Now and then I remind myself that Aniela loved me, that I could have married her, that my life
might have been made bright and happy, that it merely depended upon me, and that I wasted all
that through my incapacity for action. Then I put to myself the question: "Is there any sign
of insanity in me, and is it indeed true that I could have had Aniela forever?" It must be
true, for how could I otherwise recall all the incidents from the time I met her first up to
the present moment? And to think that she might have been mine, and as faithful and loyal to
me as she is to that other one!--a hundred times more faithful, because she would love me from
her whole soul. Innate incapacity?--yes, that is it. But even if it justifies me in my own
eyes, what matters it to me, since it does not give me any comfort? The only thought that gives
me comfort is that the descendants of decayed as well as of the most buoyant races have to
go the same way,--to dust and ashes. This makes the difference between the weak and the strong
a great deal less. The whole misfortune of beings like me is their isolation. What erroneous
ideas have our novelists, and for the matter of that even our physiologists, about the decaying
races. They fancy that inward incapacity must invariably correspond with physical deterioration,
small build, weak muscles, anæmic brain, and weak intelligence. This may be the case now and
then, but to regard it as a general principle is a mistake and a pedantic repetition of the
same thing over and over again. The descendants of worn-out races have no lack of vital powers,
but they lack harmony among these powers. I myself am physically a powerful man, and never
was a fool. I knew people of my sphere built like Greek statues, clever, gifted, and yet they
did not know how to fit themselves into life, and ended badly, exactly through that want of
even balance in their otherwise luxuriant vital powers. They exist among us as in a badly organized
society where nobody knows where the rights of the one begin and those of another cease. We
live in anarchy, and it is a known fact that in anarchy society cannot exist. Each of the powers
drags its own way, often pulling all the others with it; and this produces a tragic exclusiveness.
I am now suffering from this exclusiveness, by reason of which nothing interests me beyond
Aniela, nothing matters to me, and there is nothing else to which I can attach my life. But
people do not understand that such a want of even balance, such anarchy of the vital powers,
is a far greater disease than physical or moral anæmia. This is the solution of the problem.

Formerly the conditions of life and a differently constituted community summoned us, and in
a way forced us, into action. Now, in these antihygienic times, when we have nothing to do
with public life, and are poisoned by philosophy and doubts, our disease has grown more acute.
We have come to this at last, that we are not capable of sustained action, that our vitality
shows itself only in sudden leaps and bounds, and consequently the most gifted among us always
end in some kind of madness. Of all that constitutes life there is only woman left for us;
and we either fritter and squander ourselves away in licentiousness or cling to one love as
to a branch that overhangs a precipice. As it is mostly an unlawful love we cling to, it carries
within itself the elements of a tragedy. I know that my love for Aniela must end badly; and
therefore I do not even try to defend myself from it. Besides, whether I resist or submit,
it means ruin either way.

28 June.

The baths and especially the cool, bracing air are improving Pani Celina's health, and she
is growing stronger day by day. I surround her with every care and think of her comforts as
if she were my own mother. She is grateful for it, and seems to be growing very fond of me.
Aniela notices it, and cannot help feeling a certain regret at this vision of happiness that
might have been ours if things had turned out differently. I am quite certain now that she
does not love Kromitzki. She is and will be faithful to him; but when I see them together I
notice in her face a certain constraint and humiliation. I see it every time when he, whether
really in love or only showing himself off as a doting husband, fondles her hands, smoothes
her hair or kisses her brow. She would rather hide herself in the very earth than be forced
to submit to these endearments in my and other people's presence. Nevertheless she submits,
with a forced smile. I smile too, but as a diversion I mentally plunge my hands into my vitals
and tear them to pieces. At times the thought crosses my mind that this priestess of Diana
is more at ease and less reticent when alone with her husband. But I do not often indulge in
thoughts like these, for I feel that one drop more and I shall lose my self-control altogether.

My relation to Aniela is terrible for me as well as for her. My love shows itself in the guise
of hatred, scorn, and irony. It frightens Aniela and hurts her. She looks at me now and then,
and her pleading eyes say, "Is it my fault?" And I repeat to myself, "It is not her fault;"
but I cannot, God help me, I cannot be different to her. The more I see her oppressed and hurt,
the fiercer becomes my resentment towards her, towards Kromitzki, myself, and the whole world.
And yet I pity her from my whole heart, for she is as unhappy as I am. But as water, instead
of subduing a conflagration, makes it rage all the fiercer, so my feelings are rendered fiercer
by despair. I treat the dearest being with scorn, anger, and irony, and thereby hurt myself
far more than I hurt her; for she is capable of forgiveness, but I shall never be able to forgive
myself.

29 June.

That man notices there is some ill-feeling between me and his wife, and he explains it in a
manner worthy of him. It seems to him that I hate her because she preferred him to me. He fancies
that my resentment is nothing but offended vanity. Truly only a husband can look upon it in
this light. Consequently he tries to make it up to her by his caresses, and treats me with
the kind indulgence of a generous victor.

How vanity blinds some people! What a strange creature he is! He goes every day to the Straubinger
hotel, watches the couples promenading on the Wandelbahn, and with a certain delight puts the
worst construction upon their mutual relations. He laughs at the husbands who, according to
his views, are deceived by their wives; every new discovery puts him into better humor, and
his eyeglass is continually dropping out and put back again. And yet the same man who considers
conjugal faithlessness such an excellent opportunity for making silly jokes, would consider
it the most awful tragedy if it happened to himself. Since it is only a question of other people
it is a farce; touching his own happiness it would cry out to heaven for vengeance. Why, you
fool!--go to the looking glass, see yourself as you are, your Mongolian eyes, that hair like
a black Astrachan cap, that eyeglass, those long shanks; enter into yourself and see the meanness
of your intellect, the vulgarity of your character,--and tell me whether a woman like Aniela
ought to remain true to you for an hour! How did you manage to get her, you spiritual and physical
upstart? Is it not an unnatural monstrosity that you are her husband? Dante's Beatrice, marrying
a common Florentine cad, would have been better matched.

I had to interrupt my writing because I felt I was losing my balance; and yet I fancied myself
resigned! May Kromitzki rest easy; I do not feel that I am any better than he. Even if I supposed
I was made of finer stuff than he, it would be small comfort, since my deeds are worse than
his. He has no need of hiding anything, and I am obliged to play the hypocrite, take him always
into account, conceal my real feelings, deceive and circumvent him. Can there be anything meaner
than pursuing such a course of action, instead of taking him by the throat? I abuse him in
my diary. Such underhand satisfaction even a slave may permit himself towards his master. Kromitzki
never could have felt so small as I did in my own eyes when I committed a multitude of littlenesses,
devised cunning plans to make him take separate lodgings and not stop in the same house with
Aniela. And after all, I gained nothing. With the simple sentence, "I wish to be near my wife"
he demolished all my plans. It is simply unbearable, especially as Aniela understands every
movement of mine, every word and scheme. I fancy she must often blush for me. All this taken
together makes up my daily food. I do not think I shall be able to bear it much longer, as
I cannot be equal to the situation,--which simply means: I am not villain enough for the conditions
in which I live.

30 June.

I overheard from the veranda the end of a conversation carried on in an audible voice between
Kromitzki and Aniela.

"I will speak to him myself," said Kromitzki; "but you must tell your aunt the position I am in."

"I will never do it," replied Aniela.

"Not if such is my wish?" he said sharply.

Not desirous of playing the part of eavesdropper, I went into the room. I saw on Aniela's face
an expression of pain, which she tried to hide upon seeing me. Kromitzki was white with anger,
but greeted me with a smile. For a moment an unreasonable fear got hold of me that she had
confessed something to her husband. I am not afraid of Kromitzki; my only fear is that he may
take away Aniela and thus part me from my sorrows, my humiliations, and torments. I live by
them; without them I should be famished. Anything rather than part from Aniela. In vain I racked
my brain to guess what could have taken place between them. At moments I thought it probable
that she had told him something; but then his manner towards me would have changed, and it
was if anything even more polite than usual.

Generally speaking, but for my aversion to the man, I have no fault to find with him in so
far as I am concerned. He is very polite and friendly, gives way to me in everything as if
he were dealing with a nervous woman. He tries all means to gain my confidence. It does not
discourage him in the least that I meet his advances at times brusquely or sarcastically, and
without much consideration for his feelings show up his ignorance and want of refined nerves.
I do not miss any opportunity to expose before Aniela how commonplace he is in heart and intellect.
But he is wonderfully patient. Maybe he is so only with me. To-day I saw him for the first
time angry with Aniela, and his complexion was of the greenish hue of people who are angry
in cold blood and nurse their wrath long afterwards. Aniela is probably afraid of him, but
she is afraid of everybody,--even of me. It is sometimes difficult to understand how this woman
with the temper of a dove can at a given moment summon so much energy. There was a time when
I thought her too passive to be able to resist me long. What a disappointment! Her resistance
is all the stronger, the more unexpected it is. I do not know what was the question between
her and Kromitzki, but if she says that she is not going to do what he asks her, she will shake
with fear but will not yield. If she were mine, I would love her as the dog loves its mistress;
I would carry her on my hands, and not allow the dust to touch her feet; I would love her until
death.

1 July.

My jealousy would be a miserable thing if it were not at the same time the pain of the true
believer who sees his divinity dragged in the dust. I would abstain even from touching her
hand if I could place her on some inapproachable height where nobody could come near her.

2 July.

I deluded myself as to my state of quiescence. It was only a temporary torpidity of the nerves,
which I mistook for calmness. Besides, I knew it could not last.

3 July.

Yes, something has passed between them. They hide some mutual offence, but I see it. For some
days I have noticed that he does not take her hands, as he used to and kiss them in turn; he
does not stroke her hair or kiss her forehead. I had a moment of real joy, but Aniela herself
poisoned it. I see that she tries to conciliate and humor him as if wishing to restore their
former relations. At the sight of this a great rage possessed me, and showed itself in my behavior
to Aniela. Never had I been so pitiless to her and myself.

4 July.

To-day, returning from the Wandelbahn, I met Aniela on the bridge opposite the Cascades. She
stopped suddenly and said something, but the roar of the water drowned her voice. This irritated
me, for at present everything irritates me. Whereupon, leading her across the bridge towards
our villa, I said impatiently: "I could not hear what you were saying."

"I wanted to ask you," she said, with emotion, "why you are so different to me now? Why have
you no pity upon me?"

All my blood rushed to my heart at these words.

"Can you not see," I said quickly, "that I love you more than words can tell? and you treat
it as if it were a mere nothing. Listen! I do not want anything from you. Only tell me that
you love me, surrender your heart to me, and I will bear anything, suffer anything, and will
give my whole life to you and serve you to the last breath. Aniela, you love me! Tell me, is
it not true? You will save me by that one word; say it!"

Aniela had grown as pale as the foam on the cascade. It seemed as if she had turned to ice.
For a moment she could not utter a word; then making a great effort, she replied:--

"You must not speak to me in that way."

"Then you will never say it?"

"Never!"

"Then you have not the least--" I broke off. It suddenly whirled across my brain that if Kromitzki
asked her, she would not refuse him; and at this thought rage and despair deprived me of all
consciousness. I heard the rushing of waters in my ear, and everything grew dark before my
eyes. I only remember that I hurled a few horrible, cynical words at her, such as no man should
use against a defenceless woman, and which I dare not put down in this diary. I remember as
in a dream that she looked at me with dilated eyes, took me by the sleeve, then shook my shoulder,
and said, anxiously:--

"Leon, what is the matter with you,--what ails you?"

What ailed me was that I was losing my senses. I tore my hand away and rushed off in the opposite
direction. After a moment I retraced my steps; but she was gone. Then I understood only one
thing: the time had come to put an end to life. The thought seemed to me like a rift in the
dark clouds that weighed upon me. It was a strange state of consciousness, in one direction.
For the moment all thoughts about myself, about Aniela, were wiped from my memory; but I contemplated
the thought of death with the greatest self-possession. I knew, for instance, perfectly well
that if I threw myself from the rocks it would be considered an accident, and if I shot myself
in my own room my aunt would not survive the shock. It was still stranger that, in spite of
this consciousness, I did not feel called upon to make any choice, as if the connection between
my reasoning and my will and its consequent action had been severed. With a perfectly clear
understanding that it would be better to throw myself from the rocks, I yet went back to the
villa for my revolver. Why? I cannot explain it. I only remember that I ran faster and faster,
at last went up the stairs into my room, and began to search for the key of my portmanteau,
where the revolver was. Presently I heard steps approaching my door. This roused me, and the
thought flashed through my mind that it was Aniela, that she had guessed my intention, and
came to prevent it. The door was flung open, and there was my aunt, who called out in a breathless
voice:--

"Leon, go quick for the doctor! Aniela has been taken ill."

Hearing that, I forgot all else, and without hat I rushed forth, and in a quarter of an hour
brought a doctor from the Straubinger hotel. The doctor went to see Aniela, and I remained
with my aunt on the veranda. I asked her what had happened to Aniela.

"Half an hour ago," said my aunt, "Aniela came back with such a feverishly burning face that
both Celina and I asked whether anything had happened to her. She replied, 'Nothing, nothing,'
almost impatiently; and when Celina insisted upon knowing what was the matter with her, Aniela,
for the first time since I have known her, lost her temper and cried out, 'Why are you all
bent upon tormenting me?' Then she became quite hysterical, and laughed and cried. We were
terribly frightened, and then I came and asked you to fetch the doctor. Thank God, she is calmer
now. How she wept, poor child, and asked us to forgive her for having spoken unkindly to us."

I remained silent; my heart was too full for words.

My aunt paced up and down the veranda, and presently, her arms akimbo, stopped before me and
said,--

"Do you know, my boy, what I am thinking? It is this: We somehow do not like Kromitzki,--even
Celina is not fond of him; and Aniela sees it, and it hurts her feelings. It is a strange thing;
he does his best to make himself pleasant, and yet he always seems like an outsider. It is
not right, and it grieves Aniela."

"Do you think, aunty, that she loves him so very much?"

"I did not say very much. He is her husband, and so she loves him, and feels hurt that we treat
him badly."

"But who treats him badly? I think she is not happy with him,--that is all."

"God forbid that you should be right. I do not say but she might have done better; but after
all there is nothing to be said against him. He evidently loves her very much. Celina cannot
quite forgive him the sale of Gluchow; but as to Aniela, she defends him, and does not allow
anybody to say a word against him."

"Perhaps against her own conviction?"

"It proves all the more that she loves him. As to his affairs, the worst is that nobody knows
how he stands; and this is a great source of trouble to Celina. But after all, wealth is not
everything; besides, as I told you before, I will not forget to provide for Aniela, and you
agree with me, do you not? We both owe her a kind of duty, not to mention that she is a dear,
affectionate creature, and deserves everything we can do for her."

"With all my heart, dear aunt; she will be always as a sister to me, and shall not be in want
of anything as long as I live."

"I count upon my dear boy, and can die in peace."

Thereupon she embraced me. The doctor, coming towards us, interrupted our conversation. In
a few words he set our minds at rest,--

"A little nervous agitation; it often appears after the first baths. Leave off bathing for
a few days, plenty of air and exercise,--that is all that is wanted. The constitution is sound;
strengthen the system, and all will be well."

I paid him so liberally that he bowed, and did not put on his hat till he was beyond the railings
of the villa. I would have given anything if I could have gone immediately to Aniela, kissed
her feet, and begged her forgiveness for all the wrong I had done her. I vowed to myself that
I would be different, more patient, with Kromitzki,--not revolt any more, nor grumble. Contrition,
contrition deep and sincere, permeated my whole being. How unspeakably I love her!

Close upon noon I met Kromitzki coming back from a long walk on the Kaiserweg. I put my good
resolutions at once to the test, and was more friendly with him. He thought it was sympathy
because of his wife's illness, and as such accepted it in a grateful spirit. He and Pani Celina
spent the remainder of the day with Aniela. She had expressed a wish to dress and go out; but
they did not let her. I did not permit myself even to chafe at that. I do not remember that
I ever subdued myself to the same extent. "It is all for you, dearest," I said inwardly. I
was very stupid all the day, and felt an irresistible desire to cry like a child. Even now
tears fill my eyes. If I have sinned greatly, I bear a heavy punishment.

5 July.

After yesterday's commotion a calm has set in. The clouds have discharged their electricity,
and the storm is over. I feel exhausted morally and physically. Aniela is better. This morning
we met alone on the veranda. I put her on a rocking-chair, wrapped a shawl around her shoulders,
as the morning was rather chilly, and said:--

"Aniela dear, I beg your pardon from my whole heart for what I said yesterday. Forgive and
forget if you can, though I shall never forgive myself."

She put out her hand at once, and I clung to it with my lips. I could have groaned aloud; there
is such a gulf between my love and my misery. Aniela seemed to feel it too, for she did not
withdraw her hand at once. She too tried to control her emotion, and the feeling which urged
her towards me. Her neck and breast heaved as if she were strangling the sobs that rose to
her throat. She feels that I love her beyond everything; that a love like mine is not to be
met with every day; and that it might have been a treasure of happiness to last our whole life.
Presently she grew more composed and her face became serene. There was nothing but resignation
there, and angelic goodness.

"There is peace between us, is there not?" she asked.

"Yes," I replied.

"And forever?"

"How can I tell, dearest? You know best how things stand with me."

Her eyes again grew misty, and again she recovered herself.

"All will be well," she said, "you are so good."

"I, good?" I exclaimed with real indignation; "do you not know that if you had not fallen ill
yesterday I should--"

I did not finish. I suddenly remembered that it would be mean and cowardly to use such a weapon
against her. I felt all the more ashamed of my rashness as I saw the troubled eyes looking
anxiously into mine.

"What did you want to say?"

"I was going to say words unworthy of myself; besides, they have no meaning now."

"Leon! I must know what you meant, else I shall have no peace."

Suddenly a breath of wind blew a lock of her hair into her eyes. I rose, and with the light,
tender touch of a mother, put it back into its place.

"Dear Aniela, do not force me to tell what I ought to forget. If it be a question of your peace
of mind I pledge you my word that you need not have any fear for the future."

"You promise this?" she asked, still looking intently at me.

"Yes, most solemnly and emphatically; will that satisfy you, and drive out any foolish notions
from the little head?"

The postman coming in with a parcel of letters interrupted our conversation. There was the
usual budget from the East for Kromitzki; only one letter for Aniela, from Sniatynski (I recognized
his handwriting on the envelope), and one for me from Clara. The latter does not say much about
herself, but inquires most minutely what I am doing. I told Aniela who it was that had written,
and she, to show me that all ill-feeling and constraint had gone, began to tease me. I paid
her back in the same coin, and pointing to Sniatynski's letter said there was another poor
man who had succumbed to little Aniela's wiles. We laughed and bandied jests for a little time.

The human soul, like the bee, extracts sweetness even from bitter herbs. The most unhappy wretch
still tries to squeeze out a little happiness from his woes, and the merest shadow and pretext
will serve his turn. Sometimes I think that this intense longing for happiness is one proof
more that happiness is awaiting us in another world. I am convinced also that pessimism was
invented as a comfort to satisfy a want, sum up all human misery, and put it into a philosophic
formula. It satisfies our thirst for truth and knowledge, and happiness itself is nothing but
satisfied craving. Perhaps love in itself is such a source of happiness that even a clouded
love like ours is interwoven with golden rays. Such a ray fell on our path to-day. I had not
expected it, as I had not expected that a man whose desires are without limits could be satisfied
with so little.

We had scarcely read our letters when Pani Celina, who is now able to walk without help, came
towards us with a footstool for Aniela.

"Oh mamma!" cried out Aniela, in a shocked voice; "You ought not to do that."

"And did you not yourself nurse me night and day when I was ill?"

I took the footstool from Pani Celina's hands, and kneeling down before Aniela, I waited until
she had put her little feet upon it; and kneeling thus before her for a second filled me with
happiness for the whole day. It is a fact. A very poor man lives upon crumbs, and smiles gratefully--through
tears.

6 July.

I have a crippled heart, but it is capable of love. It is only now I fully understand what
Sniatynski meant. If I were not a man out of joint, without an even-balanced mind, poisoned
by scepticism, criticism of myself, and criticism of criticism, if my love were in harmony
with law and principles, I should have found in Aniela the dogma of my life, and other dogmas,
other beliefs, would have come to me in course of time. Yet I do not know; perhaps I could
not love otherwise than crookedly; and in this lies my incapacity for life. In short, that
which ought to have been my health and salvation has become my disease and damnation. Strange
to say, there was no lack of warnings. It almost seems as if people had foreseen what would
befall me. I remember constantly the words Sniatynski wrote to me when I was with the Davises
at Peli: "Something must always be growing within us; beware lest something should grow in
you which would cause your unhappiness, and the unhappiness of those near and dear to you."
I laughed then at the words, yet how true they were. My father, too, spoke several times as
if he had pierced the veil that hides the future. To-day the remembrance is too late. I know
it is useless to rake up the ashes of the past, but I cannot help it. I am sorry for myself,
but more sorry still for Aniela. She would have been a hundred times happier with me than with
Kromitzki. Supposing even I should have subjected her at first to analysis, and discovered
various faults, I should have loved her all the same. She would have been mine, and as such
she would have become part of me and entered into the sphere of my egoism. Her faults would
have been my weaknesses, and we are always ready to make allowance for ourselves, and though
we criticise self we do not cease to care for its well-being. Thus she would have been dear
to me; and as she is infinitely better than I, in time she would have become my pride, the
noblest part of my soul; I should have found out that criticism, as far as she was concerned,
was out of place; gradually she would have won me over to her pure faith and wrought my salvation.
All that has been wasted, spoiled, and transmuted into a tragedy for her,--into evil and a
tragedy for me.

7 July.

I have been reading what I wrote yesterday, and am struck by what I said at the end, namely:
that the love which might have been my salvation has become a source of evil. I cannot quite
agree with the thought. How can love for a pure woman like Aniela bring forth evil? One word
explains it,--it is a crooked love. I must own the truth. If two years ago somebody had told
me that I, a civilized man, a man with aesthetic nerves, and living in peace with the penal
code, should meditate for nights and days how to put out of the world, even by murder, a man
who would be in my way, I should have taken that somebody for an escaped lunatic. Yet it is
true; I have come to that. Kromitzki shuts out from me the world; he takes from me the earth,
water, and air. I cannot live because he lives; and for that reason I incessantly think of
his death. What a simple and complete solution of all the difficulties and entanglements his
death would be. I thought more than once that since the hypnotizer can send his medium to sleep,
a more concentrated power would be able to put him to sleep forever. I have sent for all the
newest books about hypnotism. In the mean while with every glance I say to Kromitzki, "Die!"
and if such a suggestion were sufficient, he would have been dead some time ago. But the whole
result of it is that he is as well as ever, is Aniela's husband, and I remain with the consciousness
that my intention is equally criminal and foolish, ridiculous, and unworthy of an active man;
and it makes me lose my self-respect more and more. Yet it does not prevent my trying to hypnotize
Kromitzki.

It is the old story again of the intelligent man who, given up by the doctors, goes for advice
to quacks and wise women. I want to kill my enemy by hypnotism; and as it only shows my own
worthlessness, it is I who suffer by it. I must also confess that as often as I am alone, I
begin to think of all possible means in human power to put the hateful man out of the way.
For some time I nursed the thought of killing him in a duel; but this would not lead to anything.
Aniela would never marry the man who had killed her husband; then, like a common criminal,
I began to think of other ways. And what is the strangest thing of all, I discovered ways which
human justice would not be able to detect. Foolishness! vain thoughts! pure theory!

Kromitzki need have no fear for his life; thoughts like these will never be acted upon. I should
not kill him if I could do it without more responsibility than is incurred in crushing a spider;
should not kill him if we two were alone together on a desert island. If one could divide the
human brain as one cuts in two an apple, and lay bare its thoughts, it would be found that
mine is honeycombed with murderous thoughts. What is more, I am well aware that if I refrain
from killing Kromitzki it is not by reason of any moral principle contained in the law "Thou
shalt do no murder." This law I have already violated morally. I refrain from killing him because
some remnants of chivalric tradition bar my way; because my refined nerves would not permit
me to commit a brutal deed; in short, I am too far removed from primitive man to be physically
competent to the task, though morally I slay him every day. And now I ask myself whether, in
presence of a higher judgment, I should be held responsible, as if I had committed the deed.

It may be that if one could lay open the human brain, as I said before, in the most virtuous
individual thoughts would be found to make our hair stand on end. I remember that, when a little
boy, there came upon me a period of such religious fervor that I prayed from morning until
night; and at the same time, in the midst of my pious transports, there came into my mind blasphemous
thoughts, as if an evil wind had blown them thither, or a demon whispered them into my ear.
In the same way I had irreverent thoughts about persons whom I loved with all my heart and
for whom I would have given my life without a moment's hesitation. I remember that this, which
I might call a tragedy of childhood, cost me a great deal of anguish. But I will not dwell
upon that now. Going back to blasphemous or criminal thoughts, I do not think we are responsible
for them, as they come from the knowledge of evil, not from an evil growing within the organism
itself; and for the very reason that it is outward to ourselves we fancy an evil spirit suggesting
the thoughts. Man listens to it, and being averse to evil, spurns it; and there may be some
merit in this. But with me it is different. The thought of getting rid of Kromitzki does not
come from the outside, but springs from me and exists within me. I have come down to that morally,
and if I do not commit the deed it is a mere matter of nerves. The part of my inward Mephistopheles
is confined to mocking and whispering into my ear that the deed would only prove my energy,
and not be much of a crime.

These are the crossways on which I never dreamed of finding myself. I look into the depths
of my own self with amazement. I do not know whether my exceptional troubles will partly atone
for my errors, but one thing I know, namely: that he whose life cannot find room in the simple
code Aniela and others like her cling to, if his soul is brimming over and breaks its bounds
it must mix with dust and be polluted in the mud.

9 July. 

Moreover, the architect should not forget that, being an opinion, and not a guaranty, he is
not only at liberty to modify it as much and as often as he sees fit, but is bound to do so,
and to inform his client at once of the change, when fuller information, or alteration in the
circumstances, shall show him that the original estimate is likely to be exceeded. If he does this
frankly, although his client may be disappointed, he cannot reproach the architect with trying
to deceive him, and there will probably still be time to make the changes necessary for reducing
the expense to the desired point. In a case decided in Paris in July, 1855, a man was condemned
to pay fifty-four thousand francs for repairs done on a house. He proved that his architect
had estimated the expense at seven or eight thousand, but it was shown that the architect
had subsequently informed him that it would be necessary to do more work than was at first contemplated,
and that he had made inquiries about the matter, and had turned out his tenants so that the
work might be done, and had paid the contractors more than the sum originally estimated; and the
court thought he had no case at all against the architect.

* * * * *

The great building firm of Peto Brothers, in England, having been awarded a contract for a large
public building, have taken advantage of what, as they say, they consider a favorable opportunity
to initiate a system of profit-sharing with their men, in accordance with a circular which is
printed in the Builder. The system described by the circular is very simple. It is to apply
for the present, only to the contract mentioned, but, if it works well, will be extended to future
cases. Under the arrangement proposed one-quarter of the net profits of the contract are, when the
building is done and the accounts settled, to be divided, as a bonus above their wages, among
the men who have worked on it, in proportion to the wages they have earned. The conditions
under which each man is entitled to his share are that he shall have worked long enough on
the contract to have earned five pounds, at the regular rate of wages; that he shall not have neglected
his duty, or misconducted himself, or wasted his time, or in other ways have acted so as to
diminish the profits of the contract, or injure the reputation of the firm for good and honest
work; and, that he shall not have engaged in any strike for shorter hours, or for wages above
the schedule of wages which prevailed at the time the contract was made, and upon which the contract
price was based. That the workmen may assure themselves of the fairness with which the division
is carried out they are invited by the circular to send a representative to watch the making-up
of the accounts by the auditor of the firm, and to sign the balance-sheet. In order to identify
the claimants, every man must obtain a printed ticket from the time-keeper, on beginning his work,
countersigned by the foreman, and noting the day and hour when his employment commenced, with
his name, number and wages. This is to be again signed and countersigned when he leaves, and
must be produced to secure a share in the dividend. Unpretending as it is, this bids fair to
be one of the most interesting experiments in social science yet
tried, and unless the trades-unions in England have forgotten their
prowess, it will not be carried out without a struggle.

Our readers will remember Mr. Lewis H. Williams's experiences in
trying a similar plan with his carpenters in New York, and his final
victory, but he had only one union to contend with, and that not a
very compact one, while Messrs. Peto Brothers will have all the building
trades about their ears at once, and the great question whether men
shall be allowed to do only a fixed amount of work in a day, and that
amount as small as possible, or whether they shall be allowed to work
as they please, will be fairly brought before the parties for decision.

THE

APARTMENT-HOUSE.

From Building News.

Most people are willing to admit that they cannot afford to pay over twice as much for a thing
as it is worth; but few in this country are aware that they do this very thing when they build for
themselves an independent city dwelling-house or pay a rent equivalent to or greater than the interest
on this outlay.

In the old country the secret of obtaining luxury and economy combined in building has been learned,
and rich and poor, fashionable and unfashionable alike live in "flats." In America, people have
not yet learned this lesson, but cling to the old and barbarous custom of living perpendicularly
in isolated towers, with all the cares and worries that go with isolated
management. Far better she were dead. Then she
will be mine; because the lawful husband will remain behind, but not I. By this token I am
more lawfully hers than he is.

There is something very strange going on within me at times. For instance, when I am very tired
or when my mind is concentrated upon one point I seem to look into the future, into far-away
space which remains invisible to me in a normal state. Then there comes to me such a conviction
that Aniela belongs to me--that in some way she is or will be mine--that when I wake up I have
to remind myself that there exists such a man as Kromitzki. Maybe in moments like those I cross
the boundary which separates the living from the dead, and have a vision of things more perfect,
such as the ideals we dream about, as they might shape themselves in outward form. Why is it
these two worlds are not more in touch with each other? As often as I try to solve this problem
I lose myself; I cannot understand this want of harmony, but feel dimly that therein lie our
imperfection and our misery. The thought comforts me, for in the ideal world Aniela could not
belong to a man like Kromitzki.

11 July.

Another disappointment, another plan shattered, but I have still hope that all is not lost.
I spoke to-day with Kromitzki about the Boyar who sold his wife, and invented a whole story
in order to discover his real feelings. We met the Englishman with his purchased wife near
the Cascades. I began by praising her beauty, and then remarked:--

"The doctor here told me something about the transaction, and I think you are a little hard
upon the Boyar."

"Hard upon him? not a bit; he amuses me intensely," he replied.

"There are extenuating circumstances in the case. He is not only a Boyar, but the owner of
extensive tannery works. Suddenly, because of the infection, the importation of skins from
Roumania was forbidden. The man recognized that unless he could tide over the time until the
law was repealed he would be ruined, and with him hundreds of families to whom he gave employment.
My dear fellow, he looked at it from a business point of view; perhaps business morality is
a little different from general morality, and as he had once entered into that--"

"He had a right to sell his wife? To fulfil one part of his duties he had no right to trample
upon another and perhaps more binding duty."

Kromitzki could not have disappointed me more thoroughly than by thus showing some decent feeling.
But I did not give up my hope at once. I know that even the meanest person has still at his
disposition high-sounding words wherewith to mask his real character. Therefore I went on:--

"You do not take into account one thing, namely, that the man would have dragged his wife with
him into poverty. Confess it is a singular idea of duty that it should lead us to deprive those
dependent on us of their daily bread."

"Do you know, I had no idea you were so deucedly sober-minded."

"You fool!" I thought to myself; "don't you understand that these are not my views, but views
I want you to adopt?" Aloud I said:--

"I only try to put myself into the place of this business man. Besides, you do not consider
that the woman probably did not love her husband, and that the other man was aware of it."

"In such a case they were worthy of each other."

"That is another question altogether. Looking a little deeper into the affair, and supposing
that being in love with the Englishman, she nevertheless remained faithful to her husband,
she may be worthier than you think. As to the Boyar, he may be a villain for anything I know,
but what can he do, I ask you, in case somebody comes to him and says: 'You are a bankrupt
twice over; you have debts you cannot pay, and a wife that does not love you. Divorce that
woman, and I will take care of her future, and will also take upon me all your liabilities.'
It is a way of speaking, to say the man 'sold' his wife; but can a transaction like this be
called a sale? Consider that the merchant who agreed to this proposition by one stroke saved
his wife from poverty,--and possibly this is the right way to look upon duty,--and saved all
those who depended upon him!"

Kromitzki thought a little, then dropped his eyeglass and said:--

"My dear fellow, as to business I flatter myself that I know a great deal more about it than
you; but as to arguments, I confess that you would soon drive me into a corner. If you had
not inherited millions from your father, you would be able to amass a fortune as a barrister.
You have put the whole thing in such a light that I do not know what to think of that Roumanian
chap. All I know about it is that some kind of transaction about his wife had occurred, and
that, put it in whatever light you will, is always a disreputable thing. Besides, as I am somewhat
of a merchant myself, I will tell you another thing: a bankrupt can always find a way out of
his difficulties: he either makes another fortune and then pays his debts, or he blows out
his brains and pays with his life; and at the same time, if he is married, he sets his wife
free and gives her another chance."

I fumed and raged inwardly, and would have given anything if I could have shouted out to him:
"You are a bankrupt already in one thing, for your wife does not love you. You see the Cascades;
jump in, set her free, and give her the chance of some happiness." But I remained silent, chewing
the bitter cud of my reflections. Kromitzki, however commonplace he might be, though capable
of selling Gluchow and taking advantage of his wife's trust in him, was not the villain I took
him for. It was a disappointment and destroyed the plan to which for the moment I had clung
as to a plank of safety. Again I felt powerless, and saw looming up before me the vast solitude.
Nevertheless, I held fast to that purpose because I understood that unless I could do something,
I should go mad. "It will at least prepare the ground for anything that may turn up, and accustom
Kromitzki to the thought of parting with Aniela," I said to myself. As I said before, nobody
knows in what state Kromitzki's affairs are, but I suppose that a man who speculates is liable
to losses as well as to gains. I said to him:--

"I do not know whether your principles are, strictly speaking, business principles, but at
any rate they are the sentiments of an honorable man, and I respect you for them. You said,
if I understood you, that a man has no right to drag his wife with him into poverty."

"No, I did not say that; I only said that to sell one's wife is a villany; the wife ought to
share her husband's fate. I think but little of a fair-weather wife, who wants to break her
marriage vows because her husband cannot give her the comforts of life."

"Suppose she did not agree, he might set her free against her will. Besides, if she knew that
by submitting to a divorce, she could save her husband, duty well understood would bid her
to yield."

"It is unpleasant even to talk about such things."

"Why? are you sorry for the Boyar?"

"Not I; I shall always hold him for a blackguard."

"Because you do not look at things from an objective point of view. But that is not astonishing.
A man like you, with whom everything is prospering, cannot enter into the psychology of a bankrupt
unless he be a philosopher; and philosophy has nothing to do with making millions."

I did not wish to prolong the conversation, so utterly disgusted was I with my own perversity.
I had sown the seed,--a very small and pitiable seed to produce anything; and yet I clung to
it tenaciously. One thing revived my hope. At the moment when I tried to make him believe that
a ruined man ought to set his wife free, there was a certain constraint and trouble in his
expression. I also noticed that when I spoke about his millions a slight sigh escaped him.
To infer from this that he is on the brink of ruin, would be jumping at conclusions; but I
may fairly conjecture that his affairs are in a precarious state. I resolved to get at the
truth as quickly as possible.

In the mean while my own self seemed to be divided in two parts. The one said: "If you waver
ever so little, I will push you downward if it should cost me my whole fortune. I will work
your ruin, and when I come to deal with a broken man, it remains to be seen whether for certain
transactions you do not find a gentler word than, 'villany.'" Yet I was conscious at the same
time that these were not my thoughts nor my ways of dealing; that they had been suggested to
me by somebody else, and that but for my desperate position they would never have found room
in me, as they are averse to my nature and repulsive to me. Money never played any part in
my life, either as means or as aim. I consider myself incapable of using such a weapon, and
I felt what a degradation it would be for me and Aniela to introduce that element into our
relations to each other. The thought of it was so repulsive to me that I said to myself: "Will
you not spare yourself? Must you even drink from such a bowl? See how you are degenerating
step by step. Formerly thoughts like these would never have crossed your mind; and what is
more, schemes like these are utterly useless, and will only lower you in your own eyes."

In fact, formerly, when my aunt spoke of Kromitzki's affairs in a doubting spirit, it had always
caused me some uneasiness. The prospect that at some time or other he might want me to assist
him or take a share in his transactions had made me consider what I should do in such a case;
and I always vowed that I would decline and have nothing to do with any of his affairs; so
repugnant to me was the thought of mingling money matters with my relations to Aniela. I remember
that I saw in this another proof of the nobility and refinement of my feelings. To-day I grasp
that weapon as if I were a banker and had lived by money transactions all my life.

I perceive with absolute certainty that my thoughts and deeds are worse than myself, and I
ask myself how that can be. Most probably because I cannot find the way out of the labyrinth.
I love a noble woman; my love is very great; and yet, putting the two together, the net result
is crookedness, and enchanted circles where my character loses itself and even my nerves grow
less sensitive. When, in former times, I erred and strayed from the right path there still
remained something, some aesthetic feeling, by the help of which I still distinguished good
from evil. At present I have none of that feeling, or if it still exists it is powerless. If
I had only at the same time lost the consciousness of what is ugly and offensive! But no; I
have it still, only it does not serve me as a curb, and is of no effect except to aggravate
my troubles. Beside my love for Aniela there is no room for anything; but consciousness does
not require space. I absorb love, hatred, and sorrow as a cancer breeds in a diseased organism.

He who has never been in a position similar to mine cannot understand it. I knew that from
love's entanglements spring various sufferings, but I did not appreciate those sufferings.
I did not believe they were so real and so difficult to bear. Only now I understand the difference
between "knowing" and "believing," and the meaning of the French thinker's words: "We know
we must die, but we do not believe it."

12 July.

To-day my pulses are beating wildly, and there is a singing in my ears; for something has occurred
the memory of which thrills every nerve as in a fever. The day was very beautiful, the evening
more lovely still, and there was a full moon. We resolved to make an excursion to Hofgastein,--all
but Pani Celina, who preferred to remain at home. My aunt, Kromitzki, and I went down together
to the villa gate, whence Kromitzki sped towards Straubinger's to order a carriage, my aunt
and I waiting for Aniela, who lingered behind. As she did not come I went back and saw her
descending the winding staircase leading from the second floor into the garden.

As the moon was on the other side, this part of the house was wrapped in darkness, and Aniela
came down very slowly. There was a moment when my head was on a level with Aniela's feet. The
temptation was too great; I put my hands gently around them and pressed my lips to them. I
knew I should have to pay a heavy penalty for this minute of happiness, but I could not forego
it. God knows with what reverence I touched her feet, and for how much pain this moment compensated
me. But for Aniela's resistance I should have put her foot upon my head in token that I was
her servant and her slave. She drew back and went upstairs again but I ran down calling out
loudly, so that my aunt could hear me:--

"Aniela is coming, coming."

Nothing remained for her now but to come down again, which she could do safely, as I had remained
near the gate. At the same moment Kromitzki arrived with the carriage. Aniela coming up to
us said:--

"I came to ask you, aunty, to let me stop at home. I would rather not leave mamma alone. You
can go, and I will wait for you with the tea."

"But Celina is quite well," replied my aunt, with a shade of annoyance in her voice, "it was
she who proposed the excursion, mainly for your sake."

"Yes, but--" began Aniela.

Kromitzki came up, and hearing what was the matter, said sharply: "Please do not raise any
difficulties." And Aniela, without saying a word, took her seat in the carriage.

In spite of my emotion I was struck by Kromitzki's tone of voice and Aniela's silent obedience,--all
the more as I had already noticed that his manners towards her during the day had been those
of a man who is displeased. There was evidently the same reason, of which I knew nothing, at
the bottom of this, and of the estrangement some time ago. But there was no room now for these
reflections; the fresh memory of the kiss I had imprinted on her feet still overpowered my
senses. I felt a great delight and joy, not unmixed with fear. I could account for the delight
because I felt it every time I only touched her hand. But why the joy? Because I saw that the
immaculate Aniela could not escape from me altogether, and must needs confess to herself: "I
am on the downward path too, and cannot look people in the face; he was at my feet a moment
ago, the man who loves me, and I am obliged to be his accomplice and cannot go to my husband
and tell him to take me hence." I knew she could not do this without creating a commotion;
and if she could, she would not do it, for fear of an encounter between me and Kromitzki,--"And
who knows for whom she is most afraid?" something within me whispered.

Aniela's position is indeed a difficult one, and I, knowing this, take advantage of it without
more scruples than are admitted by a general in time of war who attacks the enemy at his weakest
point. I asked myself whether I would do the same if Kromitzki would make me personally responsible;
and as I could conscientiously say "Yes," I thought there was no need for any further consideration.
Kromitzki inspires me with fear only in so far as he has power to remove Aniela and put her
out of my reach altogether. The very thought makes me desperate. But at this moment, in the
carriage, I only feared Aniela. What will happen to-morrow? How will she take it? As a liberty,
or as a mere impulse of respect and worship?

I felt as a dog may feel that has done wrong and is afraid of being whipped. Sitting opposite
Aniela, I tried at moments when the moon shone on her face to read there what was to be my
sentence. I looked at her so humbly and was so meek that I pitied myself, and thought she too
ought to pity me a little. But she did not look at me at all, and listened or seemed to listen
attentively to what Kromitzki was telling my aunt he would do if Gastein belonged to him. My
aunt only nodded, and he repeated every moment: "Now, really, don't you think I am right?"
It is evident that he wants to impress my aunt with his enterprising spirit, and to convince
her that he is capable of making a shilling out of every penny.

The road to Hofgastein, hewn out of the rocks, skirting the precipices, winds and twists around
the mountain slopes. The light of the moon shone alternately on our faces and those of the
ladies opposite, according to the varying directions of the road. In Aniela's face I saw nothing
but a sweet sadness, and I took courage from the fact that it was neither stern nor forbidding.
I did not obtain a single glance, but I comforted myself by the thought that when concealed
in the shadow, she would perhaps look at me and say to herself: "Nobody loves me as he does,
and nobody can be at the same time more unhappy than he,"--which is true. We were both silent.
Only Kromitzki kept on talking; his voice mingled with the rush of the waters below the rocks
and the creaking of the brake, which the driver often applied. This creaking irritated my nerves
very much, but the warm, transparent night lulled them into restfulness again. It was, as I
said before, full moon; the bright orb had risen above the mountains, and sailing through space
illumined the tops of Bocksteinkogl, the Tischlkar glaciers, and the precipitous slopes of
the Graukogl. The snow on the heights shone with a pale-green, metallic lustre, and as the
mountain sides below were shrouded in darkness, the snowy sheen seemed to float in mid air,
as if not belonging to the earth. There was such a charm, such peace and restfulness in these
sleeping mountains, that involuntarily the words of the poet came into mind:--

  "At such a moment, alas! two hearts are grieving.
  What there is to forgive, they are forgiving;
  What was to be forgot, they dismiss to oblivion."

And yet what is there to forgive? That I kissed her feet? If she were a sacred statue she could
not be offended by such an act of reverence. I thought if it came to an explanation between
us I would tell her that.

I often think that Aniela does me a great wrong, not to say that she calls things by wrong
names. She considers my love a mere earthly feeling, an infatuation of the senses. I do not
deny that it is composed of various threads, but there are among them some as purely ideal
as if spun of poetry. Very often my senses are lulled to sleep, and I love her as one loves
only in early youth. Then the second self within me mocks, and says derisively: "I had no idea
you could love like a schoolboy or a romanticist!" Yet such is the fact. I may be ridiculous,
but I love her thus, and it is not an artificial feeling. It is this which makes my love so
complete, and at the same time so sad; for Aniela misconstrues it and cannot enter into its
spirit. Even now I inwardly spoke to her thus: "Do you think there are no ideal chords in my
soul? At this moment I love you in such a way that you may accept my love without fear. It
would be a pity to spurn so much feeling; it would cost you nothing, and it would be my salvation.
I could then say to myself: 'This is my whole world; within its boundaries I am allowed to
live. It would be something at least. I would try to change my nature, try to believe in what
you believe, and hold fast to it all my life.'"

It seemed to me that she ought to agree to such a proposition, after which there would be everlasting
peace between us. I promised myself to put it before her, and once we know that our souls belong
to each other we may even part. There awoke within me a certain hope that she will agree to
this, for she must understand that without it both our lives will remain miserable.

It was nine o'clock when we arrived at Hofgastein. It was very quiet and still in the village.
Only the Gasthaus was lighted, and before Meger's some excellent voices were singing mountain
airs. I thought of asking the serenaders to sing before our window, but I found they were not
villagers; they were Viennese mountaineers, to whom one could not offer money. I bought two
bunches of edelweiss and other Alpine flowers, and giving one to Aniela I accidentally, as
it were, unloosened the other and the flowers fell under her feet.

"Let them lie there," I said, seeing she was stooping to pick them up. I went in search of
some more flowers for my aunt. When I came back I heard Kromitzki say:--

"Even here at Hofgastein, by erecting another branch establishment, one could easily make a
hundred per cent."

"You are still hammering at the same subject," I said quietly. I said this on purpose; it was
the same as to say to Aniela: "See, while my whole being is occupied with you he thinks of
nothing but how to make money. Compare our feelings; compare us with each other." I am almost
certain she understood my meaning.

On the return journey I made several attempts to draw Aniela into general conversation, but
did not succeed. When we arrived at the gate of the villa Kromitzki went upstairs with the
ladies, and I remained behind to pay for the carriage. When I went up I did not find Aniela
at tea. My aunt said she had gone to bed and seemed very tired. A great uneasiness got hold
of me, and I reproached myself for tormenting her. There is nothing more crushing for the man
who loves truly than the consciousness that he is bringing unhappiness on her he loves. We
took our tea in silence, for my aunt was drowsy, Kromitzki seemed depressed, and I tormented
myself more and more with anxious thoughts. "She must have taken it very much to heart," I
thought, "and as usual has put upon it the worst construction." I expected she would avoid
me the next day and consider our treaty of peace broken by that rash act of mine. This filled
me with fear, and I resolved to go, or rather to escape, the next day to Vienna; firstly, because
I dreaded meeting Aniela, secondly, because I wanted to see Doctor Chwastowski; and finally,
I thought,--and God knows how bitter is the thought,--to relieve her of my presence for a few
days and give her rest.

15 July.

A whole budget of events. I do not know where to begin, as the last sensations are the uppermost.
Never yet had I such convincing proofs that she cares for me. It will cost me no small effort
to put everything down in proper order. I am now almost sure Aniela will agree to the conditions
I am going to propose to her. My head is still in a whirl; but I will try to start from the
beginning.

I have been in Vienna and brought some news I am going to discuss with my aunt. I have seen
Chwastowski. What a fine fellow he is!--works at the hospitals, is busy upon a series of hygienic
articles his brother is to publish in three-penny booklets for the people, belongs to several
medical and non-medical associations, and still finds time for various gay entertainments on
the Kaerthner Strasse. I do not know when he finds time to sleep. And the fellow looks like
a giant from a fair. What an exuberance of life!--he seems literally brimming over with life.
I told him without any preliminaries what had brought me to Vienna.

"I do not know," I said, "whether you are aware that my aunt and I possess considerable capital.
We are not obliged to speculate, but if we could invest our money in some enterprise where
it would bring profit, the profit would be so much gain for the country. I suppose if at the
same time we could render a service to Pan Kromitzki it would be a two-fold gain. Between ourselves,
he is personally indifferent to us, but he is by his marriage connected with our family. We
should be glad to help him provided we can do so without running any risk."

"And you would like to know how he stands in his affairs, sir?"

"Yes, I should. He seems very sanguine in his hopes, and no doubt believes himself to be right.
The question is whether he does not delude himself. Therefore if your brother has written you
anything without binding you to secrecy I should like to know what he says. You might also
ask him to give me an exact statement as to their business transactions. My aunt relies upon
you, considering that the relations which connect us with your family are of a much older standing
than those connecting her with Kromitzki."

"All right; I will let my brother know about it. He mentioned something in one of his letters,
but as it does not interest me very much I did not take notice of it at the time."

Saying this, he began to search in his desk among his papers, where he found it easily and
then read aloud: "'I am heartily tired of the place. No women here worth talking about, and
not a pretty one in the whole lot.'" He laughed. "No, that's not what I wanted. He would like
to be in Vienna." Turning over a page he handed it to me, but I found only these few lines:--

"As to Kromitzki, his speculation in oil has turned out a failure. With the Rothschilds a struggle
is impossible, and he went against them. We had to get out of it as well as we could, but lost
a deal of money. We have got a monopoly in the contract business; there are immense profits
to be made, but there is also a considerable risk. It all depends upon the honesty of the people
we deal with. We treat them fairly and trust to luck. But money is wanted, because the government
pays us at stated terms, and we have to pay money down, and besides that, often receive bad
material. I have to look at present after everything myself."

"We will furnish the money," I said, when I had finished reading.

On the way back to Gastein I thought it over and my better instincts prevailed. "Let the future
take care of itself," I thought; and in the mean while would it not be more simple and more
honest to help Kromitzki instead of ruining him? Aniela would appreciate such an act, and my
disinterestedness would win her approval; and as to the future, let Providence decide about that.

But would it be an act of disinterestedness on my part? Reflecting upon it, I found that my
own selfish views had a great deal to do with it. Thus I foresaw that Kromitzki, getting hold
of the money, would leave Gastein immediately and release me from the torments his presence
near Aniela gives me. Aniela would remain alone, surrounded by my devotion, with gratitude
in her heart for me, resentment or even indignation towards Kromitzki because he had availed
himself of my offer. I seemed to see new horizons opening before me. But above all, and at
whatever cost, I wanted to get free of Kromitzki's presence.

I thought so much of my future relation to Aniela that I arrived at Lend-Gastein before I was
aware of it. At Lend I found a great commotion. A railway accident had happened on the branch
line of Zell am See, and the place was full of wounded people; but scarcely had I taken my
seat in the carriage when the impression the killed and wounded had made upon me gave way to
the thoughts that occupied me so exclusively. I saw clearly that some change must take place
in our relation, that the present state could not be prolonged indefinitely without doing mischief
to both of us and bringing us both to such a pass that it would be better for me to roll down
the precipice there and then and make an end of it at once.

Aniela, though she does not yield in the least, must needs be distracted in her mind by the
continual presence of that forbidden love. It is true she does not give me any encouragement,
but now and then I kiss her hands, her feet; she is compelled to listen to words of love, obliged
to have secrets from her husband and her mother, and always control herself and me lest I might
overstep the boundary. Life under such conditions becomes unbearable to us both. It must undergo
some change. At last I had found, I thought, a solution of the problem. Let Aniela frankly
admit that she loves me, and say to me: "I am yours heart and soul, and will be yours forever;
but let that satisfy you. If you agree to that our souls henceforth will be as one and belong
to each other forever." And I bound myself to her. I fancied I was taking her hand and saying:
"I take you thus and promise not to seek for anything more, promise that our relations will
remain purely spiritual, but as binding as those of husband and wife."

Is such an agreement feasible, and will it put an end to our sorrow? For me it is a renunciation
of all my hopes and desires, but it creates for me a new world in which Aniela will be mine.
Besides that, it will make our love a legitimate right; and I would give my very health if
Aniela would agree to it. I see in this another proof of the earnestness of my love, and how
I wish her to be mine; I am ready to pay any price, accept any restrictions, provided she acknowledges
her love.

I began to think intently whether she would agree. And it seemed to me she would. I heard myself
speaking to her in a persuasive, irrefutable manner:--

"Since you really love me, what difference can it make to you if you tell me so with your own
lips? What can there be nobler, holier than the love I ask you for? I have surrendered to you
my whole life, because I could not do otherwise. Ask your own conscience, and it will tell
you that you ought to do this much for me. It is the same relation as Beatrice's to Dante.
Angels love each other in that way. You will be near me, as near as one soul can be to another,
and yet as distant as if you dwelt on the highest of heights. That it is a love above all earthly
loves is all the more a reason for your not rejecting it; carried on the wings of such a love
your soul will remain pure; it will save me and bring peace and happiness to both of us."

I felt within me a boundless wealth of this almost mystic love, and a belief that this earthly
chrysalis would come forth in another world a butterfly, which, detached from all earthly conditions
would soar from planet to planet, till it became united to the spirit of All-Life. For the
first time the thought crossed my mind that Aniela and I may pass away as bodies, but our love
will survive and even be our immortality. "Who knows," I thought, "whether this be not the
only existing form of immortality?"--because I felt distinctly that there is something everlasting
in my feeling, quite distinct from the ever changing phenomena of life. A man must love very
deeply to be capable of such feelings and visions; he must be very unhappy, and perhaps close
on the brink of insanity. I am not yet on that brink, but I am close upon mysticism, and never
so happy as when I thus lose myself and scatter my own self, so that I have some difficulty
in finding it again. I fully understand why this is the case. My dualism, my inward criticism
shattered all the foundations of my life, together with the happiness these foundations would
have given me. In those lands where, instead of syllogisms, visions and dim consciousness reign
paramount, criticism finds no room; and this solution gives me rest and relief.

Thus I rested when I drew near Gastein. I saw myself and Aniela wedded spiritually and at peace.
I had the proud consciousness that I had found a way out of the enchanted circle and into happiness.
I was certain Aniela would give me her hand, and thus together we would begin a new life.

Suddenly I started as if waking from a dream, and saw that my hand was covered with blood.
It appeared that the same vehicle I was travelling in had been used to transport some of the
injured victims of the railway disaster. There was a deal of blood at one side of the seat,
which the driver had not noticed or had forgotten to wipe off. My mysticism does not go so
far as to create belief in the intervention of mysterious powers through omens, signs, or predictions.
Yet, though not superstitious myself, I am able to enter the train of thought of a superstitious
man, and consequently observe the singular coincidence of this fact. It seemed to me strange
that in the carriage where I dreamed about the beginning of a new life some other life had
perhaps breathed its last; also that with bloodstained hands I had been thinking of peace and
happiness.

Coincidences like these more or less influence nervous persons, not by filling them with presentiments,
but rather by throwing a dark shadow upon all their thoughts. Undoubtedly mine would have travelled
in that direction had I not been close upon Wildbad. Slowly crawling up the hill I saw another
carriage coming down at an unusual speed. "There will be another collision," I thought, as
on the steep road it is very difficult for two carriages to pass each other. But at the same
moment the driver of the vehicle put on the brake with all his strength, and the horses went
at a slow pace. Suddenly, to my great astonishment, I recognized in the inmates of the carriage
my aunt and Aniela. They, too, had caught sight of me; and Aniela cried out:--

"It is he! Leon! Leon!"

In an instant I was at their side. My aunt fell upon my neck, and repeated, "God has been good
to us!" and breathed as rapidly as if she had been running all the way from Wildbad. Aniela
had clutched my hand and held it fast; then all at once a terrible fear shone in her face,
and she cried out:--

"You are wounded?"

I understood at once what was the matter, and said,--

"Not in the least. I was not at the accident at all. I got the blood on my hand from the carriage,
which had been used for the wounded."

"Is it true, quite true?"

"Quite true."

"What train was it that was wrecked?" asked my aunt.

"The train coming from Zell am See."

"Oh, good God! A telegram came to say it was the Vienna train. It almost killed me. Oh, God,
what happiness! Praise be to God!"

My aunt began wiping the perspiration from her face. Aniela was as white as a sheet. She released
my hand, and turned her head aside to hide her tears and twitching mouth.

"We were alone in the house," continued my aunt. "Kromitzki had gone with some Belgians to
Nassfeld. The landlord came and told us about the accident on the line, and you can well imagine
what state I was in, knowing you were coming by that same line. I sent the landlord at once
for a carriage, and this dear child would not let me go alone. What a terrible time it has
been for us! Thank God, we escaped with a mere fright. Did you see the wounded?"

I kissed my aunt's and Aniela's hands, and told them what I had seen at Lend-Gastein. It appeared
that the telegram sent to the Kurhaus was thus expressed: "Railway accident at Lend-Gastein;
many killed and wounded." From which everybody concluded that the calamity had happened on
the Vienna-Salzburg line.

I gave them a few fragmentary details of what I had seen. I did not think much of what I was
saying, as my head was full of the one joyful thought: "Aniela could not wait for news at home,
and preferred to come with my aunt and meet me!" Did she do this for my aunt's sake? Most assuredly
not. I saw the trouble in her face, the sudden terror when she noticed the blood on my hand,
and the lighting up of her whole countenance when she heard I had not been near the place at
the time of the accident. I saw she was still so deeply moved as to be inclined to weep from
sheer happiness. She would have burst into tears if at that moment I had taken her hands and
told her how I loved her, and would not have snatched them away. And as all this was as clear
as the day, it seemed to me that my torments were about to end, and that from that moment the
dawn of another life had begun. From time to time I looked at her with eyes in which I concentrated
all my power of love, and she smiled at me. I noticed that she was without gloves or mantle.
She had evidently forgotten them in her haste and perturbation. As it had grown rather chilly,
I wanted to wrap her in my overcoat. She resisted a little, but my aunt made her accept it.

When we arrived at the villa Pani Celina met me with as much overflowing tenderness and delight
as if Aniela in case of my death had not been the next of kin, and heiress to the Ploszow estate.
Such noble, disinterested women are not often met with in this world. I would not guarantee
that Kromitzki when he comes to hear about it may not utter a discreet sigh, and think that
the world would go on quite as well if there were no Ploszowskis.

Kromitzki returned very tired and cross. The Belgians he had met, and with whom he had gone
to Nassfeld, were capitalists from Antwerp. He spoke of them as idiots who were satisfied to
get three per cent. for their capital. He said when parting for the night that he wished to
talk with me in the morning about some important matter. Formerly I should have disliked the
idea of this, for I suppose he will make some financial proposition. Now I almost wished to
get it over at once; but I wanted to be alone with my thoughts, with my happiness, and with
Aniela in my heart and soul. I pressed her hand at good-night as a lover might, and she returned
a warm pressure.

"Are you really and truly mine?" I said inwardly.

16 July.

I had scarcely finished dressing in the morning when my aunt came into my room, and after wishing
me good-morning said, without any preface,--

"While you were away Kromitzki made me a proposal to enter into partnership with him."

"And what answer did you give him?"

"I refused point-blank. I said to him: 'My dear cousin, thank God, I have as much as I want;
and after my death Leon will be one of the wealthiest men in the country. Why should we rush
into adventures and tempt Providence? If you make millions in your enterprises, it will be
a good thing for you; if you lose your money, why should we lose ours with you? I do not know
anything about these things, and am not in the habit of undertaking what I know nothing about.'
Was I right?"

"Very much so."

"That is just what I wanted to talk over with you, and I am glad you look at it from the same
point of view. You see, he was a little offended that I called his enterprises adventures;
he explained everything to me, nevertheless, and told me what prospects he had for the future.
Then I asked him, straight out, why he wanted a partner, since everything was going on so well.
He replied that the more money was put into the concern the greater would be the profit; that
out there everything was done on a great scale, and he would rather the family shared the profits
than strangers. I thanked him for his family sympathies, but repeated my refusal. I saw that
he was greatly disappointed. He began to grumble that nobody in the country had any brains
for business; all they were capable of was to spend what they had got. He said in plain words
that it was a social crime not to use one's capital to a better purpose. Thereupon I became
very angry. 'My good friend,' I said, 'I have managed my estate I dare say in woman fashion,
but I have not lost any money; rather I have increased my property; and as to social crimes,
if anybody has the right to speak of that, it is certainly not you, who sold Gluchow. If you
wanted to hear the truth, you hear it now. If you had not sold Gluchow, I should have trusted
you more. As to your enterprises, it is not only I that know nothing about them, but others
too are equally in the dark; one thing is quite clear to me, and that is that if your prospects
were as brilliant as you make them out, you would not be in search of partners or feel hurt
at my refusal. You want a partner because you cannot do without; you have not dealt openly
with me, and that I dislike more than anything else.'"

"What did he say to that?"

"He said that he could not understand why he should be held responsible for the sale of Gluchow.
It was not he who had let the estate slip through his fingers; it had been slipping gradually
through the hands of those that had administered it badly, and it was their thoughtlessness
and lavishness that had made the sale indispensable. Aniela when she married him had nothing
but debts. He had saved out of the wreck more than anybody else could have done, and now instead
of gratitude he met with reproaches and--wait a bit, what word did he use?--yes, and 'pathetic
declamations.'"

"It is not true," I said; "Gluchow could have been saved."

"I said the same to him, and also that upon Gluchow I would have lent him the money. 'You might
have sent me word through Aniela,' I said to him, 'about the sale, or told her to talk it over
with me, and God knows, I would have made any sacrifice to save the property. But such is your
method,--not to let anybody know what you are doing. We all believed in your millions, and
that is the reason I never dreamed of offering you any pecuniary help.' He laughed ironically.
'Aniela,' he said, 'is too great a lady and far too lofty to stoop to interest herself in the
details of her husband's business. I asked her twice to speak to you about the partnership,
and both times she refused most decidedly. It is very easy to speak about saving Gluchow when
the opportunity is gone. Judging by the reception I have met with to-day, I am entitled to
believe that it would have been the same about Gluchow.'"

I had begun to listen with the greatest interest, for now I saw clearly what had led to the
estrangement between Kromitzki and Aniela. My aunt continued:--

"When I heard that I said: 'Now you see how little sincerity there is in what you told me.
At first you said that you proposed the partnership in order that the family might derive the
benefit of it, in preference to strangers, and now it turns out that you want it for your own
sake.' He is not wanting in cleverness, and therefore replied at once that in this kind of
affairs the gain was on both sides, and that naturally it was a matter of concern to him to
have as much capital at his disposition as he could get; for in this kind of business the larger
the basis it rested upon, the more certain the profit. 'Besides that,' he said, 'taking Aniela
without any money I thought I might count upon the support of the family, at least in a case
like this, when the help would turn out a clear gain to the family.' He was very cross, especially
when I told him he had not taken Aniela without anything, as it had always been my intention
to give her the life interest of a certain sum."

"You told him that?"

"Yes. I told him all that was uppermost in my mind. 'I love Aniela,' I said, 'as if she were
my own child; and for that very reason, to make her safe, I will not leave her the principal,
but a life interest. The principal might be swallowed up in your speculations, which may turn
out God knows how; and an annual income will give Aniela the means of a decent establishment.
The principal,' I said, 'will go to your children, if you have any, after Aniela's death; and
that is all I intend to do,--which of course does not exclude any smaller services I may be
able to render you.'"

"And that ended the conversation?"

"Almost. I saw he was very much upset. I fancy he was especially angry because I promised a
life interest to Aniela instead of a round sum down, as it shows how little I trust him. When
going away he said that for the future he would look for partners among strangers, as he could
not meet with less good-will, and might find a better understanding of business matters. I
meekly accepted this reproach. Yesterday he went for an excursion with the Belgians and came
back discontented, I suppose he tried it on with them and met with a disappointment. Do you
know what I think, Leon? His business is shaky, since he is so anxious to get partners. And
I may tell you that the thought troubles me; for if such be the case common-sense tells us
not to have anything to do with his affairs; and yet the simplest family duty bids us to help
him, if only for Aniela's sake. That is one reason why I was so anxious to talk it over with you."

"His affairs are not in such a desperate state as you think, aunty." And I told her what I
had heard from Chwastowski, and guessed long ago from Kromitzki's manner, namely, that he was
in want and looking about for capital. I added that it was mainly to inquire about the state
of his affairs that I had gone to Vienna.

My aunt was delighted with my tactics and perspicacity; and walking up and down the room according
to her habit she muttered to herself, "He is a genius in everything." She finally decided to
leave everything in my hands, and to act as I thought best. Upon this, she went below, and
I, after perusing yesterday's papers for half an hour, followed her.

I found the whole company gathered round the breakfast table, and one glance was sufficient
to tell me that something unusual had taken place. Aniela looked frightened, Pani Celina troubled,
and my aunt was flushed with anger. Only Kromitzki was quietly reading the paper, but he looked
cross, and his face was as yellow as if he had been ill.

"Do you know," said my aunt, pointing at Aniela, "what news she has brought me as a morning's
greeting?"

"No, what is it?" I said, sitting down at the table.

"Nothing more nor less than that in two weeks, Celina's health permitting, they are both going
to Odessa or somewhere farther still."

If a thunderbolt had fallen in the middle of the table, I could not have been more startled.
My heart sank within me. I looked at Aniela, who had grown very red, as if caught in the act
of committing a wrong deed, and at last asked, "Where are they going? why?"

"They give me a deal of trouble at Ploszow, you know," said my aunt, imitating Aniela's voice.
"They do not want to be a burden to me, the charitable souls. They evidently think I yearn
after solitude; and in case you went away too, it would be ever so much better, more cheerful
for me, to be by myself in that big house. They have discussed this all the night, instead
of sleeping like other respectable people."

My aunt waxed angrier still, and turning upon Kromitzki asked: "Did you preside at that debate?"

"Not at all," he replied; "I was never even consulted. But if my wife has resolved to go, I
suppose it is in order to be nearer me, for which I ought to feel grateful."

"There is nothing settled yet," remarked Aniela.

I, forgetting all precautions, looked steadily at her, but she did not lift her eyes; which
convinced me all the more that I was the cause of this sudden resolve. I cannot find words
to express what I felt at that moment, and what deadly bitterness suffused my heart. Aniela
knows perfectly that I live for her only, exist through her; that all my thoughts belong to
her, my actions have only her in view; that she is to me an issue of life and death; and in
spite of all that she calmly decides to go away. Whether I should perish or beat my head against
the wall, she never so much as considered. She will be more at ease when she ceases to see
me writhing like a beetle stuck on a pin; she will be no longer afraid of my kissing her feet
furtively, or startling that virtuous conscience. How can she hesitate when such excellent
peace can be got, at so small a price as cutting somebody's throat! Thoughts like these spun
across my brain by thousands. I felt a bitter taste in my mouth. "You are virtuous," I said
inwardly to Aniela, "because you have no heart. If a dog attached himself to you as I am attached,
something would be due to him. You have never shown me any indulgence, or any spark of pity;
you have never confessed to me any tender feeling, and you have taken from me what you could.
If you were able, you would deprive me of your presence altogether,--although you had the certainty
that if I could not see you my eyes would perish forever. But I begin to understand you now,
begin to see that your inflexibility is so great because your heart is so small. You are cold
and unfeeling, and your virtue is nothing but an enormous egoism, that wants above everything
to be left undisturbed, and for that peace is capable of sacrificing all else."

During the whole time of breakfast I did not say a word. When alone in my own room I held my
head with both hands and with a weary, over-wrought brain, began to think again of what had
happened. My thoughts were still very bitter. Women of narrow hearts often remain unyielding
through a certain philistinism of virtue. The first thing with them is to keep their accounts
in order, like any tradesman. They fear love, as the grocer fears street-risings, war, riots,
exalted ideas, and audacious flights of fancy. Peace at any price, because peace is good for
business. Everything that rises above the rational and commonplace standard of life is bad,
and deserves the contempt of reasonable beings. Virtue has its heights and precipices, but
also its level plains.

I now struggled with the exceedingly painful question whether Aniela did not belong to that
kind of commonplace virtuous women, who want to keep their accounts in order, and reject love
because it reaches above the ordinary standard of their hearts and minds. I searched in the
past for proofs. "Who knows," I said to myself, "whether her simple ethical code is not resting
upon such a foundation?" I had believed her to be one of those exceptional natures, different
from all other women, inaccessible as the snowy heights of the Alps that without any slope
soar straight heavenward. And now this lofty nature considers it the most proper thing that
a husband in slippers should trample on those snows. What does it all mean? Whenever thoughts
like these crowd my brain I feel as if I were on the brink of madness; such a rage seizes me
that if I could I would throw down, trample, and spit upon the forces of life, reduce the whole
world to chaos and obliterate its existence. On my journey back from Vienna I was searching
for some unearthly abode where I might love Aniela even as Dante loved Beatrice. I built it
of the sufferings from which as from fire my love had risen purified, of my renunciations and
sacrifices, and thought that in a superhuman, simply angelic way she would be mine, and feel
that she belonged to me. And now it came into my thoughts that it was not worth while to speak
about it, as she would not understand me; not worth while leading her on to those heights,
as she would not be able to breathe there. She might agree, in her soul, that I should go on
loving her, go on suffering, since that flatters her vanity; but no compact, no union the most
spiritual, no mutual belonging even in the Dantesque meaning,--to none of these will she agree,
because she understands only one belonging and one right, which is expressed in a man's dressing-gown,
and her soul cannot rise above the narrow, mean, matrimonial, book-keeping spirit.

I felt an overwhelming regret that I had not been in the wrecked train. The regret was as much
the result of physical exhaustion as of Aniela's cruelty. I was tired, as one who has watched
night after night at the sick bed of a very dear friend, and to whom death appears as a desired
rest. And then I thought that if they had brought my mangled remains to Gastein something would
perhaps have stirred in her. Thinking of this I suddenly remembered yesterday's Aniela, who
went with my aunt in search of me. I recalled to my mind the sudden terror and the joy close
upon it, those eyes full of tears, the disordered hair; and love immeasurable, love a hundred
times more real than all my thoughts and reasonings took possession of me. It was like a great
convulsive motion of the heart, which almost at once got buried in a wave of doubts. All I
had noticed that day might be explained upon quite different grounds. Who knows whether it
was I or my aunt who played the principal part in this emotion? Besides impressionable women
have always a store of sympathy at command, even for the merest stranger. What more natural
than that she should exhibit some feeling when he who was threatened by some danger was a relative?
She would naturally be horrified at the thought of my death, and rejoice at seeing me alive.
If, instead of her, Pani Sniatynska had been staying with my aunt, she too would have been
terror-stricken, and I should have seen her without her gloves, and her hair in disorder. No,
in regard to that I cannot delude myself any longer. Aniela knew very well that her departure
would be to me a more dangerous catastrophe than a wound on my head or the loss of an arm or
leg; and yet she did not hesitate a moment. I was perfectly aware that it was all her doing.
She wanted to be near her husband, and what would become of me was not taken into account.

Again I felt myself growing pale with anger, hatred, and indignation, and only one step removed
from madness. "Stop a little," I said to myself, pressing both hands against my temples; "perhaps
she is seeking safety in flight because she loves you, and feels she cannot resist any longer."
Ah me! and these thoughts sprung up, but they did not find any congenial soil and perished
like the seed sown on a rock; they only roused a bitter, despairing irony. "Yes," something
said within me, "hers is a love resembling the compassion which makes people remove the pillow
from under the dying man's head, to shorten his agony. I shall not suffer much longer, and
Kromitzki will be able to see her often and bring her such comfort as a wife expects from her
husband."

Aniela at that moment was hateful to me. For the first time in my life I wished she really
loved Kromitzki; she would have been less repugnant to me. Anger and resentment almost deprived
me of my senses, and I saw clearly that if I did not do something, revenge myself upon her
in some way, something terrible would happen to me. I jumped up, and under the influence of
that thought, as if touched by a red-hot iron, I took my hat and went forth in search of Kromitzki.
I did not find him either in the house or in the garden. I went to the Wandelbahn, then to
the reading-rooms; he was in neither of the two places. I stopped for a moment on the bridge
near the Cascades, thinking what to do next. The wind coming from that direction blew a cloud
of spray into my face. This caused me a pleasant sensation and relieved the tension of my nerves.
I bared my head and exposed it to the spray until my hair was quite wet. I felt a purely animal
delight in the coolness. I had regained all my self-possession. There remained now only the
distinct and decided wish to thwart Aniela. I said to her, "You shall not be allowed to go
away, and henceforth I will treat you as a man who has paid for you with his money." I saw
the way clear before me, and was not afraid of making any mistakes in dealing with Kromitzki.
I found him outside Straubinger's hotel reading the paper. When he saw me he dropped his eyeglass
and said:--

"I was just thinking of going to look for you."

"Let us go on the Kaiserweg."

And we went. Not waiting for him to begin, I plunged at once into the subject.

"My aunt told me about your conversation with her yesterday," I said.

"I am very sorry it took place at all," replied Kromitzki.

"As far as I can judge, you were both not as calm as one ought to be in treating affairs of
that kind. My dear fellow, I will be open with you, and tell you at once that you do not know
my aunt. She is the dearest woman in the world, but she has one weakness. Possessed of a great
deal of common-sense and shrewdness, she likes to assert them; therefore any new scheme or
proposition is met by her with a certain almost exaggerated suspicion. For that reason she
invariably refuses at first to have anything to do with it. Chwastowski, her manager, might
tell you something about that. In dealing with her it is always best to suggest a thing and
leave her time to digest it; and besides, you rubbed her the wrong way, and that makes her
always more determined; a pity you could not have avoided that."

"But how could I have irritated her? If anybody it is I who should be able to discuss matters
of this kind."

"You made a mistake in saying that you had married Aniela without a dowry; she is still very
angry about that."

"I said it when she threw the sale of Gluchow in my teeth. Besides I only spoke the truth;
Gluchow was so encumbered that next to nothing really belonged to Aniela."

"Plainly speaking, what induced you to sell that unfortunate estate?"

"Because by doing so I was able to do a good turn to somebody upon whom my future career depends
to a great extent; besides, he paid more than I could have got from anybody else."

"Well, let that pass. My aunt felt all the more hurt as she has some intentions in regard to
Aniela."

"Yes, I know. She is going to leave her a yearly income."

"Between ourselves, I tell you that she thinks of no such thing. I know she spoke to you about
a life interest, because she was angry and wanted to let you feel that she mistrusted your
business capacities. I as her heir ought to know something about her intentions, especially
as she does nothing without consulting me."

Kromitzki looked at me keenly. "Anything she is doing for Aniela," he said, "would be against
your interest as the heir."

"Yes, that is so; but I do not spend even my income, consequently I can speak about it quite
calmly. If you cannot explain it any other way, consider it as a whim of mine. There are such
people in the world. I may tell you that I do not intend to put any limit to my aunt's generosity,
and also that she intends to give Aniela, not the life interest she spoke about, but the capital.
Of course my influence might turn the scale either way, but I do not intend to exert it against
you."

Kromitzki squeezed my hand with effusion, and his shoulders moved exactly like those of a wooden
manikin. How repulsive the man is to me! I suppose he considered me more of a fool than an
oddity; but he believed me, and that was all I wanted. He is quite right as to that, for I
was decided that Aniela should have the capital instead of only a life interest. I saw that
he was consumed with curiosity to know how much and when; but he understood that it would not
do to show his hand so openly, and therefore remained silent as if from emotion. I continued:--

"You must remember one thing, my aunt wants careful handling. I know for certain that she means
to provide for Aniela; but it all depends on her will, and even her humor. In the mean while,
what is it you both are doing? Yesterday you made her angry, and to-day Aniela vexed her still
more. As the future heir I ought to rejoice at your blunders, and not warn you, and yet you
see I am doing the opposite. My aunt was deeply hurt by Aniela's plan, and in her anger turned
upon you, hoping, I fancy, that you would take her side; but you, on the contrary, supported them!"

"My dear fellow," said Kromitzki, squeezing my hand again, "I will tell you openly that I agreed
to their plan because I was vexed with your aunt, and that is the top and bottom of it. There
is no sense in it at all. I cannot stand exaltation, and both these women are full of it. They
always seem to think they ought not to take advantage of your aunt's hospitality, that they
cannot always remain at Ploszow, and so on, ad infinitum. I am heartily sick of it. In the
mean while it is this way: I cannot take them with me to Turkestan, and when I am there it
is all the same to me whether they are at Odessa or at Warsaw. When I wind up my affairs, with
a more than considerable fortune, I hope I shall give them, of course, an adequate home. That
will take place in a year at the latest. The sale of the business itself will bring in a considerable
sum. If they were not at Ploszow, I should have to look out for some other place; but since
your aunt offers her house and is pleased to have them, it would be folly not to accept the
offer. My mother-in-law has only just recovered from her illness. Who knows what might happen
in the future? and if things went wrong, Aniela, young and inexperienced as she is, would be
alone with all these troubles. I simply cannot remain with them; even now I am in a fever to
be off, and only delayed my departure in the hope that I might persuade you or your aunt into
a partnership. Now I have told you all that is in my mind; and it is your turn to tell me whether
I may count upon your good-will."

I breathed again. Aniela's scheme was reduced to nothing. I was delighted because I had got
what I wanted. Although my love for Aniela was akin to deep hatred, it was all I had to live
for, and it wanted food; and this it would get only from Aniela's presence. From Kromitzki's
words I concluded that by one stroke I could gain the most wished for end,--Kromitzki's departure
for an almost unlimited time. I remained impassive, and thought it more advisable to show myself
a little reluctant.

"I cannot," I said, "give you any promise beforehand. Tell me first exactly how you stand."

He began to talk, and talked with great volubility, showing that once embarked upon this theme,
he felt himself in his proper element. Now and then he paused to buttonhole me or press me
against the rocks. When he had said something he thought very convincing, he swiftly screwed
his eyeglass into his eye and scrutinized my face to see what impression he had made upon me.
This, added to his voice, which was like the sound of creaking hinges, and the reiteration
of his "what, what," was very trying to my nerves, but I must render him justice; he did not
try to deceive me. He told me substantially the same things that I had heard from Chwastowski.
The affair stood thus: Great capital had already been invested in material, the purveying of
which was solely in Kromitzki's hands. The danger of the business consisted in the fact that
the capital already sunk came back to him only after passing through various official forms,
therefore very slowly; and also in the fact that Kromitzki had to deal with purveyors whose
interest it was to supply him with the very worst materials, for which he was held responsible.
This last point put him more or less at the mercy of the agency, which besides had the most
complete right to accept only good material. Who knows what complications might arise from
that? After having listened to his statement, which lasted an hour, I replied:--

"My good fellow, considering all you have told me, neither my aunt nor I can have anything
to do with the partnership."

His countenance fell, and he turned very yellow. "Tell me why," he said.

"If you, in spite of cautiousness and care, are in danger of lawsuits, we will not be mixed
up in your affairs."

"Looking at things in that way, nobody would embark in any business at all."

"There is no necessity for us to do so. But supposing we entered into any partnership, how
much would you want us to put into the business?"

"It is of no use to speak of that now; but if you could have come into it, let us say with
seventy-five thousand roubles--"

"No, we will not put anything into the business; we do not think it advisable to do so. But
as you are connected with our family, we will help you in another way. In brief, I will lend
you the sum you mentioned upon a note of hand."

Kromitzki stopped, looked at me, and blinked as one who is not fully awake. But this lasted
only a moment. He evidently thought it would not be wise to show too great a delight,--a mercantile
caution not at all necessary, and ridiculous under present circumstances. He only pressed my
hand and said: "Thank you,--at what rate of interest?"

"We will talk of that later on. I must go back now and talk with my aunt."

I said good-by at once. On the way I reflected whether Kromitzki would not think my acting
thus a little curious and open to suspicion. But it was a vain fear. Husbands are proverbially
blind, not because they love and trust their wives, but because they love themselves. Besides,
Kromitzki, looking at us from his business point of view, considers me and my aunt as two fantastic
beings, who, with little knowledge of practical matters, stick to antiquated notions about
family ties and duties. He is, indeed, in many respects of such an altogether different type
from us, that we cannot help looking upon him as an intruder.

When I came back to the villa I saw Aniela at the gate buying wild strawberries from a peasant
woman. Passing close by, I said roughly, "You will not go away, because I do not wish it,"
and then went up into my room.

During dinner the conversation again turned upon the departure of the ladies. This time Kromitzki
spoke up and treated the whole thing as a childish whim, to be laughed at by sensible people.
He was not very considerate either to his wife or his mother-in-law, but then his nature is
not a refined one. I did not say anything,--as if the question of their going or staying mattered
very little to me. But I noticed that Aniela was conscious that her husband acted as a mere
puppet in my hands, and she felt ashamed for him and deeply humiliated; but such was the resentment
I had towards her that the sight of it did me good.

For in truth I was deeply wounded, and I cannot forgive Aniela. If, on the way from Vienna,
I had not thought so much of that new compact, if I had not made a wholesale sacrifice of all
my desires, passions, and senses, in fact of my whole nature, I should not have felt the disappointment
so acutely. But it fell out so cruelly that, when, out of love for her, I was ready to change
my whole being, when I climbed to a height I had never reached before, only to be near her,
she, without any consideration or pity for me, wished to push me into the very depth of despair
and without considering for a moment what would become of me! These thoughts poison even the
pleasure afforded by Kroimitzki's departure.

The future will bring some kind of solution, but I am too tired to speculate upon it. The simplest
solution would be inflammation of the brain. It will come to that. I torment myself all the
day, do not sleep at night, smoke endless cigars to stupefy myself, and sit up till daylight.

30 July.

I have not written in my diary for two weeks. I went; with Kromitzki to Vienna to conclude
his business; after which he remained three days and then left for the East. I had such violent
headaches that I could not write. Pani Celina's cure is completed, but we still remain at Gastein
because of the great heat.

Kromitzki's departure was a great relief to me, to Pani Celina,--whom he irritates to such
a degree that if he were not her son-in-law she could not stand him at all,--and perhaps also
to Aniela. The latter cannot forgive him that he involved me in his affairs. He, not supposing
there could be anything between me and his wife except social relations, made no secret of
the loan. She opposed it energetically, but could not tell him the reason,--perhaps from a
secret fear that after an explanation he might compel her to remain where she is, and thus
destroy the last shred of respect she has for him. I am almost sure that since the sale of
Gluchow, both she and her mother distrust him, and in the secrecy of their hearts consider
him worse than he really is. In my opinion he is a spiritual upstart, with a dry and wooden
disposition, and incapable of any fine feeling or subtle thought. There is no generosity in
him; his mind is neither deep, noble, nor sensitive; but in the general acceptance of the word
he is a decent member of society. A certain natural pedantry aids him in this, which harmonizes
with his money-making neurosis,--a degenerated imaginativeness seeking expression in financial
adventure. Taking him all in all, he is so intensely repulsive to me--with his eyeglass, oblique
eyes, long legs, and sallow, hairless face--that I doubt if I am capable of judging him objectively.
Nevertheless I am quite sure that unless he loses his own money I shall not lose mine. But
I put it down, in all sincerity, that I would rather he lost the money, his senses, his life,
and went altogether to perdition.

I am ill. I have seen very little of Aniela lately,--partly by reason of my headaches, that
kept me confined to my room, and partly because I wished to let her feel how deeply she had
injured and grieved me. Not to see her cost me great self-denial, for my eyes want her as they
want the light. I have already mentioned that with all her inflexibility, she has a certain
weakness: she cannot bear that anybody should be angry with her; it frightens her, and she
tries her best to conciliate those that are angry. She is then meek, sweet tempered, and looks
into one's eyes with the pleading expression of a child who is afraid to be punished. This
always moved me deeply and was my delight, as it kept up the delusion that I had only to open
my arms and she would fall upon my neck, if only to soften my resentment. I cannot get rid
altogether of this delusion, although convinced of its futility; and even now I cherish some
hope in a corner of my heart that when we come to make it up, something will happen between
us,--she will make a kind of submission and will draw closer to me. On the other hand I see
in this mutual irritation a tacit acknowledgment on the part of Aniela that I have the right
to love her; for if she admits the resentment springing from love, she must admit the love
itself. It is a shadowy right, dim and vague as a dream, without shape or substance; yet I
cling to it, for it saves me from utter apathy and hopelessness.

2 August.

I have received another letter from Clara Hilst. She must have divined something; there is
much pity and sympathy in her words, as if she knew how wretched I am. I do not know and do
not want to know, whether she loves me as a sister or otherwise, I only feel that she loves
me. I answered her letter in the same hearty spirit, grateful for her friendliness. She is
going to Berlin now, and promises her appearance in Warsaw for the winter. She wants me to
come to Berlin, if only for a few days. I will not go to Berlin, will not part from my troubles,
but shall be glad to see her again at Warsaw. With Aniela I speak only of indifferent subjects,
so as not to draw the attention of the elder ladies to the state of things between us. When
alone we are both silent. I noticed several times that she was about to say something, but
seemed afraid; as regards myself I could only say, "I love you;" and even that seems inadequate
to express my feelings.

There is now resentment in my love. The thought is troubling my mind that she has a narrow
heart, and that in this lies the secret of her unyieldingness. To-day, when I come to think
it over more calmly, I go back to the conviction that she has some feeling for me, composed
of gratitude, pity, and memories of the past; but it has no active power, cannot rise above
prejudice,--even to the avowal of its existence. It does not respect itself, hides, is ashamed
of itself, and in comparison with mine is as the mustard-seed to those Alps which surround
us. From Aniela one may expect that she will restrict it rather than let it grow. It is of
no use to hope or watch for anything from her; that conviction makes me very wretched.

4 August.

Some time ago I had a faint hope that under the influence of indignation against her husband,
Aniela might come to me and say: "Since you have paid for me, I am yours." Another of my delusions.
Any other woman, with exalted notions fed upon French novels, might have acted thus; or one
who wanted only a pretext to throw herself into a lover's arms. No; Aniela will never do that,
and if such a thought came into my mind at all it is because I too have been fed upon those
pseudo-dramas of the feminine soul, which at bottom illustrate only the desire to cast virtue
adrift. There is but one thing which would push Aniela into my arms, and that is her heart;
but no artificial scenes, no phrases or false pathos. There is not the slightest possibility
of her yielding to these.

If it be a great misfortune to love another man's wife, be she ever so commonplace, it is an
infinitely greater misfortune to love a virtuous woman. There is something in my relations
to Aniela of which I never heard or read; there is no getting out of it, no end. A solution,
whether it be a calamity or the fulfilment of desire, is something, but this is only an enchanted
circle. If she remain immovable and I do not cease loving her, it will be an everlasting torment,
and nothing else. And I have the despairing conviction that neither of us will give way.

If she has a narrow heart it will not trouble her very much. As to myself I desire nothing
more ardently than to get free from bondage; but I cannot get free. I say to myself, over and
over again, that it must be done; and I put forth all my strength, as the drowning man does
to save himself. At times I fancy that I have achieved some kind of victory, when lo! I see
her passing under my window, my eyes rest upon her, and I experience a shock in my heart; the
whole depth of my feeling is revealed, as the flash of lightning tears asunder the clouds and
shows the depth of the sky. Ah me! what torture to have to deal with virtue, cold and merciless
as the letter of the law! Even if Aniela had no heart I should still love her, as a mother
would love a child though it were deformed. Pity then grows all the stronger,--and so does pain.

5 August.

What an inadequate, mean standard is human intellect when it comes to measure anything great,
awesome, or very lofty. Reason, which serves well enough in the everyday conditions of life,
becomes a drivelling fool, like Polonius, in exceptional cases. It seems to me that the usual
ethical code cannot be considered a standard by which to measure great passions. To see in
an immense feeling like mine only the infringement of this or that law, not to see anything
else, not to see that it is an element and part of those higher forces that mock at empty rules,
a godlike, immeasurable, creative power on which rests the All-Life, is a kind of blindness
and littleness. Alas, Aniela thus looks upon my love! I suppose she often thinks I must respect
her for her conduct; while I--God knows, I do not say it because it concerns my own fate, but
judging her quite impartially--despise her, or at least try not to despise her for it, and
say to her inwardly: "I should respect you and worship you a thousandfold if you could look
upon the matter differently, not as regards our relations, but as regards love in general."

6 August.

There is something in Gastein very health-giving. To-day I noticed that Aniela has gained quite
a brown color from the mountain air, and looks very well; which is all the more noteworthy,
as she has had many troubles and anxieties. One of her troubles was the difference arising
between her and her husband, the humiliation of his accepting a loan from me, and my love,
which distracts her mind and troubles her peace. Notwithstanding all this, the delicate face
is glowing with health. There is more color in it than before we came here. I recall the time
when she seemed almost to fade away in my eyes. I remember how horrified I was at the thought
that her life might be in danger. To-day that fear at least has ceased to haunt me. If I knew
that in the future there would be even less pity for me, that my feelings for her would count
for nothing, but that she would be happy and full of health, I should say: "Let her be pitiless,
let her slight my feelings, provided she be well." In the composition of true feeling, there
is the desire for personal happiness, but there is also tender thoughtfulness and affection.

Yesterday Aniela had donned one of her old dresses. I noticed it at once, and the whole past
stood before me. Jane Leade often describes her flower garden as oriental.

Psychologically and mythologically the breeze has the value of a
spermatic symbol.

Anagogically it is concerned with the bestowing of a power or (to retain the procreation metaphor)
the impregnation with such a power.] Therefore this word was revealed and spoken to me: ‘This
is space and place where the love realm is to arise and become verdant with its natural inhabitants,
who have laid aside their crass self-love [selfishness] and left it behind them, as it might
not come here; even as it is the one which makes the entrance so narrow and crowded....’ Hereupon
I saw in my spirit unexpectedly different persons, modified out of
measure in their bodies, and they were so highly versed in this mystery
that they breathed forth such a spirit from them that they could give
being and existence to everything that they willed and desired.

At times they spread golden tents and went in and out of them, at
other times in places that appeared to be quite waste and desolate
they made wonderful plants and trees to grow up, which actually offered
their perfect fruit that appeared in a bright golden radiance; of
which it was related that they were the magical nourishment and food
on which the inhabitants of this land were supposed to live.” [We
may also say the masters of the art cultivate an uncultivated people,
and provide spiritual nourishment at the drawing table.] “And although
at my first entrance here it seemed that I saw nothing, yet I did
see after a few moments this whole spacious place filled with spirits
of so high a degree that they attracted me at once.

Thereupon they set me divers philosophical questions [Catechizing.] which I did not understand.
So one of them in a very friendly manner offered to instruct and teach me; said further that
he would teach me the secret of their art.... Accordingly he brought me into a magnificent tent,
and requested me to wait there so that I might advance into the pure acts or works of faith,
because I would succeed thereby in becoming an adept in this high
philosophy.


We could talk only about our two selves, or else remain silent. And we walked on in silence
for a long time; this silence besides was necessary for me, and gave me time to conquer that
restlessness which seizes us when we approach a great crisis. I got myself so far under control
that I resolved to speak of my love, with calmness and naturally, as if it were a known and
established fact. Experience had taught me that women can be attuned to any disposition. Nothing
influences the feminine mind so much as the tone of conversation; and if the man in making
a proposal does it with the air of one who expects the earth to swallow him as soon as he has
uttered the words, that is, in terror and the consciousness that he is doing something quite
unheard of, that terror and that consciousness communicate themselves very quickly to the woman.
Acting in the opposite way, the proposal loses much of its impressiveness, but it goes smoother
and creates less opposition. Besides, I had already told her of my love; all I wanted now was
to prevent Aniela from going off at a tangent at the first tender word; in that case conversation
would become impossible. It was necessary to introduce the subject in order to establish our
future relations on a proper basis. Considering all this, I said in a very quiet voice:--

"You cannot have the slightest idea how deeply you hurt me by that project of your departure.
I know very well that the reasons you gave were only ostensible, and that I was the cause of
that sudden resolution. In making your plans you forgot only one thing, and that is what would
become of me. That did not enter into your calculation at all. Believe me, it was not your
departure which would have hurt me, so much as the thought that I count for nothing in your
life. You might say that you meant it for the best and wanted me to forget you. Do not try
that, for the remedy would be worse than you suppose."

Aniela's face in an instant was covered with burning blushes. It was evident that my words
had touched her to the quick. I do not know what she would have said, on the spur of the moment,
had not an accident diverted her attention. Close to the road, there suddenly appeared one
of those cretins so common about Gastein. He was not a pleasant sight, with that big head,
immense goître, and bestial expression of face. He had risen so suddenly from amid the tall
grasses that Aniela screamed with terror. While she recovered herself and searched for some
money--I had forgotten my purse--several minutes elapsed. During that time the impression my
words had made upon her had grown less vivid, and as we resumed our walk she said, in a sad
voice, full of inexpressible sweetness:--

"You have often been unjust to me, but never more so than now. You think that it costs me nothing,
that I have no heart; and yet I am not a whit happier than you."

Her voice seemed to fail, and my pulses began to beat wildly. It seemed to me that one more
effort and I should force from her a confession.

"Aniela!" I exclaimed, "for God's sake tell me what you mean!"

"I mean that since I am unhappy, you must allow me to remain honest. Dear Leon, I beg you to
have pity upon me. You do not know how unhappy I am! I would sacrifice everything except my
honesty. Do not ask me to give up that last plank of salvation,--because it is not right, one
is not allowed to sacrifice that! Oh, Leon, Leon!"

She folded her hands and looked at me with eyes veiled by tears, and her body trembling like
an aspen leaf. I do not know, if I had taken her into my arms she might have died afterwards
from shame and sorrow, but probably she would not have found the strength to resist. But at
that moment I forgot about my own self and saw only her. I threw at her feet my senses, my
passions, and my egoism. What did it all matter where she was concerned? The beloved woman
that defends herself with tears, tears that do not flow for the sake of keeping up appearances
but from the depth of her sorrow, is invincible. I took both her hands, kissed them with reverent
love, and said:--

"It will be as you wish; I swear it upon the love I bear you."

We both could not speak for some time. To confess the truth, I felt at this moment a better
and nobler man than I had ever been before. I was like one who has passed the crisis in a severe
illness, is still very weak and exhausted, but glad of the dawning life before him. Presently
I began to talk to her, quietly and gently, not only as a lover but as the nearest friend,
whose main object is the happiness of the being that belongs to him.

"You do not want to stray from the right path," I said; "and I will not lead you astray. You
have changed me, and all the sorrows and sufferings I endure have made a different man of me.
Through you I have come to understand the difference between love and passion. I cannot promise
that I shall cease to love you, for I cannot; I should lie to you and to myself if I should
promise that. I do not say it in temporary exaltation, but as a man who has looked into his
inmost self and knows what is delusion and what truth. I will love you as if you were dead,--I
will love your soul. Do you agree to that, Aniela dear? It is a sad love, but angelic. You
can accept and return it. I make my vow of faithfulness this moment, and it is as binding as
if it had been uttered before the altar. I shall never marry another woman; I shall live for
you only, and my soul will be yours. You too will love me as if I had died. I do not ask for
anything else; and you will not refuse, because there is no sin. You have read Dante? Remember,
he too was married, and he loved Beatrice with the same love I ask from you; he openly acknowledged
the feeling, and the Church holds his poem as almost a sacred thing. If you have that feeling
for me in your heart, give me your hand, and after that nothing will be able to come between
us or to mar our peace."

Aniela, after a momentary silence, gave me her hand. "I always had that friendship for you."
she said, "and I promise you from my heart and soul."

I winced at the word "friendship," which is too small for me, and does not express our feelings.
But I did not say anything. "The word 'love' still frightens her," I said to myself; "she will
get accustomed to it by and by;" and since the thing is essentially the same, it was not worth
while to disturb the peace at which we had arrived through stormy seas of misunderstandings,
troubles, and sorrows. We are both so tired that the rest is welcome and is worth making some
little sacrifices for.

Besides, it was a mere shadow, that disappeared in the joyful light of the thought that the
dear being belongs to me and is spiritually my faithful wife. I would have given anything if
to a question "Are you really mine?" she had answered in the affirmative. I would have asked
the question a hundred times a day and never tired of the answer; but at this moment I did
not want to frighten her. I, who can make allowance for so many things, understand that there
are certain words which, however expressive of the existing state of things they may be, come
with difficulty from a woman's lips,--especially from those of such a woman as Aniela. Yet
every word she said was a confession that she loves me; and did she not consent that our souls
should belong to each other? What more could I wish for?

When we had gone as far as the Schreckbrücke, we turned back. On the way we tried to look at
our new position, as people look around a new house and try to make themselves at home in it.
This did not come easy to either of us at first. Even this pleased me, for it seemed to me
that thus bride and bridegroom would feel a few hours after they were joined in wedlock, while
yet they had not had time to grow accustomed to each other. Nevertheless I spoke a great deal
about us both. I explained to her the holiness and purity of such a union as ours. I tried
to inspire her with trust and confidence. She listened to me with a bright, serene countenance,
and now and then turned her beautiful eyes towards me. The serenity of the weather corresponded
with the serenity of our souls. The sun had gone down behind the mountains; and they shone
now in their evening dress of purple. I offered my arm to Aniela, which she accepted, and so
we went together in the soothing stillness of the evening. Suddenly I noticed that her step
had grown uncertain, as if she were afraid of something, and her face became very white. It
lasted only a minute, but her disturbance was so evident that I got frightened for her, and
began to ask what had frightened her.

At first she did not want to tell me, but when I insisted she confessed reluctantly that the
unfortunate cretin had come into her mind, and that for an instant she had felt afraid he might
suddenly jump up from the roadside.

"I do not know," she said, "why he should have made such a horrible impression on me, and feel
ashamed to have such silly nerves, but I would not meet him again for anything in the world."

I soothed and comforted her, saying that nothing could happen to her while I was by. She still
kept looking uneasily at the roadside, but presently our conversation dispersed the unpleasant
impression.

It was dusk when we arrived at the Cascades, but the evening was exceptionally warm. On the
square before Straubinger's a great many people were listening to some strolling harpists.
I do not know why this solitary mountain pass should have reminded me so strongly of Italy.
It recalled to my memory the evenings on the Pincio, when I thought how happy I could be had
I Aniela at my side. I now felt her arm resting upon mine, and still more felt her soul close
to my own. And thus, full of sweet peacefulness, we returned home.

10 August.

I thought to-day much about what Aniela had said to me on the way to the Schreckbrücke. I was
particularly struck by the exclamation which burst from her lips: "You do not know how unhappy
I am!" There was such deep sorrow, such a wail in these words, and an involuntary confession
that she does not love her husband, cannot love him; and also that her heart, in spite of all
her efforts, belongs to me. If so she has been as unhappy as I. I say "has been," because at
present she is not. Now she can say to herself: "I can remain true and keep my faith; and for
the rest, I trust to God."

11 August.

It came into my mind that I had no right to expect Aniela to sacrifice everything for me. It
is not true that one sacrifices everything to love. If, for instance, I had an encounter with
Kromitzki and she adjured me in the name of our love to ask his pardon on my bended knees,
I would not do it. It is a fantastic, senseless supposition, yet at the very thought the blood
mounts to my head. No, Aniela dear, you are right; there are things we may not sacrifice even
to love.

12 August.

We went in the morning on the Windischgrätzhöhe. It is about three quarters of an hour on foot,
but I got a horse for Aniela, which I led by the bridle. Walking at her side, I rested my hand
on the horse's neck and at the same time touched her dress. Mounting on the horse's back, she
held on to me for a moment and the old Adam woke up very strong in me. To kill him, I should
have to annihilate my body and become a spirit. I bound myself to keep my senses and impulses
under control, and I am doing so; but I did not bind myself not to have them. I might as well
have bound myself not to breathe. If the touch of Aniela's hand made no more impression upon
me than if it were a piece of wood it would prove that I did not love her any longer, and then
all pledges would be unnecessary. Saying to Aniela that my whole nature had changed in contact
with her, I did not intend to deceive her, but had not exactly defined the change. The truth
is I only keep myself in check. I renounced complete happiness in order to secure a part of
it. I preferred to have Aniela in this way to not having her at all, and I think that every
one who knows the meaning of true love will understand me easily. If the passions are dogs,
as the poets say, I have chained them up, will starve them into submission, but I cannot prevent
their straining at the chain or emitting an occasional howl.

I know to what I have pledged myself, and shall keep to it; there is nothing else to do. In
the face of Aniela's firmness of purpose there is no room for any agreeing or disagreeing.
The fear that she may take back what she has given is enough curb for me. I rather exaggerate
my caution and wariness, so as not to frighten away the bird which I call "spiritual love,"
and she calls "friendship." That word, which in the first moment was merely a prick, enough
to make me wince, is gradually growing into a sore. At the time it seemed to me not expressive
enough, and now it appears to me too cautious, too full of conditions. How strange that characteristic
of feminine nature, not to call things by their name. Yet I explained distinctly to Aniela
what I was asking for, and she understood me fully; and nevertheless she called the feeling
"friendship," as if she wanted to veil herself with it before me, before herself and God.

Looking at it from another point, it is true that a feeling devoid of all earthly substance
may be called by any name. There is sadness and bitterness in the thought. This caution, common
to very pure-minded women, is undoubtedly the outcome of their modesty, but it does not permit
them to be generous. I might go straight to Aniela and say to her: "I have sacrificed to you
one half of my existence, and you grudgingly dole me out your words; is it right?" And I tell
her so inwardly with reproachful eyes. It is difficult to imagine love without generosity,
without a desire to make some sacrifices.

To-day on Windischgrätzhöhe we conversed together like two beings closely connected by the
ties of love and friendship, but there was nothing in our speech that brother and sister might
not have said to each other. If we had made such an excursion before we had entered into our
compact, I should undoubtedly have taken some advantage of it, kissed her hands or feet or
even tried, if only for a moment, to take her in my arms; to-day I walked quietly at her side,
like one who is afraid of the slightest frown. Partly I restrained myself on purpose, thinking
that in this way I should win her confidence and favor. By this silence I meant to say: "You
will not be disappointed in me; I will take rather less than I have a right to,--so as not
to break our compact."

But one feels hurt all the same, when the sacrifice is accepted promptly and cheerfully as
soon as it is offered. Involuntarily one says inwardly to the beloved woman: "Do not let yourself
be outdone in generosity." And I said so,--but in vain.

What is the result? A certain disappointment for myself. I used to think if such a compact
existed between us, I should have perfect liberty within its boundaries; should be able to
say, "I love you" as often as I liked, and hear the same from her lips; and that this would
compensate me for all my torments, for the whole time of my suffering,--in short that I should
be king in that restricted kingdom; but now it appears that my horizon gets narrower than ever,
and doubts arise within me that might be compressed in the query: "What have you gained?" I
try to chase the thoughts away. I have gained something. I have gained the sight of a bright
and happy face; I have gained the smile; I have gained the delight of seeing her limpid eyes
look fearlessly into mine. If I feel cramped and not quite at home in the new house, the reason
is that I have not got used to it. Besides, formerly I was without a roof to shelter me; and
if I cannot always see clearly what I have gained, I know perfectly well that I have lost nothing.
I shall never forget that.

14 August.

My aunt begins to talk about going home. She is pining after her beloved Ploszow. I asked Aniela
if she would like to go. She said she would; therefore I too am anxious to return. Formerly
I attached some vague, undefined hope to a change of place. Now I expect nothing; but at Ploszow
there are so many pleasant memories that I shall be glad to see the place again.

16 August.

The days flow now very evenly. I think much and I rest. My thoughts are often sad, at times
not without bitterness, but my soul was so weary that I find this restfulness very soothing.
It makes me feel conscious how much better off I am than I used to be. I am mostly with Aniela;
we read together, and then discuss what we have read. Everything I say to her is only a definition,
a development of love; everything tends in that direction; but strange to say I notice that
now I never speak of it directly, as if that feminine objection to calling things by their
proper names had also infected me. I do not know why this is so, but it is a fact. And it grieves
me,--sometimes grieves me very much; and it pleases me, because I see that Aniela is pleased,
and what is more, loves me for it. In order to cement the union of our souls, I have begun
to speak much about myself so as not to have any secrets from her. I am reticent only about
such things as might offend her delicacy of feeling or the purity of her thoughts. I tried
to initiate her into the workings of a spirit undermined by scepticism and the want of a basis
in life. I told her openly that I had nothing to live for except her; told her also what was
going on within me after her marriage, what shocks had passed through my heart and brain since
my return to Ploszow; I spoke of this all the more eagerly, as it was like a series of confessions,
as it all meant: "I loved you then, as I love you now, beyond expression." She was deceived
as to the meaning of these confidences and listened to them as if there had been no question
about her, with emotion, sympathy, and possibly unconscious delight. I saw tears gathering
in her eyes, her breast heaved as if her whole spiritual being went out to me with open arms
saying: "Come to me; you have suffered enough and deserve some happiness." And I reply with
my eyes: "I do not ask, do not remind you of anything; I am altogether at your mercy."

I made those confidences also for another reason, namely, to introduce the habit of mutual
confidence between us, and make her tell me what was going on in her mind at the same time.
But I could not manage it. I tried to ask, but the words seemed to come from her with such
difficulty, there was such evident constraint and uneasiness, that I left off asking. To be
quite open with me, she would have to reveal all she felt for me and what was her relation
to her husband. I wanted her to come to that; but her modesty and her loyalty for the absent
husband would not permit her to speak.

I understood all perfectly, but I could not help feeling very sore, and my pessimism says:
"It is you who pay the score; you give everything, without getting anything in return; you
are deceived in thinking her soul belongs to you; even that soul remains a blank to you; then
what do you possess?"

I admit the truthfulness of the utterance, but still I count upon the future.

17 August.

I am often reminded of the poet Mickiewicz's words, "Alas! it was only a half-salvation!" But
even if I did not see in that half-salvation all that is wanting, I could not arrive at perfect
peace. This would be achieved only by not desiring anything more, in other words by ceasing
to love. There come upon me, more and more, moments of despondency when I say to myself that
this is only another enchanted circle. I found some relief from torments I could bear no longer,
that is true; but relief is not the same as the removal of the pain. When the famished Arab
sucks pebbles instead of drinking water, he does not satisfy his thirst; he only deceives it.
Query: Do I deceive my self? There are again two persons within me: the spectator and the actor;
and the one criticises and mocks the other. The sceptic Ploszowski, the Ploszowski who has
no settled and unshakable belief in the existence of a soul, in love with a soul, appears simply
ridiculous to that critical number two. What is, after all, my relation with Aniela? Sometimes
I see in it merely the product of a diseased imagination. I am now indeed like the bird that
drags one wing on the earth. I have doomed to paralysis one half of my being, live only half
a life, and love with half a love. It is a vain enterprise. To separate desire from love is
as impossible as to separate thought from existence. Even religious feelings, the most ideal
of all feelings, manifest themselves by words, by songs, by kneeling, and kissing of sacred
objects; and I would deprive the love for a woman of all embodiment, sever all connection with
the earth, and make it live upon earth in a transmundane shape! Love is a natural tendency
and desire. What did I take away from it? The tendency and the desire. I might as well have
gone to Aniela, and said to her, "Since I love you above everything, I pledge myself to love
you no longer."

There is some terrible mistake in this. I had truly lost my way in the desert; no wonder that
I saw a Fata Morgana.

18 August.

Yesterday I felt oppressed and troubled by various thoughts. I could not sleep. I left off
plunging into the depths of pessimism, and instead of that began to think of Aniela and call
her image before my eyes. This always soothes me. My imagination strained to the utmost point
brings her before me so lifelike that I fancy I could speak to her. I recalled to memory the
time I had met her first as a grown-up girl. I saw the white, gauzy draperies studded with
bunches of violets, the bare shoulders, and the face a little too small but fresh like a spring
morning, and so original in the bold outline of the eyebrows, the long lashes, and that soft
down on either side of the face. It seems to me as if I still heard her voice saying, "Do you
not recognize me, Leon?" I wrote at the time that her face appeared to me like music translated
into human features. There was in her at the same time the charm of the maiden and the attraction
of the woman. No other woman ever fascinated me so strongly, and there must needs cross my
way a Circe-like Laura to lure me away from the one woman I could love, almost my bride.

Nobody feels more than I that the words, "The spell thou hast cast upon me lasts forever,"
are not a mere poetic fancy, but bitter reality. Besides love and desire, I have for her an
immense liking, the tenderness of affection, and am drawn to her with the irresistible force
of the magnet to iron. And it cannot be otherwise, for she is still the same Aniela, and is
not changed in the least. It is the same face of a little girl, with the charm of a woman,
the same look, the same eyelashes, brows, shoulders, and supple waist. She has now one more
charm,--that of the lost Paradise.

What a tremendous gulf between our relations in the past and those in the present. When I think
of the Aniela who was waiting, as for her salvation, to hear from me the words, "Will you be
mine?" I can scarcely believe it to have been true. Reflecting upon that, I feel like the ruined
magnate who at one time scattered his wealth about, dazzling the world by his splendor, and
in later years lived upon charity.

That night, when I thought about Aniela and evoked her image before my eyes, it suddenly occurred
to me that we had no portrait of her, and a strong desire seized me to have her likeness. I
grasped at the idea with enthusiasm, and it made me feel so happy that it finally drove all
sleep from my eyes. "I shall have you," I said; "I shall be able to look at you at any time,
kiss your hands, your eyes, your lips; and you will not be able to prevent it." I began at
once to think how it might be done. I could not go and say to Aniela, "Have your portrait painted,
and I will defray the expenses;" but with my aunt I could always do what I liked, and a hint
will be enough to make her wish for Aniela's portrait. At Ploszow she has a whole collection
of family portraits, which are her pride, and my desperation, as some of them are truly hideous;
but my aunt will not have them removed out of sight. Considering her deep attachment to Aniela,
I was sure she would be delighted with the idea of adding her picture to the collection. As
far as she is concerned I consider the thing done; but now came the question whom to intrust
with the execution of the portrait. I thought it would be impossible to induce the ladies to
take Paris on their way; there I should have the choice between the accuracy and objectivism
of Bonnat, the bold breadth of Carolus Duran, and the inimitable sweetness of Chaplin. Shutting
my eyes, I imagined how each of them would acquit himself of the task, and I was pleased with
the fancy. But I saw it was impracticable; I foresaw that my aunt would insist upon a Polish
painter. I should have no objection to that, for I remembered seeing at the Warsaw and Cracow
exhibition portraits as excellent as from the brush of any foreign painter. I was only afraid
of the delay. As regards fancies, and also in many other things, there is something eminently
feminine in my composition. When I plan a thing I want to get it done at once. As we were in
Germany, not very far from Munich and Vienna, I began to choose among the German painters.
I fixed upon two names: Lembach and Angeli. I had seen some fine portraits by Lembach, but
only men's; besides, I did not like his self-assurance and sketchiness, which, as I am fond
of French painting, I can endure only from a Frenchman. Angeli's faces did not altogether satisfy
me, but I had to admit his delicacy of touch; and that is just the thing wanted for Aniela's
face. Besides, in order to get Lembach we should have to go out of our way, and Angeli is on
the way,--a circumstance one is ashamed to confess, not wanting to be regarded as a Philistine.
But in this case I wanted to save time. "The dead ride quick," as the poet says; but lovers
ride quicker still. Besides I should have chosen Angeli in any case, and finally decided that
he should paint Aniela's portrait. As a rule, I do not approve of portraits in ball dress,
but I resolved to have Aniela in a white dress with violets. I want to have the delusion in
looking at her that she is the Aniela of the never-to-be-forgotten times. I do not want anything
to remind me that she is Pani Kromitzka. And besides, the dress is dear to me as a memory.

I thought the night would never end, so impatient was I to speak about it to my aunt. I changed
my plan though, for if my aunt had the portrait painted, she would insist upon a Polish painter.
I decided instead to offer Aniela's likeness to my aunt on her name's-day, which is towards
the end of October. Put in this way, Aniela cannot refuse. Of course I shall have a copy for
myself.

I scarcely slept at all, but look upon it as a satisfactory night, as all the hours were occupied
with these plans. I dozed a little towards five, but was up and dressed at the stroke of eight.
I went to Straubinger's and sent a telegram to the Vienna Künstlerhaus inquiring whether Angeli
was at home, then returned to the villa and found the ladies at the breakfast-table. I opened
fire at once. "Aniela," I said, "I have come to confess my guilt in regard to you. Last night
instead of sleeping I have disposed of your person, and it now remains to be seen whether you
will consent."

She looked at me with half-frightened eyes. Perhaps she fancied I was going mad, or that in
a fit of despair I had made up my mind to blurt out the truth before the elder ladies; but
seeing my calmness she asked:--

"How have you disposed of me?"

"I wanted it to be a surprise for you, dear aunt, but I do not see how it could be done in
secret, and so I must tell you what present I intend to give you for your name's-day;" and
I told them what I had in my mind. My aunt, who has an excellent portrait of me, painted some
years ago, was greatly delighted, and thanked me warmly. I saw that Aniela was not less pleased,
and that was enough for me. There and then a lively discussion sprung up as to when and by
whom the portrait was to be painted, and the question of dress, so dear to the feminine heart,
had to be gone into with all details. I had a ready answer for all questions and saw my chance
of getting something else besides the picture.

"It will not take much time," I said. "I have sent a telegram to Angeli, and I do not think
it will delay our journey much. Aniela will give Angeli five or six sittings, and as you would
have to stop at Vienna in any case to see Notnagel, there is no loss of time. The dress can
be painted from a model, and the face will be finished in five sittings. But we must send at
once Aniela's photograph and a lock of her hair. The hair I must have at once. Then Angeli
will be able to make the rough sketch, and later on put in the finishing touches." I counted
upon the fact that none of the ladies knew much about portrait-painting. I wanted the hair
for myself, not for Angeli, to whom it would have been of use only if he painted Aniela's portrait
from a photograph, to which he would not have consented. But I spoke as if the whole portrait
depended on that lock of hair. Two hours after breakfast I received an answer to my telegram.
Angeli is in Vienna, where he is just finishing the portrait of the Princess M. I wrote to
him at once and sent him Aniela's photograph; then went out to Aniela, who was walking in the
garden.

"And your hair?" I said; "I want to send the letter by the two-o'clock post."

She went at once into her room, and shortly afterwards returned with a lock of hair. My hand
shook a little as I took it from her, but my eyes looked straight into hers and said in that
glance:--

"Do you not guess that I want it for myself, that it will be for me the most precious treasure?"

Aniela did not say anything, but blushed like a girl who listens for the first time to words
of love. She had guessed it. I thought that for one touch of those lips it would be worth while
giving one's life. My love for her becomes so strong at times that it is akin to pain.

I have now a small part of her physical being. I got it by cunning. I the man of the world,
the sceptic, I who enter into myself and analyze every thought, have come to practise little
tricks and devices, like Goethe's Siebel. But I say to myself, "At the worst I am only sentimental
and ridiculous." Who knows whether the second self that reduces everything to consciousness
with cold criticism is not more foolish and more ridiculous? Analysis is like the pulling to
pieces of a flower. It spoils the beauty of life, therefore, its happiness--the only sensible
thing in life.

22 August.

After the completion of Pani Celina's cure we waited for weeks till the heat in the plains
should have grown less intense, and at last the weather broke and again delayed our journey.
There has been an almost Egyptian darkness for three days. The clouds which have been gathering
on the summits, breeding snow and rain, have descended from the heights and enveloped Gastein
as in a wet blanket. There is such a mist that in the middle of the day I have to pick my way
carefully from Straubinger's to our villa. Everything is wrapped in a thick veil,--the houses,
the trees, the mountains, and cascades. The shapes of things dissolve and disappear in the
moist clouds that weigh upon everything, and also upon the human mind. We light the lamps at
two o'clock in the afternoon. The ladies have finished packing, and we should have gone in
spite of the mist, but the road is torn up by the mountain torrents beyond Hofgastein. Pani
Celina again suffers from headaches, and my aunt, after receiving a letter from Chwastowski
about the harvest, walks with heavy steps about the room, talking to herself and scolding Chwastowski.
Aniela looked pale and out of sorts in the morning. She had a bad night and dreamed about the
cretin she had seen near the Schreckbrücke. She woke up, and could not go to sleep again; she
spent the rest of the night in nervous terror. It is very strange what an impression the wretched
cripple has made upon her. I tried by cheerful conversation to make her forget about the incident,
in which I succeeded. Since our compact on the Schreckbrücke she is without comparison brighter,
more cheerful, and happier.

As regards myself, seeing Aniela thus contented, I cannot find it in my heart to complain,
though it often occurs to me that our relation is mainly based upon there being no relation
at all. When I entered into the compact I knew what I was doing and what shape our feeling
would take; but now that shape seems to be getting more intangible and undefined, and wrapped
up in a mist like that which enfolds Gastein. I have a presentiment that Aniela will not grant
me what is due to me, and I dare not remind her about anything. I dare not, because a struggle
is too exhausting, especially a struggle for the woman we love. I have been engaged in this
struggle half a year and not gained anything; and I feel so weary that I prefer the truce,
such as it is, to a renewal of my former warfare. There is also another reason. If this state
of things does not exactly answer to my expectations, it pleases and conciliates Aniela. She
fancies I love her in a nobler way, therefore she appreciates, I dare not say loves, me more
and more. In spite of the absence of all outward signs, I see it and it gives me courage; I
say to myself, "If her feeling increases, only persevere, and a time may come when it will
be stronger than her power of resistance."

People generally, and women especially, fancy that the so-called Platonic love is a peculiar
species of love, very rare and very noble. It is simply a confusion of ideas. There may be
such a thing as Platonic relations, but Platonic love is as much nonsense as dark light. Even
love for the dead consists of a longing after their bodily presence as well as their souls.
Among the living this feeling is called resignation.

I did not want to say an untruth when I told Aniela I would love her as if she were dead; but
resignation does not exclude all hope. In spite of all my disappointments, in spite of the
consciousness that my hopes are vain, I still nourish in a corner of my heart the hope that
the present state of affairs is only a halting-place on the way to love. I may repeat to myself
over and over again, "Delusion! delusion!" but I cannot get rid of it until I get rid of my
desire. They are inseparable. I agreed to the compact because I could not help myself, because
I preferred this to nothing at all; but I consider it, almost unconsciously, as a diplomatic
move which aims at complete, not half happiness. What makes me nevertheless thoughtful, surprises,
and grieves me, and what I simply cannot understand, is that on this line even I am defeated.
My victories lie in the dim, far-off future; but in the present, in spite of all my cunning,
experience of life, strong feelings, and diplomacy, I am defeated by a being infinitely more
simple than I, less skilled in life's tactics, less cautious and calculating in the course
she takes. It is a defeat; there is no other word for it. What is our present relation? Nothing
more than the relation of brother and sister, which she wished for and which I did not wish.
Formerly I fought with the storm and often came to grief, but I steered my own bark. Now Aniela
steers for us both; we go more smoothly and more evenly, but I feel I am going where I did
not wish to go. I now understand why she put out her hand at once, when I mentioned Dante's
love for Beatrice. She wanted to lead me. Has she calculated everything beforehand more carefully
and profoundly than I? No; I do not know anybody less capable of any calculation, therefore
I cannot admit the idea; yet I cannot get rid of the consciousness, bordering upon the mystical,
that some one has calculated it for her.

It is all very strange, and the strangest thing of all is that I forged the fetters which bind
me; I myself contrived to bring about a relation so foreign to my nature, my views, and my
most ardent desires. If somebody had foretold to me, before I knew Aniela, that I should hit
upon such devices, it would have made me laugh at the prophet and at myself. I, and Platonic
relations! Even now I feel sometimes inclined to laugh and jeer at myself. But I cannot; it
is sheer misery that has brought me to that pass.

23 August.

We leave here to-morrow. The sky is clearing up and there is a westerly breeze that promises
fine weather. The mist has gathered into long, whitish billows, that hang on the mountain sides,
and like huge leviathans are slowly rolling down. I went with Aniela on the Kaiserweg. This
morning the question arose in my mind what would happen if the existing state of things ceased
to satisfy Aniela. I have no right to overstep the boundary, and I am afraid to do so; suppose
she too thought the same? Her innate modesty and shyness in themselves would prove an almost
insurmountable barrier; and if, added to that, she thought the mutual agreement as binding
for her as for me, we should never come to an understanding; we should suffer in vain.

Reflecting upon this, I understood the futility of such fears. She, to whom even that Platonic
relation appears too broad, who consciously or unconsciously restricts, and does not even grant
me what is due to me within these limits, should be the first to acknowledge any greater rights.
And yet the human soul, even if in hell, will never lose hope altogether. In spite of the self-evident
impossibility, I resolved to make myself safe by giving Aniela to understand that if I considered
the agreement as binding, it was not the same with her.

I wanted to say many other things, especially that she was doing me a great wrong, and that
my soul yearned to hear a word of love from her lips, not once but many times, and that only
thus I should be able to remain on those lofty heights whereon she condemned me to dwell. But
that morning she was so gay, so cheerful and kind to me, that I had not the heart to disturb
her peace. Yesterday I could not understand how a being so full of simplicity had got me under
her power and conquered me even on those fields I thought my exclusive domain. To-day it seems
clearer to me; and I have a ready and very sad hypothesis,--she loves me less than I love her.

I knew a man who had the trick of repeating in all his sentences, "Never mind me." It would
not be strange if I began to do the same. For when I feel, as I do sometimes, a desire to get
rid of some words that almost burn my tongue, the sudden thought that I might mar her cheerfulness,
drive away the smile, and change her good disposition, renders me mute. Ah me! how often this
does happen!

The thought that I love Aniela more than she loves me has crossed my mind a hundred times;
one day I think of it in one way, the next in another. I am straying among my thoughts and
look at the matter in a different light every day. At one time it seems to me that she does
not care for me very much, in fact is incapable of any strong feeling; and again, I not only
think but am conscious that she has one of the deepest and most loving hearts I ever met in
the world. I have always plenty of proofs either way. Thus I say to myself: "If her love increases,
three, four, ten times as much, will there not come a time when it will grow stronger than
her resistance?" Yes. Then it is only a question of how great her feeling is? No. For if the
feeling were small she would not have suffered so much, and I have seen her suffer almost as
much as I did myself. Against all reasoning I have one answer: "I have seen."

To-day a sentence escaped her which I shall remember, for it is an answer to my doubts. She
would not have said this had I spoken about us and our love. But I spoke in a general way,
as I now always do. I argued that it lay in the nature of feeling to be connected with action;
that love produces acts of will. When I had finished she said quietly:--

"Not always. One may suffer."

Of course one may suffer. With these few words she had crushed my arguments and filled my heart
with reverence for her. In moments like these I am happy and unhappy, as again it seems to
me that she loves me as I love her, but will remain pure before God, and men, and herself.
And I shall not be able to shake that temple. When all is said and done this analysis of her
heart and feelings does not lead to any certainty. I am always walking in the dark. To my philosophical
and social "I do not know" there is now added a personal consideration, far more serious; for
this "I do not know" threatens my very life.

I forged myself the chain which binds me to Aniela, and there is no hope whatever that it ever
will be broken. I love her despairingly, and it is a question whether my love be not a disease.
If I were younger, less shattered in mind and nerves,--in short, of a more normal disposition,--I
might, seeing the hopelessness, try to break that chain. As it is, I do not make even an effort.
I love as a man with diseased nerves, a man who is close upon mania; love as old men do, clinging
to love with all their might, as it is for them a question of life. Thus one may cling to a
branch overhanging a precipice.

This one thing has blossomed in my life, consequently its growth is so out of all proportion.
A phenomenon like this is easy to understand and will repeat itself the oftener, the more people
there are like me; that is, hyper-analytical sceptics inclined to hysteria, with a great nothingness
in their souls, and a strong neurosis in their veins. This modern product of our epoch, drawing
to its end, may not love at all, or may look upon love as mere licentiousness; but if it happen
that all the forces of one's life centre in one feeling, and come under the sway of his neurosis,
the predilection will become as ineradicable as any other chronic disease. Physiologists have
not fully understood this, still less novelists, who occupy themselves with the analysis of
the modern human soul.

Vienna, 25 August.

We arrived to-day at Vienna. On the way I listened to a conversation between my aunt and Pani
Celina, of which I took note, as it seemed to make an extraordinary impression upon Aniela.
We four were alone in the railway carriage; we were discussing the portrait, and especially
the question whether the white dress would not have to be abandoned, as the making of it would
take up too much time. Suddenly Pani Celina, whose mind is full of reminiscences and dates,
which she quotes in and out of season, turned to Aniela and said:--

"It is just two months to-day since your husband arrived at Ploszow, is it not?"

"I believe so," replied Aniela.

At the same instant she grew very red and tried to hide her confusion by taking down one of
her bags from the rack. The blush had not gone from her face when she turned round again, and
there was in her face an expression of acute pain. The ladies did not notice it, for they were
deep in a discussion as to the exact date of Kromitzki's arrival; but I had noticed it and
it grated upon my nerves, for it reminded me that that very day she had to submit to his caresses.
I was furious, and at the same time ashamed for that blush of hers. In my love there are many
great thorns, but there are also a multitude of small, hideous ones. Before that unlucky remark
of Pani Celina's I felt almost happy because I had the illusion that I was travelling with
Aniela as my affianced wife. Now in one moment the good disposition fled. I felt resentment
towards Aniela, and I showed it in my manners. She noticed it at once, and when we arrived
at Vienna and were left alone for a moment, she asked:--

"Are you angry with me about something?"

"No, but I love you," I said curtly.

Her face grew sad. She thought, perhaps, that I had grown tired of the peaceful current of
our life, and the old Leon had come back again. I felt angry with her, but angrier still with
myself, that all my philosophy and consciousness did not serve to give me the mastery over
the slightest sensations.

I went at once to Angeli, but when I arrived at his studio it was six o'clock and the studio
was closed. Aniela will be rested, and to-morrow I will go with her. I have changed my idea.
I do not want her in a ball-dress, showing her arms and shoulders; I will have her as she is
every day, and as I love her most.

In the evening Doctor Chwastowski came to see us. He looks very well, and as strong as a giant.

26 August.

I had a very nasty dream. I begin with it the description of the day. I am not one to attach
any meaning to dreams, and I am convinced that a healthy brain could not produce such stuff.
Sleeplessness has troubled me now for some time, but yesterday I had scarcely closed my eyes
when I fell into a heavy sleep. I do not know at what time I had that dream; it must have been
towards morning, for when I awoke it was broad daylight, and I could not have dreamed long.
I saw a great quantity of cockchafers and black beetles crawl from under the mattress and along
the sides of the bed. They were as big as matchboxes. Presently I saw them crawling up the
wall. Strange how realistic dreams can be; I distinctly heard the rustling of their feet on
the paper. Raising my eyes I noticed big clusters of beetles hanging from the ceiling; but
they were of a different kind, much larger, with black and white spots. On some of them I could
distinguish the white belly, with two rows of feet on either side which looked like ribs. In
my dream they seemed quite in their place, and yet horrible. They filled me with loathing,
but I was neither astonished nor afraid. Only after I had awoke the loathing became unbearable
and changed into a kind of fear,--fear of death. It was the first time I had that sensation,
and that fear of death took such a form. "Who knows," I thought, "what hideous shapes are awaiting
me in the darkness, on the other side of life?" Later on I remembered that I had seen some
similar beetles in an entomological collection, but at the time they seemed to me something
unnatural, belonging to an intangible after-life. I jumped up and raised the blind, and the
sight of daylight calmed me at once. The streets were already alive with the traffic of the
early morning,--vegetable carts drawn by dogs, servants going to market, and laborers to their
work. The sight of the normal human life is the best remedy against phantasms like these. I
feel now an immense necessity for light and life. The final conclusion of all this is that
I am not well. My tragedy undermines me like a cancer. I see white threads in my hair; this
might have come in the course of nature; but my face, especially in the morning, has a waxen
hue, and my hands are getting transparent. I am not getting thin, it is rather the opposite,
but I am conscious of anæmia as I am conscious of my psychical state, and I feel that my vital
powers are passing through a crisis, and that some calamity is threatening me.

I shall never go mad. I cannot even imagine how I could ever lose control over myself. Besides,
a celebrated physician, and what is more an intelligent man, told me that at a certain point
of developed consciousness this was quite impossible. I think he has written a book about it.
But without going mad I may be on the eve of some portentous nervous disease; and as I know
a little what that means, I say sincerely that any other would be preferable.

I have not much faith in doctors, especially in those that trust to physic, but I may take
some advice if only to please my aunt. I know one remedy, which would be infallible; if Kromitzki
died and I could marry Aniela I should speedily get well. A disease springing from nerves must
be cured through nerves. But she will not be my physician, even if my life is in danger.

I went with Aniela and my aunt to Angeli's studio. The first sitting took place to-day. How
right I was in saying that she is one of the most beautiful women I ever met in life, because
there is nothing commonplace in her beauty. Angeli looked at her with manifest pleasure, as
if he had before him a noble piece of art. He was in excellent spirits, drew the outline with
enthusiasm, and did not conceal at all the reason of his satisfaction. "In my profession,"
he said, "a model like this is very rare indeed. With such a sitter it is delightful to work.
What a face! what expression!"

The expression was by no means so charming as usual, because Aniela is a shy little creature;
she felt confused, bewildered, and it evidently cost her an effort to keep a natural pose.
Angeli understood that.

"It will be easier the next time," he said; "like everything else, one must get accustomed
to it." And he repeated several times: "This will be something like a portrait."

He looked also with a pleased countenance at my aunt, who has noble features and a singularly
commanding presence. The way she met Angeli was in itself a treat. It was the off-hand manner
of the grande dame, always in good taste, but evidently not making much of him. Angeli, who
is used to flattery and homage, and at the same time a clever man, judged her aright, and I
saw he was amused by her demeanor.

We had decided upon a black silk dress, very elegantly made. It shows off Aniela's figure to
perfection, its suppleness and rounded curves. I can neither think nor write about it calmly.
Angeli, addressing Aniela, repeatedly called her "Mademoiselle." Feminine nature, even an angelic
one, has still its little weaknesses. I noticed that my dear love was pleased, and still more
so when I told Angeli of his mistake, and he said:--

"But I shall always fall into the same mistake; looking at madame it is impossible not to make
the mistake."

And indeed with those vivid blushes mantling in her face she was surpassingly lovely.

On our way out, when a little distance from my aunt, I whispered to Aniela:--

"Aniela, do you know yourself how beautiful you are?"

She did not say anything, but lowered her eyelashes, as she always does in such a case. Nevertheless,
I noticed that during the rest of the day there was a shade of unconscious coquetry in her
manner towards me. Angeli's words and mine had attuned her to that disposition. She knows I
admire her, that never woman was admired more, and it pleases her. I not only admired her,
but I said inwardly, rather shouted to myself: "To the deuce with all compacts. I love you
without limits and restrictions."

In the evening we went to the opera to hear Wagner's "Fliegende Hollander." I scarcely heard
anything at all, or rather, heard and saw only through her. I asked of Wagner: "What impression
do you make upon her? Does your music enter her soul and make her inclined to love me? Do you
transport her into higher spheres, where love is the highest law?" That is the only thing that
interests me. Women perhaps cannot love so exclusively. They always reserve part of their soul
for themselves, for the world and its sensations.

27 August.

My aunt expressed a wish to depart. She is anxious to be back at Ploszow, and says that her
presence here is not necessary, and that in fact we should get on better without her; that
we should not be obliged to consider her and could devote all our time to the portrait. We
all protested a little, and maintained that a lady of her years ought not to travel alone.
Though reluctantly, I considered it my duty to offer my companionship. I confess that I awaited
her reply with a certain trepidation; but the dear old lady said, with great liveliness:--

"Don't think of it even. Suppose Celina should fall ill again, who would look after them, or
accompany Aniela to the studio? She must not go alone." She shook her finger playfully at Aniela,
and with a frown on her brow, and smiling mouth she added: "I don't quite trust that painter,
he looks at her more than his work requires; and she sees it too and is pleased with it,--I
know her little ways."

"But aunty, he is not a young man," said Aniela, laughingly kissing her hands.

My aunt muttered: "Little coaxing rogue, he is not a young man, you say? but he pays you compliments
all the same. Leon, you must keep your eye on them."

I relinquished the journey to Ploszow with delight, yielding to my aunt's convincing reasons.
Pani Celina insisted upon her taking the maid, at least, who had gone with them to Gastein.
My aunt refused at first, but consented when Aniela pointed out that they would do very well
without a maid in the hotel. She gave orders at once to have her things packed. She is very
quick in her decisions and wants to go to-morrow by an early train. I teased her during dinner,
saying that she liked her horses better than all of us together. "Foolish boy," she said, "don't
talk nonsense;" then forgot herself, and began soliloquizing about the horses. The sitting
was a very long one to-day. Aniela posed much better. The face is already laid in.

28 August.

My aunt left us this morning. Pani Celina, who went with us to the studio, could scarcely restrain
an exclamation of horror when she saw Aniela's face on the picture. She has no idea about painting
and the different phases a picture has to go through, and fancied the face would remain thus.
I had to set her mind at rest. Then Angeli, who guessed what was the matter, laughed and said
that what she saw before her was only the chrysalis, from which the butterfly would come forth
in time.

"I believe it will be one of the best portraits I ever painted," he said; "for a long time
I have not worked so con amore."

I hope his words will prove true. After the sitting I went to get tickets for the opera. When
I returned I found Aniela alone, and suddenly temptation seized me with the force of a hurricane.
I thought if she would come into my arms, now was the moment; and at the very thought I felt
myself growing pale, my pulses beat wildly, I trembled and caught my breath. The room was in
semi-darkness, veiled by heavy curtains. I made superhuman efforts to conquer the irresistible
power that pushed me towards her. It seemed as if a hot wave emanating from her enfolded me,
and that she too must feel the same storm in her breast. "I must take her in my arms, kiss
her eyes and lips," a voice within me seemed to say, "though I were to perish for it afterwards."
She noticed at once my unusual state; there was a momentary terror in her eyes, but she collected
herself at once and said quickly:--

"You must be my guardian now in mamma's absence. There was a time when I used to be afraid
of you; but now I trust you and feel quite at ease with you."

I kissed her hands and said in a choking voice: "Oh, Aniela, if you knew what is passing within
me!"

She replied, with sadness and compassion: "I know; you are so good, and all the nobler."

For a moment I still fought with myself; but she disarmed me,--I did not dare. During the remainder
of the day she tried to compensate me for my restraint. Never had I seen in her eyes so much
affection and such tenderness. Is this not perhaps the best way, after all? Perhaps in this
guise the feeling will grow stronger and conquer her at last. I do not know, I begin to lose
my head. But following this road I sacrifice every day my love for love's sake.

29 August.

Something very strange and terrifying has happened. During the sitting, while posing quietly,
Aniela suddenly shuddered, her face grew very red and then turned as white as snow. Both Angeli
and I were terribly frightened. He interrupted his work at once and asked Aniela to rest; I
brought her a glass of water. After a few moments she grew better and wanted to resume the
pose; but I saw that it cost her some effort and that she still seemed dazed. Perhaps she was
tired. The weather is very hot to-day and the streets are like a baker's oven. We went back
much sooner than the day before, and I noticed that she had not recovered her usual spirits.
During dinner she grew suddenly very red. Pani Celina asked whether she felt indisposed. She
assured us that nothing was the matter with her. To my offer to go and bring a doctor, she
replied with unusual vivacity, and with a touch of irritation, that there was no need for it,
that she was not ill. During the remainder of the day she was pale, the black eyebrows contracted
every now and then, and there was an expression of sternness in her face. She was more indifferent
to me than yesterday, and I fancied she avoided my eyes. I cannot make out what it means. I
am very restless, and shall not be able to sleep; or if I go to sleep I shall have dreams such
as I had before.

30 August.

There is something mysterious going on around me. Towards noon I knocked at the room of the
ladies, to let Aniela know it was time to go to the studio; but they were not there. The hotel
servant told me they had ordered a carriage two hours before and driven into town. A little
surprised at that, I resolved to wait for their return. Half an hour later they came in, but
Aniela gave me her hand silently and passed at once into her room. A quick glance at her face
told me it was troubled. I thought she had only gone to change her dress, when Pani Celina said:--

"My dear Leon, please go to Angeli and apologize for Aniela; her nerves are so shaken that
she cannot possibly sit for him."

"What is the matter with her?" I asked, anxiously.

Pani Celina seemed at a loss what to say, and at last replied: "I do not know; I took her to
the doctor, but we did not find him at home. I left my card and asked him to call on us at
the hotel; that is all I can tell you."

I could not get anything more out of her. I took a cab and drove at once to Angeli's studio.
When I told him that Aniela could not come it seemed to me as if he looked suspicious. Perhaps
the troubled expression of my face had something to do with it. It crossed my mind, "Suppose
he suspects us to have changed our minds, and that we do not want the portrait any longer?"
He does not know us; he might even think that some money difficulties are the cause of my anxiety.
To guard against such suspicions, I made up my mind to pay him in advance. When he heard of
this, he protested vehemently and said he never accepted payment until the picture was finished;
but I replied that I was only the depositary of the sum, and as I might be called away at any
moment, I would rather get rid of the trouble. After some more discussion, which bored me,
it was settled according to my wish. We agreed that the sitting should take place at the same
hour the day following, and in case Pani Kromitzka was still unable to attend I would let him
know before ten. When back at the hotel, I went at once to the ladies. Aniela was in her room.
Pani Celina said the doctor had just gone away, but did not say anything conclusive; only advised
her to keep quiet and avoid emotion. I do not know why, but I fancied I saw again in her face
the same hesitation. Possibly it comes only from her anxiety about Aniela, which I can well
understand, as I feel the same.

When in my own room I reproached myself bitterly for having been, at least partly, the cause
of this; as all this struggle between her love and her duty could not but act perniciously
upon her health. Thinking of all this, I had a sensation which might be summed up in a few
words: "Better I should perish than that she should suffer." I thought with terror that she
would not come down to dinner, as if something serious, God knows what, had depended upon it.
Fortunately she did come down; but she still avoided my eyes, and there was the same mysterious
something in the air. First she grew confused at seeing me, and then made an effort to be her
usual self, but failed. She made upon me the impression of a person that tries to conceal a
trouble. She must have been paler too than usual, for though she cannot be called dark she
almost looked like a brunette.

I racked my brain to guess what could have happened. Was it anything connected with Kromitzki;
and if so, what could it be? Perhaps my money is in danger. The deuce take the money! All I
possess may perish, rather than that Aniela should have a moment of anxiety. I must get at
the bottom of the mystery to-morrow. I am quite sure it has to do with Kromitzki; but what
can he have done? He has not sold another Gluchow, for the simple reason that there is not
another to sell.

Berlin, 5 September.

I am at Berlin, because escaping from Vienna I had to go somewhere. I could not go to Ploszow,
because she will be there. I was so convinced that no human power could tear me from her that
the very idea of separation seemed to me a wild impossibility. But no! It is always the unexpected
that happens, for I have gone away, and everything is at an end. I am at Berlin. I feel as
if I had an engine in my head, the wheels of which keep whirring incessantly. This hurts me;
but I am not mad. I know everything and remember everything. My physician was right; it is
only weak heads that come to grief. Besides, it could not happen to me, because insanity sometimes
means happiness.

6 September.

Yet at times I fancy that my brain is bursting bounds. What is there more natural than that
a married woman should have children? But to me that natural order seems so monstrous that
it well-nigh maddens me. Yet a thing cannot be at the same time in the order of nature and
a monstrosity. No brain can withstand that. What does it mean? I understand that those whom
fate means to crush are crushed by some great, overwhelming calamity. With me it is different.
I am rent asunder by an ordinary, natural event,--and the more natural, the more terrible it
is. One contradicts the other. She is not responsible,--I understand that because I am not
mad. She is still virtuous, and yet I could have sooner forgiven her any other crime. And I
cannot, God knows I cannot forgive you, because I loved you so much. And believe me, there
is not another woman in the whole world I scorn so much as I scorn you. For, after all, it
comes to this: you had two lovers, one for Platonic love and the other for matrimonial love.
There is in me a wild desire to laugh, and at the same time to dash my head against the wall.
I had not foreseen that a way could be found to tear me from you; and yet there is one, and
it has proved effective.

8 September

When I come to think that all is at an end between us, and that I have left her forever, I
can scarcely believe it. There is no Aniela for me any more. Then what is there? Nothing. Then
why do I live? I do not know. It is not out of curiosity to know whether a son or a daughter
will be born to Pan Kromitzki. I always think of it as the most natural thing in the world,
and my head seems nigh to bursting. It is very strange! I ought to have been prepared for that,
and yet the thought never entered my head. I should have sooner expected a stroke of lightning
to fell me down. Yet Kromitzki was with her at Ploszow; they were together in Vienna, and afterward
in Gastein.

And I put it all down to her nerves, to her deep feelings! What egregious foolishness! Since
I could bear to see the two together, I ought to be able to put up with the consequences. Alas,
it is not my reason that revolts, it is my nerves that quiver under these consequences. There
are people in whom these two forces dwell in harmony; within me they worry each other like
dogs. That is another of my misfortunes. How is it I never thought of it? It ought to have
struck me that if there were any terrible coincidence, any blow more painful than another,
it would be reserved for me.

Sometimes it seems to me as if I were hunted by a Providence that, not satisfied by the logic
of facts that contain in themselves a Nemesis, took a special delight in fastening personally
upon me. There are many others who love their neighbors' wives, and they do not suffer, because
they love less honestly, more thoughtlessly. Is there any justice in that? No, it is not that.
There is no self-conscious thought in the ordering of these things; they happen by chance and
by virtue of necessity.

10 September.

The thought still pursues me that as a rule human tragedy is the outcome of exceptional events
and calamities, and mine comes from a natural event. Really I do not know which is worst. The
natural order of things seems to me past bearing.

11 September.

I have heard that a man struck by lightning stiffens, but does not fall down at once. I too
keep up, sustained by that thunderbolt that struck me, but I feel myself falling. As soon as
it grows dark in the evening something strange takes place within me. I feel so oppressed that
it costs me an effort even to sigh; it seems as if the air could not get to my lungs, and that
I breathe with only a part of them. During the night, and also in the day, a sudden nameless
terror seizes me,--terror of nothing in particular. I feel as if something horrible was going
to happen, something worse than death. Yesterday I put the question to myself: "What would
become of me if, in this foreign town, I suddenly forgot my name and where I lived, and wandered
on and on in darkness without knowing where I was going?"

These are sick fancies. Besides, in such a case that would happen to my body which has already
happened to my soul; for in a moral sense I do not know where I dwell,--I walk in darkness,
aimlessly, in a kind of madness. I am afraid of everything, except of death. Strictly speaking,
I have a strange sensation as if it were not that I am afraid, but as if fear dwelt in me,
as a separate being,--and I tremble; I cannot bear darkness now. In the evening I go out and
walk in the streets, lighted by electric lamps, until I am thoroughly tired. If I met anybody
I knew, I should escape, if to the other end of the world; but crowds have become a necessity
to me. When the streets are getting empty I feel terrified. The thought of night fills me with
nameless fear. And how long they seem, these nights!

I have continually a metallic taste in my mouth. I felt it for the first time that night when
I came home and found Kromitzki waiting for me; the second time I felt it when Pani Celina
told me the "great news." What a day! I had gone to ask how Aniela was, when the doctor had
seen her for the second time. There was not the slightest suspicion in my mind; I did not understand
anything even when Pani Celina said: "The doctor says that those are purely nervous symptoms,
and have nothing to do with her state."

Seeing that I did not understand, she said, with a certain uneasiness:--

"I must tell you the great news."

And she told me the "great news." When I heard it I felt the metallic taste in my mouth, and
a cold sensation in my brain, exactly as I had felt that evening I met Kromitzki unexpectedly.
I went into my room. I remember among other things that I felt an immense desire to laugh.
That ideal being, for whom even Platonic love seemed to be impermissible, and who instead of
"love" used the word "friendship!" I felt a desire to laugh, and at the same time to dash my
head against the wall.

I preserved nevertheless a mechanical self-possession. It came from the consciousness that
everything was over and done with; that I must go--that there was nothing for it but to go.
That consciousness transformed me into an automaton, doing by routine everything that was necessary
for my departure. I was even conscious of keeping up appearances. Why? I do not know, as this
did not matter now to me any longer. Most likely it was an instinctive action of the brain,
which for months had been trained in concealing the truth and keeping up appearances. I told
Pani Celina that I had seen a doctor, and that he said there was something amiss with my heart,
and ordered me to go to Berlin without delay,--and she believed it.

Not so Aniela. I saw her eyes dilated with terror, and in her face the expression of a degraded
martyr; and there were two persons within me: one who said, "Is it her fault?" and another
who despised her. Oh, why did I love her so much?

12 September.

It is almost two weeks since I left. They must be at Ploszow by this time. I wrote to-day a
letter to my aunt, because I was afraid she might be uneasy about me and come here to look
after me. I am sometimes astonished to find there is still somebody that cares what becomes of me.

13 September.

There are men who lead astray other men's wives, deceive them, and afterwards throw them aside
and quietly resume their every-day life. I have never done any such thing, and if Aniela had
been my victim I should have wiped the dust from off her path; no human power could have torn
me from her. There are greater crimes than mine, but upon me has fallen such a burden that
it gives me the impression of an exceptional punishment; and I cannot help thinking that my
love must have been a terrible crime.

This is a kind of instinctive fear, against which scepticism is no safeguard. And yet by all
moral laws it must be admitted that it would be a greater offence to lead a woman to ruin without
love, and do from calculation what I did from a deep love. Surely the responsibility cannot
be greater for an immense, overpowering feeling than for a mean little weakness.

No! therefore my love is, above all, an awful calamity. A man free from prejudices can imagine
how he would feel if he were swayed by prejudice; so, too, a man who doubts may imagine how
he could pray if he had the faith. I not only have the feeling, but it breaks forth into a
complaint, almost like a sincere prayer, and I say: "If I am guilty, O God! I have been punished
severely, and a little mercy might be shown to me." But I cannot even imagine in what shape
that mercy could come to me now! It is impossible!

14 September.

They must have gone back to Ploszow by this time. I still think of Aniela very often, for we
cannot wipe out the past; especially when we have nothing to look for in the future; and I
have nothing, nothing at all. If I had faith I might become a priest; if I were a man who denies
the existence of God I might become a convert. But within me the organs with which we believe
are withered, as sometimes a limb withers. I do not know anything except that in my sorrows
I do not find comfort in religion.

When Aniela married Kromitzki, I thought everything between us was over. I was mistaken. It
is only now I have the full conviction that everything is over; for now we are divided not
only by our will and my departure, but by something that is beyond us, by forces of nature
independent of us. We are like two parallel lines that can never meet, though we wish for it
ever so much. On Aniela's line there will be suffering, but there will be also new worlds,
a new life; on mine there is nothing but solitude. She doubtless understands that as well as
I. I wonder whether sometimes she says to herself: "It is I who, without intending it, have
ruined that man." It does not matter much to me, and yet I should like to know that she is
sorry for me. Maybe she will feel a little sorry until her child is born. After that all her
feelings will flow into one channel, and, for her, I shall not exist any longer. That also
is a law of nature,--an excellent law.

16 September.

I saw to-day on an advertisement in big letters the name of Clara Hilst. I now remembered that
she had told me in her last letter that she was going to Berlin. She is here, and she is going
to give several concerts. At the time, the news neither pleased nor displeased me. Now, in
proportion as my nervous restlessness increases, the sensation grows more distinct, and takes
a twofold shape: the thought that she is near acts soothingly on me, but the thought is sufficient,
and I would rather not see her; and when I say to myself that I ought to call on her it gives
me an unpleasant sensation. Clara has that inquisitive solicitude that wants to know everything
and asks questions. She has a strong leaning towards romantic situations, and the firm belief
that friendship is a remedy for all evils. For me to make confidences is simply impossible.
I often, lack the strength even to think of what has happened.

17 September.

Why do I wake up in the morning? Why do I exist? And what do I care for acquaintances or people
in general? I did not go to see Clara, because she can have nothing to say to me that could
possibly interest me, and it wearies me beforehand. The whole world is as entirely indifferent
to me as I am to the world.

18 September.

I did well to write to my aunt. If I had not done so she would have come here. She writes thus:--

"Your letter came to hand the same day that Celina and Aniela arrived. How are you now, my
dearest boy? You say that you are all right, but is that really and truly so? What did the
doctors in Berlin say, and how long do you think of remaining there? Send me a telegram whether
you are still there, and I will come to you at once. Celina says you went away so suddenly
that she and Aniela were terribly frightened. If you had not mentioned that the doctor most
likely will advise a sea voyage, I should have started off at once after receiving your letter.
It is only some fifteen hours by rail, and I feel stronger than ever. The congestions I used
to have have not returned. I am very anxious about you, and do not like the idea of the sea
at all. You are used to that sort of thing, but I shudder at the thought of ships and storms.
Celina is quite well, and Aniela fairly so. I hear that you have been told the news. Before
leaving Vienna they consulted a specialist, and he said there was no doubt whatever about Aniela's
state. Celina is overjoyed, and I too am glad. Perhaps this will induce Kromitzki to give up
his speculations and settle at home. Aniela will now be altogether happy, having an aim in
life. She looked rather tired and as if oppressed when she came back, but that may be only
the consequence of the journey.

"Sniatynski's child has been very bad with croup, but is better now."

Reading my aunt's letter gave me the impression that there is no room for me among them, especially
near Aniela. Even my memory will soon become unpleasant to her.

19 September.

I cannot imagine myself as living a year or two hence. What shall I do? Such utter aimlessness
ought to debar one from life. Properly speaking, there is no room for me anywhere.

I did not go to see Clara, but met her in the Friedrichsstrasse. Seeing me she grew pale from
joy and emotion, and greeted me with such effusion that it pleased and pained me at the same
time. I was conscious that my cordiality towards her was a mere outward form, and that I did
not derive any pleasure from the meeting. When she had recovered from the surprise at meeting
me thus unexpectedly, she scrutinized my face anxiously. Truly I must have presented a strange
sight; and my hair has become much grayer too. She began to inquire after my health, and in
spite of my friendship for her, I felt that to see her often would be more than I could stand.
I resolved to put myself on guard against this; I told her that I did not feel very well, and
was shortly going away to a warmer climate. She tried to persuade me to come and see her; than
asked after my aunt, Pani Celina, and Aniela. I put her off with general remarks. I thought
to myself that she perhaps is the only being who would have understood me, and yet I felt that
I could not open my heart to her.

Nevertheless I am still susceptible to human kindness. At moments, when those honest blue eyes
of Clara's looked into mine with such kindliness and such keen scrutiny, as if they wanted
to look into my very soul, her goodness humiliated me so that I felt a desire to weep. Clara,
in spite of my effort to seem as usual, noticed that I was changed, and with quick feminine
intuition she guessed that I speak, live, almost think mechanically, and that my soul is half
dead within me. She left off all searchings and inquiries, but became very tender. I saw that
she was afraid of wearying me. She also tried to make me understand that in the tenderness
she was showing there was no concealed intention of winning my regard, but only the desire
to comfort me. And it did comfort me, but I could not help feeling very tired. My mind is not
capable of any concentration, any effort to maintain a conversation, even with a friend. And
besides, since the one aim of my life has vanished from my eyes, everything appears to me so
empty that I have continually the question in my mind: "What is the use of it? what can it
matter now?"

21 September.

Never in my life have I passed a more terrible night. I had a sensation of terror, as if I
descended by endless steps into deeper and deeper darkness, full of horrible, indefined, moving
shapes. I made up my mind to leave Berlin; I cannot breathe under that heavy, leaden sky. I
will go back to Rome, to my house on the Babuino, and settle there for good. I think my accounts
with Aniela and the world in general may be considered as closed, and henceforth I will quietly
vegetate at Rome until my time comes. Anything for tranquillity! Yesterday's visit to Clara
convinced me that even if I wished it, I cannot live with others, since I have nothing wherewith
to repay their kindness. I am excluded from general life and stand outside, and though I am
conscious of the indescribable solitude, I have no wish to go back. The idea of Rome and my
hermitage on the Babuino smiles upon me; it is a pale, sorrowful smile, but I prefer it to
anything else. There I spread my wings to fly out into the world, and thither I go back with
broken wings,--to wait for the end.

I am writing mostly in the morning, for at night I always descend to those dark regions wherein
fear dwells. To-day I shall go to the concert and say good-by to Clara. To-morrow I depart.
On the way I may stop at Vienna, perhaps see Angeli, but am not certain. I am never certain
how I shall feel, or what I shall do the next day.

I received to-day a note from Clara, in which she asks me to come and see her after the concert.
I shall go to the concert because there are so many healthy-minded people there that I feel
safer in their midst; and they do not tire me, as they are personally unknown to me; I see
only the crowd. But I shall not go to Clara. She is too kind. It is said of persons dying from
starvation that for some time before their death they cannot bear the sight of food. In the
same way my spiritual organism cannot stand sympathy and kindness. It cannot bear memories
either. It is a very small thing, but I know now why that visit to Clara was such a trial to
my nerves. She uses the same scent I brought from Vienna for Aniela. I have noticed the same
thing before, that nothing recalls to the mind a certain person so distinctly as when one inhales
the perfume she is in the habit of using.

22 September.

I have broken down at last. I caught a chill yesterday coming from the concert-room, where
the air was very close. I did not put on my overcoat, and when I arrived at the hotel I was
chilled to the bone. Every breath I draw gives me a sensation as if my lungs in expanding came
in contact with two rows of needles hidden under the shoulder-blade. I feel alternately very
hot and very cold. I am continually thirsty. At times I feel so weak that I could not go downstairs.
There is no question now about going away; I could not get into the carriage without help.
While writing I hear my own breath coming three times as quick and loud as usual. I am quite
certain that but for my nerves the sudden chill would not have done me any harm, but in my
present state of nervous prostration I have lost all power of resistance. It is undoubtedly
inflammation of the lungs.

I shall keep up as long as I can. In the morning as soon as I felt ill, I wrote to my aunt,
telling her I was all right, and would leave Berlin in a few days. In a few days, if I am still
conscious, I shall write the same. I asked her to send all letters and telegrams to my banker
here. I shall take care that nobody at Ploszow knows about my illness. How very fortunate I
said good-by to Clara yesterday.

23 September.

I am worse than yesterday. I am feverish and at times conscious that my thoughts wander, but
I have not lain down. When I shut my eyes the border line between the real and the outcome
of my sick brain seems to vanish altogether. But I have still control over my senses. I am
only afraid the fever will overpower me and I shall lose consciousness altogether.

The thought comes now and then into my mind that I, a man more richly endowed by fate than
so many others, who could have a home, a family, be surrounded by loving hearts, sits here
lonely and in sickness, in a strange place, with nobody near him to give him a glass of water.
Aniela would be near me too--I cannot go on.

14 October.

I resume my writing after an interval of three weeks. Clara has left me. Seeing me on a fair
way to recovery she went to Hanover and promised to come back in ten days. She nursed me during
the whole time of my illness. It was she who brought a doctor to me. I should probably have
died but for her. I do not remember whether it was the third or fourth day of my illness she
came here. I was conscious, but at the same time as indifferent as if it were not to me that
she had come, or as if her being there were an every-day occurrence. She came with the doctor,
whose thick, curly, white hair attracted my attention and fascinated me. After examining me
he asked me several questions, first in German, then in French; and though I understood what
he said, I did not feel the slightest inclination to answer, could not make an effort,--as
if my will-power had been struck down by the disease, as well as the body.

They worried me that day with cupping, and then I remained quiet without any sensations. Sometimes
I thought that I was going to die, but this did not trouble me any more than what was going
on around me. Perhaps in severe illness, even when conscious, we lose the sense of proportion
between great and small matters, and for some reason or other our attention is mainly fixed
upon small things. Thus, for instance, besides the doctor's curly hair, I was greatly interested
in seeing them push back the upper and lower bolt of the door of the room adjoining mine, which
Clara intended to occupy. I remember that I could not take my eyes off that door, as if something
depended on whether it would open or not. Presently the surgeon came in who was to look after
me under Clara's supervision. He began to say something to me, but Clara motioned him to be silent.

I am still very tired, and must leave off.

16 October.

My nerves have quieted down during that long illness. I have none of those terrors that haunted
me before. I only wish Clara would come back as quickly as possible. It is not so much a longing
for her presence, as the selfishness of the convalescent, who feels that nothing can replace
her tender care and nursing. I know she will not dwell close to me any longer; but her presence
soothes me. Weakness and helplessness cling to the protecting power as a child clings to its
mother. I am convinced that no other woman would have done for me what Clara did; other women
would have thought more of the proprieties than of saving a man's life. Thinking of this, bitterness
rises in my throat, and there is one name on my lips--But those are things better left alone,
as long as I have not strength enough to think about them. Clara used to sleep fully dressed
on the sofa in the room next to mine, with the door open. Whenever I moved she was at once
at my bedside: I saw her by night, leaning over my bed, her hair disarranged, and eyes winking
with sleeplessness and fatigue. She herself measured out my physic, and raised my head from
the pillow. When, in moments of consciousness, I wanted to thank her, she put a finger to her
lips as a sign that the doctor had enjoined quietness. I do not know how many nights she spent
at my bedside. She looked very tired in the daytime, and, when sitting near me in an armchair,
sometimes dozed off in the middle of a sentence. Waking up she smiled at me, and dozed again.
At nights she walked to and fro in her own room, in order to keep awake; but so softly that
I could not have known it but for the shadow moving on the wall, which I saw through the open
door. Once, when she was near me, not knowing how to express my gratitude, I raised her hand
to my lips; she stooped down quickly, and, before I could prevent it, kissed my hand. But I
must confess that I was not always so grateful. Sick people as a rule are fanciful and irritable;
I felt irritated at her being so tall. I felt a kind of resentment that she was not like Aniela;
for so long a time I had been in the habit of acknowledging grace and beauty only in so far
as they approached the grace and beauty of that other one.

Sometimes, looking at Clara, I irritated myself inwardly by the most singular thought that
she is beautiful, not because nature meant her to be beautiful,--not by right of her race,--but
by a fortunate accident of birth. Sometimes other beautiful feminine heads made upon me the
same impression. These are subtle shades which only very delicate and sensitive nerves can
perceive.

There were moments, especially at night, when, looking at Clara's face grown thin and tired
with watching me, I had a delusion that I saw the other one. This happened when she was sitting
in the half-light, a certain distance from my bed. This delusion was fostered by fever and
a sick brain, for which impossibilities do not exist. Sometimes my mind wandered and I called
Clara by that other's name, spoke to her as if she were Aniela. I remember it as if in a dream.

17 October.

The banker B. sent me some letters written by my aunt. She asks me about my plans for the future.
She writes even about the crops, but nothing about the inmates of Ploszow. I do not even know
whether they be alive or dead. What an irritating way of writing letters. What do I care about
the crops, and about the whole estate? I replied at once, and could not disguise my displeasure.

18 October.

To-day I received a telegram from Kromitzki addressed to Warsaw. My aunt, instead of sending
its contents in another telegram, put it into an envelope, and sent it by post. Kromitzki entreats
me to save my own money and his whole future by sending him another twenty-five thousand roubles.
Beading this I merely shrugged my shoulders. What do I care now for Kromitzki or my money?
Let it go with the rest! If he only knew the reason I helped him the first time, he would not
ask me now. Let him bear his losses as quietly as I bear mine. Moreover, there is awaiting
him the "great news;" that ought to comfort him. Rejoice as much as you can; have as many children
as you like; but if you think I am going to provide for their future, you ask a little too much.

If at least she had not sacrificed me with such inconsiderate egoism to her so-called "principles."
But enough of this; my brain cannot stand it,--let me at least be ill in peace.

20 October.

They cannot let me alone,--found me even here. Again for two days I had no peace; again I press
both hands against my head to stop that whirring sound in my brain. I think again of Ploszow
and of her, and of the solitude that is awaiting me. It is a fearful thing when suddenly something
goes out of our life for which we lived exclusively. I do not know whether illness has weakened
my brain, but I simply cannot understand various phenomena that I perceive within myself. It
seems as if jealousy had outlived my love.

It is a twofold jealousy,--a jealousy not only of facts, but of feelings. I am torn by the
thought that the child which is to be born will take Aniela's heart from me, and what is more,
and concerns me most, it will bring her closer to Kromitzki. I would not have her now if she
were free; but I cannot bear the thought of her loving her husband. I would give all that remains
of life if nobody would love her, and she not love anybody any more. Under such conditions
life might be endurable still.

21 October.

If what is now in my mind does not save me, I shall again fall ill, or perhaps go mad. I am
making up my accounts. Is there anything owing to me from life? Nothing. What is awaiting me
in the future? Nothing. If so, there is no reason why I should not make a present of myself
to somebody whom that present would make happy. For my life, my intellect, my abilities,--for
the whole of my own self I would not give a stiver. Moreover, I do not love Clara; but if she
loves me, and sees her happiness in me, it would be cruel to refuse her what I hold so very
cheap. I should consider it my duty to tell her what she is taking; worse for her if it does
not discourage her,--but that will be her concern.

This plan attracts me chiefly for one reason,--namely, it widens the gulf that separates me
from the other one. I will prove to her that, as she has taken her own way, I am able to take
mine. Then there will be an end of it. But I am thinking of her still! I notice it, and it
puts me into a rage. Perhaps it is hatred now; but it is not indifference.

Pani Kromitzka probably fancied that I tore myself away forced by circumstances; she will see
now that it was also my wish. And the thicker the wall I raise up between us, the sooner I
shall be able to banish her from my mind. As to Clara, I repeat that I do not love her; but
she loves me. Moreover, I owe her a debt of gratitude. During my illness there were moments
when I considered Clara's devotedness a piece of German sentimentality, and yet the other one
would not have found courage enough for such sentimentality. It would be more in accordance
with her exalted virtue to let a man die than to see him without his necktie; this is a freedom
reserved for the lawful husband. Clara did not care anything about such things; she gave up
for me her music, exposed herself to trouble, sleepless nights, and possibly to the world's
comments, and stood by me. I contracted towards her a debt, and am going to pay it. I pay it
badly and in bad faith; for I offer to her what I do not value myself,--the mere remnants of
what was once a man. But if she values it, let it be hers.

To my aunt it will be a disappointment; it will hurt her family pride and patriotic feelings.
Yet, if my aunt could but know what has been lately going on in my heart, she would prefer
this matrimonial scheme to that other love; I have not the slightest doubt as to that. What
does it matter that Clara's ancestors were most probably weavers? I have no prejudices; I have
only nerves. Any casual view I take tends rather towards liberalism. Sometimes I fancy that
people professing to be liberals are more narrow in their views than conservatives; but, on
the other hand, liberalism itself is resting on a larger basis than conservatism, and more
in accord with Christ's teachings; but I am wholly indifferent to both parties. It is scarcely
worth speaking or reasoning about them. Real unhappiness shows us the emptiness of mere partisan
hair-splittings. Involuntarily I fall to thinking, "How will Aniela receive the news of my
resolve?" I have been so accustomed to feel through her that the painful habit still clings to me.

22 October.

This morning I sent the letter to Clara. To-morrow I shall have a reply, or perhaps Clara herself
will come tonight. In the afternoon they sent me a second despatch from Kromitzki. It expresses
as much despair as a few words can contain. Things seem to have turned out very badly, indeed;
even I did not think ruin would come so quickly. Some unexpected circumstances must have intervened
that even Kromitzki could not have foreseen. The loss I incur does not make a great difference
to me; I shall always be what I was,--but Kromitzki? And he told me further concerning this: that
where the universal or general love is born in any one, such would be the true signature and
token that this seraphic stone would there be formed and take to itself a bodily shape.” (L. G. B.,
I, p. 44).

[Here we meet clearly the trinity [Symbol: Sun] [Symbol: Philosopher’s Stone] [Symbol: Moon], sun,
moon, and as an outgrowth of both the [Symbol: Philosopher’s Stone]
gold stone, the Philosopher’s Stone, which unites in itself the [Symbol:
Gold] and [Symbol: Silver] or which is the same [Symbol: Fire] and
[Symbol: Water].

It is therefore not at all a mistake to see in the [Symbol: Water]
a union of action and reaction.

The G must be conceived in the anagogic sense, as the genesis of the Philosopher’s Stone or
as regeneration.] In L. G. B., I, p. 147, I find also this remarkable passage: “The word of
Jesus was revealed to me in the following manner: O you that wait upon Jerusalem. Through what
gate have you entered? And what have you seen here that you are so desirous of living here?
Have you not been taken in by the fire flaming eye? [The eye is the
flaming star.

In L. G. B., I, p. 196, is found the representation of a face that
is equivalent to the eye.

A moon is added to it.

The eye [Symbol: Gold] is, as it were, the sun to this moon.] so that you intend not to go
out again from here, till you get another heart [The pectoral learns who approaches to the flaming
star.] which never could be completely changed?... O then be therefore wise, and await your
nuptial spirit [Genesis] and the garment of the power unfailing.

[i. i. d. St.] No one can ever get that outside of this treasure city, for in this Zion all must
be born anew....” [Oswald Wirth regards the alchemistic concept Rebis as the expression of
the perfect degree of community. “The initiated, who becomes in some way androgynous, because
he unites the virile energy with the feminine sensitiveness, is represented in alchemy by the
Rebis [from res bina, the double thing]. This substance, at once male and female, is a mercury [Symbol:
Mercury] animated by its sulphur [Symbol: Sulphur] and transformed by this act into Azoth [Symbol:
Mercury], i.e., into this quintessence of the elements [fifth essence] of which the flaming star is
the symbol.

It should be noted that this star is always placed in such a way that it receives the double
radiation of the male sun [Symbol: Gold] and the female moon [Symbol: Moon]; its light is thus
of a bisexual nature, androgynous or hermaphrodite. The Rebis corresponds otherwise to the
matter prepared by the final work, otherwise called the journeyman who has been made worthy
to be raised to the mastery.” (W. S. H., p.99.)]

But to return to Jane Leade’s magical journey. “Hereupon I was moved (because I well knew and was certain
that this heavenly stone already had its birth and growth in me) [Rebirth = the cubical stone’s
change from potentiality to actuality] with great frankness to ask whether my external furnace
[her own body] would keep so long, and not perish [die] before the stone would have attained
its perfection. Whereupon this dear saint [John] said to me in answer: Worry and trouble not
yourself about this but be only patient in hope; for the true philosophic tree is grown and
in a fair way to produce ripe fruit.” (L. G. B., I, pp. 44 ff.) The preparation of the stone is
now described by John according to the well known outlines. For “said Wisdom and the apostle
John to me: Henceforth you shall be brought to the old worthy heroes
of the faith who have [The masters too.] effected projection with
the stone [= the work of transmutation].

And after I was brought there I saw the patriarchs or arch fathers and all the great philosophers,
who had been taught by God himself both in the earlier and in the later times. After that
I was led into a darkness and gloom, which was of itself changed by a magic power into a clear
silver light.” (L. G. B., I, p. 46.) Several other allegories follow for the changing activity,
as described already (L. G. B., I, p. 41).

John explains that all the wonders were accomplished with the stone
of wisdom and that whoever has worked out this stone in himself is
marked as one sealed [Sigillum, Hermetes, Sealing with the Trowel,
mark of salvation, Mark Mason.] of God with the power from above.



28 October.

I am quite certain that Clara will not come back to Berlin; and what is more, that when she
went away it was with the intention of not coming back again. She wanted to avoid my gratitude.
I think of her gratefully and sadly, and am sorry she did not meet a different man from me.
There is such an irony of fate in this! But what is the use of deceiving myself? I am still
yoked to my memories. I see before me Aniela, as she appeared to me at Warsaw, as I saw her
at Ploszow and Gastein; and I cannot tear myself away from the past. Besides, it has absorbed
so much of my strength and life that I am not surprised at it. The difficulty is, not to remember.
Every instant I catch myself in the act of thinking about Aniela, and I have to remind myself
that she is changed now, that her feelings will be going, have gone already, into another direction,
and that I am nothing to her now.

Formerly I preferred not to think of my wrecked condition, because my brain could not stand
the thought; now I do it sometimes on purpose, if only to defend myself against the voice that
calls out: "Is it her fault? and how do you know what is passing in her heart? She would not
be a woman if she did not love her own child when it comes into the world, but who told you
that she is not as unhappy as you are?" At times it seems to me that she is even more unhappy,
and then I wish for another inflammation of the lungs. Life with such a chaos of thoughts is
impossible.

30 October.

With my returning health I am gradually drifting back into the magic circle. The doctor says
that in a few days I shall be able to travel. I will go hence, for it is too near Warsaw and
Ploszow. It may be one of my nervous whims, but I feel I shall be better and more at rest in
Rome on the Babuino. I do not promise myself to forget the past; on the contrary, I shall think
of it from morning until night, but the thoughts will be like unto meditations behind cloister
walls. Besides, what can I know of how it will be? All I know is that I cannot remain here
any longer. I shall call upon Angeli by the way; I must have her portrait at Rome.

2 November.

I leave Berlin, I renounce Rome, and go back to Ploszow. I wrote some time ago that Aniela
is not only the beloved woman, but the very crown of my head. Yes, it is a fact; let it be
called by any name,--neurosis, or an old man's madness; I have got it in my blood and in my soul.

I am going to Ploszow. I will serve her, take care of her, do for her what I can; and for all
reward let me be able to look at her. I wonder at myself that I fancied I should be able to
live without seeing her. One letter from my aunt brought out all that was buried within me.
My aunt says:--

"I did not write much about us, because I had nothing cheerful to tell you; and as I am not
clever at disguising things, I feared I should make you uneasy, knowing that you were not well.
I am in terrible anxiety about Kromitzki, and should like to have your advice. Chwastowski
showed me his son's letter, in which he says that Kromitzki's affairs are in a deplorable state,
and that he is threatened with legal prosecution. Everybody has deceived him. He suddenly received
orders to deliver a great quantity of goods, and as the appointed term was very short, he had
no time to look into things and see whether everything was as it should be. It turned out that
all the goods were bad,--imitations, and second and third rate quality. They were rejected;
and in addition Kromitzki is threatened with a trial for defrauding the agency. God grant that
we may be able to prevent this, especially as he is innocent. Ruin does not matter, provided
there be no disgrace. I am altogether at a loss what to do and how to save him. I do not like
to risk the money I intended Aniela to have, and yet we must not let it come to a trial. Tell
me what to do, Leon; for you are wise and will know what is expedient in these matters. I have
not told Celina anything about it, nor Aniela,--and I am very anxious about Aniela. I cannot
understand what is the matter with her. Celina is the worthiest of women, but she always had
exaggerated ideas about modesty, and has brought up Aniela in the same way. I do not doubt
that Aniela will be the best of mothers, but now I am quite angry with her. A married woman
ought to be prepared for consequences, and Aniela seems to be in despair, as if it were a disgrace.
Nearly every day I see traces of tears in her eyes. It torments me to see her looking so thin
and pale, with those dark rings under her eyes and ready to burst into tears at the slightest
provocation; and there is always an expression of pain and humiliation in her face. I have
never in my life seen a young woman so distressed at her situation. I tried persuasion and
I tried scolding,--all in vain. Perhaps I love her too much, and in my old age am losing my
former energy; but then she is such an affectionate creature! If you only knew how she asks
after you day by day, whether a letter has arrived and if you were well, when you will be going,
and how long you mean to stop at Berlin. She knows I like to speak about you, and she makes
me talk for hours. God give her strength to bear all the troubles that are awaiting her. I
am really so concerned about her health that I positively dare not give her any hint about
her husband's position. But sooner or later it must come to her ears. I have not said anything
to Celina either, because she is troubled about Aniela, and cannot understand why she should
take her position so tragically."

Why? I alone in the world understand and could have answered that question,--and that is the
reason I go back to Ploszow. It is not her position she takes tragically, but my desertion.
My despair she is aware of, the sundering of those ties that have grown dear to her from the
time when after so much suffering, so many efforts, she contrived to change them into ideal
relations. Only now I enter into her thoughts, into her very soul. From the moment I came back
to Ploszow there arose a struggle between duty and feeling in that noble heart. She wished
to remain true to him to whom she had promised her faith, because her spiritual nature abhors
impurity and falsehood; and at the same time she could not help being drawn to the man she
had loved with all the fresh feelings of her young heart,--all the more as the man was near
her, loved her, and was supremely unhappy. Whole months had passed in that struggle. At last
there came a moment of peace, when the feeling had become a union of souls so pure and unearthly
that neither her modesty nor her loyalty could take exception to it. This is the reason of
her unhappiness; I am reading now her soul as an open book,--therefore I go back.

I also now see clearly that I would not have left her if I had had a complete certainty that
her feelings would outlast all changes in her life. The mere animal jealousy that fills my
mind with rage because another has rights over her which are denied to me would not have been
sufficient to drive me away from the one woman who is all the world to me. But I thought that
the child, even before it was born, would take possession of her heart, draw her closer to
her husband, and blot me out of her heart and life forever.

I do not delude myself even now, for I know that I shall not be to her what I have been, nor
what I might have been but for the combined forces of circumstances. I might have been the
dearest and only one for her, attaching her to life and happiness; now it will be quite different.
But as long as there is a glimmering spark of feeling for me I will not leave her, because
I cannot; I have nowhere to go.

Therefore I return; I shall nurse that spark, fan it into life again, and get some warmth from
it for myself. It is as if I had been starving, and somebody had given me a piece of bread.
I am eating it, and feel as if I could cry from sheer gratitude. Perhaps God's mercy toward
me is beginning to appear at last. For I feel that I am changed; the former self has died in
me. I shall not revolt against her will any more; I will bear everything, will soothe and comfort
her; I will even save her husband.

4 November.

After thinking it over, I remain two days more at Berlin. It is a great sacrifice for me, because
I can scarcely contain myself in my impatience; but it is necessary to send a letter to prepare
her for my coming. A telegram might alarm her, as also my sudden arrival. I have sent off a
cheerful letter, winding up with a friendly message for Aniela as if nothing ever had happened
between us. I want her to understand that I am reconciled to my fate, and that I come back
the same I was before I left her. My aunt must have counted upon my coming on receipt of her
letter.

Warsaw, 6 November.

I arrived this morning. My aunt awaited me at Warsaw. At Ploszow things are a little better.
Aniela is much calmer. There is no news from Kromitzki.

The poor old aunt met me with a horrified exclamation,--"Leon, whatever has happened to you?"
She did not know I had been so ill, and protracted illness alters one's appearance; and my
hair has grown quite gray on the temples. I even thought of darkening it artificially. I do
not want to look old now. My aunt, too, had changed very much, and although it is not so long
since we parted, I found a great difference in her appearance. Her face has lost its familiar
determined expression, though her features have grown more immovable. I noticed that her head
is trembling a little, especially when she is listening with deep attention. When with some
inward trouble I inquired after her health, she said, with her usual frankness, "After my return
from Gastein I felt very well; but now everything seems to go wrong, and I feel that my time
is coming. We Ploszowskis all end with paralysis; and I feel a numbness in my arm every morning.
But it is not worth talking about; it will be as God ordains."

She would not say anything more. Instead of that we took counsel together how to help Kromitzki,
and we resolved not to let it come to a criminal prosecution if we could help it. We could
not save him from ruin, as this would have involved our own ruin, which, if only in consideration
for Aniela, we must avoid. I made a proposition to settle Kromitzki here, by giving him one
of the larger farms. God knows how my mind recoiled from, the very thought of his being always
with Aniela, but to make my sacrifice complete I had made up my mind to swallow the bitter draught.

My aunt offers one of her farms, and I am furnishing the necessary capital to establish him,
which, taken together, will be Aniela's dowry. Kromitzki will have to pass his word not to
embark in further speculation. But before that can be done we must get him free, and for that
purpose we are going to send out an able lawyer with instructions and ample means.

When we had finished our consultation I began to inquire after Aniela. My aunt told me, among
other things, that she was very much changed, and her former beauty almost gone. Hearing this,
I felt the more pity for her. Nothing will be able to turn my heart from her. She is the very
crown of my head. I wanted to start off at once for Ploszow, but my aunt said she felt tired,
and wanted to pass the night at Warsaw. As I had told her about my having had inflammation
of the lungs, I suspect she remained on purpose so as not to let me travel in bad weather.
It has been raining since morning. Besides we should not have been able to go, as Kromitzki's
affairs must be dealt with at once.

7 November.

We arrived in Ploszow at seven in the evening. It is now midnight, and the whole house is asleep.
Thank God, the meeting did not excite her much. She came out to me with hesitating step, and
there was fear and shame in her eyes; but I had vowed to myself to meet her as if we had parted
yesterday, and take care to avoid anything in the nature of reconciliation, anything to remind
her that we had parted under unusual circumstances. When I saw her coming, I put out my hand,
saying cheerfully,--

"How do you do, dear Aniela? I have been longing to see you all, and it made me put off my
sea voyage for another time."

She understood at once that such a greeting meant reconciliation, peace, and the sacrifice
of myself for her sake. For a moment there passed across her face a wave of such emotion that
I felt afraid she would lose command over herself. She wanted to say something and could not;
she only pressed my hand. I thought she might burst into tears, but I did not give her time,
and continued quickly in the same tone:--

"What about the portrait? The head was finished when you left Vienna, was it not? Angeli will
not send it soon, because he said to me it would be his masterpiece. He will want to exhibit
it in Vienna, Munich, and Paris. It is lucky I asked him to make a copy, otherwise we might
wait a year before we got it. I wanted a copy for myself."

She was obliged to fall in with my humor in spite of all the emotions that worked in her breast,
especially as my aunt and Pani Celina took part in the conversation. In this way the first
awkward moments were tided over. Everything I said was intended to divert our attention from
the real state of feelings. I kept on in the same strain all the evening, although at times
I felt the perspiration breaking out on my forehead from the effort. I was still weak after
my recent illness, and all this told upon me terribly.

During supper Aniela looked at my pale face and the gray hairs. I saw she guessed what I must
have suffered. I spoke about my Berlin experiences almost gayly. I avoided looking at her changed
appearance, so as not to let her see that I had noticed it, and that the sight moved me deeply.
Towards the end of the evening I felt faint several times, but I fought against it, and she
did not see anything in my face except calmness, serenity, and boundless affection. She is
very keen-sighted; she knows, perceives, understands things very quickly; but I fairly surpassed
myself,--I was so natural and so much at my ease. Even if there be still any lingering doubt
in her mind as to my submission, she has none as to my affection and her being to me the same
worshipped Aniela.

I noticed that she seemed better and evidently began to revive in the warmer atmosphere. I
had indeed reason to be proud of myself, for I brought at once an appearance of cheerfulness
into a house where dulness had reigned paramount. My aunt and Pani Celina appreciated it keenly.
The latter said frankly when I wished her good-night:--

"Thank Heaven, you have come. Everything looks different at once with you in the house."

Aniela, pressing my hand, said shyly, "You will not go away soon, will you?"

"No, Aniela," I replied; "I will not go away again." And I went, or rather fled, to my room,
because I felt that I could bear the strain no longer. There had been such an accumulation
of misery and tears in my heart during that evening that I felt half choked. There are small
sacrifices that cost more than great ones.

8 November.

Why do I repeat to myself so often that she is as the crown of my head? Because one must love
a woman more than life, consider her as the crown of life, if he does not leave her under circumstances
like these. I am perfectly aware that mere physical repugnance would have driven me from any
other woman; and since I remain here the thought occurs to me again that my love must be an
aberration of the nerves, which could not exist were I a normally healthy specimen of mankind.
The modern man, who explains to himself everything by the word "neurosis," and is conscious
of all that is going on within himself, has not even the comfort which a conviction of his
own faithfulness might give him. For if he says to himself, "Your faithfulness and perseverance
are signs of disease, not virtues," it adds one bitterness the more. If consciousness of all
these things makes life so much more difficult, why do we take so much care to cultivate it.

To-day, by daylight, I noticed how much Aniela is changed, and my heart was torn at the sight.
Her mouth is swollen, and the once so pure brow has lost its purity and clearness. My aunt
was right,--her beauty is almost gone. But the eyes are the same as those of the former Aniela,
and that is enough for me. That changed face only increases my pity and tenderness, and she
is dearer to me than ever. If she were ten times more changed I should love her still. If this
be disease, I am sickening with it, and do not wish to get well again; I would rather die of
this disease than of any other.

9 November.

A time will come when under changed circumstances she will recover her beauty. I thought of
it to-day and at once asked myself what would be our relations towards each other in the future,
and whether it would make any change. I am certain it will not. I know already how it feels
to live without her, and shall not do anything which might make her cast me off. She will always
remain the same; I have now not the slightest doubt that I am necessary to her life, but I
know also that she will never call the feeling she has for me by any other name than great
sisterly affection. What matters the name? it will be always the ideal love of one soul towards
another; and that is lawful, because permitted to brother and sister. Were it otherwise, she
would be in arms against it at once.

In regard to this I have no illusion whatever. I have already said that since she changed our
mutual relations into ideal feelings, they have become dear to her. Let it remain thus, provided
they be dear to her.

10 November.

It is an altogether wrong idea that the modern product of civilization is less susceptible
to love. I sometimes think it is the other way. He who is deprived of one lung breathes all
the harder with the remaining one; we have lost much of what makes up the sum of life, and
are endowed instead with a nervous system more highly strung and more sensitive than that of
our ancestors. It is quite another matter that a lack of red globules in our blood creates
abnormal and unhealthy feelings, and the tragedy of human life rather increases therefore than
grows less. It is increased for the very reason that, whereas the former man in his disappointments
found consolation in religion and social duties, the modern man does not find it there. Formerly
character proved a strong curb for passions; in the present there is not much strength in character,
and it grows less and less because of the prevailing scepticism, which is a decomposing element.
It is like a bacillus breeding in the human soul; it destroys the resistant power against the
physiological craving of the nerves, of nerves diseased. The modern man is conscious of everything,
and cannot find a remedy against anything.

11 November.

There has been no news from Kromitzki for some time; even Aniela has not heard from him. I
sent him a telegram to inform him that a lawyer was coming out to him to set his affairs straight;
then I wrote to him,--trusting to chance that he may get the letter; for we do not know where
he is at present. No doubt the telegram and letter will find him in time, but where or when
we do not know. The elder Chwastowski has written to his son; perhaps he first will hear something
as to how matters stand.

I spend whole hours with Aniela, with nothing to disturb us. Pani Celina, who knows now about
Kromitzki's position, asked me to prepare Aniela for any news she might be likely to receive.
I have already told Aniela what I think in regard to her husband's speculation, but only from
a personal point of view. I told her even that she ought not to take it to heart if he lost
all his money, which after all might be the best thing that could happen to him, as then he
might be able to settle to a quiet, practical life. I set her mind at rest as to the money
I had lent him, and said that was all right; I also told her something of my aunt's plans for
their future. She listened with comparative calmness and without showing signs of emotion.
What most gives her strength and comfort is the consciousness that so many loving hearts are
near her. I love her now beyond all words; she sees it,--she reads it in my eyes, and in my
whole manner towards her. When I succeed in cheering her up, or call forth her smiles, I am
beside myself with delight. There is at present in my love something of the attachment of the
faithful servant who loves his mistress. I often feel as if I ought to humble myself before
her, as if my proper place were at her feet. She never can grow ugly, changed, or old to me.
I accept everything, agree to everything, and worship her as she is.

12 November.

Kromitzki is dead! The catastrophe has come upon us like a thunderbolt. God keep Aniela from
any harm in her present state. To-day came a telegram to the effect that, accused of fraud
and threatened with imprisonment, he has taken his life. I should have expected anything but
that! Kromitzki is dead! Aniela is free! But how will she bear it? I have been looking again
and again at the telegram, to make sure I am not dreaming. I cannot yet believe my own eyes;
but the signature, "Chwastowski," vouches for its truth. I knew it could not end well, but
I never supposed the end would be so speedy and so tragic. No! the thought never crossed my mind.

I feel as if I had received a blow on the head. If my brain does not give way now, it can bear
anything. I once helped Kromitzki, and latterly I have done what I could for him, consequently
I have nothing to reproach myself with. There was a time when from my whole soul I wished him
dead,--that is true; but it is all the more to my credit that I helped him in spite of that.
And death has overtaken him, not in consequence of anything I did, but in spite of it. And
Aniela is free! Strange, though I know it, I cannot believe it altogether. I am as if only
half conscious. Kromitzki to me was a mere stranger, moreover the greatest obstacle in my way.
The obstacle is removed, therefore I ought to feel a boundless joy; and yet I cannot, dare
not feel it,--possibly because a fear of the consequences for Aniela is connected with it.
My first thought when I received the telegram was: "What will happen to Aniela? How will she
bear the news?" God guard her! She did not love the man, but in her present state a shock may
kill her. I am thinking of taking her away from here.

What a fortunate thing that I received the telegram in my own room, and not in the dining-room.
I do not know whether I should have been able to control my features. For some time I could
not recover myself from the sudden shock. I then went to my aunt, but did not show her the
telegram. I said only:--

"I have had bad news about Kromitzki."

"What has happened?"

"You must not be shocked, aunty."

"They brought him up for trial,--is that it?"

"No, it is worse; he is brought up for trial, but before a higher tribunal than ours."

My aunt winked with both eyes vigorously.

"What do you mean, Leon?"

I showed her the telegram. She read it, and without saying a word went to her prie-Dieu and
buried her face in her hands. After a short time she rose from her knees and said:--

"Aniela may pay for it with her life. What is to be done?"

"She must not know anything until after the child is born."

"But how can we prevent it? It will be in everybody's mouth; the papers will discuss it. How
can we keep it from her?"

"Dearest aunt," I said, "there is only one way. We must have the doctor here and ask him to
prescribe for her a change of air. Then I will take her and Pani Celina to Rome. There I can
keep all news from her. Here it would be difficult, especially when the servants come to hear
about it?"

"But will she be able to bear the journey?"

"I do not know; it all depends upon what the doctor says; I will send for him at once."

My aunt agreed to my proposal. It was really the best thing to do under the circumstances.
We resolved to take Pani Celina into our confidence, in order that she might further our plan
of departure. I saw all the servants, and gave strict orders that all letters, papers, and
telegrams should be brought direct to my room, and nobody approach the young lady with any
news or gossip whatever.

My aunt was terribly shocked. According to her views, suicide is one of the greatest crimes
anybody can commit; therefore with the pity for the unfortunate man, there was a great deal
of horror and indignation. "He ought not to have done this," she said over and over again,--"especially
now when he expected to become a father." But I suppose he might not have received news of
that. During the last few weeks he must have been in a state of feverish anxiety, travelling
from one place to another as the entangled position of his affairs drove him.

I dare not condemn him, and will confess openly that it has raised the man in my esteem. There
are some men who, justly accused of fraud and wrong-dealing, and sentenced to imprisonment,
take it easy, and pass their time in prison gayly drinking champagne. He did not do that,--he
preferred death to disgrace. Maybe he remembered who he was. I should have less sympathy with
him if he had made away with himself merely because he had failed; but I suppose even that
would have been a sufficient motive for him to do so. I remember what he said about it at Gastein.
If my love be a neurosis, then most undoubtedly his feverish desire for gold is the same. When
this one aim went out from his life, this one basis slipped away from under his feet, he saw
before him, perhaps, a gulf and a desert such as I saw when alone at Berlin. And what could
hold him back? The thought of Aniela? He knew we would take care of her; and besides,--who
knows?--perhaps in a dim way he felt that he was not necessary to her happiness. I did not
think he had it in him; I had not expected from him so much energy and courage, and I confess
that I judged him wrongly.

I had put down my pen, but take it up again because I cannot sleep; and besides, while writing
my thoughts flow more evenly, and I do not feel my brain reeling. Aniela is free! Aniela is
free! I repeat it to myself and cannot encompass the whole meaning. I feel as if I could go
mad with joy, and at the same time I am seized with an undefined dread. Is it really true that
a new life is dawning for me? What is it? Is it one of Nature's tricks, or is it God's mercy
at last for all I suffered, and for the great love I bear in my heart? Perhaps there exists
a mystic law which gives the woman to the man who loves her most in order that a great, eternal
commandment of the Creator should be fulfilled. I do not know. I have a feeling as if I and
all those near me were carried away by an immense wave, beyond human will or human control.

I interrupted my writing again, because the carriage I sent for the doctor has come back without
him. He has an operation on hand and could not come, but promised to be here in the morning.
He must remain with us at Ploszow until our departure, and go with us to Rome. There I shall
find others to take his place.

It is late in the night. Aniela is asleep, and has no foreboding of what is hanging over her,
what a complete change in her life has taken place. May it bring peace and happiness to her!
She deserves it all. Perhaps it is for her sake God's mercy is showing.

My nerves are so overstrung that I start when I hear a dog barking in the distance, or the
watchman's rattle; it seems to me as if somebody were bringing news and trying to get to Aniela.
I make an effort to calm myself, and explain away the strange fear that haunts me, by the state
of Aniela's health; I try to be convinced that but for this I should not feel so uneasy. I
repeat to myself that my fear will pass, as everything passes, and afterwards there will be
the beginning of a new life.

I have to familiarize myself with the thought that Kromitzki is no more. Out of this catastrophe
springs my happiness, such happiness as I dared not hope for; but there is within us a moral
instinct which forbids us to rejoice at the death of even an enemy. And moreover in death itself
there is an awful solemnity,--those who speak in presence of it speak in hushed voices; that
is the reason I dare not rejoice.

13 November.

All my plans are shattered. The doctor came this morning, and after examining Aniela, announced
that there could be no question of any long journey for her, as it would be positively dangerous.
There seem to be some irregularities in her state. What a torture to hear his professional
jargon, when every word he utters seems to threaten the life of the beloved woman. I told the
doctor the position we are in, and he said that between two dangers he preferred the lesser one.

What troubled and angered me most was his advice to tell Aniela, after due preparation, about
her husband's death. Alas! I cannot deny that from his point of view he is right. "If you are
quite sure," he said, "that you can keep it from Pani Kromitzka for some months to come, it
would certainly be better to do so; but if not, it would be advisable to prepare her mind and
then tell her; for if she receives the news suddenly there may be another catastrophe."

What is to be done? I must establish a quarantine around Ploszow, not let a paper or letter
come in unknown to me, instruct the servants what to say, and to keep even their features under
command.

What an impression news like this makes upon every one; I had an illustration in Pani Celina,
to whom we had to tell the truth. She fainted twice, and then went off into hysterics; which
almost drove me frantic, because I thought she would be heard all over the house. And yet she
was not fond of her son-in-law; but she too, I suppose, was mostly afraid for Aniela. I am
strenuously opposed to the doctor's advice, and do not think I shall ever agree to it. I cannot
tell them one thing,--that Aniela did not love her husband, and that for that very reason the
shock will be more terrible to her.

It is not merely a question of sorrow after the death of a beloved being, but of the reproaches
she will apply to herself, thinking that if she had loved him more he might have clung more
to his life. Empty, trivial, and unjust reproaches, for she did everything that force of will
could command,--she spurned my love and remained pure and faithful to him. But one must know
that soul full of scruples as I know it, to gauge the depth of misery into which the news would
plunge her, and how she would suspect herself,--asking whether his death did not correspond
to some deeply hidden desire on her part for freedom and happiness; whether it did not gratify
those wishes she had scarcely dared to form. My hair seems to rise at the very thought, because
it is his death that opens a new life for her; consequently it will be a twofold shock,--two
blows to fall upon the dear head. This, neither the doctor, my aunt, nor Pani Celina can understand.
No! she ought not to be told until after the event.

What a misfortune that she cannot go away! Here it is difficult, almost impossible, to guard
her. She will read in our faces what has happened. The least word, the least glance will rouse
her suspicion, and she will fancy all sorts of things. To-day she was surprised by the sudden
arrival of the doctor. Pani Celina told me she had inquired why he was sent for and whether
she was in any danger. Fortunately, my aunt, always ready for any emergency, said that it was
the usual thing in such a case to call in the doctor from time to time. Aniela has no experience,
and believed her at once. How shall I be able to persuade the servants not to look so mysterious?
They already guess that something is the matter, from my warnings and cautionings, and they
will know all about it in time. I cannot dismiss them all. The frequent telegrams are enough
to excite their curiosity. To-day I had another telegram from Chwastowski at Baku, with the
inquiry what he is to do with the body. I replied that he should bury it there for the present.
I asked the elder Chwastowski to take it to Warsaw, and sent a money order by telegraph. I
do not know even whether such an order can be sent from Warsaw to Baku.

To-day I looked through the papers. In two of them there was a paragraph about Kromitzki's
death. If that is young Chwastowski's doing, he must be mad. The servants know everything.
Their faces are such that I am surprised Aniela does not suspect something. During dinner she
was cheerful and unusually lively. The doctor's presence is a great relief to me. Kromitzki
is nothing to him. He engages Aniela's attention, makes jokes, and teaches her to play chess.
Pani Celina, on the contrary, reduces me to despair. The merrier Aniela grew, the longer and
more funereal became her mother's countenance. I spoke to her about it rather sharply.

14 November.

We are all at Warsaw. They told Aniela that hot-water pipes were to be laid in all the rooms
at Ploszow, and so, to avoid the general upset and discomfort, we all intended to go to Warsaw.
The drive tired her very much; but I am glad we are here, for I can rely upon my servants.
The house is a little in disorder. A great many pictures are already unpacked. Aniela, in spite
of being tired, wanted to see them, and I acted as cicerone. I told her that it was my greatest
wish to be at some time her cicerone at Rome, and she replied, with a shade of sadness:--

"I, too, often dream of seeing Rome, but sometimes I think that I shall never go there."

Her words caused me a twinge of anguish, for I am afraid of everything, even presentiments,
and am ready to see in every word a forecast of evil.

"I promise you shall go to Rome and stop there as long as you like," I replied cheerfully.

It is strange how easily human nature adapts itself to a new position and exercises its rights.
Involuntarily I look upon Aniela as my own, and guard her as my property.

The doctor was right. We did well to come to Warsaw,--firstly, because in case of any sudden
emergency there is help at hand; secondly, we are not obliged to receive visitors. At Ploszow
we could not have avoided that, as it is impossible to turn away a visitor from one's own gates;
and probably a great many would have come with condolences. Finally, at Ploszow there existed
already a mysterious, heavy atmosphere, in which my efforts to give the conversation a light
and cheerful turn appeared unnatural. I suppose this cannot be avoided even here, but Aniela's
mind will be occupied with hundreds of little sensations, and be less observant of any slight
changes in her surroundings than she would be at Ploszow. She will not go out often, and never
alone. The doctor orders exercise, but I have found means for that. Beyond the stables there
is a good-sized garden with a wooden gallery near the wall. I will have it glazed, and in bad
weather Aniela can walk there. It is a terrible strain, this continual anxiety hanging over
our heads.

15 November.

How did it happen? How the slightest suspicion could have entered her head I cannot understand.
And yet it is there. To-day, during breakfast, she suddenly raised her eyes, looked inquiringly
at all of us in turn and said:--

"I cannot quite make it out, but I am under the impression that you are concealing something
from me."

I felt myself growing pale,--Pani Celina behaved most fatally; only the dear old aunt did not
lose her presence of mind and at once began to scold Aniela:--

"Of course we are hiding something, and did not like to tell you that we consider that little
head of yours a foolish one. Leon said yesterday that you would never learn to play chess,
as you had no idea about combination."

I breathed more easily, and getting hold of the clue began to make fun of her. Aniela seemed
satisfied for the moment, but I am quite certain that we have not dispersed her suspicion,
and that even my cheerfulness may have seemed artificial to her. My aunt and Pani Celina were
thoroughly frightened, and I was in despair; for I saw how fruitless would be our endeavors
so keep the thing from her altogether. I fancy that Aniela suspects we are keeping from her
some bad news about her husband's financial affairs; but what will she think if week after
week passes and she does not get any letters from him? What can we tell her; how explain the
silence?

Towards noon the doctor came. We told him what had happened, and he repeated what he had said
before, that it would be better to let her know the truth.

"Naturally Pani Kromitzka will be getting anxious at not receiving any letters, and thence
will draw the worst conclusions."

I still tried to avoid extreme measures and said that this anxiety would prepare her mind for
the news.

"Yes," replied the doctor, "but anxiety prepares the organism badly for an ordeal which even
under more favorable circumstances would not be an easy thing to bear."

Perhaps he is right, but my heart quakes with terror. Everything has its limits, and so has
human courage There is something within me that protests desperately against this, and I am
afraid of the voice which says, "No."

The ladies have almost made up their minds to tell her to-morrow. I will have nothing to do
with it. INTRODUCTION.

The Author of the book in hand, having passed through the various scenes through which he would
accompany his readers, was prompted to make this offering to the craft and the public in order
to relieve his mind of the thoughts had upon the subject of making
shoes, as well as to contribute something of a literary character
which, in the broad range of possibilities, may become useful as a
text-book, or family-book, for those who may feel interested in making
or wearing shoes, and perhaps lead to something better.

Realizing the imperfections and shortcomings of the human family,
to some extent at least, no claim beyond that which you are disposed
to put upon it is held, so that any communication will be gladly received
and noted.

 The doctor prepared us to expect that the fever would increase gradually up to forty
degrees; there will be great pains, sickness, and swelling of the feet--that is what he promises!

Let there be at once also the end of the world! O God! if that is to be my punishment, I swear
I will go away, never to see her again in life,--only save her!

18 November.

I have not seen her. I sit at her door almost bereft of my senses; but I do not go in, because
I am afraid that the sight of me will make her worse and increase the fever. At times a horrible
idea crosses my mind that I am going mad and might kill Aniela in a fit of insanity. That is
the reason I force myself to write, for it seems to me that it is the best way of keeping my
senses under control.

19 November.

I heard her voice and her moans through the door. In that illness the suffering is terrible.
According to the doctor it is the usual sign, but to me it seems blind cruelty! My aunt says
she clings round her neck and her mother's and asks them for help. And nothing can be done,
nothing! Continual sickness, the pains are increasing, the feet are quite swollen. The doctor
says nothing, but that it may turn out all right, or may end badly. I know that without him!
The fever is at forty degrees. She is always conscious.

20 November.

I know it now. Nobody told me, but I know for certain that she is going to die. I have all
my senses under control, I am even calm. Aniela will die! Last night, sitting at her door,
I saw it as clearly as I now see the sunlight. A man in a certain condition of mind sees things
which other people with less concentrated minds cannot see. Towards morning something passed
within me which made me see how it would end; it was as if a veil had been torn from my eyes
and brain. Nothing now can save Aniela. I know it better than all the doctors. And that is
the reason why I do not resist any longer. What good can it do either to her or to me? The
sentence has been pronounced. I should be blind if I did not perceive that some power as strong
as the universe is parting us. What this power is, what it is called, I do not know. I know
only that if I knelt down, beat my head on the floor, prayed, and cried out for mercy, I might
move a mountain sooner than move that power. As nothing now could part me from Aniela but death,
she must die. This may be very logical, but I do not consent to part from her.

21 November.

Aniela wished to see me. My aunt took everybody out of the room, thinking she wanted to recommend
her mother to my care, and this was really the case. I saw my beloved, the soul of my life.
She is always conscious her eyes are very bright and her mental faculties excited. The pain
has almost ceased. All traces of her former state have disappeared, and her face is like an
angel's. She smiled at me, and I smiled back. Since yesterday I know what is awaiting me, and
it seems to me as if I were dead already; therefore I am calm. Taking my hand in hers, she
began to speak about her mother, then looked at me as if she wished to see as much as she could
of me before her eyes closed forever, and said:--

"Do not be afraid, Leon,--I feel much better; but in case anything should happen to me I wanted
to leave you something to remember me by. Perhaps I ought not to say it so soon after my husband's
death; but as I might die, I wanted to tell you now that I loved you very, very much."

I replied to her: "I know it, dearest;" and I held her hand and we looked into each other's
eyes. For the first time in her life she smiled at me as my betrothed wife. And I wedded her
by vows stronger and more lasting than earthly vows. We were happy at this moment though overshadowed
by a sadness as strong as death left her only when we were told the priest had come. She had
prepared me for his coming, and asked me not to grieve at it; she had sent for him, not because
she thought she was dying, but that it might do her good and set her mind at rest.

When the priest had left I went back to her. After so many sleepless nights she was tired and
fell asleep she is sleeping now. When she wakes up I will not leave her again until she falls
asleep again.

22 November.

She is very much better. Pani Celina is beside herself with joy. I am the only one who knows
what it is. There was no need for the doctor to tell me that it means paralysis of the bowels.

23 November.

Aniela died this morning.

ROME, 5 December.

I might have been your happiness, and became your misfortune. I am the cause of your death,
for if I had been a different man, if I had not been wanting in all principles, all foundations
of life, there would not have come upon you the shocks that killed you. I understood that in
the last moments of your life, and I promised myself I would follow you. I vowed it at your
dying bed, and my only duty is now near you.

To your mother I leave my fortune; my aunt I leave to Christ, in whose love she will find consolation
in her declining years, and I follow you--because I must. Do you think I am not afraid of death?
I am afraid because I do not know what there is, and see only darkness without end; which makes
me recoil. I do not know whether there be nothingness, or existence without space and time;
perhaps some midplanetary wind carries the spiritual monad from star to star to implant it
in an ever-renewing existence. I do not know whether there be immense restlessness, or a peace
so perfect as only Omnipotence and Love can bestow on us. But since you have died through my
"I do not know," how could I remain here--and live?

The more I fear, the more I do not know,--the more I cannot let you go alone; I cannot, Aniela
mine,--and I follow. Together we shall sink into nothingness, or together begin a new life;
and here below where we have suffered let us be buried in oblivion.