CHAPTER VIII.

The sun had passed the meridian when Melissa and Andreas left the house. They walked on in
silence through the deserted streets, the girl with her eyes sadly fixed on the ground; for
an inward voice warned her that her lover's life was in danger.  She did not sob, but more
than once she wiped away a large tear.

Andreas, too, was lost in his own thoughts.  To win a soul to the Saviour was surely a good
work.  He knew Melissa's sober, thoughtful nature, and the retired, joyless life she led with
her surly old father.  So his knowledge of human nature led him to think that she, if any one,
might easily be won over to the faith in which he found his chief happiness. Baptism had given
such sanctification to his life that he longed to lead the daughter of the only woman for whom
his heart had ever beat a shade faster, to the baptismal font.  In the heat of summer Olympias
had often been the guest for weeks together of Polybius's wife, now likewise dead. Then she
had taken a little house of her own for herself and her children, and when his master's wife
died, the lonely widower had known no greater pleasure than that of receiving her on his estate
for as long as Heron would allow her to remain; he himself never left his work for long.  Thus
Andreas had become the great ally of the gem-cutter's children, and, as they could learn nothing
from him that was not good and worth knowing, Olympias had gladly allowed them to remain in
his society, and herself found a teacher and friend in the worthy steward. Changeable and rainy weather
prevented us from going out much.

30th. Our people, and with them the strange Esquimaux, met for public worship. Brother Kohlmeister
once more explained to them our intention in coming thus far to visit
them.  At that time his passion for Melissa's mother had possessed him
so wholly that his life was a constant struggle against the temptation to covet his neighbor's
wife. And he had conquered, doing severe penance for every glance which might for an instant
betray to her the weakness of his soul.  She had loved flowers, and he knew the plant-world
so well, and was so absolutely master over everything which grew and bloomed in the gardens
of which he had charge, that he could often intrust his speechless favorites to tell her things
which lips and eyes might not reveal.  Now she was no more, and the culture of plants had lost
half its charm since her eyes could no longer watch their thriving.  He now left the gardens
for the most part to his men, while he devoted himself to other cares with double diligence,
and to the strictest exercises of his faith.

But, as many a man adores the children of the woman he might not marry, Alexander and Melissa
daily grew dearer to Andreas.  He took a father's interest in their welfare, and, needing little
himself, he carefully hoarded his ample income to promote the cause of Christianity and encourage
good works; but he had paid Alexander's debts when his time of apprenticeship was over, for
they were so considerable that the reckless youth had not dared confess the sum to his stern
father.

Very soon after this, Alexander had become one of the most popular painters of the town; and
when he proposed to repay his friend the money he had lent him, Andreas accepted it; but he
added it to a capital of which the purpose was his secret, but which, if his prayers were heard,
might return once more to benefit Alexander.  Diodoros, too, was as dear to the freedman as
a son of his own could have been, though he was a heathen.  In the gymnasium and the race-course,
or in the practice of the mysteries, the good seed which he sowed in the lad's heart was trodden
down.  Polybius, too, was an utter heathen; indeed, he was one of the priests of Dionysus and
Demeter, as his wealth and position in the senate required.

Then, Diodoros had confessed to him that he hoped to win Melissa for his wife, and this had
been adverse to Andreas's hope and purpose of making a Christian of the girl; for he knew by
experience how easily married happiness was wrecked when man and wife worship different gods.
But when the freedman had again seen the gem-cutter's brutality and the girl's filial patience,
an inward voice had called to him that this gentle, gifted creature was one of those elect
from among whom the Lord chose the martyrs for the faith; and that it was his part to lead
her into the fold of the Redeemer.  He had begun the work of converting her with the zeal he
put into everything.  But fresh doubts had come upon him on the threshold of the sick-room,
after seeing the lad who was so dear to him, and whose eye had met his with such a trustful,
suffering look.  Could it be right to sow the seed of discord between him and his future wife?
And supposing Diodoros, too, should be converted by Melissa, could he thus alienate from his
father the son and heir of Polybius--his benefactor and master?

Then, he remembered, too, to what a position he had risen through that master's confidence
in him.  Polybius knew nothing of the concerns of his house but from the reports laid before
him by Andreas; for the steward controlled not merely the estate but the fortune of the family,
and for years had been at the head of the bank which he himself had founded to increase the
already vast income of the man to whom he owed his freedom. Polybius paid him a considerable
portion of each year's profits, and had said one day at a banquet, with the epigrammatic wit
of an Alexandrian, that his freedman, Andreas, served his interests as only one other man could
do--namely, himself--but with the industry of ten.  The Christian greatly appreciated his confidence;
and as he walked on by the side of Melissa, he told himself again and again that it would be
dishonorable to betray it.

If only the sweet girl might find the way alone!  If she were chosen to salvation, the Lord
himself would lead and guide her.  Had he indeed not beckoned her already by impressing on
her heart those words, "The fullness of the time is now come?"

That he was justified in keeping this remembrance alive he had no doubt; and he was about to
speak of it again, when she prevented him by raising her large eyes beseechingly to his, and
asking him:

"Is Diodoros in real danger?  Tell me the truth.  I would rather endure the worst than this
dreadful anxiety."

So Andreas acknowledged that the youth was in a bad way, but that Ptolemaeus, himself well-skilled,
hoped to cure him if his greater colleague Galenus would aid him.

"And it is to secure his assistance, then," Melissa went on, "that the leech would have him
carried to the Serapeum?"

"Yes, my child.  For he is in Caesar's train, and it would be vain to try to speak with him
to-day or to-morrow."

"But the journey through the town will do the sufferer a mischief."

"He will be carried in a litter."

"But even that is not good for him.  Perfect quiet, Ptolemaeus said, was the best medicine."

"But  Galenus  has even  better  remedies  at hand," was the reply.

Melissa seemed satisfied with this assurance, for she walked on for some time in silence. 
But when the uproar of the crowd in the vicinity of the Serapeum became more audible as they
advanced, she suddenly stood still, and said:

"Come what may, I will find my way to the great physician's presence and crave his help." 
"You?"  cried the freedman; and when she firmly reiterated her purpose, the strong man turned pale.

"You know not what you say!"  he exclaimed, in deep concern.  "The men who guard the approaches
to Caracalla are ruthless profligates, devoid of courtesy or conscience.  But, you may rely
upon it, you will not even get into the antechamber."

"Perhaps.  Nevertheless, it is my duty, and I will try."

How firmly and decisively she spoke!  And what strength of will sparkled in the quiet, modest
maiden's eyes!  And the closely set lips, which usually were slightly parted, and hardly covered
two of her pearly white teeth, gave her a look of such determination, that Andreas could see
that no obstacle would check her.

Still, love and duty alike required him to use every means in his power to keep her from taking
such a step.  He lavished all his eloquence; but she adhered to her purpose with steadfast
persistency, and none of the reasons he could adduce to prove the impossibility of the undertaking
convinced her.  The only point which staggered her was the information that the great leech
was an old man, who walked with difficulty; and that Galen, as a heathen and a disciple of
Aristotle, would never be induced to enter a Christian dwelling.  Both these facts might be
a serious hindrance to her scheme; yet she would not now stop to reflect.  They had got back
to the great street of Hermes, leading from the temple of that god to the Serapeum, and must
cross it to reach the lake, their immediate destination.  As in all the principal streets of
Alexandria, a colonnade bordered the street in front of the houses on each side of the wide
and handsome roadway.  Under these arcades the foot-passengers were closely packed, awaiting
Caesar's passage.  He must soon be coming, for the reception, first at the Kanopic Gate, and
then at the Gate of the Sun, was long since over;  and, even if he had carried out his purpose
of halting at the tomb of Alexander the Great, he could not be detained much longer.  The distance
hither down the Kanopic Way was not great, and swift horses would quickly bring him down the
Aspendia street to that of Hermes, leading straight to the Serapeum.  His train was not to
follow him to the Soma, the mausoleum of the founder of the city, but to turn off to the southward
by the Paneum, and make a round into the street of Hermes.

The praetorians, the German body-guard, the imperial Macedonian phalanx, and some mounted standard-bearers
had by this time reached the spot where Melissa was proceeding up the street holding Andreas's
hand.  Close by them came also a train of slaves, carrying baskets full of palm-leaves and
fresh branches of ivy, myrtle, poplar, and pine, from the gardens of the Paneum, to be carried
to the Serapeum.  They were escorted by lictors, endeavoring with their axes and fasces to
make a way for them through the living wall which barred their way.

By the help of the mounted troops, who kept the main road clear, space was made for them; and
Andreas, who knew one of the overseers of the garden-slaves, begged him as a favor to allow
Melissa and himself to walk among his people.  This was willingly granted to so well-known
a man; and the way was quite free for the moment, because the imperial cartage had not followed
immediately on the soldiers who had now all marched past. Thus, among the flower-bearers, they
reached the middle of the street; and while the slaves proceeded on their way to the Serapeum,
the freedman tried to cross the road, and reach the continuation of the street they had come
by, and which led to the lake.  But the attempt was frustrated, for some Roman lictors who
had just come up stood in their way, and sent them to the southern side of the street of Hermes,
to mingle with the gaping crowd under the arcade.

They were, of course, but ill received by these, since they naturally found themselves in front
of the foremost rank; but the stalwart frame and determined face of Andreas, and the exceptional
beauty of his young companion, over whose pretty head most of the gazers could easily see,
protected her from rough treatment.

Andreas spoke a few words of apology to those standing nearest to them, and a young goldsmith
at once courteously made way, so that Melissa, who had taken a place behind a column, might
see better.

And in a few minutes--there was that to see which made every one forget the intruders.  Vehicles
and outriders, litters swung between mules, and a long train of imperial footmen, in red tunics
embroidered with gold, huntsmen with leashes of noble dogs, baggage-wagons and loaded elephants,
came trooping down toward the Serapeum; while suddenly, from the Aspendia into the Hermes Way,
the Numidian horse rushed out, followed by a troop of mounted lictors, who galloped up the
street, shouting their orders in loud tones to the imperial train, in a mixture of Latin and
Greek, of which Melissa understood only the words "Caesar!" and "Make way to the right!"

The command was instantly obeyed.  Vehicles, foot-passengers, and riders alike crowded to the
southern or left-hand side of the road, and the many-headed throng, of which Andreas and Melissa
formed a part, drew as far back as possible under the colonnade; for on the edge of the footway
there was the risk of being trampled on by a horse or crushed by a wheel. The back rows of
the populace, who had collected under the arcades, were severely squeezed by this fresh pressure
from without, and their outcries were loud of anger, alarm; or pain; while on the other side
of the street arose shouts of delight and triumph, or, when anything singular came into view,
loud laughter at the wit and irony of some jester.  Added to these there were the clatter of
hoofs and the roll of wheels, the whinnying of horses, the shouts of command, the rattle of
drums, the blare of trumpets, and the shrill pipe of flutes, without a moment's pause.  It
was a wild and ear-splitting tumult; to Melissa, however, neither painful nor pleasing, for
the one idea, that she must speak with the great physician, silenced every other.  But suddenly
there came up from the east, from the rising of the sun, whose course Caesar had followed,
such a tremendous roar that she involuntarily clutched her companion's hand.

Every instant the storm of noise increased, rolling on with irresistible vehemence, gathering
force as it came on, receiving, as it were, fresh tributaries on its way, and rapidly swelling
from the distance to the immediate vicinity, compelling every one, as with a magic power, to
yield to the superior will of numbers and join in the cry.  Even Melissa cheered.  She, too,
was as a drop in the tide, a leaf on the rippling face of the rushing torrent; her heart beat
as wildly and her voice rang as clear as that of the rest of the throng, intoxicated with they
knew not what, which crowded the colonnades by the roadway, and every window and roof-top,
waving handkerchiefs, strewing flowers on the ground, and wiping the tears which this unwonted
excitement had brought to their eyes.

And now the shout is so tremendous that it could not possibly be louder. It seems as though
it were the union of voices innumerable rather than the seabreeze, which flutters the pennons
and flags which wave from every house and arch, and sways the garlands hung across the street.
Melissa can see none but flushed faces, eyes swimming in tears, parted lips, wildly waving
arms and hands.  Then suddenly a mysterious power hushes the loud tones close round her; she
hears only here and there the cry of "Caesar!"  "He is coming!"  "Here he is!"--and the swift
tramp of hoofs and the clatter of wheels sounding like the rattle of an iron building after
a peal of thunder, above the shouts of ten thousand human beings. Closer it comes and closer,
without a pause, and followed by fresh shouting, as a flock of daws follow an owl flying across
the twilight, swelling again to irrepressible triumph as the expected potentate rushes past
Melissa and her neighbors.  They only see Caesar as a form scarcely discerned by the eye during
the space of a lightning-flash in a dark night.

Four tawny bay horses of medium size, dappled with black, harnessed abreast and wide apart,
fly along the cleared road like hunted foxes, the light Gallic chariot at their heels.  The
wheels seem scarcely to touch the smooth flags of the Alexandrian pavement.  The charioteer
wears the red-bordered toga of the highest Roman officials.  He is well known by repute, and
the subject of many a sharp jest; for this is Pandion, formerly a stableboy, and now one of
"Caesar's friends," a praetor, and one of the great men of the empire.  But he knows his business;
and what does Caracalla care for tradition or descent, for the murmurs and discontent of high
or low?

Pandion holds the reins with elegant composure, and urges the horses to a frantic pace by a
mere whistle, without ever using the whip.  But why is it that he whirls the mighty monarch
of half a world, before whose bloodthirsty power every one quakes, so swiftly past these eager
spectators? Do not our poets sing, Our pressmen praise in dithyrambic prose, The 'lads' who win
our worlds and face our foes? Who never, save to human pity, yield One step in wilderness or battlefield!"

Meanwhile,
with troubled eyes and straining hands, Silent, attentive, thoughtful, Justice stands. To
her alone let the appeal be made.

Heroes, or merely tools of huckstering Trade, Men brave, though fallible, or sordid brutes, Let
all be heard. Since each to each imputes Unmeasured baseness, somewhere the black stain Must
surely rest. The dead speak not, the slain Have not a voice, save such as that which spoke From
ABEL's blood.

Green laurels, or the stroke Of shame's swift scourge? There's the alternative Before the lifted
eyes of those who live. One fain would see the grass unstained that waves In the dark Afric
waste o'er those two graves. To Justice the protagonist makes appeal. Justice would wish him
smirchless as her steel, But stands with steadfast eyes and unbowed head Silent--betwixt the Living
and the Dead!

* * * * *

OPERA NOTES.

What's a Drama without a Moral, and what's Rigoletto without a MAUREL, who was cast for the part,
but who was too indisposed to appear? So Signor GALASSI came and
"played the fool" instead, much to the satisfaction of all concerned,
and all were very much concerned about the illness or indisposition
of M. MAUREL. DIMITRESCO not particularly strong as the Dook; but
Mlle. STROMFELD came out well as Gilda, and, being called, came out
in excellent form in front of the Curtain. Signor BEVIGNANI, beating
time in Orchestra, and time all the better for his beating.

The tyrant who wore this gaudy cloak was, no doubt, devoid alike of truth and conscience; but,
as to his being a philosopher, who knew the worthlessness of earthly things and turned his
back upon the world, those who could might believe it!  He was no more than an actor, who played
the part of Timon not amiss, and who made use of his public to work upon their fears and enjoy
the sight of their anguish.  There was something lacking in him to make one of those thorough-going
haters of their kind at whose mere aspect every knee must bend.  The appearance, in short,
of this false philosopher was not calculated to subdue the rash tongues of the Alexandrians.

To this many of them agreed; still, there was no time for such reflections till the dust had
shrouded the chariot, which vanished as quickly as it had come, till the shouting was stilled,
and the crowd had spread over the roadway again.  Then they began to ask themselves why they
had joined in the acclamations, and had been so wildly excited; how it was that they had so
promptly surrendered their self-possession and dignity for the sake of this wicked little man.
Perhaps it was his unlimited control over the weal and woe of the world, over the life and
death of millions, which raised a mortal, not otherwise formed for greatness, so far above
common humanity to a semblance of divinity. Perhaps it was the instinctive craving to take
part in the grand impulsive expression of thousands of others that had carried away each individual.
It was beyond a doubt a mysterious force which had compelled every one to do as his neighbors
did as soon as Caesar had appeared.

Melissa had succumbed with the rest; she had shouted and waved her kerchief, and had not heeded
Andreas when he held her hand and asked her to consider what a criminal this man was whom she
so eagerly hailed.  It was not till all was still again that she recollected herself, and her
determination to get the famous physician to visit her lover revived in renewed strength.

Fully resolved to dare all, she looked about with calm scrutiny, considering the ways and means
of achieving her purpose without any aid from Andreas.  She was in a fever of impatience, and
longed to force her way at once into the Serapeum.  But that was out of the question, for no
one moved from his place.  There was, however, plenty to be seen.  A complete revulsion of
feeling had come over the crowd.  In the place of Expectancy, its graceless step-child, Disappointment,
held sway.  There were no more shouts of joy; men's lungs were no longer strained to the utmost,
but their tongues were all the busier.  Caesar was for the most part spoken of with contempt
as Tarautas, and with the bitterness--the grandchild of Expectancy-which comes of disappointment.
Tarautas had originally been the name of a stunted but particularly bloodthirsty gladiator,
in whom ill-will had traced some resemblance to Caesar.

The more remarkable figures in the imperial train were curiously gazed at and discussed.  A
worker in mosaic, who stood near Melissa, had been employed in the decoration of the baths
of Caracalla at Rome, and had much information to impart; he even knew the names of several
of the senators and courtiers attached to Caesar.  And, with all this, time was found to give
vent to discontent.

The town had done its utmost to make itself fine enough to receive the emperor.  Statues had
been erected of himself, of his father, his mother, and even of his favorite heroes, above
all of Alexander the Great; triumphal arches without number had been constructed.  The vast
halls of the Serapeum, through which he was to pass, had been magnificently decorated; and
in front of the new temple, outside the Kanopic Gate, dedicated to his father, who now ranked
among the gods, the elders of the town had been received by Caesar, to do him homage and offer
him the gifts of the city.  All this had cost many talents, a whole heap of gold; but Alexandria
was wealthy, and ready to make even greater sacrifices if only they had been accepted with
thanks and condescension. Highly emotional, they love to charm, and this has become an art with
them; balancing this emotional nature is the mathematical quality. These two combined have
made French women the great leaders in their own country and among women of all races.
  The delegates had retired as though they
had been condemned to death.  To none but Timotheus, the high-priest of Serapis, had he spoken
graciously.

Others confirmed this report; and dissatisfaction found expression in muttered abuse or satirical
remarks and bitter witticisms.

"Why did he drive past so quickly?" asked a tailor's wife; and some one replied:

"Because the Eumenides, who haunt him for murdering his brother, lash him on with their whips
of snakes!"

A spice-merchant; who was not less indignant but more cautious, hearing a neighbor inquire
why Tarautas drove panther-spotted horses, replied that such beasts of prey had spotted skins,
and that like to like was a common rule.  A cynical philosopher, who proclaimed his sect by
his ragged garment, unkempt hair, and rough mode of speech, declared that Caesar had a senator
to guide his chariot because he had long since succeeded in turning the senate-house into a stable.

To all this, however, Melissa turned a deaf ear, for the thought of the great Roman leech possessed
her mind entirely.  She listened earnestly to the mosaic-worker, who had come close up to her,
and officiously mentioned the names of the most important personages as they went past. Caesar's
train seemed endless.  It included not merely horse and foot soldiers, but numberless baggage-wagons,
cars, elephants--which Caracalla especially affected, because Alexander the Great had been
fond of these huge beasts--horses, mules, and asses, loaded with bales, cases, tents, and camp
and kitchen furniture.  Mingling with these came sutlers, attendants, pages, heralds, musicians,
and slaves of the imperial household, in knots and parties, looking boldly about them at the
bystanders.  When they caught sight of a young and pretty woman on the edge of the path, they
would wave a greeting; and many expressed their admiration of Melissa in a very insolent manner.
Woolly-headed negroes and swarthy natives of north Africa mixed with the fairer dwellers on
the Mediterranean and the yellow or red haired sons of northern Europe. Roman lictors, and
Scythian, Thracian, or Keltic men-at-arms kept every one out of the way who did not belong
to the imperial train, with relentless determination.  Only the Magians, wonder-workers, and
street wenches were suffered to push their way in among the horses, asses, elephants, dogs,
vehicles, and mounted troops.

Each time that one of the unwieldy traveling-carriages, drawn by several horses, came in sight,
in which the wealthy Roman was wont to take his ease on a long journey, or whenever a particularly
splendid litter was borne past, Melissa asked the mosaic-worker for information.  In some few
instances Andreas could satisfy her curiosity, for he had spent some months at Antioch on a
matter of business, and had there come to know by sight some of Caesar's most illustrious companions.

So far the great Galenus was not of the number; for Caracalla, who was ailing, had but lately
commanded his presence.  The famous physician had sailed for Pelusium, in spite of his advanced
age, and had only just joined the sovereign's suite.  The old man's chariot had been pointed
out to the mosaic-worker at the Kanopic Gate, and he was certain that he could not mistake
it for any other; it was one of the largest and handsomest; the side doors of it were decorated
with the AEsculapius staff and the cup of Hygeia in silver, and on the top were statuettes
in wood of Minerva and of AEsculapius.  On hearing all this, Melissa's face beamed with happy
and hopeful anticipation.  With one hand pressed to her throbbing bosom, she watched each vehicle
as it drove past with such intense expectancy that she paid no heed to Andreas's hint that
they might now be able to make their way through the crowd.

Now--and the freedman had called her once more--here was another monstrous conveyance, belonging
to Julius Paulinus, the former consul, whose keen face, with its bright, merry eyes, looked
out between the silken curtains by the side of the grave, unsympathetic countenance of Dion
Cassius the senator and historian.

The consul, her informant told her--and Andreas confirmed the statement-- had displeased Severus,
Caracalla's father, by some biting jest, but, on being threatened with death, disarmed his
wrath by saying, "You can indeed have my head cut off, but neither you nor I can keep it steady."

Those of the populace who stood near enough to the speaker to hear this anecdote broke out
in loud cheers, in which they were joined by others who had no idea of what had given rise to them.

The consul's chariot was followed by a crowd of clients, domestic officials, and slaves, in
litters, on horses or mules, or on foot; and behind these again came another vehicle, for some
time concealed from sight by dust.  But when at last the ten fine horses which drew it had
gone past Melissa, and the top of the vehicle became visible, the color mounted to her cheeks,
for on the corners of the front she recognized the figures of AEsculapius and Minerva, which,
if the mosaic-worker were right, distinguished the chariot of Galenus.  She listened breathlessly
to the roll of the wheels of this coach, and she soon perceived the silver AEsculapius staff
and bowl on the wide door of this house on wheels, which was painted blue.  At an open window
by the door a kindly old face was visible, framed in long, gray hair.

Melissa started at hearing the order to halt shouted from the Serapeum, far down the road,
and again, close at hand, "Halt!"  The procession came to a standstill, the riders drew rein,
the blue wheels ceased to turn, the coach was immovable but a few steps in front of her, and
her eyes met those of the old man.  The thought flashed through her brain that Fate itself
had brought about this pause just at this spot; and when she heard the mosaic-worker exclaim,
"The great Roman physician!" horses, coach, and everything swam before her eyes; she snatched
her hand away from that of Andreas, and stepped out on the roadway.  In an instant she was
standing face to face with the venerable leech.

She heard the warning voice of her companion, she saw the crowd staring at her, she had, no
doubt, a brief struggle with her maidenly shyness, but she carried out her purpose.  The thought
that the gods themselves were helping her to appeal to the only man who could save her lover,
encouraged her to defy every obstacle.

She was standing by the vehicle; and scarcely had she raised her sweet, innocent, blushing
face with pathetic and touching entreaty to the white- haired Roman, her large, tear-filled
eyes meeting his, when he beckoned her to him, and in pleasant, sympathetic tones desired to
know what she wanted.  Then she made bold to ask whether he were the great Roman physician,
and he replied with a flattered and kindly smile that he was sometimes so called.  Her thankful
glance to heaven revealed what a comfort his words were, and now her rosy lips moved freely,
and she hurriedly, but with growing courage, gave him to understand that her betrothed, the
son of a respected Roman citizen of Alexandria, was lying badly wounded in the head by a stone,
and that the leech who was treating him had said that none but he, the great Galenus, could
save the young man's life.  She also explained that Ptolemaeus, though he had said that Diodoros
needed quiet above all things, had proposed to carry him to the Serapeum, and to commend him
there to the care of his greater colleague, but that she feared the worst results from the
move.  She glanced pleadingly into the Roman's eyes, and added that he looked so kind that
she hoped that he would go instead to see the sufferer, who had, quite by chance, been taken
into a Christian house not very far from the Serapeum, where he was being taken good care of,
and--as a matter of course--cure her lover.

The old man had only interrupted her tale with a few sly questions as to her love-affair and
her religion; for when she had told him that Diodoros was under the care of Christians, it
had occurred to him that this simply but not poorly dressed girl, with her modest ways and
sweet, calm face, might herself be a Christian.  He was almost surprised when she denied it,
and yet he seemed pleased, and promised to grant her request.  It was not fitting that a girl
so young should enter any house where Caesar and his train took up their abode; he would wait
for her, "there"--and he pointed to a small, round temple to Aphrodite, on the left-hand side
of the street of Hermes, where the road was rather wider--for the coach had meanwhile slowly
moved on.

Next day, at three hours after the rising of the fierce African sun--for he could not bear
its meridian heat--he would go thither in his litter. "And be sure you are there in good time!"
he added, shaking his finger at her.

"If you come an hour too soon, you will find me waiting!" she cried.

He laughed, and said, "What pretty maid, indeed, would dare to be late for an appointment under
the very eyes of the goddess of Love!" He bade her a friendly farewell, and lay back in the
chariot.

Melissa, radiant with happiness, looked about her for the place where she had left her companion.
However, in spite of the lictors, Andreas had followed her; he drew her hand under his arm,
and led her through the now-thinning crowd into a sidelane which led to the lake, opening out
of the colonnaded street opposite the little temple.

Melissa's steps were winged.  Her joy at having gained her end so quickly and so easily was
uppermost in her mind, and as they threaded their way among the people she tried to tell Andreas
what the great physician had promised.  But the noise drowned her speech, for at this moment
Caesar's tame lion, named the "Sword of Persia" was being led through the street by some Numidian
slaves.

Every one was looking at the splendid beast; and, as she too turned to gaze, her eye met the
ardent glance of a tall, bearded man standing at the window of a house just behind the round
temple to Aphrodite.  She at once recognized Serapion, the Magian, and whispered his name to
Andreas; he, however, without looking round, only drew her along more quickly, and did not
breathe easily till they found themselves in the narrow, deserted alley.

The Magian had observed her while she stood by the Roman's chariot, and his conversation with
a Syrian of middle age in his company had been of her.  His companion's appearance was as insignificant
as his own was stately and commanding.  Nothing distinguished the Syrian from a thousand of
his fellows but the cunning stamped on his sharply-cut features; still, the great Magian seemed
to hold him in some esteem, for he readily replied to the little man's questions and remarks.

At this moment the Syrian waved his hand in the air with a gesture common to men of his race
when displaying their own superior knowledge, as he said "What did I spend ten years in Rome
for, if I do not know Serenus Samonicus?  He is the greatest book-collector in the empire.
And he regards himself as a second AEsculapius, and has written a book on medicine in verse,
which Geta, Caesar's murdered brother, always had about him, for he regarded the physicians
here as mere bunglers.  He is as rich as the Alabarch, and riding in his coach is Galenus,
for whom Caesar sent.  What can that girl want of him?"

"H'm!" muttered the other, stroking his beard with thoughtful dignity. "She is a modest maiden;
it can only be something urgent and important which has prompted her to address the Roman."

"Your Castor will be able to find out," replied the Syrian Annianus. "That omniscient rascal
can get through a key-hole, and by to-morrow will be the best friend of the Roman's people,
if you care to know."

"We will see,"  said Serapion.  "Her brother, perhaps, to-morrow evening, will tell me what
is going on."

"The philosopher?" said the other, with a contemptuous flourish.  "You are a great sage, Serapion,
as the people hold; but you often sew with needles too fine for me.  Why, just now, when Caesar
is here, and gain and honor be in the streets for such a one as you only to stoop for--why,
I say, you should waste precious time on that poring fellow from the Museum, I can not understand."

A superior smile parted the Magian's lips; he stepped back into the room, followed by Annianus,
and replied:

"You know how many who call themselves Magians will crowd round Caesar, and the fame of Sosibius,
Hananja, and Kaimis, is not much behind mine. Each plies his art by his own formulas, though
he may call himself a Pythagorean or what not.  None dare claim to belong to any recognized
school, since the philosophers of the guild pride themselves on condemning the miracle-mongers.
Now, in his youth, Caracalla went through his courses of philosophy.  He detests Aristotle,
and has always attached himself to Plato and the Pythagoreans.  You yourself told me that by
his desire Philostratus is writing a life of Apollonius of Tyana; and, though he may turn up
his nose at the hair-splitting and frittering of the sages of the Museum, it is in his blood
to look for marvels from those privileged philosophers.  His mother has made courtiers of them
again; and he, who looks for everything from the magic arts, has never yet met a Magian who
could have been one of them."

At this the Syrian clapped his hands, exclaiming: "And you propose to use Philip as your signbearer
to talk to the emperor of a thaumaturgist who is hand in hand with all the learning of the
Museum?  A cursed good idea! But the gem-cutter's son does not look like a simpleton; and he
is a skeptic into the bargain, and believes in nothing.  If you catch him, I shall really and
truly believe in your miraculous powers."

"There are harder things than catching him," said the Magian.

"You mean to break his will," said the Syrian, looking down at the ground, "by your eye and
the laying on of hands, as you did mine and Triphis's two years ago?"

"That, no doubt, formed the first bond between us," said Serapion. "I now need only your ventriloquism.
Philip himself will come half-way to meet me on the main point."

"And what is that?"

"You called him a skeptic, and he does, in fact, pride himself on going further than the old
masters of the school.  Diligent study has brought him to the point of regarding nothing as
certain, but, on the other hand, everything as possible.  The last result he can arrive at
is the probability--since certainty there is none--that it is impossible ever to know anything,
be it what it may.  He is always ready to listen with sympathetic attention to the arguments
for the reappearance of the souls of the dead in the earthly form they have quitted, to visit
and converse with the living.  He considers it a fallacy to say that anything is impossible;
and my arguments are substantial.  Korinna will appear to him.  Castor has discovered a girl
who is her very image.  Your arts will convince him that it is she who speaks to him, for he
never heard her voice in life, and all this must rouse his desire to see her again and again.
And thus the skeptic will be convinced, in spite of his own doctrine.  In this, as in every
other case, it is the passionate wish that gives rise to the belief."

"And when you have succeeded in getting him to this point?"  asked the Syrian, anxiously.

"Then," replied the Magian, "he will help me, with his triumphant dialectics, to win Caesar
over to the same conviction; and then we shall be able to satisfy the emperor's desire to hold
intercourse with the dead; and for that I count on your power of making voices proceed from
any person present."

He said no more.  The little man looked up at him approvingly, and said, modestly: "You are
indeed wise, Serapion, and I will do my best to help you.  The next thing to be done is to
seek representatives of the great Alexander, of Apollonius of Tyana, and of Caesar's brother,
father-in- law, and wife."

"Not forgetting Papinian, the noblest of his victims," added the Magian. "Back again already,
Castor?"

These words were addressed to a tall and apparently elderly man in a long white robe, who had
slipped in without a sound.  His demeanor was so grave and dignified that he looked precisely
like a Christian priest impressed with the sanctity of his office; but hardly had he got into
the room, and greeted the Magian with much unction, than he pulled the white garment off over
his head, rubbed from his cheeks the lines which gave him twenty added years, stretched his
lithe limbs, and exclaimed with delight:

"I have got her!  Old Dorothea will bring her to your theatre!"--and the young fellow's mobile
face beamed with the happy radiance of success.

It almost seemed as though fermenting wine flowed in the man's veins instead of blood; for,
when he had made his report to the Magian, and had been rewarded with a handful of gold-pieces,
he tossed the coins in the air, caught them like flies in the hollow of his hand, and then
pitched wheel fashion over head and heels from one end of the room to the other. Then, when
he stood on his feet once more, he went on, without a sign of breathlessness:

"Forgive me, my lord!  Nature asserts her rights.  To play the pious for three whole hours!
Eternal gods, that is a hard task, and a man must--"

"I know all about it," Serapion broke in with a smile and a threatening finger.  "Now go and
stretch your limbs, and then share your lightly earned gains with some pretty flute-player.
But I want you again this evening; so, if you feel weak, I shall lock you up."

"Do," said Castor, as earnestly as if he had been promised some pleasure. "What a merry, good-for-nothing
set they are!-Dorothea will bring the girl at the appointed hour.  Everything is arranged."

Whereupon he danced out of the room, singing a tune.

"An invaluable creature!" said the Syrian, with an admiring glance.

"A better one spoiled," said Serapion.  "He has the very highest gifts, but is utterly devoid
of conscience to set a limit to his excesses.  How should he have one?  His father was one
of a troupe of Ephesian pantomimists, and his mother a golden-haired Cyprian dancer.  But he
knows every corner of Alexandria--and then, what a memory!  What an actor he would have made!
Without even a change of dress, merely by a grimace, he at once becomes an old man, an idiot,
or a philosopher."

"And what a genius for intrigue!"  Annianus went on enthusiastically. "As soon as he saw the
portrait of Korinna he knew that he had seen her double among the Christians on the other side
of the lake.  This morning he tracked her out, and now she is caught in the snare.  And how
sharp of him to make Dorothea bring her here!"

"I told him to do that, and use the name of Bishop Demetrius," observed the Magian.  "She would
not have come with a stranger, and Dorothea must be known to her in the meetings of their congregation."

CHAPTER IX.

While this conversation was taking place, Melissa and her companion had reached the shore of
the lake, the large inland sea which washed the southern side of the city and afforded anchorage
for the Nile-boats. The ferry-boat which would convey them to the gardens of Polybius started
from the Agathodaemon Canal, an enlarged branch of the Nile, which connected the lake with
the royal harbor and the Mediterranean; they had, therefore, to walk some distance along the shore.

The setting sun shot slanting rays on the glittering surface of the glassy waters in which
the numberless masts of the Nile-boats were mirrored.

Vessels large and small, with white or gayly-painted lateen sails gleaming in the evening glow,
large galleys, light skiffs, and restless, skimming pleasure-boats, were flitting to and fro;
and among them, like loaded wagons among chariots and horsemen, the low corn-barges scarcely
seemed to move, piled as they were with pyramids of straw and grain as high as a house.

The bustle on the quay was less conspicuous than usual, for all who were free to follow their
curiosity had gone into the city.  There were, however, many slaves, and Caesar's visit no
more affected their day's toil than it did the course of the sun.  To-day, as every other day,
they had to pack and unload; and though few ships were sailing, numbers were arriving from
the south, and throwing out the landing-bridges which connected them with the shore. 

DAILY NAPS

The morning nap from the sixth month on should be from two to three hours long, out on the porch,
well protected; while the afternoon nap may be from one to one and a half hours long with an
interval of two or three hours before bedtime. The child should be wakened at regular intervals for
feedings during the day--every three hours until he is six months
old, and then every four hours.

These naps should be taken in a cool place--on the porch, on the roof, in the yard, under a
tree, or on the protected fire escape.

If the nap is to be taken indoors, then lower the windows from the top and darken the room. All
children should take daily naps until they are five or six years old.

CHAPTER XXIII

BABY HYGIENE

Possibly if all our babies could grow up in a mild, warm climate, out of doors, where they were cared
for by mothers who had nothing else to do but enjoy nature in a garden, their babies unhampered
by clothes and other conventionalities inflicted upon us by our present standards of living--well,
if that were our environment, probably this chapter on baby hygiene would not need to be written.
But realizing that variable climatic conditions, the indoor life, and the necessary bundling up
with clothes, all tend to increase the ever-present danger of infection from thickly settled
peoples and their domestic pets--these facts, together with the further fact that modern social conditions
make it necessary for some mothers to toil long hours--all these influences, I say, considered
separately or combined, make it imperative for us to give thoroughgoing
consideration to the essentials of baby hygiene.

The subjects of fresh air, sleep, bathing, etc., have been duly discussed in previous chapters.

WATER
DRINKING

As soon as the newborn baby has been washed and dressed, before he is put to sleep, he is given
two teaspoons of warm, boiled water in a sterile bottle with a clean nipple. This is repeated
every two hours when he is awake, until he is old enough to ask for water himself. This water
should contain no sugar, or anything else--just clean, boiled water. It is better to give
this water from a bottle; for in case of enforced weaning, this practice
of taking his water from a bottle, will have made him acquainted with
that method of feeding.

URINATION

The baby may pass very little urine during the first day or two of
his life, but if the warm, boiled water is administered regularly,
the urine will soon become more abundant.

As the child nears two years of age, if put to bed at six P. M. he should be taken up at ten
or eleven to urinate.

In older children, bed wetting is often corrected by serving the last meal not later than four
P. M. and not allowing any liquids after that hour.

The physician should be consulted in all instances where the habit
of bed wetting extends beyond three years. The subject will be treated
more fully in a later chapter.

EXERCISE

A baby pen, lifted up from
the floor, well protected at the sides, and covered with mosquito
bar--if exposed to flies or mosquitoes--affords splendid opportunity
for exercise. Here the little fellow may lay on a well-padded mattress
and kick, move his arms, and otherwise roll about to his own satisfaction.
It should not be in the direct sunshine, but rather in a protected,
somewhat shady place, yet where the air is pure and fresh.

Much exercise
is obtained from the daily cry. Here, the arms, legs, hands and feet,
as well as the body, are all exercised until the baby is pink. A good
rebound of blood is flowing through the well-warmed skin, while the
baby is greatly benefited by such daily exercise.

Later on, "creeping"
is urged, but not forced. With regard to standing--he will pull himself
up on his feet just as soon as nature qualifies him, and so he needs
no urging or coaxing in this matter. Older children should be encouraged
in active romping, games, etc., rather than to spend the entire day
in the more sedentary amusements, puzzle pictures, etc.

It is a most
abnormal situation when a three-, or four-year-old child is content
to sit quietly all day.  Nothing but good has happened
to us since, and yet you look as if the locusts had come down on your garden."

They had reached a spot on the shore where a ship was being unloaded of its cargo of granite
blocks from Syene.  Black and brown slaves were dragging them to land.  An old blind man was
piping a dismal tune on a small reed flute to encourage them in their work, while two men of
fairer hue, whose burden had been too heavy for them, had let the end of the column they were
carrying sink on the ground, and were being mercilessly flogged by the overseer to make them
once more attempt the impossible.

Andreas had watched the scene; a surge of fury had brought the blood to his face, and, stirred
by great and genuine emotion, he broke out:

"There--there you see the locusts which destroy my garden--the hail which ruins my crops! 
It falls on all that bears the name of humanity--on me and you.  Happy, girl?  None of us can
ever be happy till the Kingdom shall arise for which the fullness of the time is come."

"But they dropped the column; I saw them myself," urged Melissa.

"Did you, indeed?" said Andreas.  "Well, well, the whip, no doubt, can revive exhausted powers.
And that is how you look upon such deeds!--you, who would not crush a worm in the garden, think
this is right and just!"

It suddenly struck Melissa that Andreas, too, had once been a slave, and the feeling that she
had hurt him grieved her to the heart.  She had often heard him speak sternly and gravely,
but never in scorn as he did now, and that, too, distressed her; and as she could not think
of the right thing to say in atonement for the wrong she had done, she could only look up with
tearful entreaty and murmur, "Forgive me!"

"I have nothing to forgive," he replied in an altered tone.  "You have grown up among the unjust
who are now in power.  How should you see more clearly than they, who all walk in darkness?
But if the light should be shown to you by one to whom it hath been revealed, it would not
be extinguished again.--Does it not seem a beautiful thing to you to live among none but brethren
and sisters, instead of among oppressors and their scourged victims; or is there no place in
a woman's soul for the holy wrath that came upon Moses the Hebrew?  But who would ever have
spoken his great name to you?"

Melissa was about to interrupt his vehement speech, for, in a town where there were so many
Jews, alike among the citizens and the slaves, even she had heard that Moses had been their
lawgiver; but he prevented her, by adding hastily: "This only, child, I would have you remember--for
here is the ferry--the worst ills that man ever inflicts on his fellow-man are the outcome
of self-interest; and, of all the good he may do, the best is the result of his achieving self-forgetfulness
to secure the happiness and welfare of others."

He said no more, for the ferry-boat was about to put off, and they had to take their places
as quickly as possible.

The large flat barge was almost unoccupied; for the multitude still lingered in the town, and
more than one seat was empty for the weary girl to rest on.  Andreas paced to and fro, for
he was restless; but when Melissa beckoned to him he came close to her, and, while he leaned
against the little cabin, received her assurance that she now quite understood his desire to
see all slaves made free.  He, if any one, must know what the feelings of those unhappy creatures
were.

"Do I not know!" he exclaimed, with a shake of the head.  Then, glancing round at the few persons
who were sitting at the other end of the boat, he went on sadly: "To know that, a man must
himself have been branded with the marks of his humiliation."  He showed her his arm, which
was usually hidden by the long sleeve of his tunic, and Melissa exclaimed in sorrowful surprise:
"But you were free-born! and none of our slaves bear such a brand.  You must have fallen into
the hands of Syrian pirates."

He nodded, and added, "I and my father."

"But he," the girl eagerly put in, "was a great man."

"Till Fate overtook him," Andreas said.

Melissa's tearful eyes showed the warm sympathy she felt, as she asked:

"But how could it have happened that you were not ransomed by your relations?  Your father
was, no doubt, a Roman citizen; and the law--"

"The law forbids that such a one should be sold into slavery," Andreas broke in, "and yet the
authorities of Rome left him in misery--left--"

At this, her large, gentle eyes flashed with indignation, and, stirred to the depths of her
nature, she exclaimed:

"How was such horrible injustice possible?  Oh, let me hear.  You know how truly I love you,
and no one can hear you."

The wind had risen, the waves splashed noisily against the broad boat, and the song of the
slaves, as they plied their oars, would have drowned a stronger voice than the freedman's;
so he sat down by her side to do her bidding.

And the tale he had to tell was sad indeed.

His father had been of knightly rank, and in the reign of Marcus Aurelius he had been in the
service of Avidius Cassius, his fellow-countryman, the illustrious governor of Asia as 'procurator
ab epistolis'.  As holding this high post, he found himself involved in the conspiracy of Avidius
against the emperor.  After the assassination of his patron, who had already been proclaimed
emperor by the troops, Andreas's father had been deprived of his offices, his citizenship,
and his honors; his possessions were confiscated, and he was exiled to the island of Anaphe.
It was to Caesar's clemency that he owed his life.

On their voyage into exile the father and son fell into the hands of Syrian pirates, and were
sold in the slave-market of Alexandria to two separate masters.  Andreas was bought by a tavern-keeper;
the procurator, whose name as a slave was Smaragdus, by the father of Polybius; and this worthy
man soon learned to value his servant so highly, that he purchased the son also, and restored
him to his father.  Thus they were once more united.

Every attempt of the man who had once held so proud a position to get his release, by an act
of the senate, proved vain.  It was with a broken heart and enfeebled health that he did his
duty to his master and to his only child.  He pined in torments of melancholy, till Christianity
opened new happiness to him, and revived hope brought him back from the very brink of despair;
and, even as a slave, he found the highest of all dignities--that, namely, which a Christian
derives from his faith.

At this point Melissa interrupted her friend's narrative, exclaiming, as she pointed across
the waters:

"There! there! look!  In that boat--I am sure that is Alexander!  And he is making for the town."

Andreas started up, and after convincing himself that she was indeed right, for the youth himself
had recognized his sister, who waved her hand to him, he wrathfully exclaimed:

"Madman!" and by intelligible and commanding signs he ordered the reckless young artist to
turn his little skiff, and follow in the wake of the ferry-boat, which was by this time nearing
land.

But Alexander signaled a negative, and, after gayly blowing a kiss to Melissa, plied his oars
again with as much speed and energy as though he were rowing for a wager.  How swiftly and
steadily the keel of his little boat cut through the crisply foaming waves on which it rose
and fell! The daring youth did not lack strength, that was certain, and the couple who watched
him with so much uneasiness soon understood that he was striving to overtake another and larger
bark which was at some distance in front of him.  It was being pulled by slaves, whose stalwart
arms made the pace a good one, and under the linen awning which shaded the middle part of it
two women were seated.

The rays of the sun, whose fiery globe was now sinking behind the palm- groves on the western
shore, flooded the sky with ruby light, and tinged the white robes of these women, the light
canopy over their heads, and the whole face of the lake, with a rosy hue; but neither Andreas
nor his companion heeded the glorious farewell of departing day.

Melissa pointed out to her friend the strangeness of her brother's attire, and the hood which,
in the evening light, seemed to be bordered with gold.  He had on, in fact, a Gallic mantle,
such as that which had gained Caesar the nickname of Caracalla, and there was in this disguise
something to reassure them; for, if Alexander pulled the hood low enough, it would hide the
greater part of his face, and make it difficult to recognize him.  Whence he had procured this
garment was not hard to divine, for imperial servants had distributed them in numbers among
the crowd.  Caesar was anxious to bring them into fashion, and it might safely be expected
that those Alexandrians who had held out their hands to accept them would appear in them on
the morrow, as no order required that they should be worn.  Alexander could not do better than
wear one, if only by such means he could escape Zminis and his men.

But who were the women he was pursuing?  Before Melissa could ask the question, Andreas pointed
to the foremost boat, and said:

"Those are Christian women, and the bark they are in belongs to Zeno, the brother of Seleukus
and of the high-priest of Serapis.  That is his landing-creek.  He lives with his family, and
those of the faith to whom he affords refuge, in the long, white house you can just see there
among the palm-trees.  Those vineyards, too, are his.  If I am not mistaken, one of the ladies
in that boat is his daughter, Agatha."

"But what can Alexander want of two Christian women?" asked Melissa.

Andreas fired up, and a vein started on his high forehead as he retorted angrily:

"What should he not want!  He and those who are like him--the blind-- think nothing so precious
as what satisfies the eye.--There! the brightness has vanished which turned the lake and the
shore to gold. Such is beauty!--a vain show, which only glitters to disappear, and is to fools,
nevertheless, the supreme object of adoration!"

"Then, is Zeno's daughter fair?" asked the girl.

"She is said to be," replied the other; and after a moment's pause he added: "Yes, Agatha is
a rarely accomplished woman; but I know better things of her than that.  It stirs my gall to
think that her sacred purity can arouse unholy thoughts.  I love your brother dearly; for your
mother's sake I can forgive him much; but if he tries to ensnare Agatha--"

"Have no fear," said Melissa, interrupting his wrathful speech. "Alexander is indeed a butterfly,
fluttering from flower to flower, and apt to be frivolous over serious matters, but at this
moment he is enslaved by a vision--that of a dead girl; and only last night, I believe, he
pledged himself to Ino, the pretty daughter of our neighbor Skopas.  Beauty is to him the highest
thing in life; and how should it be otherwise, for he is an artist!  For the sake of beauty
he defies every danger.  If you saw rightly, he is no doubt in pursuit of Zeno's daughter,
but most likely not to pay court to her, but for some other season."

"No praiseworthy reason, you may be sure," said Andreas.  "Here we are. Now take your kerchief
out of the basket.  It is damp and cool after sundown, especially over there where I am draining
the bog.  The land we are reclaiming by this means will bring your future husband a fine income
some day."

They disembarked, and ere long reached the little haven belonging to Polybius's estate.  There
were boats moored there, large and small, and Andreas hailed the man who kept them, and who
sat eating his supper, to ask him whether he had unmoored the green skiff for Alexander.

At this the old fellow laughed, and said: "The jolly painter and his friend, the sculptor,
met Zeno's daughter just as she was getting into her boat with Mariamne.  Down they came, running
as if they had gone mad. The girl must have turned their heads.  My lord Alexander would have
it that he had seen the spirit of one who was dead, and he would gladly give his life to see
her once again."

It was now dark, or it would have alarmed Melissa to see the ominous gravity with which Andreas
listened to this tale; but she herself was sufficiently startled, for she knew her brother
well, and that no risk, however great, would stop him if his artistic fancy were fired.  He,
whom she had believed to be in safety, had gone straight into the hands of the pursuers; and
with him caution and reflection were flown to the winds when passion held sway.  She had hoped
that her friend Ino had at last captured the flutterer, and that he would begin to live a settled
life with her, as master of a house of his own; and now, for a pretty face, he had thrown everything
to the winds, even the duty of self-preservation. Andreas had good reason to be angry, and
he spoke no more till they reached their destination, a country house of handsome and important
aspect.

No father could have received his future daughter more heartily than did old Polybius.  The
fiend gout racked his big toes, stabbing, burning, and nipping them.  The slightest movement
was torture, and yet he held out his arms to her for a loving embrace, and, though it made
him shut his eyes and groan, he drew her pretty head down, and kissed her cheeks and hair.
He was now a heavy man, of almost shapeless stoutness, but in his youth he must have resembled
his handsome son.  Silvery locks flowed round his well-formed head, but a habit of drinking
wine, which, in spite of the gout, he could not bring himself to give up, had flushed his naturally
good features, and tinged them of a coppery red, which contrasted strangely with his snowy
hair and beard.  But a kind heart, benevolence, and a love of good living, beamed in every look.

His heavy limbs moved but slowly, and if ever full lips deserved to be called sensual, they
were those of this man, who was a priest of two divinities.

How well his household understood the art of catering for his love of high living, was evident
in the meal which was served soon after Melissa's arrival, and to eat which the old man made
her recline on the couch by his side.

Andreas also shared the supper; and not the attendant slaves only, but Dame Praxilla, the sister
of their host, whose house she managed, paid him particular honor.  She was a widow and childless,
and, even during the lifetime of Diodoros's mother, she had given her heart, no longer young,
to the freedman, without finding her love returned or even observed.  For his sake she would
have become a Christian, though she regarded herself as so indispensable to her brother that
she had rarely left him to hold intercourse with other Christians.  Nor did Andreas encourage
her; he doubted her vocation.  Whatever happened in the house, the excitable woman made it
her own concern; and, although she had known Melissa from childhood, and was as fond of her
as she could be of the child of "strangers," the news that Diodoros was to marry the gem- cutter's
daughter was displeasing to her.  A second woman in the house might interfere with her supremacy;
and, as an excuse for her annoyance, she had represented to her brother that Diodoros might
look higher for a wife.  Agatha, the beautiful daughter of their rich Christian neighbor Zeno,
was the right bride for the boy.

But Polybius had rated her sharply, declaring that he hoped for no sweeter daughter than Melissa,
who was quite pretty enough, and in whose veins as pure Macedonian blood flowed as in his own.
His son need look for no wealth, he added with a laugh, since he would some day inherit his aunt's.

In fact, Praxilla owned a fine fortune, increasing daily under the care of Andreas, and she
replied:

"If the young couple behave so well that I do not rather choose to bestow my pittance on worthier
heirs."

But the implied threat had not disturbed Polybius, for he knew his sister's ways.  The shriveled,
irritable old lady often spoke words hard to be forgiven, but she had not a bad heart; and
when she learned that Diodoros was in danger, she felt only how much she loved him, and her
proposal to go to the town next morning to nurse him was sincerely meant.

But when her brother retorted: "Go, by all means; I do not prevent you!" she started up, exclaiming:

"And you, and your aches and pains!  How you get on when once my back is turned, we know by
experience.  My presence alone is medicine to you." "And a bitter dose it is very often," replied
the old man, with a laugh; but Praxilla promptly retorted: "Like all effectual remedies.  There
is your ingratitude again!"

The last words were accompanied by a whimper, so Polybius, who could not bear to see any but
cheerful faces, raised his cup and drank her health with kindly words.  Then refilling the
tankard, he poured a libation, and was about to empty it to Melissa's health, but Praxilla's
lean frame was standing by his side as quickly as though a serpent had stung her.  She was
drawing a stick of asparagus between her teeth, but she hastily dropped it on her plate, and
with both hands snatched the cup from her brother, exclaiming:

"It is the fourth; and if I allow you to empty it, you are a dead man!"

"Death is not so swift," replied Polybius, signing to a slave to bring him back the cup.  But
he drank only half of it, and, at his sister's pathetic entreaties, had more water mixed with
the wine.  And while Praxilla carefully prepared his crayfish--for gout had crippled even his
fingers--he beckoned to his white-haired body-slave, and with a cunning smile made him add
more wine to the washy fluid.  He fixed his twinkling glance on Melissa, to invite her sympathy
in his successful trick, but her appearance startled him.  How pale the child was--how dejected
and weary her sweet face, with the usually bright, expressive eyes!

It needed not the intuition of his kind heart to tell him that she was completely exhausted,
and he desired his sister to take her away to bed. But Melissa was already sound asleep, and
Praxilla would not wake her. She gently placed a pillow under her head, laid her feet easily
on the couch, and covered them with a wrap.  Polybius feasted his eyes on the fair sleeper;
and, indeed, nothing purer and more tender can be imagined than the girl's face as she lay
in dreamless slumber.

The conversation was now carried on in subdued tones, so as not to disturb her, and Andreas
completed the history of the day by informing them that Melissa had, by mistake, engaged the
assistance not of the great Galen but of another Roman practiced in the healing art, but of
less illustrious proficiency.  He must, therefore, still have Diodoros conveyed to the Serapeum,
and this could be done very easily in the morning, before the populace should again besiege
the temple.  He must forthwith go back to make the necessary arrangements.  Praxilla whispered
tenderly:

"Devoted man that you are, you do not even get your night's rest."  But Andreas turned away
to discuss some further matters with Polybius; and, in spite of pain, the old man could express
his views clearly and intelligently.

At last he took his leave; and now Praxilla had to direct the slaves who were to carry her
brother to bed.  She carefully arranged the cushions on his couch, and gave him his medicine
and night-draught.  Then she returned to Melissa, and the sight of the sleeping girl touched
her heart.  She stood gazing at her for some time in silence, and then bent over her to wake
her with a kiss.  She had at last made up her mind to regard the gem-cutter's daughter as her
niece, so, determined to treat her as a child of her own, she called Melissa by name.

This awoke the sleeper, and when she had realized that she was still in Polybius's eating-room,
she asked for Andreas.

"He has gone back to the town, my child," replied Praxilla.  "He was anxious about your betrothed."

"Is he worse, then?"  asked Melissa, in alarm.  "No, no," said the widow, soothingly.  "It
is only--I assure you we have heard nothing new--"

"But what then?"  Melissa  inquired.  "The great Galen is to see him early to-morrow."  Praxilla
tried to divert her thoughts.  But as the girl would take no answer to her declaration that
Galen himself had promised to see Diodoros, Praxilla, who was little used to self-command,
and who was offended by her persistency, betrayed the fact that Melissa had spoken to the wrong
man, and that Andreas was gone to remove Diodoros to the Serapeum.

At this, Melissa suddenly understood why Andreas had not rejoiced with her, and at the same
time she said to herself that her lover must on no account be exposed to so great a danger
without her presence.  She must lend her aid in transporting him to the Serapeum; and when
she firmly expressed her views to the widow, Praxilla was shocked, and sincerely repented of
having lost her self-control.  It was far too late, and when the housekeeper came into the
room and gladly volunteered to accompany Melissa to the town, Praxilla threatened to rouse
her brother, that he might insist on their remaining at home; but at last she relented, for
the girl, she saw, would take her own way against any opposition.

The housekeeper had been nurse to Diodoros, and had been longing to help in tending him.  When
she left the house with Melissa, her eyes were moist with tears of joy and thankfulness.

CHAPTER X.

The Nubian boat-keeper and his boy had soon ferried them across the lake. Melissa and her companion
then turned off from the shore into a street which must surely lead into that where the Christians
dwelt.  Still, even as she went on, she began to be doubtful whether she had taken the right
one; and when she came out by a small temple, which she certainly had not seen before, she
knew not which way to go, for the streets here crossed each other in a perfect labyrinth, and
she was soon obliged to confess to her companion that she had lost her road.  In the morning
she had trusted herself to Andreas's knowledge of the town, and while talking eagerly to him
had paid no heed to anything else.

What was to be done?  She stood meditating; and then she remembered the spot where she had
seen Caesar drive past.  This she thought she could certainly recognize, and from thence make
her way to the street she sought.

It was quite easy to find the street of Hermes, for the noise of the revelers, who were to-night
even more numerous than usual in this busy highway, could be heard at a considerable distance.
They must follow its guidance till they should come to the little temple of Aphrodite; and
that was a bold enterprise, for the crowd of men who haunted the spot at this hour might possibly
hinder and annoy two unescorted women.  However, the elder woman was sturdy and determined,
and sixty years of age; while Melissa feared nothing, and thought herself sufficiently protected
when she had arranged her kerchief so as to hide her face from curious eyes.

As she made her way to the wide street with a throbbing heart, but quite resolved to find the
house she sought at any cost, she heard men's voices on a side street; however, she paid no
heed to them, for how, indeed, could she guess that what they were saying could nearly concern her?

The conversation was between a woman and a man in the white robe of a Christian priest.  They
were standing at the door of a large house; and close to the wall, in the shadow of the porch
of a building opposite, stood a youth, his hair covered by the hood of a long caracalla, listening
with breathless attention.

This was Alexander.

He had been standing here for some time already, waiting for the return of Agatha, the fair
Christian whom he had followed across the lake, and who had vanished into that house under
the guidance of a deaconess.  The door had not long closed on them when several men had also
been admitted, whom he could not distinguish in the darkness, for the street was narrow and
the moon still low.

It was sheer folly--and yet he fancied that one of them was his father, for his deep, loud
voice was precisely like that of Heron; and, what was even more strange, that of the man who
answered him seemed to proceed from his brother Philip.  But, at such an hour, he could more
easily have supposed them to be on the top of Mount Etna than in this quarter of the town.

The impatient painter was very tired of waiting, so, seating himself on a feeding-manger for
asses which stood in front of the adjoining house, he presently fell asleep.  He was tired
from the sleepless night he had last spent, and when he opened his eyes once more and looked
down the street into which the moon was now shining, he did not know how long he had been slumbering.
Perhaps the damsel he wanted to see had already left the house, and he must see her again,
cost him what it might; for she was so amazingly like the dead Korinna whom he had painted,
that he could not shake off the notion that perhaps--for, after Serapion's discourse, it seemed
quite likely--perhaps he had seen the spirit of the departed girl.

He had had some difficulty in persuading Glaukias, who had come across the lake with him, to
allow him to follow up the fair vision unaccompanied; and his entreaties and prohibitions would
probably alike have proved vain, but that Glaukias held taken it into his head to show his
latest work, which a slave was carrying, to some friends over a jar of wine.  It was a caricature
of Caesar, whom he had seen at the Kanopic Gate, modeled while he was in the house of Polybius,
with a few happy touches.

When Alexander woke, he crept into the shadow of the porch opposite to the house into which
Korinna's double had disappeared, and he now had no lack of entertainment.  A man came out
of the tall white house and looked into the street, and the moonlight enabled the artist to
see all that took place.

The tall youth who had come to the door wore the robe of a Christian priest.  Still, it struck
Alexander that he was too young for such a calling; and he soon detected that he was certainly
not what he seemed, but that there was some treachery in the wind; for no sooner had a woman
joined him, whom he evidently expected, than she blamed him for his want of caution.  To this
he laughingly replied that he was too hot in his disguise, and, pulling out a false beard,
he showed it to the woman, who was dressed as a Christian deaconess, exclaiming, "That will do it!"

He went on to tell her, in a quick, low tone, much of which escaped the listener, that Serapion
had dared much that day, and that the performance had ended badly, for that the Christian girl
he had so cleverly persuaded to come from the other side of the lake had taken fright, and
had insisted on knowing where she was.

At this the deaconess seemed somewhat dismayed, and poured out endless questions in a low voice.
He, however, cast all the blame on the philosopher, whom his master had got hold of the day
before.  Then, as the woman desired more particular information, he briefly told her the story.

The fair Agatha, he said, after being invited by him, at noon, in the name of Bishop Demetrius,
to a meeting that evening, had reached the ferryhouse at about sunset.  She had been told that
many things of immediate importance were to be announced to the maidens of the Christian congregation;
more especially, a discussion was to be held as to the order issued by the prefect for their
taking part in a procession in Caesar's honor when he should quit Alexandria.  Old Dorothea
had met the girl at the ferry-house, and had brought her hither.  The woman who had attended
her across the lake was certainly none of the wisest, for Dorothea had easily persuaded her
to remain in her house during the meeting.

"Once there," the sham priest went on, "the girl's waiting-woman must have had some dose in
wine or sirup and water, for she is fast asleep at this moment in the ferry-house, or wherever
Dorothea took her, as she could not be allowed to wake under Dorothea's roof.

"Thus every one was out of the way who could make any mischief; and when the Syrian, dressed
as a Christian priest, had explained to Agatha what the patriarch required of his maidens,
I led her on to the stage, on which the spectators were to see the ghosts through a small opening.

"The Syrian had desired her to put up so many and such prayers for the congregation in its
peril from Caesar; and, by Aphrodite!  she was as docile as a lamb.  She fell on her knees,
and with hands and eyes to heaven entreated her god.  But hark!

"Did you hear anything?  Something  is stirring within.  Well, I have nearly done.

"The philosopher was to see her thus, and when he had gazed at her as if bewitched for some
little time through the small window, he suddenly cried out, 'Korinna!  Korinna!' and all sorts
of nonsense, although Serapion had strictly forbidden him to utter a sound.  Of course, the
curtain instantly dropped.  But Agatha had heard him call, and in a great fright she wanted
to know where she was, and asked to go home.--Serapion was really grand.  You should have heard
how the fox soothed the dove, and at the same time whispered to me what you now are to do!"

"I?"  said the woman, with some annoyance.  "If he thinks that I will risk my good name in
the congregation for the sake of his long beard--"

"Just be quiet," said Castor, in a pacifying tone.  "The master's beard has nothing to do with
the case, but something much more substantial. Ten solidi, full weight, shall be yours if you
will take Agatha home with you, or safe across the lake again, and pretend to have saved her
from mystics or magicians who have decoyed her to some evil end.  She knows you as a Christian
deaconess, and will go with you at once.  If you restore her to her father, he is rich, and
will not send you empty away. Tell him that you heard her voice out in the street, and with
the help of a worthy old man--that am I--rescued her from any peril you may invent. If he asks
you where the heroic deed was done, name any house you please, only not this.  Your best plan
is to lay it all on the shoulders of Hananja, the thaumaturgist; we have owed him a grudge
this many a day. However, I was not to teach you any lesson, for your wits are at least a match
for ours."

"Flattery will not win me," the woman broke in.  "Where is the gold?"

Castor handed her the solidi wrapped in a papyrus leaf, and then added:

"Stay one moment!  I must remove this white robe.  The girl must on no account recognize me.
I am going to force my way into the house with you--you found me in the street, an old man,
a total stranger, and appealed to me for help.  No harm is done, nothing lost but Dorothea's
credit among the Christians.  We may have to get her safe out of the town.  I must escort you
and Agatha, for nothing unpleasant must happen to her on the way home.  The master is imperative
on that point, and so much beauty will certainly not get through the crowded streets without
remark.  And for my part, I, of course, am thinking of yours."

Here Castor laughed aloud, and rolled the white robe into a bundle. Alexander peeped out of
his nook and shook his head in amazement, for the supple youth, who a moment before stood stalwart
and upright, had assumed, with a bent attitude and a long, white beard hastily placed on his
chin, the aspect of a weary, poor old man.

"I will give you a lesson!" muttered Alexander to himself, and he shook his fist at the intriguing
rascal as he vanished into the house with the false deaconess.

So Serapion was a cheat!  And the supposed ghost of Korinna was a Christian maiden who was
being shamefully deluded.  But he would keep watch over her, and bring that laughing villain
to account.  The first aim of his life was not to lose sight of Agatha.  His whole happiness,
he felt, depended on that.  The gods had, as it were, raised her from the dead for him; in
her, everything that he most admired was united; she was the embodiment of everything he cared
for and prized; every feeling sank into the shade beside the one desire to make her his.  She
was, at this moment, the universe to him; and all else--the pursuers at his heels, his father,
his sister, pretty Ino, to whom he had vowed his love only the night before--had ceased to
exist for him. 

CHAPTER XIII.

Return to Okkak.

September 1st.--At ten A.M. we fell down the river with the ebb-tide,
and about noon anchored near its mouth.

The Esquimaux showed great attachment to us, and could hardly resolve to take a final leave.
They called after us, "Come soon again, we shall always be wishing for you." Several of them, and
among them our friend Uttakiyok, followed us in their kayaks to the mouth of the river.

We erected here, on the promontory Kernerauyak, a board with an inscription similar to that
put up at George river, but with the day of our departure inserted,
viz.

Sept. 1st, instead of the day of our arrival, Aug. 7th. The same solemnities took place as on the
former occasion. Our faithful pilot Uttakiyok, who had rendered us such important and essential
services, now took leave of us, as he intends to spend the winter in this neighbourhood. He
repeated his assurance, that if we settled here, he would be the first to join us, and to turn
with his whole heart to God. Not willing to be any longer incumbered with the skin-boat, we added
it to other useful articles given to Uttakiyok, as a reward for his faithful attention to
us. He was very highly gratified, and thankful for this species of remuneration.

2d. Left the Koksoak, called by us, South river, and steered to the N. of Kernerauyak and Kikkertorsoak.
In the evening we cast anchor in an open road, among the Nachorutsit
islands, with fine weather.

3d. Set sail at sun-rise, wind and tide
in our favour, and proceeded rapidly. About noon, however, a fog came
on, which obliged us to come to an anchor at Pitsiolak. When it cleared
up, we proceeded, steering between Allukpalak and Nipkotok, and cast
anchor in the open sea, near Kernertut, where, on our first arrival,
we encountered such a tremendous storm. The night proved quite calm
and fair.

4th. A gentle breeze brought us pleasantly as far as the
island Nauyet, at the mouth of the Kangertlualuksoak, where we cast
anchor, having performed the same voyage in three days, which took
us twelve on our former passage.
Oh, if only those eyes might look into his own as warmly and gratefully as they now gazed into
the face of that treacherous woman!

He had a hard struggle with himself to subdue the impulse to put an end, now and here, to the
fiendish tricks which guile was playing on the purest innocence; but the street was deserted,
and if he had to struggle with the bent old man, whose powerful and supple limbs he had already
seen, and if the villain should plant a knife in his ribs--for as a wrestler he felt himself
his match--Agatha would be bereft of a protector and wholly in the deceiver's power.

This, at any rate, must not be, and he even controlled himself when he heard the music of her
words, and saw her grasp the hand of the pretended graybeard, who, with an assumption of paternal
kindness, dared to kiss her hair, and then helped her to draw her kerchief over her face. 
The street of Hermes, he explained, where the deaconess dwelt, was full of people, and the
divine gift of beauty, wherewith Heaven had blessed her, would attract the baser kind, as a
flame attracts bats and moths.  The hypocrite's voice was full of unction; the deaconess spoke
with pious gravity.  He could see that she was a woman of middle age, and he asked himself
with rising fury whether the gods were not guilty who had lent mean wretches like these such
winning graces as to enable them to lay traps for the guileless?  For, in fact, the woman's
face was well- favored, gentle, and attractive.

Alexander never took his gaze off Agatha, and his artist-eye reveled in her elastic step and
her slender, shapely form.  Above all, he was bewitched by the way her head was set, with a
little forward bend; and as long as the way led through the silent lanes he was never weary
of comparing her with lovely images-with a poppy, whose flower bows the stem; with a willow,
whose head leans over the water; with the huntress Artemis, who, chasing in the moonlight,
bends to mark the game.

Thus, unwearied and unseen, he had followed them as far as the street of Hermes; there his
task became more difficult, for the road was swarming with people.  The older men were walking
in groups of five or six, going to or coming from some evening assembly, and talking as they
walked; or priests and temple servants on their way home, tired from night services and ceremonies;
but the greater number were young men and boys, some wearing wreaths, and all more or less
intoxicated, with street-wenches on the lookout for a companion or surrounded by suitors, and
trying to attract a favorite or dismiss the less fortunate.

The flare of the torches which illuminated the street was mirrored in eager eyes glowing with
wine and passion, and in the glittering weapons of the Roman soldiery.  Most of these were
attached to Caesar's train. As in the field, so in the peaceful town, they aimed at conquest,
and many a Greek sulkily resigned his claims to some fickle beauty in favor of an irresistible
tribune or centurion.  Where the courteous Alexandrians made way, they pushed in or thrust
aside whatever came in their path, securely confident of being Caesar's favorite protectors,
and unassailable while he was near.  Their coarse, barbaric tones shook the air, and reduced
the Greeks to silence; for, even in his drunken and most reckless moods, the Greek never lost
his subtle refinement.  The warriors rarely met a friendly glance from the eye of a native;
still, the gold of these lavish revelers was as welcome to the women as that of a fellow-countryman.

The blaze of light shone, too, on many a fray, such as flared up in an instant whenever Greek
and Roman came into contact.  The lictors and townwatch could generally succeed in parting
the combatants, for the orders of the authorities were that they should in every case side
with the Romans.

The shouts and squabbling of men, the laughing and singing of women, mingled with the word
of command.  Flutes and lyres, cymbals and drums, were heard from the trellised tavern arbors
and cook-shops along the way; and from the little temple to Aphrodite, where Melissa had promised
to meet the Roman physician next morning, came the laughter and song of unbridled lovers. 
As a rule, the Kanopic Way was the busiest and gayest street in the town; but on this night
the street of Hermes had been the most popular, for it led to the Serapeum, where Caesar was
lodged; and from the temple poured a tide of pleasure-seekers, mingling with the flood of humanity
which streamed on to catch a glimpse of imperial splendor, or to look at the troops encamped
on the space in front of the Serapeum.  The whole street was like a crowded fair; and Alexander
had several times to follow Agatha and her escort out into the roadway, quitting the shelter
of the arcade, to escape a party of rioters or the impertinent addresses of strangers.

The sham old man, however, was so clever at making way for the damsel, whose face and form
were effectually screened by her kerchief from the passers-by, that Alexander had no opportunity
for offering her his aid, or proving his devotion by some gallant act.  That it was his duty
to save her from the perils of spending a whole night under the protection of this venal deceiver
and her worthless colleague, he had long since convinced himself; still, the fear of bringing
her into a more painful position by attracting the attention of the crowd if he were to attack
her escort, kept him back.

They had now stopped again under the colonnade, on the left-hand side of the road.  Castor
had taken the girl's hand, and, as he bade her good- night, promised, in emphatic tones, to
be with her again very early and escort her to the lake.  Agatha thanked him warmly.  At this
a storm of rage blew Alexander's self-command to the four winds, and, before he knew what he
was doing; he stood between the rascal and the Christian damsel, snatched their hands asunder,
gripping Castor's wrist with his strong right hand, while he held Agatha's firmly in his left,
and exclaimed:

"You are being foully tricked, fair maid; the woman, even, is deceiving you.  This fellow is
a base villain!"

And, releasing the arm which Castor was desperately but vainly trying to free from his clutch,
he snatched off the false beard.

Agatha, who had also been endeavoring to escape from his grasp, gave a shriek of terror and
indignation.  The unmasked rogue, with a swift movement, snatched the hood of the caracalla
off Alexander's head, flew at his throat with the fury and agility of a panther, and with much
presence of mind called for help.  And Castor was strong too while Alexander tried to keep
him off with his right hand, holding on to Agatha with his left, the shouts of the deaconess
and her accomplice soon collected a crowd.  They were instantly surrounded by an inquisitive
mob, laughing or scolding the combatants, and urging them to fight or beseeching them to separate.
But just as the artist had succeeded in twisting his opponent's wrist so effectually as to
bring him to his knees, a loud voice of malignant triumph, just behind him, exclaimed:

"Now we have snared our scoffer!  The fox should not stop to kill the hare when the hunters
are at his heels!"

"Zminis!" gasped Alexander.  He understood in a flash that life and liberty were at stake.

Like a stag hemmed in by dogs, he turned his head to this side and that, seeking a way of escape;
and when he looked again where his antagonist had stood, the spot was clear; the nimble rascal
had taken to his heels and vanished among the throng.  But a pair of eyes met the painter's
gaze, which at once restored him to self-possession, and reminded him that he must collect
his wits and presence of mind.  They were those of his sister Melissa, who, as she made her
way onward with her companion, had recognized her brother's voice.  In spite of the old woman's
earnest advice not to mix in the crowd, she had pushed her way through, and, as the men-at-arms
dispersed the mob, she came nearer to her favorite but too reckless brother.

Alexander still held Agatha's hand.  The poor girl herself, trembling with terror, did not
know what had befallen her.  Her venerable escort was a young man--a liar.  What was she to
think of the deaconess, who was his confederate; what of this handsome youth who had unmasked
the deceiver, and saved her perhaps from some fearful fate?

As in a thunder-storm flash follows flash, so, in this dreadful night, one horror had followed
another, to bewilder the brain of a maiden who had always lived a quiet life among good and
quiet men and women.  And now the guardians of the peace had laid hands on the man who had
so bravely taken her part, and whose bright eyes had looked into her own with such truth and
devotion.  He was to be dragged to prison; so he, too, no doubt, was a criminal.  At this thought
she tried to release her hand, but he would not let it go; for the deaconess had come close
to Agatha, and, in a tone of sanctimonious wrath, desired her to quit this scene.

What was she to do?  Terrified and undecided, with deceit on one hand and on the other peril
and perhaps disaster, she looked first at Elizabeth and then at Alexander, who, in spite of
the threats of the man-at-arms, gazed in turns at her and at the spot where his sister had stood.

The lictors who were keeping off the mob had stopped Melissa too; but while Alexander had been
gazing into Agatha's imploring eyes, feeling as though all his blood had rushed to his heart
and face, Melissa had contrived to creep up close to him.  And again the sight of her gave
him the composure he so greatly needed.  He knew, indeed, that the hand which still held Agatha's
would in a moment be fettered, for Zminis had ordered his slaves to bring fresh ropes and chains,
since they had already found use for those they had first brought out.  It was to this circumstance
alone that he owed it that he still was free.  And, above all things, he must warn Agatha against
the deaconess, who would fain persuade her to go with her.

It struck his alert wit that Agatha would trust his sister rather than himself, whom the Egyptian
had several times abused as a criminal; and seeing the old woman of Polybius's household making
her way up to Melissa, out of breath, indeed, and with disordered hair, he felt light dawn
on his soul, for this worthy woman was a fresh instrument to his hand. The Esquimaux customs never
permit men and women to sit down together at a meal.

It sometimes happens among the heathen Esquimaux, that several having
had good success, one huntsman's feast is hardly over, before another
proclaims the invitation to his banquet.

This is never suffered to pass unnoticed, while the power of cramming down another morsel remains.
Thus they will continue eating, till they are scarcely able to breathe,
and then lie down to sleep off the effects of their gluttony. Agatha had at once recognized the old nurse,
and when she confirmed Alexander's statement, and the Christian looked in Melissa's face, she
saw beyond the possibility of doubt an innocent woman, whose heart she might fully trust.

She threw her arm round Melissa, as if to lean on her, and the deaconess turned away with well-curbed
wrath and vanished into an open door.

All this had occupied but a very few minutes; and when Alexander saw the two beings he most
loved in each other's embrace, and Agatha rescued from the deceiver and in safe keeping, he
drew a deep breath, saying to his sister, as if relieved from a heavy burden:

"Her name is Agatha, and to her, the image of the dead Korinna, my life henceforth is given.
Tell her this, Melissa."

His impassioned glance sought that of the Christian; and when she returned it, blushing, but
with grateful candor, his mirthful features beamed with the old reckless jollity, and he glanced
again at the crowd about him.

What did he see there?  Melissa observed that his whole face was suddenly lighted up; and when
Zminis signed to the man who was making his way to the spot holding up the rope, Alexander
began to sing the first words of a familiar song.  In an instant it was taken up by several
voices, and then, as if from an echo, by the whole populace.

It was the chant by which the lads in the Gymnasium of Timagetes were wont to call on each
other for help when they had a fray with those of the Gymnasium of the Dioscuri, with whom
they had a chronic feud. Alexander had caught sight of his friends Jason and Pappus, of the
sculptor Glaukias, and of several other fellow-artists; they understood the appeal, and, before
the night-watch could use the rope on their captive, the troop of young men had forced their
way through the circle of armed men under the leadership of Glaukias, had surrounded Alexander,
and run off with him in their midst, singing and shouting.

"Follow him!  Catch him!  Stop him!--living or dead, bring him back! A price is on his head--a
splendid price to any one who will take him!" cried the Egyptian, foaming with rage and setting
the example.  But the youth of the town, many of whom knew the artist, and who were at all
times ready to spoil sport for the sycophants and spies, crowded up between the fugitive and
his pursuers and barred the way.

The lictors and their underlings did indeed, at last, get through the solid wall of shouting
and scolding men and women; but by that time the troop of artists had disappeared down a side
street.

