CHAPTER XV.

For a long time nothing was heard beneath the sycamore save Miriam's low moans and the impatient
footsteps of the warrior who, while struggling for composure, did not venture to disturb her.

He could not yet understand what had suddenly towered like a mountain between him and the object
of his love.

He had learned from Hur's words that his father and Moses rejected all mediation, yet the promises
he was bearing to the people seemed to him a merciful gift from the Most High.  None of his
race yet knew it and, if Moses was the man whom he believed him to be, the Lord must open his
eyes and show him that he had chosen him, Hosea, to lead the people through his mediation to
a fairer future; nor did he doubt that He could easily win his father over to his side.  He
would even have declared a second time, with the firmest faith, that it was the Most High who
had pointed out his path, and after reflecting upon all this he approached Miriam, who had
at last risen, with fresh confidence.  His loving heart prompted him to clasp her in his arms,
but she thrust him back and her voice, usually so pure and clear, sounded harsh and muffled
as she asked why he had lingered so long and what he intended to confide to her.

While cowering under the sycamore, she had not only struggled and prayed for composure, but
also gazed into her own soul.  She loved Hosea, but she suspected that he came with proposals
similar to those of Uri, and the wrathful words of hoary Nun rang in her ears more loudly than
ever. The fear that the man she loved was walking in mistaken paths, and the startling act
of Hur had made the towering waves of her passion subside and her mind, now capable of calmer
reflection, desired first of all to know what had so long detained him whom she had summoned
in the name of her God, and why he came alone, without Ephraim.

The clear sky was full of stars, and these heavenly bodies, which seem to have been appointed
to look down upon the bliss of united human lovers, now witnessed the anxious questions of
a tortured girl and the impatient answers of a fiery, bitterly disappointed man.

He began with the assurance of his love and that he had come to make her his wife; but, though
she permitted him to hold her hand in his clasp, she entreated him to cease pleading his suit
and first tell her what she desired to know.

On his way he had received various reports concerning Ephraim through a brother-in-arms from
Tanis, so he could tell her that the lad had been disobedient and, probably from foolish curiosity,
had gone, ill and wounded, to the city, where he had found shelter and care in the house of
a friend.  But this troubled Miriam, who seemed to regard it as a reproach to know that the
orphaned, inexperienced lad, who had grown up under her own eyes and whom she herself had sent
forth among strangers, was beneath an Egyptian roof.

But Hosea declared that he would undertake the task of bringing him back to his people and
as, nevertheless she continued to show her anxiety, asked whether he had forfeited her confidence
and love.  Instead of giving him a consoling answer, she began to put more questions, desiring
to know what had delayed his coming, and so, with a sorely troubled and wounded heart, he was
forced to make his report and, in truth, begin at the end of his story.

While she listened, leaning against the trunk of the sycamore, he paced to and fro, urged by
longing and impatience, sometimes pausing directly in front of her.  Naught in this hour seemed
to him worthy of being clothed in words, save the hope and passion which filled his heart.
Had he been sure that hers was estranged he would have dashed away again, after having revealed
his whole soul to his father, and risked the ride into unknown regions to seek Moses.  To win
Miriam and save himself from perjury were his only desires, and momentous as had been his experiences
and expectations, during the last few days, he answered her questions hastily, as if they concerned
the most trivial things.

He began his narrative in hurried words, and the more frequently she interrupted him, the more
impatiently he bore it, the deeper grew the lines in his forehead.

Hosea, accompanied by his attendant, had ridden southward several hours full of gladsome courage
and rich in budding hopes, when just before dusk he saw a vast multitude moving in advance
of him.  At first he supposed he had encountered the rear-guard of the migrating Hebrews, and
had urged his horse to greater speed.  But, ere he overtook the wayfarers, some peasants and
carters who had abandoned their wains and beasts of burden rushed past him with loud outcries
and shouts of warning which told him that the people moving in front were lepers.  And the
fugitives' warning had been but too well founded; for the first, who turned with the heart-
rending cry: "Unclean! Unclean!"  bore the signs of those attacked by the fell disease, and
from their distorted faces covered with white dust and scurf, lustreless eyes, destitute of
brows, gazed at him.

Hosea soon recognized individuals, here Egyptian priests with shaven heads, yonder Hebrew men
and women.  With the stern composure of a soldier, he questioned both and learned that they
were marching from the stone quarries opposite Memphis to their place of isolation on the eastern
shore of the Nile.  Several of the Hebrews among them had heard from their relatives that their
people had left Egypt and gone to seek a land which the Lord had promised them.  Many had therefore
resolved to put their trust also in the mighty God of their fathers and follow the wanderers;
the Egyptian priests, bound to the Hebrews by the tie of a common misfortune, had accompanied
them, and fixed upon Succoth as the goal of their journey, knowing that Moses intended to lead
his people there first.  But every one who could have directed them on their way had fled before
them, so they had kept too far northward and wandered near the fortress of Thabne.  Hosea had
met them a mile from this spot and advised them to turn back, that they might not bring their
misfortune upon their fugitive brethren.

During this conversation, a body of Egyptian soldiers had marched from the fortress toward
the lepers to drive them from the road; but their commander, who knew Hosea, used no violence,
and both men persuaded the leaders of the lepers to accept the proposal to be guided to the
peninsula of Sinai, where in the midst of the mountains, not far from the mines, a colony of
lepers had settled.  They had agreed to this plan because Hosea promised them that, if the
tribes went eastward, they would meet them and receive everyone who was healed; but if the
Hebrews remained in Egypt, nevertheless the pure air of the desert would bring health to many
a sufferer, and every one who recovered would be free to return home.

These negotiations had consumed much time, and the first delay was followed by many others;
for as Hosea had been in such close contact with the lepers, he was obliged to ride to Thabne,
there with the commander of the garrison, who had stood by his side, to be sprinkled with bird's
blood, put on new garments, and submit to certain ceremonies which he himself considered necessary
and which could be performed only in the bright sunlight. I ought to have married. The chances
I had weren't particularly good chances. I didn't like 'em."

She paused. "Then Carnaby came along."

I remained quite still. She spoke now with downcast eyes, and one finger just touching the water.

"One
gets bored, bored beyond redemption.

One does about to these huge expensive houses I suppose--the scale's immense. One makes one's
self useful to the other women, and agreeable to the men. One has to dress.... One has food
and exercise and leisure, It's the leisure, and the space, and the
blank opportunity it seems a sin not to fill.

Carnaby isn't like the other men. He's bigger.... They go about making love. Everybody's making
love. I did.... And I don't do things by halves."

She stopped.

"You knew?"--she asked, looking up, quite steadily. I nodded.

"Since when?"

"Those last days.... It hasn't seemed to matter really. I was a little
surprised."

She looked at me quietly.

"Cothope knew," she said. "By instinct. I could feel it."

"I suppose," I began, "once, this would have mattered immensely.

Now--"

"Nothing matters," she said, completing me. "I felt I had to tell you.

I wanted you to understand why I didn't marry you--with both hands. I have loved you"--she paused--"have
loved you ever since the day I kissed you in the bracken. Only--I forgot."

And suddenly she dropped her face upon her hands, and sobbed passionately--

"I forgot--I forgot," she cried, and became still....

I dabbled my paddle in the water. "Look here!" I said; "forget again! Here am I--a ruined man.
Marry me."

She shook her head without looking up.

We were still for a long time. "Marry me!" I whispered.

She looked up, twined back a whisp of hair, and answered dispassionately--

"I wish I could. Anyhow, we have had this time. It has been a fine
time--has it been--for you also?

I haven't nudged you all I had to give. It's a poor gift--except for what it means and might
have been. But we are near the end of it now."

"Why?"

I asked. "Marry me! Why should we two--"

"You think," she said, "I could take courage and come to you and be
your everyday wife--while you work and are poor?"

"Why not?" said
I.

She looked at me gravely, with extended finger. "Do you really
think that--of me? Haven't you seen me--all?"

I hesitated.

"Never
once have I really meant marrying you," she insisted. "Never once.
I fell in love with you from the first. But when you seemed a successful
man, I told myself I wouldn't. I was love-sick for you, and you were
so stupid, I came near it then. But I knew I wasn't good enough. What
could I have been to you? A woman with bad habits and bad associations,
a woman smirched. And what could I do for you or be to you? If I wasn't
good enough to be a rich man's wife, I'm certainly not good enough
to be a poor one's. Forgive me for talking sense to you now, but I
wanted to tell you this somehow."

She stopped at my gesture. I sat
up, and the canoe rocked with my movement.

"I don't care," I said.
"I want to marry you and make you my wife!"

"No," she said, "don't
spoil things. That is impossible!"

"Impossible!"

"Think! I can't
do my own hair! Do you mean you will get me a maid?"

"Good God!"
I cried, disconcerted beyond measure, "won't you learn to do your
own hair for me? Do you mean to say you can love a man--"

She flung
out her hands at me. "Don't spoil it," she cried. "I have given you
all I have, I have given you all I can. If I could do it, if I was
good enough to do it, I would. But I am a woman spoilt and ruined,
dear, and you are a ruined man. When we are making love we're lovers--but
think of the gulf between us in habits and ways of thought, in will
and training, when we are not making love. Think of it--and don't
think of it! Don't think of it yet. We have snatched some hours. We
still may have some hours!"

She suddenly knelt forward toward me,
with a glowing darkness in her eyes. "Who cares if it upsets?" she
cried. "If you say another word I will kiss you. And go to the bottom
clutching you.

"I'm not afraid of that. I'm not a bit afraid of that.
I'll die with you. Choose a death, and I'll die with you--readily.
Do listen to me! I love you. I shall always love you. It's because
I love you that I won't go down to become a dirty familiar thing with
you amidst the grime.

"First hear my message."

"No, no!"  she answered quickly.  "The reply would die upon my lips. Let me first tell you
of the woman who has a loving heart, and yet knows something else that stands higher than love.
Do you smile?  You have a right to do so, you have so long been a stranger to the secret I
mean to confide.  .  .  ."

"Speak then!"  he interrupted, in a tone which betrayed how difficult it was for him to control
his impatience.

"I thank you," she answered warmly.  Then leaning against the trunk of the ancient tree, while
he sank down on the bench, gazing alternately at the ground and into her face, she began:

"Childhood already lies behind me, and youth will soon follow.  When I was a little girl, there
was not much to distinguish me from others.  I played like them and, though my mother had taught
me to pray to the God of our fathers, I was well pleased to listen to the other children's
tales of the goddess Isis.  Nay, I stole into her temple, bought spices, plundered our little
garden for her, anointed her altar, and brought flowers for offerings.  I was taller and stronger
than many of my companions, and was also the daughter of Amram, so they followed me and readily
did what I suggested.  When I was eight years old, we moved hither from Zoan.  Ere I again
found a girl-playfellow, you came to Gamaliel, your sister's husband, to be cured of the wound
dealt by a Libyan's lance.  Do you remember that time when you, a youth, made the little girl
a companion?  I brought you what you needed and prattled to you of the things I knew, but you
told me of bloody battles and victories, of flashing armor, and the steeds and chariots of
the warrior, You showed me the ring your daring had won, and when the wound in your breast
was cured, we roved over the pastures.  Isis, whom you also loved, had a temple here, and how
often I secretly slipped into the forecourt to pray for you and offer her my holiday-cakes.
I had heard so much from you of Pharaoh and his splendor, of the Egyptians, and their wisdom,
their art, and luxurious life, that my little heart longed to live among them in the capital;
besides, it had reached my ears that my brother Moses had received great favors in Pharaoh's
palace and risen to distinction in the priesthood.  I no longer cared for our own people; they
seemed to me inferior to the Egyptians in all respects.

"Then came the parting from you and, as my little heart was devout and expected all good gifts
from the divine power, no matter what name it bore, I prayed for Pharaoh and his army, in whose
ranks you were fighting.

"My mother sometimes spoke of the God of our fathers as a mighty protector, to whom the people
in former days owed much gratitude, and told me many beautiful tales of Him; but she herself
often offered sacrifices in the temple of Seth, or carried clover blossoms to the sacred bull
of the sun-god.  She, too, was kindly disposed toward the Egyptians, among whom her pride and
joy, our Moses, had attained such high honors.

"So in happy intercourse with the others I reached my fifteenth year. In the evening, when
the shepherds returned home, I sat with the young people around the fire, and was pleased when
the sons of the shepherd princes preferred me to my companions and sought my love; but I refused
them all, even the Egyptian captain who commanded the garrison of the storehouse; for I remembered
you, the companion of my youth.  My best possession would not have seemed too dear a price
to pay for some magic spell that would have brought you to us when, at the festal games, I
danced and sang to the tambourine while the loudest shouts of applause greeted me.  Whenever
many were listening I thought of you--then I poured forth like the lark the feelings that filled
my heart, then my song was inspired by you and not by the fame of the Most High, to whom it
was consecrated."

Here passion, with renewed power, seized the man, to whom the woman he loved was confessing
so many blissful memories.  Suddenly starting up, he extended his arms toward her; but she
sternly repulsed him, that she might control the yearning which threatened to overpower her also.

Yet her deep voice had gained a new, strange tone as, at first rapidly and softly, then in
louder and firmer accents, she continued:

"So I attained my eighteenth year and was no longer satisfied to dwell in Succoth.  An indescribable
longing, and not for you only, had taken possession of my soul.  What had formerly afforded
me pleasure now seemed shallow, and the monotony of life here in the remote frontier city amid
shepherds and flocks, appeared dull and pitiful.

"Eleasar, Aaron's son, had taught me to read and brought me books, full of tales which could
never have happened, yet which stirred the heart. Many also contained hymns and fervent songs
such as one lover sings to another.  These made a deep impression on my soul and, whenever
I was alone in the evening, or at noon-day when the shepherds and flocks were far away in the
fields, I repeated these songs or composed new ones, most of which were hymns in praise of
the deity.  Sometimes they extolled Amon with the ram's head, sometimes cow-headed Isis, and
often, too, the great and omnipotent God who revealed Himself to Abraham, and of whom my mother
spoke more and more frequently as she advanced in years.  To compose such hymns in quiet hours,
wait for visions revealing God's grandeur and splendor, or beautiful angels and horrible demons,
became my favorite occupation.  The merry child had grown a dreamy maiden, who let household
affairs go as they would.  And there was no one who could have warned me, for my mother had
followed my father to the grave; and I now lived alone with my old aunt Rachel, unhappy myself,
and a source of joy to no one. Aaron, the oldest of our family, had removed to the dwelling
of his father-in-law Amminadab: the house of Amram, his heritage, had become too small and
plain for him and he left it to me.  My companions avoided me; for my mirthfulness had departed
and I patronized them with wretched arrogance because I could compose songs and beheld more
in my visions than all the other maidens.

"Nineteen years passed and, on the evening of my birthday, which no one remembered save Milcah,
Eleasar's daughter, the Most High for the first time sent me a messenger.  He came in the guise
of an angel, and bade me set the house in order; for a guest, the person dearest to me on earth,
was on the way.

"It was early and under this very tree; but I went home and, with old Rachel's help, set the
house in order, and provided food, wine, and all else we offer to an honored guest.  Noon came,
the afternoon passed away, evening deepened into night, and morning returned, yet I still waited
for the guest.  But when the sum of that day was nearing the western horizon, the dogs began
to bark loudly, and when I went to the door a powerful man, with tangled grey hair and beard,
clad in the tattered white robes of a priest, hurried toward me.  The dogs shrank back whining;
but I recognized my brother.

"Our meeting after so long a separation at first brought me more fear than pleasure; for Moses
was flying from the officers of the law because he had slain the overseer.  You know the story.

"Wrath still glowed in his flashing eyes.  He seemed to me like the god Seth in his fury, and
each one of his slow words was graven upon my soul as by a hammer and chisel.  Thrice seven
days and nights he remained under my roof, and as I was alone with him and deaf Rachel, and
he was compelled to remain concealed, no one came between us, and he taught me to know Him
who is the God of our fathers.

"Trembling and despairing, I listened to his powerful words, which seemed to fall like rocks
upon my breast, when he admonished me of God's requirements, or described the grandeur and
wrath of Him whom no mind can comprehend, and no name can describe.  Ah, when he spoke of Him
and of the Egyptian gods, it seemed as if the God of my people stood before me like a giant,
whose head touched the sky, and the other gods were creeping in the dust at his feet like whining
curs.

"He taught me also that we alone were the people whom the Lord had chosen, we and no other.
Then for the first time I was filled with pride at being a descendant of Abraham, and every
Hebrew seemed a brother, every daughter of Israel a sister.  Now, too, I perceived how cruelly
my people had been enslaved and tortured.  I had been blind to their suffering, but Moses opened
my eyes and sowed in my heart hate, intense hate of their oppressors, and from this hate sprang
love for the victims. I vowed to follow my brother and await the summons of my God.  And lo,
he did not tarry and Jehovah's voice spoke to me as with tongues.

"Old Rachel died.  At Moses' bidding I gave up my solitary life and accepted the invitation
of Aaron and Amminadab.

"So I became a guest in their household, yet led a separate life among them all.  They did
not interfere with me, and the sycamore here on their land became my special property.  Beneath
its shadow God commanded me to summon you and bestow on you the name "Help of Jehovah"--and
you,  no longer Hosea, but Joshua, will obey the mandate of God and His prophetess."

Here the warrior interrupted the maiden's words, to which he had listened earnestly, yet with
increasing disappointment:

"Ay, I have obeyed you and the Most High.  But what it cost me you disdain to ask.  Your story
has reached the present time, yet you have made no mention of the days following my mother's
death, during which you were our guest in Tanis.  Have you forgotten what first your eyes and
then your lips confessed?  Have the day of your departure and the evening on the sea, when
you bade me hope for and remember you, quite vanished from your memory?  Did the hatred Moses
implanted in your heart kill love as well as every other feeling?"

"Love?"  asked  Miriam, raising  her large eyes mournfully to his. "Oh no.  How could I forget
that time, the happiest of my life!  Yet from the day Moses returned from the wilderness by
God's command to release the people from bondage--three months after my separation from you--I
have taken no note of years and months, days and nights."

"Then you have forgotten those also?"  Hosea asked harshly.

"Not so," Miriam answered, gazing beseechingly into his face.  "The love that grew up in the
child and did not wither in the maiden's heart, cannot be killed; but whoever consecrates one's
life to the Lord....."

Here she suddenly paused, raised her hands and eyes rapturously, as if borne out of herself,
and cried imploringly:  "Thou art near me, Omnipotent One, and seest my heart!  Thou knowest
why Miriam took no note of days and years, and asked nothing save to be Thy instrument until
her people, who are, also, this man's people, received what Thou didst promise."

During this appeal, which rose from the inmost depths of the maiden's heart, the light wind
which precedes the coming of dawn had risen, and the foliage in the thick crown of the sycamore
above Miriam's head rustled; but Hosea fairly devoured with his eyes the tall majestic figure,
half illumined, half veiled by the faint glimmering light.  What he heard and saw seemed like
a miracle.  The lofty future she anticipated for her people, and which must be realized ere
she would permit herself to yield to the desire of her own heart, he believed that he was hearing
to them as a messenger of the Lord.  As if rapt by the noble enthusiasm of her soul, he rushed
toward her, seized her hand, and cried in glad emotion: "Then the hour has come which will
again permit you to distinguish months from days and listen to the wishes of your own soul.
For to I, Joshua, no longer Hosea, but Joshua, come as the envoy of the Lord, and my message
promises to the people whom I will learn to love as you do, new prosperity, and thus fulfils
the promise of a new and better home, bestowed by the Most High."

Miriam's eyes sparkled brightly and, overwhelmed with grateful joy, she exclaimed:

"Thou hast come to lead us into the land which Jehovah promised to His people?  Oh Lord, how
measureless is thy goodness!  He, he comes as Thy messenger."

"He comes, he is here!"  Joshua enthusiastically replied, and she did not resist when he clasped
her to his breast and, thrilling with joy, she returned his kiss.

CHAPTER XVI.

Fear of her own weakness soon made Miriam release herself from her lover's embrace, but she
listened with eager happiness, seeking some new sign from the Most High in Joshua's brief account
of everything he had felt and experienced since her summons.

He first described the terrible conflict he endured, then how he regained entire faith and,
obedient to the God of his people and his father's summons, went to the palace expecting imprisonment
or death, to obtain release from his oath.

He told her how graciously the sorrowing royal pair had received him, and how he had at last
taken upon himself the office of urging the leaders of his nation to guide them into the wilderness
for a short time only, and then take them home to Egypt, where a new and beautiful region on
the western bank of the river should be allotted to them.  There no foreign overseer should
henceforward oppress the workmen, but the affairs of the Hebrews should be directed by their
own elders, and a man chosen by themselves appointed their head.

Lastly he said that he, Joshua, would be placed in command of the Hebrew forces and, as regent,
mediate and settle disputes between them and the Egyptians whenever it seemed necessary.

United to her, a happy husband, he would care in the new land for even the lowliest of his
race.  On the ride hither he had felt as men do after a bloody battle, when the blast of trumpets
proclaim victory.  He had indeed a right to regard himself as the envoy of the Most High.

Here, however, he interrupted himself; for Miriam, who at first had listened with open ears
and sparkling eyes, now showed a more and more anxious and troubled mien.  When he at last
spoke of making the people happy as her husband, she withdrew her hand, gazed timidly at his
manly features, glowing with joyful excitement, and then as if striving to maintain her calmness,
fixed her eyes upon the ground.

Without suspecting what was passing in her mind, Hosea drew nearer.  He supposed that her tongue
was paralyzed by maidenly shame at the first token of favor she had bestowed upon a man.  But
when at his last words, designating himself as the true messenger of God, she shook her head
disapprovingly, he burst forth again, almost incapable of self-control in his sore disappointment:

"So you believe that the Lord has protected me by a miracle from the wrath of the mightiest
sovereign, and permitted me to obtain from his powerful hand favors for my people, such as
the stronger never grant to the weaker, simply to trifle with the joyous confidence of a man
whom he Himself summoned to serve Him."

Miriam, struggling to force back her tears, answered in a hollow tone: "The stronger to the
weaker!  If that is your opinion, you compel me to ask, in the words of your own father: 'Who
is the more powerful, the Lord our God or the weakling on the throne, whose first-born son
withered like grass at a sign from the Most High.  Oh, Hosea!  Hosea!'"

"Joshua!"  he interrupted fiercely.  "Do you grudge me even the name your God bestowed?  I
relied upon His help when I entered the palace of the mighty king.  I sought under God's guidance
rescue and salvation for the people, and I found them.  But you, you .  .  .  ."

"Your father and  Moses, nay, all the believing heads of the tribes, see no salvation for us
among the Egyptians," she answered, panting for breath.  "What they promise the Hebrews will
be their ruin.  The grass sowed by us withers where their feet touch it!  And you, whose honest
heart they deceive, are the whistler whom the bird-catcher uses to decoy his feathered victims
into the snare.  They put the hammer into your hand to rivet more firmly than before the chains
which, with God's aid, we have sundered.  Before my mind's eye I perceive .  .  .  ."

"Too much!"  replied the warrior, grinding his teeth with rage.  "Hate dims your clear intellect.
If the bird-catcher really--what was your comparison--if the bird-catcher really made me his
whistler, deceived and misled me, he might learn from you, ay, from you!  Encouraged by you,
I relied upon your love and faith.  From you I hoped all things--and where is this love?  As
you spared me nothing that could cause me pain, I will, pitiless to myself, confess the whole
truth to you.  It was not alone because the God of my fathers called me, but because His summons
reached me through you and my father that I came.  You yearn for a land in the far uncertain
distance, which the Lord has promised you; but I opened to the people the door of a new and
sure home.  Not for their sakes--what hitherto have they been to me?--but first of all to live
there in happiness with you whom I loved, and my old father.  Yet you, whose cold heart knows
naught of love, with my kiss still on your lips, disdain what I offer, from hatred of the hand
to which I owe it.  Your life, your conflicts have made you masculine.  What other women would
trample the highest blessings under foot?"

Miriam could bear no more and, sobbing aloud, covered her convulsed face with her hands.

At the grey light of dawn the sleepers in the camp began to stir, and men and maid servants
came out of the dwellings of Amminadab and Naashon. All whom the morning had roused were moving
toward the wells and watering places, but she did not see them.

How her heart had expanded and rejoiced when her lover exclaimed that he had come to lead them
to the land which the Lord had promised to his people.  Gladly had she rested on his breast
to enjoy one brief moment of the greatest bliss; but how quickly had bitter disappointment
expelled joy!  While the morning breeze had stirred the crown of the sycamore and Joshua had
told her what Pharaoh would grant to the Hebrews, the rustling among the branches had seemed
to her like the voice of God's wrath and she fancied she again heard the angry words of hoary-headed
Nun.  The latter's reproaches had dismayed Uri like the flash of lightning, the roll of thunder,
yet how did Joshua's proposition differ from Uri's?

The people--she had heard it also from the lips of Moses--were lost if, faithless  to their
God, they yielded to the temptations of Pharaoh. To wed a man who came to destroy all for which
she, her brothers, and his own father lived and labored, was base treachery.  Yet she loved
Joshua and, instead of harshly repulsing him, she would have again nestled ah, how gladly,
to the heart which she knew loved her so ardently.

But the leaves in the top of the tree continued to rustle and it seemed as if they reminded
her of Aaron's warning, so she forced herself to remain firm.

The whispering above came from God, who had chosen her for His prophetess, and when Joshua,
in passionate excitement, owned that the longing for her was his principal motive for toiling
for the people, who were as unknown to him as they were dear to her, her heart suddenly seemed
to stop beating and, in her mortal agony, she could not help sobbing aloud.

Unheeding Joshua, or the stir in the camp, she again flung herself down with uplifted arms
under the sycamore, gazing upward with dilated, tearful eyes, as if expecting a new revelation.
But the morning breeze continued to rustle in the summit of the tree, and suddenly everything
seemed as bright as sunshine, not only within but around her, as always happened when she,
the prophetess, was to behold a vision.  And in this light she saw a figure whose face startled
her, not Joshua, but another to whom her heart did not incline.  Yet there he stood before
the eyes of her soul in all his stately height, surrounded by radiance, and with a solemn gesture
he laid his hand on the stones he had piled up.

With quickened breath, she gazed upward to the face, yet she would gladly have closed her eyes
and lost her hearing, that she might neither see it nor catch the voices from the tree.  But
suddenly the figure vanished, the voices died away, and she appeared to behold in a bright,
fiery glow, the first man her virgin lips had kissed, as with uplifted sword, leading the shepherds
of her people, he dashed toward an invisible foe.

Swiftly as the going and coming of a flash of lightning, the vision appeared and vanished,
yet ere it had wholly disappeared she knew its meaning.

The man whom she called "Joshua" and who seemed fitted in every respect to be the shield and
leader of his people, must not be turned aside by love from the lofty duty to which the Most
High had summoned him.  None of the people must learn the message he brought, lest it should
tempt them to turn aside from the dangerous path they had entered.

Her course was as plain as the vision which had just vanished.  And, as if the Most High desired
to show her that she had rightly understood its meaning, Hur's voice was heard near the sycamore--ere
she had risen to prepare her lover for the sorrow to which she must condemn herself and him--commanding
the multitude flocking from all directions to prepare for the departure.

The way to save him from himself lay before her; but Joshua had not yet ventured to disturb
her devotions.

He had been wounded and angered to the inmost depths of his soul by her denial.  But as he
gazed down at her and saw her tall figure shaken by a sudden chill, and her eyes and hands
raised heavenward as though, spell- bound, he had felt that something grand and sacred dwelt
within her breast which it would be sacrilege to disturb; nay, he had been unable to resist
the feeling that it would be presumptuous to seek to wed a woman united to the Lord by so close
a tie.  It must be bliss indeed to call this exalted creature his own, yet it would be hard
to see her place another, even though it were the Almighty Himself, so far above her lover
and husband.

Men and cattle had already passed close by the sycamore and just as he was in the act of calling
Miriam and pointing to the approaching throng, she rose, turned toward him, and forced from
her troubled breast the words:

"I have communed with the Lord, Joshua, and now know His will.  Do you remember the words by
which God called you?"

He bent his head in assent; but she went on:

"Well then, you must also know what the Most High confided to your father, to Moses, and to
me.  He desires to lead us out of the land of Egypt, to a distant country where neither Pharaoh
nor his viceroy shall rule over us, and He alone shall be our king.  That is His will, and
if He requires you to serve Him, you must follow us and, in case of war, command the men of
our people."

Joshua struck his broad breast, exclaiming in violent agitation: "An oath binds me to return
to Tanis to inform Pharaoh how the leaders of the people received the message with which I
was sent forth.  Though my heart should break, I cannot perjure myself."

"And mine shall break," gasped Miriam, "ere I will be disloyal to the Lord our God.  We have
both chosen, so let what once united us be sundered before these stones."

He rushed frantically toward her to seize her hand; but with an imperious gesture she waved
him back, turned away, and went toward the multitude which, with sheep and cattle, were pressing
around the wells.

Old and young respectfully made way for her as, with haughty bearing, she approached Hur, who
was giving orders to the shepherds; but he came forward to meet her and, after hearing the
promise she whispered, he laid his hand upon her head and said with solemn earnestness:

"Then may the Lord bless our alliance."

Hand in hand with the grey-haired man to whom she had given herself, Miriam approached Joshua.
Nothing betrayed the deep emotion of her soul, save the rapid rise and fall of her bosom, for
though her cheeks were pale, her eyes were tearless and her bearing was as erect as ever.

She left to Hur to explain to the lover whom she had forever resigned what she had granted
him, and when Joshua heard it, he started back as though a gulf yawned at his feet.

His lips were bloodless as he stared at the unequally matched pair.  A jeering laugh seemed
the only fitting answer to such a surprise, but Miriam's grave face helped him to repress it
and conceal the tumult of his soul by trivial words.

But he felt that he could not long succeed in maintaining a successful display of indifference,
so he took leave of Miriam.  He must greet his father, he said hastily, and induce him to summon
the elders.

Ere he finished several shepherds hurried up, disputing wrathfully and appealed to Hur to decide
what place in the procession belonged to each tribe.  He followed them, and as soon as Miriam
found herself alone with Joshua, she said softly, yet earnestly, with beseeching eyes:

"A hasty deed was needful to sever the tie that bound us, but a loftier hope unites us.  As
I sacrificed what was dearest to my heart to remain faithful to my God and people, do you,
too, renounce everything to which your soul clings.  Obey the Most High, who called you Joshua!
This hour transformed the sweetest joy to bitter grief; may it be the salvation of our people!
Remain a son of the race which gave you your father and mother!  Be what the Lord called you
to become, a leader of your race! If you insist on fulfilling your oath to Pharaoh, and tell
the elders the promises with which you came, you will win them over, I know.  Few will resist
you, but of those few the first will surely be your own father. I can hear him raise his voice
loudly and angrily against his own dear son; but if you close your ears even to his warning,
the people will follow your summons instead of God's, and you will rule the Hebrews as a mighty
man.  But when the time comes that the Egyptian casts his promises to the winds, when you see
your people in still worse bondage than before and behold them turn from the God of their fathers
to again worship animal-headed idols, your father's curse will overtake you, the wrath of the
Most High will strike the blinded man, and despair will be the lot of him who led to ruin the
weak masses for whose shield the Most High chose him.  So I, a feeble woman, yet the servant
of the Most High and the maiden who was dearer to you than life, cry in tones of warning: Fear
your father's curse and the punishment of the Lord!  Beware of tempting the people."

Here she was interrupted by a female slave, who summoned her to her house--and she added in
low, hurried accents: "Only this one thing more. If you do not desire to be weaker than the
woman whose opposition roused your wrath, sacrifice your own wishes for the welfare of yonder
thousands, who are of the same blood!  With your hand on these stones you must swear .  .  .  ."

But here her voice failed.  Her hands groped vainly for some support, and with a loud cry she
sank on her knees beside Hur's token.

Joshua's strong arms saved her from falling prostrate, and several women who hurried up at
his shout soon recalled the fainting maiden to life.

Her eyes wandered restlessly from one to another, and not until her glance rested on Joshua's
anxious face did she become conscious where she was and what she had done.  Then she hurriedly
drank the water a shepherd's wife handed to her, wiped the tears from her eyes, sighed painfully,
and with a faint smile whispered to Joshua: "I am but a weak woman after all."

Then she walked toward the house, but after the first few steps turned, beckoned to the warrior,
and said softly:

"You see how they are forming into ranks.  They will soon begin to move. Is your resolution
still unshaken?  There is still time to call the elders."

He shook his head, and as he met her tearful, grateful glance, answered gently:

"I shall remember these stones and this hour, wife of Hur.  Greet my father for me and tell
him that I love him.  Repeat to him also the name by which his son, according to the command
of the Most High, will henceforth be called, that its promise of Jehovah's aid may give him
confidence when he hears whither I am going to keep the oath I have sworn."

With these words he waved his hand to Miriam and turned toward the camp, where his horse had
been fed and watered; but she called after him: "Only one last word:  Moses left a message
for you in the hollow trunk of the tree."

Joshua turned back to the sycamore and read what the man of God had written for him.  "Be strong
and steadfast" were the brief contents, and raising his head he joyfully exclaimed: "Those
words are balm to my soul. We meet here for the last time, wife of Hur, and, if I go to my
death, be sure that I shall know how to die strong and steadfast; but show my old father what
kindness you can."

He swung himself upon his horse and while trotting toward Tanis, faithful to his oath, his
soul was free from fear, though he did not conceal from himself that he was going to meet great
perils.  His fairest hopes were destroyed, yet deep grief struggled with glad exaltation. 
A new and lofty emotion, which pervaded his whole being, had waked within him and was but slightly
dimmed, though he had experienced a sorrow bitter enough to darken the light of any other man's
existence.  Naught could surpass the noble objects to which he intended to devote his blood
and life--his God and his people.  He perceived with amazement this new feeling which had power
to thrust far into the background every other emotion of his breast--even love.

True, his head often drooped sorrowfully when he thought of his old father; but he had done
right in repressing the eager yearning to clasp him to his heart.  The old man would scarcely
have understood his motives, and it was better for both to part without seeing each other rather
than in open strife.

Often it seemed as though his experiences had been but a dream, and while he felt bewildered
by the excitements of the last few hours, his strong frame was little wearied by the fatigues
he had undergone. 

Come nearer to me. Oh, my love! come near! So."

She drew me to her and our lips met.

III

I asked her to marry me once again.

It was our last morning together, and we had met very early, about sunrise, knowing that we were
to part. No sun shone that day. The sky was overcast, the morning chilly and lit by a clear,
cold, spiritless light. A heavy dampness in the air verged close on rain. When I think of that
morning, it has always the quality of greying ashes wet with rain.

Beatrice too had changed. The spring had gone out of her movement; it came to me, for the first
time, that some day she might grow old.

She had become one flesh with the rest of common humanity; the softness had gone from her voice
and manner, the dusky magic of her presence had gone.

I saw these things with perfect clearness, and they made me sorry for them and for her. But
they altered my love not a whit, abated it nothing. And when we had talked awkwardly for half
a dozen sentences, I came dully to my point.

"And now," I cried, "will you marry me?"

"No," she said, "I shall keep to my life here."

I asked her to marry me in a year's time. She shook her head.

"This world is a soft world," I said, "in spite of my present disasters. I know now how to do
things. If I had you to work for--in a year I could be a prosperous man."

"No," she said, "I will put it brutally, I shall go back to Carnaby."

"But--!" I did not feel angry.

I had no sort of jealousy, no wounded pride, no sense of injury. I had only a sense of grey
desolation, of hopeless cross-purposes.

"Look here," she said. "I have been awake all night and every night.

I have been thinking of this--every moment when we have not been together. I'm not answering
you on an impulse. I love you. I love you. I'll say that over ten
thousand times.

But here we are--"

"The rest of life together," I said.

"It wouldn't be together. Now we are together. Now we have been together. We are full of memories
I do not feel I can ever forget a single one."

"Nor I."

"And I want to close it and leave it at that. You see, dear, what else is there to do?"

She turned her white face to me.

"All I know of love, all I have ever dreamt or learnt of love I have packed into these days for
you. You think we might live together and go on loving. No! For you I will have no vain repetitions.
You have had the best and all of me.

Would you have us, after this, meet again in London or Paris or somewhere,
scuffle to some wretched dressmaker's, meet in a cabinet particulier?"

"No," I said. "I want you to marry me. I want you to play the game
of life with me as an honest woman should. Come and live with me.
Be my wife and squaw. Bear me children."

I looked at her white, drawn
face, and it seemed to me I might carry her yet. I spluttered for
words.

"My God! Beatrice!" I cried; "but this is cowardice and folly!
Are you afraid of life? You of all people! What does it matter what
has been or what we were? Here we are with the world before us! Start
clean and new with me. We'll fight it through! I'm not such a simple
lover that I'll not tell you plainly when you go wrong, and fight
our difference out with you. It's the one thing I want, the one thing
I need--to have you, and more of you and more! This love-making--it's
love-making. It's just a part of us, an incident--"

She shook her
head and stopped me abruptly. "It's all," she said.

"All!" I protested.

"I'm
wiser than you. Wiser beyond words." She turned her eyes to me and
they shone with tears.

"I wouldn't have you say anything--but what
you're saying," she said. "But it's nonsense, dear. You know it's
nonsense as you say it."

I tried to keep up the heroic note, but
she would not listen to it.

"It's no good," she cried almost petulantly.
"This little world has made us what we are. Don't you see--don't you
see what I am? I can make love. I can make love and be loved, prettily.
Dear, don't blame me. I have given you all I have. If I had anything
more--I have gone through it all over and over again--thought it out.
This morning my head aches, my eyes ache.

"The light has gone out
of me and I am a sick and tired woman. But I'm talking wisdom--bitter
wisdom. I couldn't be any sort of helper to you, any sort of wife,
any sort of mother. I'm spoilt.

"I'm spoilt by this rich idle way
of living, until every habit is wrong, every taste wrong. The world
is wrong. People can be ruined by wealth just as much as by poverty.
Do you think I wouldn't face life with you if I could, if I wasn't
absolutely certain I should be down and dragging in the first half-mile
of the journey? Here I am--damned! Damned! But I won't damn you. You
know what I am! You know. You are too clear and simple not to know
the truth.

He clapped his hands as if he were driving hens out of a garden, and while the prisoners took
pails and with the guards, enjoyed the refreshing drink, their leader drew Joshua and Ephraim
away from the road --they could not be separated on account of the chain which bound their
ancles together.

The little temple soon hid them from the eyes of the others, and the warder sat down on a step
some distance off, first showing the two Hebrews, with a gesture whose meaning was easily understood,
the heavy spear he carried in his hand and the hounds which lay at his feet.

He kept his eyes open, too, during the conversation that followed.  They could say whatever
they chose; he knew the duties of his office and though, for the sake of good money he could
wink at a farewell, for twenty years, though there had been many attempts to escape, not one
of his moles--a name he was fond of giving to the future miners--had succeeded in eluding his
watchfulness.

Yonder fair lady doubtless loved the stately man who, he had been told, was formerly a chief
in the army.  But he had already numbered among his "moles," personages even more distinguished,
and if the veiled woman managed to slip files or gold into the prisoner's hands, he would not
object, for that very evening the persons of both would be thoroughly searched, even the youth's
black locks, which would not have remained unshorn, had not everything been in confusion prior
to the departure of the convicts, which took place just before the march of Pharaoh's army.

The watcher could not hear the whispered words exchanged between the degraded chief and the
lady, but her humble manner and bearing led him to suppose that it was she who had brought
the proud warrior to his ruin. Ah, these women!  And the fettered youth!  The looks he fixed
upon the slender figure were ardent enough to scorch her veil.  But patience! Mighty Father
Amon!  His moles were going to a school where people learned modesty!

Now the lady had removed her veil.  She was a beautiful woman!  It must be hard to part from
such a sweetheart.  And now she was weeping.

The rude warder's heart grew as soft as his office permitted; but he would fain have raised
his scourge against the older prisoner; for was it not a shame to have such a sweetheart and
stand there like a stone?

At first the wretch did not even hold out his hand to the woman who evidently loved him, while
he, the watcher, would gladly have witnessed both a kiss and an embrace.

Or was this beauty the prisoner's wife who had betrayed him?  No, no! How kindly he was now
gazing at her.  That was the manner of a father speaking to his child; but his mole was probably
too young to have such a daughter.  A mystery!  But he felt no anxiety concerning its solution;
during the march he had the power to make the most reserved convict an open book.

Yet not only the rude gaoler, but anyone would have marvelled what had brought this beautiful,
aristocratic woman, in the grey light of dawn, out on the highway to meet the hapless man loaded
with chains.

In sooth, nothing would have induced Kasana to take this step save the torturing dread of being
scorned and execrated as a base traitress by the man whom she loved.  A terrible destiny awaited
him, and her vivid imagination had shown her Joshua in the mines, languishing, disheartened,
drooping, dying, always with a curse upon her on his lips.

On the evening of, the day Ephraim bad been brought to the house, shivering with the chill
caused by burning fever, and half stifled with the dust of the road, her father lead told her
that in the youthful Hebrew they possessed a hostage to compel Hosea to return to Tanis and
submit to the wishes of the prophet Bai, with whom she knew her father was leagued in a secret
conspiracy.  He also confided to her that not only great distinction and high offices, but
a marriage with herself had been arrranged to bind Hosea to the Egyptians and to a cause from
which the chief of the archers expected the greatest blessings for himself, his house, and
his whole country.

These tidings had filled her heart with joyous hope of a long desired happiness, and she confessed
it to the prisoner with drooping head amid floods of tears, by the little wayside temple; for
he was now forever lost to her, and though he did not return the love she had lavished on him
from his childhood, he must not hate and condemn her without having heard her story.

Joshua listened willingly and assured her that nothing would lighten his heart more than to
have her clear herself from the charge of having consigned him and the youth at his side to
their most terrible fate.

Kasana sobbed aloud and was forced to struggle hard for composure ere she succeeded in telling
her tale with some degree of calmness.

Shortly after Hosea's departure the chief-priest died and, on the same day Bai, the second
prophet, became his successor.  Many changes now took place, and the most powerful man in the
kingdom filled Pharaoh with hatred of the Hebrews and their leader, Mesu, whom he and the queen
had hitherto protected and feared.  He had even persuaded the monarch to pursue the fugitives,
and an army had been instantly summoned to compel their return.  Kasana had feared that Hosea
could not be induced to fight against the men of his own blood, and that he must feel incensed
at being sent to make treaties which the Egyptians began to violate even before they knew whether
their offers had been accepted.

When he returned--as he knew only too well--Pharaoh had had him watched like a prisoner and
would not suffer him to leave his presence until he had sworn to again lead his troops and
be a faithful servant to the king. Bai, the new chief priest, however, had not forgotten that
Hosea had saved his life and showed himself well disposed and grateful to him; she knew also
that he hoped to involve him in a secret enterprise, with which her father, too, was associated.
It was Bai who had prevailed upon Pharaoh, if Hosea would renew his oath of fealty, to absolve
him from fighting against his own race, put him in command of the foreign mercenaries and raise
him to the rank of a "friend of the king."  All these events, of course, were familiar to him;
for the new chief priest had himself set before him the tempting dishes which, with such strong,
manly defiance, he had thrust aside.

Her father had also sided with him, and for the first time ceased to reproach him with his origin.

But, on the third day after Hosea's return, Hornecht had gone to talk with him and since then
everything had changed for the worse.  He must be best aware what had caused the man of whom
she, his daughter, must think no evil, to be changed from a friend to a mortal foe.

She had looked enquiringly at him as she spoke, and he did not refuse to answer--Hornecht had
told him that he would be a welcome son-in-law.

"And you?"  asked Kasana, gazing anxiously into his face.

"I," replied the prisoner, "was forced to say that though you had been dear and precious to
me from your childhood, many causes forbade me to unite a woman's fate to mine."

Kasana's eyes flashed, and she exclaimed:

"Because you love another, a woman of your own people, the one who sent Ephraim to you!"

But Joshua shook his head and answered pleasantly:

"You are wrong, Kasana!  She of whom you speak is the wife of another."

"Then," cried the young widow with fresh animation, gazing at him with loving entreaty, "why
were you compelled to rebuff my father so harshly?"

"That was far from my intention, dear child," he replied warmly, laying his hand on her head.
"I thought of you with all the tenderness of which my nature is capable.  If I could not fulfil
his wish, it was because grave necessity forbids me to yearn for the peaceful happiness by
my own hearth-stone for which others strive.  Had they given me my liberty, my life would have
been one of restlessness and conflict."

"Yet how many bear sword and shield," replied Kasana, "and still, on their return, rejoice
in the love of their wives and the dear ones sheltered beneath their roof."

"True, true," he answered gravely; "but special duties, unknown to the Egyptians, summon me.
I am a son of my people."

"And you intend to serve them?"  asked Kasana.  "Oh, I understand you. Yet....  why then did
you return to Tanis?  Why did you put yourself into Pharaoh's power?"

"Because a sacred oath compelled me, poor child," he answered kindly.

"An oath," she cried, "which places death and imprisonment between you and those whom you love
and still desire to serve.  Oh, would that you had never returned to this abode of injustice,
treachery, and ingratitude!  To how many hearts this vow will bring grief and tears! But what
do you men care for the suffering you inflict on others?  You have spoiled all the pleasure
of life for my hapless self, and among your own people dwells a noble father whose only son
you are.  How often I have seen the dear old man, the stately figure with sparkling eyes and
snow-white hair.  So would you look when you, too, had reached a ripe old age, as I said to
myself, when I met him at the harbor, or in the fore- court of the palace, directing the shepherds
who were driving the cattle and fleecy sheep to the tax-receiver's table.  And now his son's
obstinacy must embitter every day of his old age."

"Now," replied Joshua, "he has a son who is going, laden with chains, to endure a life of misery,
but who can hold his head higher than those who betrayed him.  They, and Pharaoh at their head,
have forgotten that he has shed his heart's blood for them on many a battlefield, and kept
faith with the king at every peril.  Menephtah, his vice-roy and chief, whose life I saved,
and many who formerly called me friend, have abandoned and hurled me and this guiltless boy
into wretchedness, but those who have done this, woman, who have committed this crime, may
they all.  .  .  ."

"Do not curse them!"  interrupted Kasana with glowing cheeks.

But Joshua, unheeding her entreaty, exclaimed "Should I be a man, if I forgot vengeance?"

The young widow clung anxiously to his arm, gasping in beseeching accents:

"How could you forgive him?  Only you must not curse him; for my father became your foe through
love for me.  You know his hot blood, which so easily carries him to extremes, despite his
years.  He concealed from me what he regarded as an insult; for he saw many woo me, and I am
his greatest treasure.  Pharaoh can pardon rebels more easily than my father can forgive the
man who disdained his jewel.  He behaved like one possessed when he returned.  Every word he
uttered was an invective. He could not endure to stay at home and raged just as furiously elsewhere.
But no doubt he would have calmed himself at last, as he so often did before, had not some
one who desired to pour oil on the flames met him in the fore-court of the palace.  I learned
all this from Bai's wife; for she, too, repents what she did to injure you; her husband used
every effort to save you. "You will," she said.

We looked at one another in silence, and her face full of fatigue and misery.

What could I do? What was there to do?

"I wish--" I said, and stopped.

"Good-bye."

IV

That should have been the last I saw of her, but, indeed, I was destined
to see her once again.

Two days after I was at Lady Grove, I forget altogether upon what errand, and as I walked back
to the station believing her to be gone away she came upon me, and she was riding with Carnaby,
just as I had seen them first. The encounter jumped upon us unprepared. She rode by, her eyes
dark in her white face, and scarcely noticed me. She winced and grew stiff at the sight of
me and bowed her head. But Carnaby, because he thought I was a broken and discomfited man, saluted
me with an easy friendliness, and shouted some genial commonplace to me.

They passed out of sight and left me by the roadside....

And then, indeed, I tasted the ultimate bitterness of life.

For the first time I felt utter futility, and was wrung by emotion
that begot no action, by shame and pity beyond words.

I had parted from her dully and I had seen my uncle break and die with dry eyes and a steady
mind, but this chance sight of my lost Beatrice brought me to tears. My face was wrung, and
tears came pouring down my cheeks. All the magic she had for me had changed to wild sorrow.
"Oh God!"

I cried, "this is too much," and turned my face after her and made
appealing gestures to the beech trees and cursed at fate.

I wanted to do preposterous things, to pursue her, to save her, to
turn life back so that she might begin again.

I wonder what would have happened had I overtaken them in pursuit, breathless with running, uttering
incoherent words, weeping, expostulatory. I came near to doing that.

There was nothing in earth or heaven to respect my curses or weeping. In the midst of it a
man who had been trimming the opposite hedge appeared and stared at me.

Abruptly, ridiculously, I dissembled before him and went on and caught
my train....

But the pain I felt then I have felt a hundred times;
it is with me as I write.

It haunts this book, I see, that is what haunts this book, from end to end.

CHAPTER THE THIRD

NIGHT AND THE OPEN SEA

I

I have tried throughout all this story to tell things as they happened to me. In the beginning--the
sheets are still here on the table, grimy and dogs-eared and old-looking--I said I wanted to
tell MYSELF and the world in which I found myself, and I have done my best. But whether I have
succeeded I cannot imagine. All this writing is grey now and dead and trite and unmeaning to me;
some of it I know by heart.

I am the last person to judge it.

As I turn over the big pile of manuscript before me certain things
become clearer to me, and particularly the immense inconsequences
of my experiences.

It is, I see now that I have it all before me, a story of activity and urgency and sterility.
I have called it Tono-Bungay, but I had far better have called it
Waste.

I have told of childless Marion, of my childless aunt, of Beatrice wasted and wasteful and
futile. What hope is there for a people whose women become fruitless? I think of all the energy I
have given to vain things. I think of my industrious scheming with my uncle, of Crest Hill's
vast cessation, of his resonant strenuous career. Ten thousand men
have envied him and wished to live as he lived.

It is all one spectacle of forces running to waste, of people who use and do not replace,
the story of a country hectic with a wasting aimless fever of trade
and money-making and pleasure-seeking. And now I build destroyers!

Other
people may see this country in other terms; this is how I have seen
it. In some early chapter in this heap I compared all our present
colour and abundance to October foliage before the frosts nip down
the leaves. That I still feel was a good image. Perhaps I see wrongly.
It may be I see decay all about me because I am, in a sense, decay.
To others it may be a scene of achievement and construction radiant
with hope. I, too, have a sort of hope, but it is a remote hope, a
hope that finds no promise in this Empire or in any of the great things
of our time.

How they will look in history I do not know, how time
and chance will prove them I cannot guess; that is how they have mirrored
themselves on one contemporary mind.

II

Concurrently with writing
the last chapter of this book I have been much engaged by the affairs
of a new destroyer we have completed. It has been an oddly complementary
alternation of occupations. Three weeks or so ago this novel had to
be put aside in order that I might give all my time day and night
to the fitting and finishing of the engines. Last Thursday X 2, for
so we call her, was done and I took her down the Thames and went out
nearly to Texel for a trial of speed.

It is curious how at times
one's impressions will all fuse and run together into a sort of unity
and become continuous with things that have hitherto been utterly
alien and remote.

"Forward!"  shouted the leader again, and with a grateful smile helped the generous lady into
the chariot, marvelling at the happy, radiant gaze with which her tearful eyes followed the
convicts.

The horses started, fresh shouts arose, blows from the whips fell on bare shoulders, now and
then a cry of pain rang on the morning air, and the train of prisoners again moved eastward.
The chain on the ancles of the companions in suffering stirred the dust, which shrouded the
little band like the grief, hate, and fear darkening the soul of each.

CHAPTER XVIII.

A long hour's walk beyond the little temple where the prisoners had rested the road, leading
to Succoth and the western arm of the Red Sea, branched off from the one that ran in a southeasterly
direction past the fortifications on the isthmus to the mines.

Shortly after the departure of the prisoners, the army which had been gathered to pursue the
Hebrews left the city of Rameses, and as the convicts had rested some time at the well, the
troops almost overtook them.  They had not proceeded far when several runners came hurrying
up to clear the road for the advancing army.  They ordered the prisoners to move aside and
defer their march until the swifter baggage train, bearing Pharaoh's tents and travelling equipments,
whose chariot wheels could already be heard, had passed them.

The prisoners' guards were glad to stop, they were in no hurry.  The day was hot, and if they
reached their destination later, it would be the fault of the army.

The interruption was welcome to Joshua, too; for his young companion had been gazing into vacancy
as if bewildered, and either made no answer to his questions or gave such incoherent ones that
the older man grew anxious; he knew how many of those sentenced to forced labor went mad or
fell into melancholy.  Now a portion of the army would pass them, and the spectacle was new
to Ephraim and promised to put an end to his dull brooding.

A sand-hill overgrown with tamarisk bushes rose beside the road, and thither the leader guided
the party of convicts.  He was a stern man, but not a cruel one, so he permitted his "moles"
to lie down on the sand, for the troops would doubtless be a long time in passing.  As soon
as the convicts had thrown themselves on the ground the rattle of wheels, the neighing of fiery
steeds, shouts of command, and sometimes the disagreeable braying of an ass were heard.

When the first chariots appeared Ephraim asked if Pharaoh was coming; but Joshua, smiling,
informed him that when the king accompanied the troops to the field, the camp equipage followed
directly behind the vanguard, for Pharaoh and his dignitaries wished to find the tents pitched
and the tables laid, when the day's march was over and the soldiers and officers expected a
night's repose.

Joshua had not finished speaking when a number of empty carts and unladen asses appeared. 
They were to carry the contributions of bread and meal, animals and poultry, wine and beer,
levied on every village the sovereign passed on the march, and which had been delivered to
the tax-gatherers the day before.

Soon after a division of chariot warriors followed.  Every pair of horses drew a small, two-wheeled
chariot, cased in bronze, and in each stood a warrior and the driver of the team.  Huge quivers
were fastened to the front of the chariots, and the soldiers leaned on their lances or on gigantic
bows.  Shirts covered with brazen scales, or padded coats of mail with gay overmantle, a helmet,
and the front of the chariot protected the warrior from the missiles of the foe.  This troop,
which Joshua said was the van, went by at a slow trot and was followed by a great number of
carts and wagons, drawn by horses, mules, or oxen, as well as whole troops of heavily-laden asses.

The uncle now pointed out to his nephew the long masts, poles, and heavy rolls of costly stuffs
intended for the royal tent, and borne by numerous beasts of burden, as well as the asses and
carts with the kitchen utensils and field forges.  Among the baggage heaped on the asses, which
were followed by nimble drivers, rode the physicians, tailors, salve- makers, cooks, weavers
of garlands, attendants, and slaves belonging to the camp.  Their departure had been so recent
that they were still fresh and inclined to jest, and whoever caught sight of the convicts,
flung them, in the Egyptian fashion, a caustic quip which many sought to palliate by the gift
of alms.  Others, who said nothing, also sent by the ass-drivers fruit and trifling gifts;
for those who were free to-day might share the fate of these hapless men to-morrow.  The captain
permitted it, and when a passing slave, whom Joshua had sold for thieving, shouted the name
of Hosea, pointing to him with a malicious gesture, the rough but kind-hearted officer offered
his insulted prisoner a sip of wine from his own flask.

Ephraim, who had walked from Succoth to Tanis with a staff in his hand, and a small bundle
containing bread, dried lamb, radishes, and dates, expressed his amazement at the countless
people and things a single man needed for his comfort, and then relapsed into his former melancholy
until his uncle roused him with farther explanations.

As soon as the baggage train had passed, the commander of the band of prisoners wished to set
off, but the "openers of the way," who preceded the archers, forbade him, because it was not
seemly for convicts to mingle with soldiers.  So they remained on their hillock and continued
to watch the troops.

The archers were followed by heavily-armed troops, bearing shields covered with strong hide
so large that they extended from the feet to above the middle of the tallest men, and Hosea
now told the youth that in the evening they set them side by side, thus surrounding the royal
tent like a fence.  Besides this weapon of defence they carried a lance, a short dagger-like
sword, or a battle-sickle, and as these thousands were succeeded by a body of men armed with
slings Ephraim for the first time spoke without being questioned and said that the slings the
shepherds had taught him to make were far better than those of the soldiers and, encouraged
by his uncle, he described in language so eager that the prisoners lying by his side listened,
how he had succeeded in slaying not only jackals, wolves, and panthers, but even vultures,
with stones hurled from a sling.  Meanwhile he interrupted himself to ask the meaning of the
standards and the names of the separate divisions.

Many thousands had already passed, when another troop of warriors in chariots appeared, and
the chief warder of the prisoners exclaimed:

"The good god! The lord of two worlds!  May life, happiness, and health be his!"  With these
words he fell upon his knees in the attitude of worship, while the convicts prostrated themselves
to kiss the earth and be ready to obey the captain's bidding and join at the right moment in
the cry: "Life, happiness, and health!"

But they had a long time to wait ere the expected sovereign appeared; for, after the warriors
in the chariots had passed, the body-guard followed, foot-soldiers of foreign birth with singular
ornaments on their helmets and huge swords, and then numerous images of the gods, a large band
of priests and wearers of plumes.  They were followed by more body- guards, and then Pharaoh
appeared with his attendants.  At their head rode the chief priest Bai in a gilded battle-chariot
drawn by magnificent bay stallions.  He who had formerly led troops in the field, had assumed
the command of this pursuing expedition ordered by the gods and, though clad in priestly robes,
he also wore the helmet and battle-axe of a general.  At last, directly behind his equipage,
came Pharaoh himself; but he did not go to battle like his warlike predecessors in a war- chariot,
but preferred to be carried on a throne.  A magnificent canopy protected him above, and large,
thick, round ostrich feather fans, carried by his fan-bearers, sheltered him on both sides
from the scorching rays of the sun.

After Menephtah had left the city and the gate of victory behind him, and the exulting acclamations
of the multitude had ceased to amuse him, he had gone to sleep and the shading fans would have
concealed his face and figure from the prisoners, had not their shouts been loud enough to
rouse him and induce him to turn his head toward them.  The gracious wave of his right hand
showed that he had expected to see different people from convicts and, ere the shouts of the
hapless men had died away, his eyes again closed.

Ephraim's silent brooding had now yielded to the deepest interest, and as the empty golden
war-chariot of the king, before which pranced the most superb steeds he had ever seen, rolled
by, he burst into loud exclamations of admiration.

These noble animals, on whose intelligent heads large bunches of feathers nodded, and whose
rich harness glittered with gold and gems, were indeed a splendid sight.  The large gold quivers
set with emeralds, fastened on the sides of the chariot, were filled with arrows.

The feeble man to whose weak hand the guidance of a great nation was entrusted, the weakling
who shrunk from every exertion, regained his lost energy whenever hunting was in prospect;
he considered this campaign a chase on the grandest scale and as it seemed royal pastime to
discharge his arrows at the human beings he had so lately feared, instead of at game, he had
obeyed the chief priest's summons and joined the expedition. It had been undertaken by the
mandate of the great god Amon, so he had little to dread from Mesu's terrible power.

When he captured him he would make him atone for having caused Pharaoh and his queen to tremble
before him and shed so many tears on his account.

While Joshua was still telling the youth from which Phoenician city the golden chariots came,
he suddenly felt Ephraim's right hand clutch his wrist, and heard him exclaim: "She!  She!
Look yonder!  It is she!"  The youth had flushed crimson, and he was not mistaken; the beautiful
Kasana was passing amid Pharaoh's train in the same chariot in which she had pursued the convicts,
and with her came a considerable number of ladies who had joined what the commander of the
foot-soldiers, a brave old warrior, who had served under the great Rameses, termed "a pleasure
party."

On campaigns through the desert and into Syria, Libya, or Ethiopia the sovereign was accompanied
only by a chosen band of concubines in curtained chariots, guarded by eunuchs; but this time,
though the queen had remained at home, the wife of the chief priest Bai and other aristocratic
ladies had set the example of joining the troops, and it was doubtless tempting enough to many
to enjoy the excitements of war without peril.

Kasana had surprised her friend by her appearance an hour before; only yesterday the young
widow could not be persuaded to accompany the troops. Obeying an inspiration, without consulting
her father, so unprepared that she lacked the necessary traveling equipments, she had joined
the expedition, and it seemed as if a man whom she had hitherto avoided, though he was no less
a personage than Siptah, the king's nephew, had become a magnet to her.

When she passed the prisoners, the prince was standing in the chariot beside the young beauty
in her nurse's place, explaining in jesting tones the significance of the flowers in a bouquet,
which Kasana declared could not possibly have been intended for her, because an hour and a
quarter before she had not thought of going with the army.

But Siptah protested that the Hathors had revealed at sunrise the happiness in store for him,
and that the choice of each single blossom proved his assertion.

Several young courtiers who were walking in front of their chariots, surrounded them and joined
in the laughter and merry conversation, in which the vivacious wife of the chief priest shared,
having left her large travelling-chariot to be carried in a litter.

None of these things escaped Joshua's notice and, as he saw Kasana, who a short time before
had thought of the prince with aversion, now saucily tap his hand with her fan, his brow darkened
and he asked himself whether the young widow was not carelessly trifling with his misery.

But the prisoners' chief warder had now noticed the locks on Siptah's temples, which marked
him as a prince of the royal household and his loud "Hail!  Hall!" in which the other guards
and the captives joined, was heard by Kasana and her companions.  They looked toward the tamarisk-
bushes, whence the cry proceeded, and Joshua saw the young widow turn pale and then point with
a hasty gesture to the convicts.  She must undoubtedly have given Siptah some command, for
the latter at first shrugged his shoulders disapprovingly then, after a somewhat lengthy discussion,
half grave, half jesting, he sprang from the chariot and beckoned to the chief gaoler.

"Have these men," he called from the road so loudly that Kasana could not fail to hear, "seen
the face of the good god, the lord of both worlds?" And when he received a reluctant answer,
he went on arrogantly:

"No matter!  At least they beheld mine and that of the fairest of women, and if they hope for
favor on that account they are right.  You know who I am.  Let the chains that bind them together
be removed."  Then, beckoning to the man, he whispered:

"But keep your eyes open all the wider; I have no liking for the fellow beside the bush, the
ex-chief Hosea.  After returning home, report to me and bring news of this man.  The quieter
he has become, the deeper my hand will sink in my purse.  Do you understand?"

The warder bowed, thinking: "I'll take care, my prince, and also see that no one attempts to
take the life of any of my moles.  The greater the rank of these gentlemen, the more bloody
and strange are their requests! How many have come to me with similar ones.  He releases the
poor wretches' feet, and wants me to burden my soul with a shameful murder. Siptah has tried
the wrong man!  Here, Heter, bring the bag of tools and open the moles' chains."

While the files were grating on the sand-hill by the road and the prisoners were being released
from the fetters on their ancles,--though for the sake of security each man's arms were bound
together,--Pharaoh's host marched by.

Kasana had commanded Prince Siptah to release from their iron burden the unfortunates who were
being dragged to a life of misery, openly confessing that she could not bear to see a chief
who had so often been a guest of her house so cruelly humiliated.  Bai's wife had supported
her wish, and the prince was obliged to yield.

Joshua knew to whom he and Ephraim owed this favor, and received it with grateful joy.

Walking had been made easier for him, but his mind was more and more sorely oppressed with
anxious cares.

The army passing yonder would have been enough to destroy down to the last man a force ten
times greater than the number of his people.  His people, and with them his father and Miriam,--who
had caused him such keen suffering, yet to whom he was indebted for having found the way which,
even in prison, he had recognized as the only right one--seemed to him marked out for a bloody
doom; for, however powerful might be the God whose greatness the prophetess had praised in
such glowing words, and to whom he himself had learned to look up with devout admiration,--untrained
and unarmed bands of shepherds must surely and hopelessly succumb to the assault of this army.
This certainty, strengthened by each advancing division, pierced his very soul.  Never before
had he felt such burning anguish, which was terribly sharpened when he beheld the familiar
faces of his own troops, which he had so lately commanded, pass before him under the leadership
of another.  This time they were taking the field to hew down men of his own blood.  This was
pain indeed, and Ephraim's conduct gave him cause for fresh anxiety; since Kasana's appearance
and interference in behalf of him and his companions in suffering, the youth had again lapsed
into silence and gazed with wandering eyes at the army or into vacancy.

Now he, too, was freed from the chain, and Joshua asked in a whisper if he did not long to
return to his people to help them resist so powerful a force, but Ephraim merely answered:

"When confronted with those hosts, they can do nothing but yield.  What did we lack before
the exodus?  You were a Hebrew, and yet became a mighty chief among the Egyptians ere you obeyed
Miriam's summons.  In your place, I would have pursued a different course."

"What  would you  have done?"  asked Joshua sternly.

"What?"  replied the youth, the fire of his young soul blazing.  "What? Only this, I would
have remained where there is honor and fame and everything beautiful.  You might have been
the greatest of the great, the happiest of the happy--this I have learned, but you made a different
choice."

"Because duty commanded it," Joshua answered gravely, "because I will no longer serve any one
save the people among whom I was born."

"The people?"  exclaimed Ephraim, contemptuously.  "I know them, and you met them at Succoth.
The poor are miserable wretches who cringe under the lash; the rich value their cattle above
all else and, if they are the heads of the tribes, quarrel with one another.  No one knows
aught of what pleases the eye and the heart.  They call me one of the richest of the race and
yet I shudder when I think of the house I inherited, one of the best and largest.  One who
has seen more beautiful ones ceases to long for such an abode."

The vein on Joshua's brow swelled, and he wrathfully rebuked the youth for denying his own
blood, and being a traitor to his people.

The guard commanded silence, for Joshua had raised his reproving voice louder, and this order
seemed welcome to the defiant youth.  When, during their march, his uncle looked sternly into
his face or asked whether he had thought of his words, he turned angrily away, and remained
mute and sullen until the first star had risen, the night camp had been made under the open
sky, and the scanty prison rations had been served.

Joshua dug with his hands a resting place in the sand, and with care and skill helped the youth
to prepare a similar one.

Ephraim silently accepted this help; but as they lay side by side, and the uncle began to speak
to his nephew of the God of his people on whose aid they must rely, if they were not to fall
victims to despair in the mines, the youth interrupted him, exclaiming in low tones, but with
fierce resolution:

"They will not take me to the mines alive!  I would rather die, while making my escape, than
pine away in such wretchedness."

Joshua whispered words of warning, and again reminded him of his duties to his people.  But
Ephraim begged to be let alone; yet soon after he touched his uncle and asked softly:

"What are they planning with Prince Siptah?"

"I don't know; nothing good, that is certain."

"And where is Aarsu, the Syrian, your foe, who commands the Asiatic mercenaries, and who was
to watch us with such fierce zeal?  I did not see him with the others."

"He remained in Tanis with his troops."

"To guard the palace?"

"Undoubtedly."

"Then he commands many soldiers, and Pharaoh has confidence in him?"

"The utmost, though he ill deserves it."

"And he is a Syrian, and therefore of our blood."

"And more closely allied to us than to the Egyptians, at least so far as language and appearance
are concerned."

"I should have taken him for a man of our race, yet he is, as you were, one of the leaders
in the army."

"Other Syrians and Libyans command large troops of mercenaries, and the herald Ben Mazana,
one of the highest dignitaries of the court--the Egyptians call him Rameses in the sanctuary
of Ra--has a Hebrew father."

"And neither he nor the others are scorned on account of their birth?"

"This is not quite so.  But why do you ask these questions?"

"I could not sleep."

"And so such thoughts came to you.  But you have some definite idea in your mind and, if my
inference is correct, it would cause me pain.  You wished to enter Pharaoh's service!"

Both were silent a long time, then Ephraim spoke again and, though he addressed Joshua, it
seemed as if he were talking to himself:

"They will destroy our people; bondage and shame await those who survive. My house is now left
to ruin, not a head of my splendid herds of cattle remains, and the gold and silver I inherited,
of which there was said to be a goodly store, they are carrying with them, for your father
has charge of my wealth, and it will soon fall as booty into the hands of the Egyptians.  Shall
I, if I obtain my liberty, return to my people and make bricks?  Shall I bow my back and suffer
blows and abuse?" 

It was agreed that the vessel should leave the landing and that a
small boat should take the fugitives aboard at night, as there were
Kentucky spies in Sandusky that might apprehend them.

Henson said he watched the vessel leave the landing and then lower a boat for the shore and in
a few minutes his black friend and two sailors landed and went with him to get his family. Thinking
that he had been captured his wife had grown despondent and had moved from the spot where he left
her. With a little difficulty, he found her, but when she saw him approaching with those men,
she was still more frightened. She was reassured, however, and soon
they were received on board in the midst of hearty cheers.

They arrived at Buffalo the next evening too late to cross the river. The following morning they
were brought to Burnham and went on the ferry boat to Waterloo.

The good Captain Burnham paid the passage money and gave Henson a
dollar beside.

They arrived in Canada on the 28th day of October, 1830.

Describing his exultation Henson said: "I threw myself on the ground,
rolled in the sand, seized handfuls of it and kissed them, and danced
round till, in the eyes of several who were present, I passed for
a madman.

'He's some crazy fellow,' said a Colonel Warren, who happened to be there. 'O, no, master! don't
you know? I'm free!' He burst into a shout of laughter. 'Well I never knew freedom make a man
roll in the sand in such a fashion,' Still I could not control myself.


At last he was about to lay his hand on the lad's shoulder, but paused as by the moonlight
he saw Ephraim raise one arm though, before he lay down, both hands were tied more firmly than
before.

Joshua now knew that it was the youth's sharp teeth gnawing the rope which had caused the noise
that had just surprised him, and he immediately stood up and looked first upward and then around
him.

Holding his breath, the older man watched every movement, and his heart began to throb anxiously.
Ephraim meant to fly, and the first step toward escape had already succeeded!  Would that the
others might prosper too!  But he feared that the liberated youth might enter the wrong path.
He was the only son of his beloved sister, a fatherless and motherless lad, so he had never
enjoyed the uninterrupted succession of precepts and lessons which only a mother can give and
a defiant young spirit will accept from her alone.  The hands of strangers had bound the sapling
to a stake and it had shot straight upward, but a mother's love would have ennobled it with
carefully chosen grafts.  He had grown up beside another hearth than his parents', yet the
latter is the only true home for youth. What marvel if he felt himself a stranger among his people.

Amid such thoughts a great sense of compassion stole over Joshua and, with it, the consciousness
that he was deeply accountable for this youth who, for his sake, while on the way to bring
him a message, had fallen into such sore misfortune.  But much as he longed to warn him once
more against treason and perjury, he refrained, fearing to imperil his success.  Any noise
might attract the attention of the guards, and he took as keen an interest in the attempt at
liberation, as if Ephraim had made it at his suggestion.

So instead of annoying the youth with fruitless warnings, he kept watch for him; life had taught
him that good advice is more frequently unheeded than followed, and only personal experiences
possess resistless power of instruction.

The chief's practiced eye soon showed him the way by which Ephraim, if fortune favored him,
could escape.

He called softly, and directly after his nephew whispered:

"I'll loose your ropes, if you will hold up your hands to me.  Mine are free!"

Joshua's tense features brightened.

The defiant lad was a noble fellow, after all, and risked his own chance in behalf of one who,
if he escaped with him, threatened to bar the way in which, in youthful blindness, he hoped
to find happiness.

CHAPTER XIX.

Joshua gazed intently around him.  The sky was still bright, but if the north wind continued
to blow, the clouds which seemed to be rising from the sea must soon cover it.

The air had grown sultry, but the guards kept awake and regularly relieved one another.  It
was difficult to elude their attention; yet close by Ephraim's couch, which his uncle, for
greater comfort, had helped him make on the side of a gently sloping hill, a narrow ravine
ran down to the valley.  White veins of gypsum and glittering mica sparkled in the moonlight
along its bare edges.  If the agile youth could reach this cleft unseen, and crawl through
as far as the pool of saltwater, overgrown with tall grass and tangled desert shrubs, at which
it ended, he might, aided by the clouds, succeed.

After arriving at this conviction Joshua considered, as deliberately as if the matter concerned
directing one of his soldiers on his way, whether he himself, in case he regained the use of
his hands, could succeed in following Ephraim without endangering his project.  And he was
forced to answer this question in the negative; for the guard who sometimes sat, sometimes
paced to and fro on a higher part of the crest of the hill a few paces away, could but too
easily perceive, by the moonlight, the youth's efforts to loose the firmly-knotted bonds. 
The cloud approaching the moon might perhaps darken it, ere the work was completed.  Thus Ephraim
might, on his account, incur the peril of losing the one fortunate moment which promised escape.
Would it not be the basest of crimes, merely for the sake of the uncertain chance of flight,
to bar the path to liberty of the youth whose natural protector he was?  So he whispered to
Ephraim:

"I cannot go with you.  Creep through the chasm at your right to the salt-pool.  I will watch
the guards.  As soon as the cloud passes over the moon and I clear my throat, start off.  If
you escape, join our people.  Greet my old father, assure him of my love and fidelity, and
tell him where I am being taken.  Listen to his advice and Miriam's; theirs is the best counsel.
The cloud is approaching the moon,--not another word now!"

As Ephraim still continued to urge him in a whisper to hold up his pinioned arms, he ordered
him to keep silence and, as soon as the moon was obscured and the guard, who was pacing to
and fro above their heads began a conversation with the man who came to relieve him, Joshua
cleared his throat and, holding his breath, listened with a throbbing heart for some sound
in the direction of the chasm.

He first heard a faint scraping and, by the light of the fire which the guards kept on the
hill-top as a protection against wild beasts, he saw Ephraim's empty couch.

He uttered a sigh of relief; for the youth must have entered the ravine. But though he strained
his ears to follow the crawling or sliding of the fugitive he heard nothing save the footsteps
and voices of the warders.

Yet he caught only the sound, not the meaning of their words, so intently did he fix his powers
of hearing upon the course taken by the fugitive. How nimbly and cautiously the agile fellow
must move!  He was still in the chasm, yet meanwhile the moon struggled victoriously with the
clouds and suddenly her silver disk pierced the heavy black curtain that concealed her from
the gaze of men, and her light was reflected like a slender, glittering pillar from the motionless
pool of salt-water, enabling the watching Joshua to see what was passing below; but he perceived
nothing that resembled a human form.

Had the fugitive encountered any obstacle in the chasm?  Did some precipice or abyss hold him
in its gloomy depths?  Had--and at the thought he fancied that his heart had stopped beating--Had
some gulf swallowed the lad when he was groping his way through the night?

How he longed for some noise, even the faintest, from the ravine!  The silence was terrible.
But now!  Oh, would that it had continued!  Now the sound of falling stones and the crash of
earth sliding after echoed loudly through the still night air.  Again the moonlight burst through
the cloud-curtain, and Joshua perceived near the pool a living creature which resembled an
animal more than a human being, for it seemed to be crawling on four feet.  Now the water sent
up a shower of glittering spray.  The figure below had leaped into the pool.  Then the clouds
again swallowed the lamp of night, and darkness covered everything.

With a sigh of relief Joshua told himself that he had seen the flying Ephraim and that, come
what might, the escaping youth had gained a considerable start of his pursuers. 

The selection of design, the care in piecing, the patience in quilting; all make for feminine
contentment and domestic happiness.

There are more quilts being made at the present time--in the great cities as well as in the
rural communities--than ever before, and their construction as a household occupation--and recreation--is
steadily increasing in popularity.

This should be a source of much satisfaction to all patriotic Americans who believe that the
true source of our nation's strength lies in keeping the family hearth flame bright.

As known to-day, the quilt is the result of combining two kinds of
needlework, both of very ancient origin, but widely different in character.

Patchwork--the art of piecing together fabrics of various kinds and colours or laying patches
of one kind upon another, is a development of the primitive desire
for adornment.

Quilting--the method of fastening together layers of cloths in such a manner as to secure firmly
the loose materials uniformly spread between them, has resulted from
the need of adequate protection against rigorous climates.

The piecing and patching provide the maker with a suitable field for the display of artistic
ability, while the quilting calls for particular skill in handling the needle. The fusing
of these two kinds of needlework into a harmonious combination is a task that requires great
patience and calls for talent of no mean order.

To our grandmothers quilt making meant social pleasure as well as necessary toil, and to their
grandmothers it gave solace during long vigils in pioneer cabins. The work of the old-time quilters
possesses artistic merit to a very high degree. While much of it was designed strictly for utilitarian
purposes--in fact, more for rugged service than display, yet the number of beautiful old quilts
which these industrious ancestors have bequeathed to us is very large. Every now and then there
comes to light one of these old quilts of the most exquisite loveliness,
in which the needlework is almost painful in its exactness.

Such treasures are worthy of study and imitation, and are deserving of careful preservation for
the inspiration of future generations of quilters.
To raise in popular esteem these most worthy products of home industry,
to add to the appreciation of their history and traditions, to give
added interest to the hours of labour which their construction involves,
to present a few of the old masterpieces to the quilters of to-day;
such is the purpose of this book of quilts.

The kindly-natured man seemed completely transformed,--for he felt what had occurred as a disgrace
which could scarcely be overcome, nay, a positive misfortune.

The prisoner who had tried to deceive him by the shout of 'jackal!' was doubtless the fugitive's
accomplice.  Prince Siptah, too, who had interfered with the duties of his office, he loudly
cursed.  But nothing of the sort should happen again; and he would make the whole band feel
what had fallen to his lot through Ephraim.  Therefore he ordered the prisoners to be again
loaded with chains, the ex-chief fastened to a coughing old man, and all made to stand in rank
and file before the fire till morning dawned.

Joshua gave no answer to the questions his new companion-in-chains addressed to him; he was
waiting with an anxious heart for the return of the pursuers.  At times he strove to collect
his thoughts to pray, and commended to the God who had promised His aid, his own destiny and
that of the fugitive boy.  True, he was often rudely interrupted by the captain of the guards,
who vented his rage upon him.

Yet the man who had once commanded thousands of soldiers quietly submitted to everything, forcing
himself to accept it like the unavoidable discomfort of hail or rain; nay, it cost him an effort
to conceal his joyful emotion when, toward sunrise, the young warders sent in pursuit returned
with tangled hair, panting for breath, and bringing nothing save one of the dogs with a broken
skull.

The only thing left for the captain of the guards to do was to report what had occurred at
the first fortress on the Etham border, which the prisoners were obliged in any case to pass,
and toward this they were now driven.

Since Ephraim's flight a new and more cruel spirit had taken possession of the warders.  While
yesterday they had permitted the unfortunate men to move forward at an easy pace, they now
forced them to the utmost possible speed.  Besides, the atmosphere was sultry, and the scorching
sun struggled with the thunderclouds gathering in heavy masses at the north.

Joshua's frame, inured to fatigues of every kind, resisted the tortures of this hurried march;
but his weaker companion, who had grown grey in a scribe's duties, often gave way and at last
lay prostrate beside him.

The captain was obliged to have the hapless man placed on an ass and chain another prisoner
to Joshua.  He was his former yoke-mate's brother, an inspector of the king's stables, a stalwart
Egyptian, condemned to the mines solely on account of the unfortunate circumstance of being
the nearest blood relative of a state criminal.

It was easier to walk with this vigorous companion, and Joshua listened with deep sympathy
and tried to comfort him when, in a low voice, he made him the confidant of his yearning, and
lamented the heaviness of heart with which he had left wife and child in want and suffering.
Two sons had died of the pestilence, and it sorely oppressed his soul that he had been unable
to provide for their burial--now his darlings would be lost to him in the other world also
and forever.

At the second halt the troubled father became franker still.  An ardent thirst for vengeance
filled his soul, and he attributed the same feeling to his stern-eyed companion, whom he saw
had plunged into misfortune from a high station in life.  The ex-inspector of the stables had
a sister-in-law, who was one of Pharaoh's concubines, and through her and his wife, her sister,
he had learned that a conspiracy was brewing against the king in the House of the Separated.--[Harem].
He even knew whom the women desired to place in Menephtah's place.

As Joshua looked at him, half questioning, half doubting, his companion whispered.  "Siptah,
the king's nephew, and his noble mother, are at the head of the plot.  When I am once more
free, I will remember you, for my sister-in-law certainly will not forget me."  Then he asked
what was taking his companion to the mines, and Joshua frankly told his name. But when the
Egyptian learned that he was fettered to a Hebrew, he tore wildly at his chain and cursed his
fate.  His rage, however, soon subsided in the presence of the strange composure with which
his companion in misfortune bore the rudest insults, and Joshua was glad to have the other
beset him less frequently with complaints and questions.

He now walked on for hours undisturbed, free to yield to his longing to collect his thoughts,
analyze the new and lofty emotions which had ruled his soul during the past few days, and accommodate
himself to his novel and terrible position.

This quiet reflection and self-examination relieved him and, during the following night, he
was invigorated by a deep, refreshing sleep.

When he awoke the setting stars were still in the sky and reminded him of the sycamore in Succoth,
and the momentous morning when his lost love had won him for his God and his people.  The glittering
firmament arched over his head, and he had never so distinctly felt the presence of the Most
High.  He believed in His limitless power and, for the first time, felt a dawning hope that
the Mighty Lord who had created heaven and earth would find ways and means to save His chosen
people from the thousands of the Egyptian hosts.

After fervently imploring God to extend His protecting hand over the feeble bands who, obedient
to His command, had left so much behind them and marched so confidently through an unknown
and distant land, and commended to His special charge the aged father whom he himself could
not defend, a wonderful sense of peace filled his soul.

The shouts of the guards, the rattling of the chain, his wretched companions in misfortune,
nay, all that surrounded him, could not fail to recall the fate awaiting him.  He was to grow
grey in slavish toil within a close, hot pit, whose atmosphere choked the lungs, deprived of
the bliss of breathing the fresh air and beholding the sunlight; loaded with chains, beaten
and insulted, starving and thirsting, spending days and nights in a monotony destructive alike
to soul and body,--yet not for one moment did he lose the confident belief that this horrible
lot might befall any one rather than himself, and something must interpose to save him.

On the march farther eastward, which began with the first grey dawn of morning, he called this
resolute confidence folly, yet strove to retain it and succeeded.

The road led through the desert, and at the end of a few hours' rapid march they reached the
first fort, called the Fortress of Seti.  Long before, they had seen it through the clear desert
air, apparently within a bowshot.

Unrelieved by the green foliage of bush or palmtree, it rose from the bare, stony, sandy soil,
with its wooden palisades, its rampart, its escarped walls, and its lookout, with broad, flat
roof, swarming with armed warriors.  The latter had heard from Pithom that the Hebrews were
preparing to break through the chain of fortresses on the isthmus and had at first mistaken
the approaching band of prisoners for the vanguard of the wandering Israelites.

From the summits of the strong projections, which jutted like galleries from every direction
along the entire height of the escarped walls to prevent the planting of scaling-ladders, soldiers
looked through the embrasures at the advancing convicts; yet the archers had replaced their
arrows in the quivers, for the watchmen in the towers perceived how few were the numbers of
the approaching troop, and a messenger had already delivered to the commander of the garrison
an order from his superior authorizing him to permit the passage of the prisoners.

The gate of the palisade was now opened, and the captain of the guards allowed the prisoners
to lie down on the glowing pavement within.

No one could escape hence, even if the guards withdrew; for the high fence was almost insurmountable,
and from the battlements on the top of the jutting walls darts could easily reach a fugitive.

The ex-chief did not fail to note that everything was ready, as if in the midst of war, for
defence against a foe.  Every man was at his post, and beside the huge brazen disk on the tower
stood sentinels, each holding in his hand a heavy club to deal a blow at the approach of the
expected enemy; for though as far as the eye could reach, neither tree nor house was visible,
the sound of the metal plate would be heard at the next fortress in the Etham line, and warn
or summon its garrison.

To be stationed in the solitude of this wilderness was not a punishment, but a misfortune;
and the commander of the army therefore provided that the same troops should never remain long
in the desert.

Joshua himself, in former days, had been in command of the most southerly of these fortresses,
called the Migdol of the South; for each one of the fortifications bore the name of Migdol,
which in the Semitic tongue means the tower of a fortress.

His people were evidently expected here; and it was not to be supposed that Moses had led the
tribes back to Egypt.  So they must have remained in Succoth or have turned southward.  But
in that direction rolled the waters of the Bitter Lakes and the Red Sea, and how could the
Hebrew hosts pass through the deep waters?

Hosea's heart throbbed anxiously at this thought, and all his fears were to find speedy confirmation;
for he heard the commander of the fortress tell the captain of the prisoners' guards, that
the Hebrews had approached the line of fortifications several days before, but soon after,
without assaulting the garrison, had turned southward.  Since then they seemed to have been
wandering in the desert between Pithom and the Red Sea.

All this had been instantly reported at Tanis, but the king was forced to delay the departure
of the army for several days until the week of general mourning for the heir to the throne
had expired.  The fugitives might have turned this to account, but news had come by a carrier
dove that the blinded multitude had encamped at Pihahiroth, not far from the Red Sea.  So it
would be easy for the army to drive them into the water like a herd of cattle; there was no
escape for them in any other direction. 

He then consulted the brother of his master's wife, then a business man in Washington, whom he
had often befriended years before and who was angry with Henson's master because the latter
had defrauded him out of certain property. This friend, therefore, gladly took up with Henson's
master the question of giving the slave an opportunity to purchase himself. He carefully explained
to the master that Henson had some money and could purchase himself and that if, in consideration
of the valuable services he had rendered, the master refused to do so, Henson would become free by
escaping to Canada.

The master agreed then to give him his manumission papers for four hundred and fifty dollars, of
which three hundred and fifty dollars was to be in cash and the remainder
in Henson's note.

As he walked with the other to the gate, and the latter remarked that Hosea deserved such favor
less than the meanest of the band, because he had connived at the escape of the fugitive of
whom he had just spoken, the commander ran his hand through his hair, and answered:

"I would gladly have shown him some kindness, though he is much indebted to me; but if that
is the case, we will omit the wine; you have rested long enough at any rate."

The captain angrily gave the order for departure, and drove the hapless band deeper into the
desert toward the mines.

This time Joshua walked with drooping head.  Every fibre of his being rebelled against the
misfortune of being dragged through the wilderness at this decisive hour, far from his people
and the father whom he knew to be in such imminent danger.  Under his guidance the wanderers
might perchance have found some means of escape.  His fist clenched when he thought of the
fettered limbs which forbade him to utilize the plans his brain devised for the welfare of
his people; yet he would not lose courage, and whenever he said to himself that the Hebrews
were lost and must succumb in this struggle, he heard the new name God Himself had bestowed
upon him ring in his ears and at the same moment the flames of hate and vengeance on all Egyptians,
which had been fanned anew by the fortress commander's base conduct, blazed up still more brightly.
His whole nature was in the most violent tumult and as the captain noted his flushed cheeks
and the gloomy light in his eyes he thought that this strong man, too, had been seized by the
fever to which so many convicts fell victims on the march.

When, at the approach of darkness, the wretched band sought a night's rest in the midst of
the wilderness, a terrible conflict of emotions was seething in Joshua's soul, and the scene
around him fitly harmonized with his mood; for black clouds had again risen in the north from
the sea and, before the thunder and lightning burst forth and the rain poured in torrents,
howling, whistling winds swept masses of scorching sand upon the recumbent prisoners.

After these dense clouds had been their coverlet, pools and ponds were their beds.  The guards
had bound them together hand and foot and, dripping and shivering, held the ends of the ropes
in their hands; for the night was as black as the embers of their fire which the rain had extinguished,
and who could have pursued a fugitive through such darkness and tempest.

But Joshua had no thought of secret flight.  While the Egyptians were trembling and moaning,
when they fancied they heard the wrathful voice of Seth, and the blinding sheets of fire flamed
from the clouds, he only felt the approach of the angry God, whose fury he shared, whose hatred
was also his own.  He felt himself a witness of His all-destroying omnipotence, and his breast
swelled more proudly as he told himself that he was summoned to wield the sword in the service
of this Mightiest of the Mighty.

