So the less a Scout pokes at a deep wound, the better. He can wash it out with hot water, and
maybe can pick out particles of visible dirt or splinters with forceps which have been boiled
for ten minutes. Then he can bandage it loosely, and wait for Nature or a surgeon.

CHAPTER XVI

Note 55, page 186: The Elks by this time had lost their pack-saddles and panniers, which had
been cached with other stuff after the two burros were stolen by the renegades. They had lost
also their lash ropes with the cinchas; so that it was necessary to throw some pack-hitch that
did not require a cincha and hook. One of the easiest of such hitches is the squaw-hitch. The
tarps were spread out and the camp stuff was folded in so that the result was a large, soft
pad, with nothing to hurt Apache's back. Then the hitch was thrown with one of the ropes, as
follows:

Figure I is a double bight, which is laid over the top of the pack, so that the two loops hang,
well down, half on each side. "X"-"Y" is the animal's back. Take the end of the rope, "c,"
and pass it under the animal's belly, and through loop "a" on the other side; pass rope end
"d" under and through loop "b," the same way. Next bring them back to the first side again,
and through the middle place "e," as shown by dotted lines of Figure II. Keep all the ropes
well separated, where they bite into the pack and into the animal's stomach, and draw taut,
and fasten with a hitch at "e." The result will look like Figure III.

The diamond hitch can be tied by using a loop instead of the cincha hook.

Note 56, page 193: Pack animals and saddle-horses do much better on the trail if they can be
permitted to graze free, or only hobbled. They like to forage about for themselves, and usually
will eat more and better grass than when tied by a picket rope. During the first three or four
days out, horse or mule is apt to wander back to the home pasture. Hobbles can be bought or
made. When bought, they are broad, flexible strips of leather about eighteen inches long, with
cuffs which buckle around each fore leg above the hoof. Hobbles can be made on the spot by
twisting soft rope from fore leg to fore leg and tying the ends by lapping in the middle.

It is safer to picket a horse by a rope upon the neck rather than upon the leg. He is not so
apt to injure himself by pulling or running. A picket rope is forty feet long. To loop it securely
about the neck, measure with the end about the neck, and at the proper place along the rope
tie a single knot; knot the end of the rope, and passing it about the neck thrust the knotted
end through the single knot. Here is a loop that cannot slip and choke the horse, and can easily
be untied.

Sometimes the loose end of the picket rope may be fastened to a tree, or to a bush. A horse
should be picketed out from trees, or in the center of an open space, so that he cannot wind
the rope about a tree and hold himself too short to graze. Sometimes the free end is fastened
to a stake or picket-pin driven into the ground. But if there is no pin, and no tree or bush
is handy, then a "dead-man" may be used. This is an old scout scheme. The rope is tied to a
stick eighteen inches long, or to a bunch of sticks, or to a bunch of brush, or to a stone;
and this buried a foot and a half or two feet, and the earth or sand tamped upon it. Thus it
is wedged fast against any ordinary pull. By this scheme a horse may be picketed out on the
bare desert.

When an animal is allowed to graze free, a good plan is to have a loose rope twenty or thirty
feet in length trail from his neck as he grazes. This is another scout scheme, used by Indians,
trappers, and cowboys. When the animal declines to be bridled or grasped by the mane, the trailing
rope usually can be caught up. Indians and trappers when riding depended much upon this trailing
rope, so that when thrown they could grab it instantly, and mount again.

CHAPTER XVII

Note 57, page 206: Flowers as well as animals have their place and their rights; and they as
well as the animals help to make the great out-of-doors different from the in-doors. A Scout
never destroys anything uselessly or "for fun."

Note 58, page 211: Scouts should learn how to repair dislocations of the jaw, the finger, and
the shoulder, as these are the least difficult and the most frequent. A dislocation can be
told from a fracture of the bone by a twisting of the hand or the foot, and by a shortening
or a lengthening of the arm or leg, according to whether the head of the bone has slipped up
from the socket, or down. And there is neither feeling nor sound of the broken bones grating
against each other. But never go ahead blindly.

A Scout who dislocates his own hip, far from help, should try lashing his leg to a tree, and
on his back, clasping another tree, should pull himself forward with all his strength. But
a dislocation of the knee is much more delicate to manage, and with that or a dislocated elbow
the Scout can contrive to get to a surgeon.

Note 59, page 214: Yes, Scouts can always manage. The quickest way to make a blanket stretcher
is to double the blanket, tie each pair of corners with a non-slipping knot, and pass a pole
through the fold on one edge and through the knotted corners of the other. The quickest way
to make a coat stretcher is to take two coats, turn the sleeves of one or of both inside, lay
the coats inside up, or sleeves up, with the tails touching at the edges. Thrust a pole through
each line of sleeves, and button each coat over the poles.

Three or four belts or other straps such as camera straps slung between poles form an emergency
litter or seat; and a man who can sit up can be carried in a chair made by a pole or rifle
thrust through the sleeves of a coat, and the coat-tail tied fast to another pole or rifle.

When an injured person is too sore to be moved from blanket to litter, an old scout method
is this: Three cross-pieces or short poles are lashed to connect the two long poles or side
poles. One short piece forms each end and one crosses the middle, thus:

This frame is lowered over the patient, and the blanket that he is on is fastened to its edges.
Then when the litter is ready, he is in it already! The middle cross-piece is handy for him
to grasp, for steadying himself.

Small stones rolled in the corners of blankets make a purchase for the wrappings, and the knots
will not slip.

Scouts may make chairs by clasping hands; but an easy way is to have the patient sit upon a
short board or short pole resting in the hollow of the bearers' arms.

In smooth country, and when the sick or wounded person is not too badly off, the Indian and
trapper "travois" or horse litter may be employed. Two elastic poles about fifteen feet long
are united by cross-pieces, ladder style; and with two ends slung one upon either side of the
horse, and the other two ends dragging, are trailed along behind the horse. The poles should
be springy, so as to lessen the jar from rough places.

If there is another steady horse, the rear ends of the litter can be slung upon it, instead
of resting on the ground. This is another old scout and Indian method.

CHAPTER XVIII

