With his private life was connected a sad little secret. He had been a young man in his day,
and the charms of the weaker sex had not fallen vainly on his susceptible soul, oh dear no!
Henry Rayne had loved once, earnestly and well, and had offered his proud name and comfortable
fortune to the object of his devotion, but though he, to day, was the same hale hearty Henry
Rayne of the past, the young bud he had cherished so fondly, lay withered in the churchyard
far away in old England. Death had come between them, and in the grief that followed, Rayne
outlived his susceptibilities, preferring to dwell fondly on the memory of the old tie, than
to reopen his heart to any new appeal. But a day came when Henry Rayne had to incline his ear
again to the winning voice of a woman, when his forced indifference had to give place to the
old warmth and the old enthusiasm, when the withering heart revived and bloomed afresh under
the tender influence of a woman's smile, a woman's care and a woman's sympathy. Of the causes
of this happy revival we will have to deal in the course of our narrative. Let us return to
the scene by the fireside where Henry Rayne sits opening his letters.

Three or four dry-as-dust laconic productions, of no earthly interest to anyone but the unromantic
writers, one formal note soliciting a generous subscription to an hospital fund, two postal
cards, one begging his patronage towards the tailoring department of an up-town dry goods store,
and the other notifying him of a meeting of prominent citizens to be held in the City Hall,
a couple of newspapers and legal documents, and there remained still two letters, less formidable
looking, less business-like than the rest.

As he tore open one of these he chuckled a low laugh to himself, saying--

"It's Guy, the rascal, I suppose he has just been dunned for some little account that requires
immediate payment, it must be some mercenary cloud that hangs over him." He was right, it was
only another of these little periodicals that Guy Elersley was accustomed to "drop" his uncle,
mainly to ask after his health and welfare, generally sliding in a P. S. which explained the
last difficulty in his balance account with the tailor or boarding-house keeper; but Mr. Rayne
made no objection, he never tired of indulging this handsome nephew of his, for besides being
of an upright and affectionate disposition, his uncle loved him as the only child of a favorite
deceased sister, since whose death, which happened when Guy was a mere child, Henry Rayne had
been at once a kind, indulgent uncle and a just solicitous father to the boy.

But this particular letter which Mr. Rayne now glanced over, had another object besides the
post-script and the uncle's health.

"I write so soon after my last," he says, "to tell you that I met a gentleman in the Windsor
House the other night who interested me for a full hour in an account of an old friend of yours,
this fellow's name is Orbury, it appears he was in Europe some years ago and was one of a company
of card players one evening in a hotel at Dublin, when, out of a conversation of miscellaneous
details, came a very jeering remark, made by some one present, relative to some rascally act
under discussion. 'It is worthy' said the speaker 'of a man named Rayne, whom I blush to own
was once a school-fellow of mine.'--But the words were scarcely uttered when some one beside
the speaker brought the back of a sinewy hand a little forcibly across his face, telling him
at the same time to measure the words he dealt out on an honorable man's name. Of course a
scene ensued, everybody present was of respectable standing and the thing assumed a serious
look. Not to interrupt the game, the two antagonists left the room to settle their difference
elsewhere, and everyone wondered who the ardent defender of the man 'Rayne' could be.

"After a while the interesting unknown returned holding his handkerchief to a wound in his
temple which bled profusely, and having apologized to those present for the interruption he
had caused, he proceeded to inform them that Henry Rayne stood in such a relation with him,
as justified him in silencing any man who took his name in jest; the little wound he had just
received, he thought was well earned, when he knew he had the satisfaction of horse-whipping
the meanest man in creation, 'for any other offence, gentlemen' said the stranger 'I could
not lay hands on him, for "he that toucheth pitch shall be defiled" but to pronounce my friend's
name in a slanderous lie, I could not endure. Perhaps,' he continued, 'it is like kicking a
man when he's down, to tell you now, gentlemen, that the fellow who had just maligned an honest
man was once thrashed within an inch of his life by this same Henry Rayne at college, for a
cowardly, disrespectful deed of his towards some lady friends of ours. The hatred born of the
moment that he lay in the dust of the college yard, with the finger of scorn raised at him
from every hand, has never flickered in its steadiness. As you see, he thought to gratify himself
somewhat by abusing this gentleman when he saw no friend of the absent one near, but he will
likely look the next time before he speaks, and now,' said he, taking his hat, 'once more I
apologize and express my regret at having been forced to disturb you, but I feel that you will
easily forgive me under the circumstances,' and dear uncle, what do you think, but every man
there shook him by the hand and stroked him on the shoulder, speaking his praises loudly and
all they knew of the chivalrous stranger was that he was a transient guest at the house, who
was passing through Dublin on his way farther south, and that his name was 'Edgeworth.' So
is this not an exciting piece of news, dear uncle; think while you are living placidly in America,
your wrongs are being enthusiastically righted in the old world."

Henry Rayne laid down the letter and looked steadily into the fire. What a torrent memory had
let loose upon him! he lived the old years all over again, he saw the dear familiar scenes
buried in the half-burned coals, the smiling associations of the past. "Poor Bob" he said,
"and I have never seen him once in all these years, to think he should have stood by me now
as he did that day at college when I punished that rascal Tremaine. How I wish I could find
him out! good honest friend that he is, can I ever repay him, I wonder, for this noble action
done me?" Here Rayne lost himself in a long reverie, he went over the days of his boyhood again,
and as he thought, a smile half sad stole over his face, and in the end a tear was actually
glistening in each eye. It was the old old story over again, memory weeping over dead joys,
experience sighing for the happy long ago. The same influence was upon him now as guided the
pen of Blair when it wrote "How painful the remembrance of joys departed never to return,"
and as inspired Byron when he sighed "Ah, happy years! once more who would not be a boy?"

We may wonder how long Henry Rayne would have sat motionless in his chair by the fireside,
with his inclined head resting on his hand, while he brooded over the years of his life and
clasped anew in their old warmth, hands that had long grown cold, either in the gloominess
of death, or for need of the responsive touch, from those that were extended to them in far-off
climes; but as the clock struck eleven Fitts appeared in the doorway, breaking the spell by
asking his master if he "need replenish the grate before retiring?" "Yes--No," replied Mr.
Rayne, "you may go Fitts, I want nothing else to-night."

Drawing a long sigh, he gathered up the scattered letters and was about to consign them to
the flames but in turning to do so, he knocked his arm violently against the back of his chair,
dropping them all again at his feet. Stooping to gather them, he noticed for the first time
the heavy letter with the foreign post-marks and large legible hand-writing which, had it not
been for this timely accident, would have been thrust unconsciously into the fire, thus forcing
our narrative to close here, but instead he raised it hurriedly, throwing the rest back on
the floor, and scrutinized it with a searching, confused look, but the more he saw it the more
it puzzled him, he was evidently in the dark: finally he tore it open and readjusting his gold
spectacles, straightened out its creases and began to read.

It was a very long time afterwards, when the paper dropped from the cold, trembling hands of
Henry Rayne; a sort of stupor had been creeping slowly over him while he read; now he had finished
the last word but he did not move, the coals had fallen to ashes, the wind had risen and howled
around the house, the room had grown chilly and damp, the rain lashed in huge drops against
the panes, but Henry Rayne saw not, felt not, heeded not, he was far far away by the side of
an esteemed friend, he was swearing a vow of eternal friendship, and was accepting gladly,
gratefully from his hands a precious charge, a weighty responsibility-- how could he hesitate?
he was pouring out all the consolation and sympathy of his ardent soul to the man he had loved
as a boy, and he never felt the chill that was stiffening all his joints, he never heeded the
ceaseless patter of the dreary rain. The clock had stopped and the fire had gone out, and still
he sat crouched in his chair, with the strange letter lying listlessly between his fingers.

What a queer phase of life was dawning upon him! what a strange mission was coming to him from
over the seas! what freak had destiny taken to send him his nephew's letter with its interesting
detail, and this other one, on the same night! Guy's letter brought back an old friend in the
freshness and vigor of his youth, with hand uplifted to defend him, this other one revealed
the same dear friend, but worn and wasted from premature age, with the daring hand laid quietly
on his breast, sleeping the last long sleep--yes; this puzzling letter had been traced by the
feeble hand of Robert Edgeworth and had been forwarded to Henry Rayne at his death. It contained
an anxious, serious request. It asked of Henry Rayne to open his heart and home, to the only
child of an old friend, to father an orphan girl for the sake of "old times," and the happy
"long ago." It would not have meant much for some others, but it seemed the greatest of all
responsibilities to Henry Rayne, who had become an utter stranger to the female sex, and who
had settled down in an old bachelor's home for the rest of his life. He tried to think it all
out, but the fragile form of a young, beautiful girl, glided between him and his thought, and
he saw upon her face the sweet, sad smile, of a parentless child pleading for protection. He
was lost--he was dreaming; he never stirred for hours, until the dawn streaked in between the
drawn curtains, giving the room an unnatural look, with its glare of gas-light and the straggling
rays of the misty morning's sun crossing one another, until "Potts" stole down with her slippers
under her arm, and in her bewilderment at the sight of the gas-light, put her head in at the door.

When she saw her master's firm, set face and vacant eyes, and the letters laying around the
floor, her heart gave a bound, and she screamed outright.

Henry Rayne raised his head, rubbed his eyes, and tried to stretch his limbs, now numb with
the damp dullness of the night. Potts had run to him and was asking the "matter," with dilated
eyes and anxious voice.

