[Footnote 44: Bourne; Drake's "Shakespeare," vol. 1, p. 153.]

[Footnote 45: Stubbes, "Anatomie of Abuses," p. 168.]

[Footnote 46: Douce, "Illustrations of Shakespeare."]

[Footnote 47: Stubbes; Drake's "Shakespeare," vol. 1, ch. vi.]

[Footnote 48: Laevinius Lemnius; Drake, vol. 2, p. 113.]

[Footnote 49: Nichol's "Progresses of Elizabeth," vol. 2, p. 391.]

[Footnote 50: Harrison: Drake's "Shakespeare and his Times," vol. 2, p. 87.]

[Footnote 51: Harrison's "Description of England"; Holinshed, vol. I, pp. 289-90; Drake's "Shakespeare
and his Times" vol. 2, pp. 88, 89.]

[Footnote 52: "Nugæ Antique", Drake's "Shakespeare and his Times," vol. 2, p. 90.]

[Footnote 53: "The Gull's Horn Book"; Drake's "Shakespeare and his Times", vol. 2, p. 184.]

[Footnote 54: Lodge's "Illustrations."]

[Footnote 55: Idem.]

[Footnote 56: Green, "Short History of the English People," p. 429.]

II.

It is to the drama that we must look for the most complete literary expression of the social
condition of the period. "You shall see. Go and stand at the crossing of the roads, turn round and
round as the children do, and do not stop until I bid you."

Brother Masseo began to turn; seized with a vertigo, he was nearly
falling, but caught himself up at once. But though there be regret, there cannot be surprise. The reigns of Elizabeth and
the Stuarts cover the period of court life; when men lived in public, and sought their intellectual
entertainment in crowds at a theatre, as now, in a time of citizen-life, they seek it in private,
by the study-lamp.[57] In a dramatic age the creations of the imagination will be placed behind
the footlights, and in a period of quiet and reflection they will be placed between the covers
of a book. In the age of Elizabeth the writers of fiction neither studied the characters and
manners of the men about them, nor aimed at any reflection of actual life. For new arguments
he had only one resource--prayer.

He felt his prayer answered when in his conversation with Jesus the parable of poverty came to
him; he returned to lay it before the pope.
There was in the desert a woman who was very poor, but beautiful.
A great king, seeing her beauty, desired to take her for his wife,
for he thought that by her he should have beautiful children. The
marriage contracted and consummated, many sons were born to him. The writer cared more to
excite admiration by the turn of his phrases and the ornaments of his language, than to interest
his reader by plot or incident.

In 1579 John Lyly published his curious romance, "Euphues, the Anatomy of Wit," a work which
attained a great popularity, and made the word Euphuism an abstract term in the language to
express the ornate and antithetical style of which this book is the most marked example. In
Lyly's own day it was said by Edward Blount that the nation was "in his debt for a new English
which hee taught them." Since then, the verdict of posterity has been that Lyly corrupted the
public taste, and introduced an affected and overloaded manner of writing which had a mischievous
influence upon literature. A careful examination of Lyly's work, and of the condition of the
English language in the last quarter of the sixteenth century, will not sustain either of these
views. The Euphuistic style was not of Lyly's invention. He acquired it from the men about
him, and merely gave it, through his writings, a distinct character and individuality. In a
letter of Elizabeth to her brother Edward VI, long-before "Euphues" was written, occurs the
following passage: "Like as a shipman in stormy wether plukes down the sails tarrying for bettar
winde, so did I, most noble kinge, in my unfortunate chanche a Thursday pluk downe the hie
sailes of my joy and comforte, and do trust one day that as troublesome waves have repulsed
me backwarde, so a gentil winde will bringe me forwarde to my haven."[58] This is a moderate
specimen of the ornate and exaggerated language which was following the new acquisitions of
learning and intelligence, just as extravagance in dress and food was following the new prosperity
and wealth. Men wished to crowd their learning and cultivation into every thing they said or
wrote. As the language was not yet settled by good prose writers, the more affected a style,
the more numerous its similes, and far-fetched its allusions, the more ingenious and admirable
it was considered to be. There resulted a sacrifice of clearness and simplicity to a strained
elegance. Still, in the Euphuistic style, tedious and grotesque as it often is, appear the
first serious efforts, among English prose writers, to attain a better mode of expression.
The results which followed the absence of a standard written language at home were strengthened
by the general acquaintance with foreign literature. Italy in the sixteenth century was the
leading intellectual nation, and the example of the refined and over-polished manner of writing
there prevalent had much to do with the growth in England of a fondness for affected mannerisms
and fancied ornaments of language. The new ideas in regard to poetry and versification which
Wyat and Surrey had brought from Italy, were but the beginning of an extensive Italian influence. J.R.
Fox.
St. Leger's Life of Archbishop Walsh.--In Doctor Oliver's History
of the Jesuits, it is stated that William St. Leger, an Irish member
of that Society, wrote the Life of Thomas Walsh, Archbishop of Cashel,
in Ireland, published in 4to. at Antwerp in 1655. Italian works were translated and circulated
in great numbers in England, and among these the most popular were the gay and amorous productions
of the story tellers.[59]

Born in Kent in 1554, John Lyly studied at Magdalen College, Oxford, and received the degree
of Master of Arts. Not a very diligent scholar, he disliked the "crabbed studies" of logic
and philosophy, "his genie being naturally bent to the pleasant paths of poetry," but he was
reputed at the University as afterward at Elizabeth's court, "a rare poet, witty, comical,
and facetious." During his life in London he produced a number of plays and poems which have
given his name a not inconsiderable place in the list of Elizabethan poets and dramatists.
He is now best known, where known at all, by his prose work "Euphues," which was so much admired
at Elizabeth's court, that all the ladies knew his phrases by heart, and to "parley Euphuism"
was a sign of breeding. For many years Lyly lingered about the court waiting for a promised
position to reward his labors and support his declining years. But in vain. "A thousand hopes,"
he complained, "but all nothing; a hundred promises, but yet nothing." Then Mass was begun at that same
altar where, three years before, Francis had heard the decisive call of Jesus; he was kneeling
in the same place, but surrounded now with a whole spiritual family.

It
is easy to imagine Clara's emotion.

The deeper meaning of Lyly's work, which lies beneath the surface of his similes and antitheses,
has escaped almost all his critics.[60] It is suggested by the title, "Euphues, The Anatomy
of Wit." In the "Schoolmaster," Ascham explained how Socrates had described the anatomy of
wit in a child, and the first essential quality mentioned by Socrates, and that most fully
discussed by Ascham was Euphuês which may be translated of good natural parts, as well of the
body as the mind. Euphues, then, as well in the story in which he figures, as afterward in
the essays or which he is the supposed author, is the model of a young man at once attractive
in appearance, and possessing the mental qualities most calculated to please. While the story
is meant to attract readers, the essays and digressions introduced into the work are intended
to inculcate the methods of education which Lyly taught in common with Ascham. It was, however,
the manner rather than the matter which gave to "Euphues" its prominence and popularity. The
story is but a slender thread. Euphues and Philautus are two young gentlemen of Naples, bound
together by the closest ties of friendship. Philautus is deeply enamored of a lady named Lucilla,
to whom in an unfortunate moment he presents Euphues. The meeting is at supper, and the conversation
turns on the question "often disputed, but never determined, whether the qualities of the minde,
or the composition of the man, cause women most to lyke, or whether beautie or wit move men
most to love." Euphues shows so much ingenuity in the discussion of this interesting subject
that Lucilla transfers her affections to him. Upon this the two friends quarrel and exchange
letters of mutual recrimination couched in the most elaborate language. Philautus writes:

    Although hereto Euphues, I have shrined thee in my heart for
    a trustie friende, I will shunne thee hereafter as a trothless
    foe. * * * Dost thou not know yat a perfect friend should be lyke
    the Glazeworme, which shineth most bright in the darke? or lyke the
    pure Frankencense which smelleth most sweet when it is in the fire?
    or at the leaste not unlike to the damaske Rose which is sweeter in
    the still than on the stalke? But thou, Euphues, dost rather
    resemble the Swallow, which in the summer creepeth under the eues
    of euery house, and in the winter leaveth nothing but durt behinde
    hir; or the humble Bee, which hauing sucked hunny out of the fayre
    flower, doth leaue it and loath it; or the Spider which in the
    finest web doth hang the fayrest Fly.

To these bitter reproaches Euphues replies that "Love knoweth no Lawes," and in support of
the proposition cites as many cases from mythology as he can remember. When called upon to appear
before the episcopal tribunal[16] Francis experienced a lively joy; his mystical espousals
to the Crucified One were now to receive a sort of official consecration. To this Jesus, whom
he had so often blasphemed and betrayed by word and conduct, he would now be able with equal publicity
to promise obedience and fidelity.

It is easy to imagine the sensation which all this caused in a small
town like Assisi, and the crowd that on the appointed day pressed
toward the Piazza of Santa Maria Maggiore, where the bishop pronounced
sentence.[17] Every one held Francis to be assuredly mad, but they
anticipated with relish the shame and rage of Bernardone, whom every
one detested, and whose pride was so well punished by all this.

 Cruelty seems to have been a common characteristic
of the school-teacher. "I knew one," said Peacham, "who in winter would ordinarily in a cold
morning whip his boyes over for no other purpose than to get himself a heat; another beat them
for swearing, and all the time he swears himself with horrible oathes that he would forgive
any fault save that. * * * Yet these are they that oftentimes have our hopefull gentry under
their charge and tuition, to bring them (up) in science and civility."[61]

The style which proved so attractive to Elizabeth's courtiers had three principal characteristics,
which the reader will perceive in the extracts hereafter to be given--a pedantic exhibition
of learning, an excess of similes drawn from natural history, usually untrue to nature, and
a habit of antithesis, which, by constant repetition becomes exceedingly wearisome. Euphues,
wishing to convince his listeners of the inferiority of outward to inward perfection, pursues
the following argument:

