To make this complete organization of a library successful, one must have an organising mind,
a wide acquaintance with literature, history, and the outlines, at least, of all the sciences;
a knowledge of the ancient and of various modern languages; a quick intuition, a ripe judgment,
a cultivated taste, a retentive memory, and a patience and perseverance that are inexhaustible.

Even were all these qualities possessed, there will be in the arrangement elements of discord
and of a failure. A multitude of uncertain points in classification, and many exceptions will
arise; and these must of necessity be settled arbitrarily. The more conversant one becomes
with systems of classification, when reduced to practice, the more he becomes assured that
a perfect bibliographical system is impossible.

Every system of classification must find its application fraught with doubts, complications,
and difficulties; but the wise bibliographer will not pause in his work to resolve all these
insoluble problems; he will classify the book in hand according to his best judgment at the
moment it comes before him. He can no more afford to spend time over intricate questions of
the preponderance of this, that, or the other subject in a book, than a man about to walk to
a certain place can afford to debate whether he shall put his right foot forward or his left.
The one thing needful is to go forward.

Referring to the chapter on bibliography for other details, I may here say that the French
claim to have reached a highly practical system of classification in that set forth in J. C.
Brunet's Manuel du Libraire. This is now generally used in the arrangement of collections of
books in France, with some modifications, and the book trade find it so well adapted to their
wants, that classified sale and auction catalogues are mostly arranged on that system. It has
only five grand divisions: Theology, Law, Arts and Sciences, Belles-lettres, and History. Each
of these classes has numerous sub-divisions. For example, geography and voyages and travels
form a division of history, between the philosophy of history and chronology, etc.

The classification in use in the Bibliothèque nationale of France places Theology first, followed
by Law, History, Philosophy and Belles-lettres. The grand division of Philosophy includes all
which is classified under Arts and Sciences in the system of Brunet.

In the Library of the British Museum the classification starts with Theology, followed by 2.
Jurisprudence; 3. Natural History (including Botany, Geology, Zoölogy, and Medicine); 4. Art
(including Archaeology, Fine Arts, Architecture, Music, and Useful Arts); 5. Philosophy (including
Politics, Economics, Sociology, Education, Ethics, Metaphysics, Mathematics, Military and Naval
Science, and Chemistry); 6. History (including Heraldry and Genealogy); 7. Geography (including
Ethnology); 8. Biography (including Epistles); 9. Belles-lettres (including Poetry, Drama,
Rhetoric, Criticism, Bibliography, Collected Works, Encyclopaedias, Speeches, Proverbs, Anecdotes,
Satirical and facetious works, Essays, Folklore and Fiction); 10. Philology.

Sub-divisions by countries are introduced in nearly all the classes.

In the Library of Congress the classification was originally based upon Lord Bacon's scheme
for the division of knowledge into three great classes, according to the faculty of the mind
employed in each. 1. History (based upon memory); 2. Philosophy (based upon reason); 3. Poetry
(based upon imagination). This scheme was much better adapted to a classification of ideas
than of books. Its failure to answer the ends of a practical classification of the library
led to radical modifications of the plan, as applied to the books on the shelves, for reasons
of logical arrangement, as well as of convenience. A more thorough and systematic re-arrangement
is now in progress.

Mr. C. A. Cutter has devised a system of "Expansive classification," now widely used in American
libraries. In this, the classes are each indicated by a single letter, followed by numbers
representing divisions by countries, and these in turn by letters indicating sub-divisions
by subjects, etc. It is claimed that this method is not a rigid unchangeable system, but adaptable
in a high degree, and capable of modification to suit the special wants of any library. In
it the whole range of literature and science is divided into several grand classes, which,
with their sub-classes, are indicated by the twenty-six letters of the alphabet. Thus Class
A embraces Generalia; B to D, Spiritual sciences (including philosophy and religion); E to
G, Historical sciences (including, besides history and biography, geography and travels); H
to K, Social sciences (including law and political science and economics); L to P, Natural
sciences; Q, Medicine; and R to Z, Arts (including not only mechanical, recreative and fine
arts, but music, languages, literature, and bibliography).

The sub-divisions of these principal classes are arranged with progressive fullness, to suit
smaller or larger libraries. Thus, the first classification provides only eleven classes, suited
to very small libraries: the second is expanded to fifteen classes, the third to thirty classes,
and so on up to the seventh or final one, designed to provide for the arrangement of the very
largest libraries.

This is the most elaborate and far-reaching library classification yet put forth, claiming
superior clearness, flexibility, brevity of notation, logical coördination, etc., while objections
have been freely made to it on the score of over-refinement and aiming at the unattainable.

What is known as the decimal or the Dewey system of classification was originally suggested
by Mr. N. B. Shurtleff's "Decimal system for the arrangement and administration of libraries,"
published at Boston in 1856. But in its present form it has been developed by Mr. Melvil Dewey
into a most ingenious scheme for distributing the whole vast range of human knowledge into
ten classes, marked from 0 to 9, each of which sub-divides into exactly ten sub-classes, all
divisible in their turn into ten minor divisions, and so on until the material in hand, or
the ingenuity of the classifier is exhausted. The notation of the books on the shelves corresponds
to these divisions and sub-divisions. The claims of this system, which has been quite extensively
followed in the smaller American libraries, and in many European ones, are economy, simplicity,
brevity of notation, expansibility, unchanging call-numbers, etc. It has been criticised as
too mechanical, as illogical in arrangement of classes, as presenting many incongruities in
its divisions, as procrustean, as wholly inadequate in its classification of jurisprudence,
etc. It is partially used by librarians who have had to introduce radical changes in portions
of the classification, and in fact it is understood that the classification has been very largely
made over both in Amherst College library and in that of Columbia University, N. Y., where
it was fully established.

This only adds to the cumulative proofs that library classification cannot be made an exact
science, but is in its nature indefinitely progressive and improvable. Its main object is not
to classify knowledge, but books. There being multitudes of books that do not belong absolutely
to any one class, all classification of them is necessarily a compromise. Nearly all the classification
schemers have made over their schemes--some of them many times. I am not arguing against classification,
which is essential to the practical utility of any library. An imperfect classification is
much better than none: but the tendency to erect classification into a fetish, and to lay down
cast-iron rules for it, should be guarded against. In any library, reasons of convenience must
often prevail over logical arrangement; and he who spends time due to prompt library service
in worrying over errors in a catalogue, or vexing his soul at a faulty classification, is as
mistaken as those fussy individuals who fancy that they are personally responsible for the
obliquity of the earth's axis.

It may be added that in the American Library Association's Catalogue of 5,000 books for a popular
library, Washington, 1893, the classification is given both on the Dewey (Decimal) system,
and on the Cutter expansive system, so that all may take their choice.

The fixed location system of arrangement, by which every book is assigned by its number to
one definite shelf, is objectionable as preventing accessions from being placed with their
cognate books. This is of such cardinal importance in every library, that a more elastic system
of some kind should be adopted, to save continual re-numbering. No system which makes mere
arithmetical progression a substitute for intrinsic qualities can long prove satisfactory.

The relative or movable location on shelves is now more generally adopted than the old plan
of numbering every shelf and assigning a fixed location to every volume on that shelf. The
book-marks, if designating simply the relative order of the volumes, permit the books to be
moved along, as accessions come in, from shelf to shelf, as the latter become crowded. This
does not derange the numbers, since the order of succession is observed.

For small town libraries no elaborate system of classification can properly be attempted. Here,
the most convenient grouping is apt to prove the best, because books are most readily found
by it. Mr. W. I. Fletcher has outlined a scheme for libraries of 10,000 volumes or less, as
follows:

A. Fiction (appended, J. Juvenile books); B. English and American literature; C. History; D.
Biography; E. Travels; F. Science; G. Useful arts; H. Fine and recreative arts; I. Political
and social science; K. Philosophy and religion; L. Works on language and in foreign languages;
R. Reference books.

Numerous sub-divisions would be required to make such a scheme (or indeed any other) fit any
collection of books.

In arranging the main classes, care should be taken to bring those most drawn upon near to
the delivery desk, or charging system of the library.

The alphabet is usefully applied in the arrangement of several of the great classes of books,
and in many sub-divisions of other classes. Thus, all English and American fiction may be arranged
in a single alphabet of authors, including English translations of foreign works. All collected
works, or polygraphy, may form an alphabet, as well as poetry, dramatic works, collections
of letters, and miscellanea, arranged by authors' names. In any of these classes, sub-divisions
by languages may be made, if desired.

The class biography may best be arranged in an alphabet of the subjects of the biographies,
rather than of writers, for obvious reasons of convenience in finding at once the books about
each person.

CHAPTER 22.

CATALOGUES.

Catalogues of libraries are useful to readers in direct proportion to their fulfilment of three
conditions: (1) Quick and ready reference. (2) Arranging all authors' names in an alphabet,
followed by titles of their works. (3) Subjects or titles in their alphabetical order in the
same alphabet as the authors. This is what is known as a "Dictionary catalogue"; but why is
it preferable to any other? Because it answers more questions in less time than any other.

The more prevalent styles of catalogues have been, 1. A list of authors, with titles of their
works under each. 2. A catalogue of subjects, in a classified topical or alphabetical order,
the authors and their works being grouped under each head. 3. A catalogue attempting to combine
these two, by appending to the author-catalogue a classed list of subjects, with a brief of
authors under each, referring to the page on which the titles of their works may be found;
or else, 4. Appending to the subject-catalogue an alphabet of authors, with similar references
to pages under subjects.

Each of these methods of catalogue-making, while very useful, contrives to miss the highest
utility, which lies in enabling the reader to put his finger on the book he wants, at one glance
of the eye. The catalogue of authors will not help him to subjects, nor will the catalogue
of subjects, as a rule, give the authors and titles with the fullness that may be needed. In
either case, a double reference becomes necessary, consuming just twice the time, and in a
two-column catalogue, three times the time required in a dictionary catalogue.

The reader who wants Darwin's "Origin of Species" finds it readily enough by the author-catalogue;
but he wants, at the same time, to find other works on the same subject, and all the author-catalogues
in the world will not help him to them. But give him a dictionary catalogue, and he has, in
the same alphabet with his Darwin, (if the library is large) dozens of books discussing the
theory of that great naturalist, under species, evolution, Darwinism, etc.

Thus he finds that there is no key which so quickly unlocks the stores of knowledge which a
library contains, as a dictionary catalogue.

The objections to it are chiefly brought by minds schooled in systems, who look askance on
all innovations, and instinctively prefer round-about methods to short-hand ones.

Ask such an objector if he would prefer his dictionary of the English language arranged, not
alphabetically, but subjectively, so that all medical terms should be defined only under medicine,
all species of fish described only under fishes, etc., and he will probably say that there
is no analogy in the case. But the analogy becomes apparent when we find, in what are called
systematic catalogues, no two systems alike, and the finding of books complicated by endless
varieties of classification, with no common alphabet to simplify the search. The authors of
systems doubtless understand them themselves, but no one else does, until he devotes time to
learn the key to them; and even when learned, the knowledge is not worth the time lost in acquiring
it, since the field covered in any one catalogue is so small. Alphabetical arrangement, on
the other hand, strictly adhered to, is a universal key to the authors and subjects and titles
of all the books contained in the library it represents. The devotee of a bibliographical system
may be as mistaken as the slave of a scientific terminology. He forgets that bibliography is
not a school for teaching all departments of knowledge, but a brief and handy index to books
that may contain that knowledge. A student who has once made a thorough comparative test of
the merits, as aids to wide and rapid research, of the old-fashioned bibliographies and the
best modern dictionary catalogues, will no more deny the superiority of the latter, than he
will contest the maxim that a straight line is the nearest road between two points. Meantime,
"while doctors disagree, disciples are free;" and the disciples who would follow the latest
guides in the art "how to make and use a catalogue," must get rid of many formulas.

The reader will find in the chapter on bibliography, notes on some classes of catalogues, with
the more notable examples of them. We are here concerned with the true method of preparing
catalogues, and such plain rules as brevity will permit to be given, will be equally adapted
to private or public libraries. For more ample treatment, with reasons for and against many
rules laid down, reference is made to the able and acute work, "Rules for a Dictionary Catalogue,"
by C. A. Cutter, published by the U. S. Bureau of Education, 3d ed. 1891.

CONDENSED RULES FOR AN AUTHOR AND TITLE CATALOGUE.

Prepared by the Co-operation Committee of the American Library Association.

                 ENTRY.

     Books are to be entered under the:

     Surnames of authors when ascertained, the abbreviation "Anon."
     being added to the titles of anonymous works.

     Initials of authors' names when these only are known, the last
     initial being put first.

     Pseudonyms of the writers when the real names are not
     ascertained.

     Names of editors of collections, each separate item to be at the
     same time sufficiently catalogued under its own heading.

     Names of countries, cities, societies, or other bodies which are
     responsible for their publication.

     First word (not an article or serial number) of the titles of
     periodicals and of anonymous books, the names of whose authors
     are not known. And a motto or the designation of a series may be
     neglected when it begins a title, and the entry may be made under
     the first word of the real title following.

     Commentaries accompanying a text, and translations, are to be
     entered under the heading of the original work; but commentaries
     without the text under the name of the commentator. A book
     entitled "Commentary on ...." and containing the text, should be
     put under both.

     The Bible, or any part of it (including the Apocrypha), in any
     language, is to be entered under the word Bible.

     The Talmud and Koran (and parts of them) are to be entered under
     those words; the sacred books of other religions are to be
     entered under the names by which they are generally known;
     references to be given from the names of editors, translators,
     etc.

     The respondent or defender of an academical thesis is to be
     considered as the author, unless the work unequivocally appears
     to be the work of the praeses.

     Books having more than one author to be entered under the one
     first named in the title, with a reference from each of the
     others.

     Reports of civil actions are to be entered under the name of the
     party to the suit which stands first on the title page. Reports
     of crown and criminal proceedings are to be entered under the
     name of the defendant. Admiralty proceedings relating to vessels
     are to be put under the name of the vessel.

     Noblemen are to be entered under their titles, unless the family
     name is decidedly better known.

     Ecclesiastical dignitaries, unless popes or sovereigns, are to be
     entered under their surnames.

     Sovereigns (other than Greek or Roman), ruling princes, Oriental
     writers, popes, friars, persons canonized, and all other persons
     known only by their first name, are to be entered under this
     first name.

     Married women, and other persons who have changed their names,
     are to be put under the last well-known form.

     A pseudonym may be used instead of the surname (and only a
     reference to the pseudonym made under the surname) when an author
     is much more known by his false than by his real name. In case of
     doubt, use the real name.

     A society is to be entered under the first word, not an article,
     of its corporate name, with references from any other name by
     which it is known, especially from the name of the place where
     its headquarters are established, if it is often called by that
     name.

                 REFERENCES.

     When an author has been known by more than one name, references
     should be inserted from the name or names not to be used as
     headings to the one used.

     References are also to be made to the headings chosen:
       asked for by their titles;

       from other striking titles;

       from noticeable words in anonymous titles, especially from the
       names of subjects of anonymous biographies;

       from the names of editors of periodicals, when the periodicals are
       generally called by the editor's name;

       from the names of important translators (especially poetic
       translators) and commentators;

       from the title of an ecclesiastical dignitary, when that, and not
       the family name, is used in the book catalogued;

       and in other cases where a reference is needed to insure the ready
       finding of the book.

                 HEADINGS.

     In the heading of titles, the names of authors are to be given in
     full, and in their vernacular form, except that the Latin form
     may be used when it is more generally known, the vernacular form
     being added in parentheses; except, also, that sovereigns and
     popes may be given in the English form.

     English and French surnames beginning with a prefix (except the
     French de and d') are to be recorded under the prefix; in other
     languages under the word following.

     English compound surnames are to be entered under the last part
     of the name; foreign ones under the first part.

     Designations are to be added to distinguish writers of the same
     name from each other.

     Prefixes indicating the rank or profession of writers may be
     added in the heading, when they are part of the usual designation
     of the writers.

     Names of places to be given in the English form. When both an
     English and a vernacular form are used in English works, prefer
     the vernacular.

                 TITLES.

     The title is to be an exact transcript of the title-page, neither
     amended, translated, nor in any way altered, except that mottos,
     titles of authors, repetitions, and matter of any kind not
     essential, are to be omitted. Where great accuracy is desirable,
     omissions are to be indicated by three dots (...). The titles of
     books especially valuable for antiquity or rarity may be given in
     full, with all practicable precision. The phraseology and
     spelling, but not necessarily the punctuation, of the title are
     to be exactly copied.

     Any additions needed to make the title clear are to be supplied,
     and inclosed by brackets.

     Initial capitals are to be given in English:
       noted events, and periods (each separate word not an article,
       conjunction, or preposition, may be capitalized in these cases);

       to adjectives and other derivatives from proper names when they
       have a direct reference to the person, place, etc., from which
       they are derived;

       to the first word of every sentence and of every quoted title;

       to titles of honor when standing instead of a proper name
       (e. g., the Earl of Derby, but John Stanley, earl of Derby);

       In foreign languages, according to the local usage;

       In doubtful cases capitals are to be avoided.

     Foreign languages.--Titles in foreign characters may be
     transliterated. The languages in which a book is written are to be
     stated when there are several, and the fact is not apparent from the
     title.

                 IMPRINTS.

     After the title are to be given, in the following order, those in
     [ ] being optional:

       the place of publication;

       [and the publisher's name] (these three in the language of
       the title);

       the year as given on the title-page, but in Arabic figures;

       [the year of copyright or actual publication, if known to be
       different in brackets, and preceded by c. or p. as the case may be];

       the number of volumes, or of pages if there is only one volume;

       [the number of maps, portraits, or illustrations not included in the
       text];

       and either the approximate size designated by letter, or the
       exact size in centimeters;

       the name of the series to which the book belongs is to be given in
       parentheses after the other imprint entries.

     After the place of publication, the place of printing may be
     given if different. This is desirable only in rare and old books.

     The number of pages is to be indicated by giving the last number
     of each paging, connecting the numbers by the sign +; the
     addition of unpaged matter may be shown by a +, or the number of
     pages ascertained by counting may be given in brackets. When
     there are more than three pagings, it is better to add them
     together and give the sum in brackets.

     These imprint entries are to give the facts, whether ascertained
     from the book or from other sources; those which are usually
     taken from the title (edition, place, publisher's name, and
     series) should be in the language of the title, corrections and
     additions being inclosed in brackets. It is better to give the
     words, "maps," "portraits," etc., and the abbreviations for
     "volumes" and "pages," in English.

                 CONTENTS, NOTES.

     Notes (in English) and contents of volumes are to be given when
     necessary to properly describe the works. Both notes and lists of
     contents to be in a smaller type.

                 MISCELLANEOUS.

     A single dash or indent indicates the omission of the preceding
     heading; a subsequent dash or indent indicates the omission of a
     subordinate heading, or of a title.

     A dash connecting numbers signifies to and including; following a
     number it signifies continuation.

     A ? following a word or entry signifies probably.

     Brackets inclose words added to titles or imprints, or changed in
     form.

     Arabic figures are to be used rather than Roman; but small
     capitals may be used after the names of sovereigns, princes, and
     popes.

     A list of abbreviations to be used was given in the Library
     journal, Vol. 3: 16-20.

                 ARRANGEMENT.

     The surname when used alone precedes the same name used with
     forenames; where the initials only of the forenames are given,
     they are to precede fully written forenames beginning with the
     same initials (e. g., Brown, Brown, J.; Brown, J. L.; Brown,
     James).

     The prefixes M and Mc, S., St., Ste., Messrs., Mr., and Mrs., are
     to be arranged as if written in full, Mac, Sanctus, Saint,
     Sainte, Messieurs, Mister, and Mistress.

     The works of an author are to be arranged in the following order:

       2. Partial collections.

       3. Single works, alphabetically, by the first word of the title.

     The order of alphabeting is to be that of the English alphabet.

     The German ae, oe, ue, are always to be written as ä, ö, ü, and
     arranged as a, o, u.

     Names of persons are to precede similar names of places, which in turn
     precede similar first words of titles.

A few desirable modifications or additions to these rules may be suggested.

1. In title-entries, let the year of publication stand last, instead of the indication of size.

2. Noblemen to be entered under their family names, with reference from their titles.

3. Instead of designations of title, profession, residence, or family, to distinguish authors,
let every name be followed by the chronology, as--

    James (Henry) 1811-82.
    James (Henry) 1843-

It is highly desirable to give this information as to the author's period in every title-heading,
without exception, when ascertainable. If unknown, the approximate period to be given, with
a query.

