THE ODYSSEY OF HOMER

DONE INTO ENGLISH PROSE

by S. H. BUTCHER, M.A.

AND

A. LANG, M.A.

PREFACE.

There would have been less controversy about the proper method of Homeric translation, if critics
bad recognised that the question is a purely relative one, that of Homer there can be no final
translation. The taste and the literary habits of each age demand different qualities in poetry,
and therefore a different sort of rendering of Homer. To the men of the time of Elizabeth,
Homer would have appeared bald, it seems, and lacking in ingenuity, if he had been presented
in his antique simplicity. For the Elizabethan age, Chapman supplied what was then necessary,
and the mannerisms that were then deemed of the essence of poetry, namely, daring and luxurious
conceits. Thus in Chapman's verse Troy must 'shed her towers for tears of overthrow,' and when
the winds toss Odysseus about, their sport must be called 'the horrid tennis.'

In the age of Anne, 'dignity' and 'correctness' had to be given to Homer, and Pope gave them
by aid of his dazzling rhetoric, his antitheses, his nettete, his command of every conventional
and favourite artifice. Without Chapman's conceits, Homer's poems would hardly have been what
the Elizabethans took for poetry; without Pope's smoothness, and Pope's points, the Iliad and
Odyssey would have seemed rude, and harsh in the age of Anne. These great translations must
always live as English poems. As transcripts of Homer they are like pictures drawn from a lost
point of view. Chaque siecle depuis le xvi a ue de ce cote son belveder different. Again, when
Europe woke to a sense, an almost exaggerated and certainly uncritical sense, of the value
of her songs of the people, of all the ballads that Herder, Scott, Lonnrot, and the rest collected,
it was commonly said that Homer was a ballad-minstrel, that the translator must imitate the
simplicity, and even adopt the formulae of the ballad. Hence came the renderings of Maginn,
the experiments of Mr. Gladstone, and others. There was some excuse for the error of critics
who asked for a Homer in ballad rhyme. The Epic poet, the poet of gods and heroes, did indeed
inherit some of the formulae of the earlier Volks-lied. Homer, like the author of The Song
of Roland, like the singers of the Kalevala, uses constantly recurring epithets, and repeats,
word for word, certain emphatic passages, messages, and so on. That custom is essential in
the ballad, it is an accident not the essence of the epic. The epic is a poem of complete and
elaborate art, but it still bears some birthmarks, some signs of the early popular chant, out
of which it sprung, as the garden-rose springs from the wild stock, When this is recognised
the demand for ballad-like simplicity and 'ballad-slang' ceases to exist, and then all Homeric
translations in the ballad manner cease to represent our conception of Homer. After the belief
in the ballad manner follows the recognition of the romantic vein in Homer, and, as a result,
came Mr. Worsley's admirable Odyssey. This masterly translation does all that can be done for
the Odyssey in the romantic style. The smoothness of the verse, the wonderful closeness to
the original, reproduce all of Homer, in music and in meaning, that can be rendered in English
verse. There still, however, seems an aspect Homeric poems, and a demand in connection with
Homer to be recognised, and to be satisfied.

Sainte-Beuve says, with reference probably to M. Leconte de Lisle's prose version of the epics,
that some people treat the epics too much as if the were sagas. Now the Homeric epics are sagas,
but then they are the sagas of the divine heroic age of Greece, and thus are told with an art
which is not the art of the Northern poets. The epics are stories about the adventures of men
living in most respects like the men of our own race who dwelt in Iceland, Norway, Denmark,
and Sweden. The epics are, in a way, and as far as manners and institutions are concerned,
historical documents. Whoever regards them in this way, must wish to read them exactly as they
have reached us, without modern ornament, with nothing added or omitted. He must recognise,
with Mr. Matthew Arnold, that what he now wants, namely, the simple truth about the matter
of the poem, can only be given in prose, 'for in a verse translation no original work is any
longer recognisable.' It is for this reason that we have attempted to tell once more, in simple
prose, the story of Odysseus. We have tried to transfer, not all the truth about the poem,
but the historical truth, into English. In this process Homer must lose at least half his charm,
his bright and equable speed, the musical current of that narrative, which, like the river
of Egypt, flows from an indiscoverable source, and mirrors the temples and the palaces of unforgotten
gods and kings. Without this music of verse, only a half truth about Homer can be told, but
then it is that half of the truth which, at this moment, it seems most necessary to tell. This
is the half of the truth that the translators who use verse cannot easily tell. They MUST be
adding to Homer, talking with Pope about 'tracing the mazy lev'ret o'er the lawn,' or with
Mr. Worsley about the islands that are 'stars of the blue Aegaean,' or with Dr. Hawtrey about
'the earth's soft arms,' when Homer says nothing at all about the 'mazy lev'ret,' or the 'stars
of the blue Aegaean,' or the 'soft arms' of earth. It would be impertinent indeed to blame
any of these translations in their place. They give that which the romantic reader of poetry,
or the student of the age of Anne, looks for in verse; and without tags of this sort, a translation
of Homer in verse cannot well be made to hold together.

There can be then, it appears, no final English translation of Homer. In each there must be,
in addition to what is Greek and eternal, the element of what is modern, personal, and fleeting.
Thus we trust that there may be room for 'the pale and far-off shadow of a prose translation,'
of which the aim is limited and humble. A prose translation cannot give the movement and the
fire of a successful translation in verse; it only gathers, as it were, the crumbs which fall
from the richer table, only tells the story, without the song. Yet to a prose translation is
permitted, perhaps, that close adherence to the archaisms of the epic, which in verse become
mere oddities. The double epithets, the recurring epithets of Homer, if rendered into verse,
delay and puzzle the reader, as the Greek does not delay or puzzle him. In prose he may endure
them, or even care to study them as the survivals of a stage of taste, which is to be found
in its prime in the sagas. These double and recurring epithets of Homer are a softer form of
the quaint Northern periphrases, which make the sea the 'swan's bath,' gold, the 'dragon's
hoard,' men, the 'ring-givers,' and so on. We do not know whether it is necessary to defend
our choice of a somewhat antiquated prose. Homer has no ideas which cannot be expressed in
words that are 'old and plain,' and to words that are old and plain, and, as a rule, to such
terms as, being used by the Translators of the Bible, are still not unfamiliar, we have tried
to restrict ourselves. It may be objected, that the employment of language which does not come
spontaneously to the lips, is an affectation out of place in a version of the Odyssey. To this
we may answer that the Greek Epic dialect, like the English of our Bible, was a thing of slow
growth and composite nature, that it was never a spoken language, nor, except for certain poetical
purposes, a written language. Thus the Biblical English seems as nearly analogous to the Epic
Greek, as anything that our tongue has to offer.

The few foot-notes in this book are chiefly intended to make clear some passages where there
is a choice of reading. The notes at the end, which we would like to have written in the form
of essays, and in company with more complete philological and archaeological studies, are chiefly
meant to elucidate the life of Homer's men. We have received much help from many friends, and
especially from Mr. R. W. Raper, Fellow of Trinity College, Oxford and Mr. Gerald Balfour,
Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, who has aided us with many suggestions while the book
was passing through the press.

In the interpretation of B. i.411, ii.191, v.90, and 471, we have departed from the received
view, and followed Mr. Raper, who, however, has not been able to read through the proof-sheets
further than Book xii.

We have adopted La Roche's text (Homeri Odyssea, J. La Roche, Leipzig, 1867), except in a few
cases where we mention our reading in a foot-note.

The Arguments prefixed to the Books are taken, with very slight alterations, from Hobbes' Translation
of the Odyssey.

It is hoped that the Introduction added to the second edition may illustrate the growth of
those national legends on which Homer worked, and may elucidate the plot of the Odyssey.

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION.

Wet owe our thanks to the Rev. E. Warre, of Eton College, for certain corrections on nautical
points. In particular, he has convinced us that the raft of Odysseus in B. v. is a raft strictly
so called, and that it is not, under the poet's description, elaborated into a ship, as has
been commonly supposed. The translation of the passage (B. v.246-261) is accordingly altered.

INTRODUCTION

COMPOSITION AND PLOT OF THE ODYSSEY.

The Odyssey is generally supposed to be somewhat the later in date of the two most ancient
Greek poems which are concerned with the events and consequences of the Trojan war. As to the
actual history of that war, it may be said that nothing is known. We may conjecture that some
contest between peoples of more or less kindred stocks, who occupied the isles and the eastern
and western shores of the Aegean, left a strong impression on the popular fancy. Round the
memories of this contest would gather many older legends, myths, and stories, not peculiarly
Greek or even 'Aryan,' which previously floated unattached, or were connected with heroes whose
fame was swallowed up by that of a newer generation. It would be the work of minstrels, priests,
and poets, as the national spirit grew conscious of itself, to shape all these materials into
a definite body of tradition. This is the rule of development--first scattered stories, then
the union of these into a NATIONAL legend. The growth of later national legends, which we are
able to trace, historically, has generally come about in this fashion. To take the best known
example, we are able to compare the real history of Charlemagne with the old epic poems on
his life and exploits. In these poems we find that facts are strangely exaggerated, and distorted;
that purely fanciful additions are made to the true records, that the more striking events
of earlier history are crowded into the legend of Charles, that mere fairy tales, current among
African as well as European peoples, are transmuted into false history, and that the anonymous
characters of fairy tales are converted into historical personages. We can also watch the process
by which feigned genealogies were constructed, which connected the princely houses of France
with the imaginary heroes of the epics. The conclusion is that the poetical history of Charlemagne
has only the faintest relations to the true history. And we are justified in supposing that,
quite as little of the real history of events can be extracted from the tale of Troy, as from
the Chansons de Geste.

By the time the Odyssey was composed, it is certain that a poet had before him a well-arranged
mass of legends and traditions from which he might select his materials. The author of the
Iliad has an extremely full and curiously consistent knowledge of the local traditions of Greece,
the memories which were cherished by Thebans, Pylians, people of Mycenae, of Argos, and so
on. The Iliad and the Odyssey assume this knowledge in the hearers of the poems, and take for
granted some acquaintance with other legends, as with the story of the Argonautic Expedition.
Now that story itself is a tissue of popular tales,--still current in many distant lands,--but
all woven by the Greek genius into the history of Iason.

The history of the return of Odysseus as told in the Odyssey, is in the same way, a tissue
of old marchen. These must have existed for an unknown length of time before they gravitated
into the cycle of the tale of Troy.

The extraordinary artistic skill with which legends and myths, originally unconnected with
each other, are woven into the plot of the Odyssey, so that the marvels of savage and barbaric
fancy become indispensable parts of an artistic whole, is one of the chief proofs of the unity
of authorship of that poem. We now go on to sketch the plot, which is a marvel of construction.

Odysseus was the King of Ithaca, a small and rugged island on the western coast of Greece.
When he was but lately married to Penelope, and while his only son Telemachus was still an
infant, the Trojan war began. It is scarcely necessary to say that the object of this war,
as conceived of by the poets, was to win back Helen, the wife of Menelaus, from Paris, the
son of Priam, King of Troy. As Menelaus was the brother of Agamemnon, the Emperor, so to speak,
or recognised chief of the petty kingdoms of 'Greece, the whole force of these kingdoms was
at his disposal. No prince came to the leaguer of Troy from a home more remote than that of
Odysseus. When Troy was taken, in the tenth year of the war, his homeward voyage was the longest
and most perilous.

The action of the Odyssey occupies but the last six weeks of the ten years during which Odysseus
was wandering. Two nights in these six weeks are taken up, however, by his own narrative of
his adventures (to the Phaeacians, p. xx) in the previous ten years. With this explanatory
narrative we must begin, before coming to the regular action of the poem.

After the fall of Troy, Odysseus touched at Ismarus, the city of a Thracian people, whom he
attacked and plundered, but by whom he was at last repulsed. The north wind then carried his
ships to Malea, the extreme southern point of Greece. Had he doubled Malea safely, he would
probably have reached Ithaca in a few days, would have found Penelope unvexed by wooers, and
Telemachus a boy of ten years old. But this was not to be.

The 'ruinous winds' drove Odysseus and his ships for ten days, and on the tenth they touched
the land of the Lotus- Eaters, whose flowery food causes sweet forgetfulness. Lotus-land was
possibly in Western Libya, but it is more probable that ten days' voyage from the southern
point of Greece, brought Odysseus into an unexplored region of fairy-land. Egypt, of which
Homer had some knowledge, was but five days' sail from Crete.

Lotus-land, therefore, being ten days' sail from Malea, was well over the limit of the discovered
world. From this country Odysseus went on till he reached the land of the lawless Cyclopes,
a pastoral people of giants. Later Greece feigned that the Cyclopes dwelt near Mount Etna,
in Sicily. Homer leaves their place of abode in the vague.  Among the Cyclopes, Odysseus had
the adventure on which his whole fortunes hinged. He destroyed the eye of the cannibal giant,
Polyphemus, a son of Poseidon, the God of the Sea. To avenge this act, Poseidon drove Odysseus
wandering for ten long years, and only suffered him to land in Ithaca, 'alone, in evil case,
to find troubles in his house.' This is a very remarkable point in the plot. The story of the
crafty adventurer and the blinding of the giant, with the punning device by which the hero
escaped, exists in the shape of a detached marchen or fairy-tale among races who never heard
of Homer. And when we find the story among Oghuzians, Esthonians, Basques, and Celts, it seems
natural to suppose that these people did not break a fragment out of the Odyssey, but that
the author of the Odyssey took possession of a legend out of the great traditional store of
fiction. From the wide distribution of the tale, there is reason to suppose that it is older
than Homer, and that it was not originally told of Odysseus, but was attached to his legend,
as floating jests of unknown authorship are attributed to eminent wits. It has been remarked
with truth that in this episode Odysseus acts out of character, that he is foolhardy as well
as cunning. Yet the author of the Odyssey, so far from merely dove-tailing this story at random
into his narrative, has made his whole plot turn on the injury to the Cyclops. Had he not foolishly
exposed himself and his companions, by his visit to the Cyclops, Odysseus would never have
been driven wandering for ten weary years. The prayers of the blinded Cyclops were heard and
fulfilled by Poseidon.

From the land of the Cyclops, Odysseus and his company sailed to the Isle of Aeolus, the king
of the winds. This place too is undefined; we only learn that, even with the most favourable
gale, it was ten days' sail from Ithaca. In the Isle of Aeolus Odysseus abode for a month,
and then received from the king a bag in which all the winds were bound, except that which
was to waft the hero to his home. This sort of bag was probably not unfamiliar to superstitious
Greek sailors who had dealings with witches, like the modern wise women of the Lapps. The companions
of the hero opened the bag when Ithaca was in sight, the winds rushed out, the ships were borne
back to the Aeolian Isle, and thence the hero was roughly dismissed by Aeolus. Seven days'
sail brought him to Lamos, a city of the cannibal  Laestrygonians. Their country, too, is in
No-man's-land, and nothing can be inferred from the fact that their fountain was called Artacia,
and that there was an Artacia in Cyzicus. In Lamos a very important adventure befel Odysseus.
The cannibals destroyed all his fleet, save one ship, with which he made his escape to the
Isle of Circe. Here the enchantress turned part of the crew into swine, but Odysseus, by aid
of the god Hermes, redeemed them, and became the lover of Circe. This adventure, like the story
of the Cyclops, is a fairy tale of great antiquity. Dr. Gerland, in his Alt Griechische Marchen
in der Odyssee, his shown that the story makes part of the collection of Somadeva, a store
of Indian tales, of which 1200 A.D. is the approximate date. Circe appears as a Yackshini,
and is conquered when an adventurer seizes her flute whose magic music turns men into beasts.
The Indian Circe had the habit of eating the animals into which she transformed men.

We must suppose that the affairs with the Cicones, the Lotus-eaters, the Cyclops, Aeolus, and
the Laestrygonians, occupied most of the first year after the fall of Troy. A year was then
spent in the Isle of Circe, after which the sailors were eager to make for home. Circe commanded
them to go down to Hades, to learn the homeward way from the ghost of the Theban prophet Teiresias.
The descent into hell, for some similar purpose, is common in the epics of other races, such
as the Finns, and the South-Sea Islanders. The narrative of Odysseus's visit to the dead (book
xi) is one of the most moving passages in the whole poem.

From Teiresias Odysseus learned that, if he would bring his companions home, he must avoid
injuring the sacred cattle of the Sun, which pastured in the Isle of Thrinacia.  If these were
harmed, he would arrive in Ithaca alone, or in the words of the Cyclops's prayer, I in evil
plight, with loss of all his company, on board the ship of strangers, to find sorrow in his
house.' On returning to the Isle Aeaean, Odysseus was warned by Circe of the dangers he would
encounter. He and his friends set forth, escaped the Sirens (a sort of mermaidens), evaded
the Clashing Rocks, which close on ships (a fable known to the Aztecs), passed Scylla (the
pieuvre of antiquity) with loss of some of the company, and reached Thrinacia, the Isle of
the Sun. Here the company of Odysseus, constrained by hunger, devoured the sacred kine of the
Sun, for which offence they were punished by a shipwreck, when all were lost save Odysseus.
He floated ten days on a raft, and then reached the isle of the goddess Calypso, who kept him
as her lover for eight years.

The first two years after the fall of Troy are now accounted for. They were occupied, as we
have seen, by adventures with the Cicones, the Lotus-eaters, the Cyclops, Aeolus, the Laestrygonians,
by a year's residence with Circe, by the descent into Hades, the encounters with the Sirens,
and Scylla, and the fatal sojourn in the isle of Thrinacia. We leave Odysseus alone, for eight
years, consuming his own heart, in the island paradise of Calypso.

In Ithaca, the hero's home, things seem to have passed smoothly till about the sixth year after
the fall of Troy. Then the men of the younger generation, the island chiefs, began to woo Penelope,
and to vex her son Telemachus. Laertes, the father of Odysseus, was too old to help, and Penelope
only gained time by her famous device of weaving and unweaving the web. The wooers began to
put compulsion on the Queen, quartering themselves upon her, devouring her substance, and insulting
her by their relations with her handmaids. Thus Penelope pined at home, amidst her wasting
possessions. Telemachus fretted in vain, and Odysseus was devoured by grief and home-sickness
in the isle of Calypso. When he had lain there for nigh eight years, the action of the Odyssey
begins, and occupies about six weeks.

  DAY 1 (Book i).

The ordained time has now arrived, when by the counsels of the Gods, Odysseus is to be brought
home to free his house, to avenge himself on the wooers, and recover his kingdom. The chief
agent in his restoration is Pallas Athene; the first book opens with her prayer to Zeus that
Odysseus may be delivered. For this purpose Hermes is to be sent to Calypso to bid her release
Odysseus, while Pallas Athene in the shape of Mentor, a friend of Odysseus, visits  Telemachus
in Ithaca. She bids him call an assembly of the people, dismiss the wooers to their homes,
and his mother to her father's house, and go in quest of his own father, in Pylos, the city
of Nestor, and Sparta, the home of Menelaus. Telemachus recognises the Goddess, and the first
day closes.

  DAY 2 (Book ii).

Telemachus assembles the people, but he has not the heart to carry out Athene's advice. He
cannot send the wooers away, nor turn his mother out of her house. He rather weakly appeals
to the wooers' consciences, and announces his intention of going to seek his father. They answer
with scorn, but are warned of their fate, which is even at the doors, by Halitherses. His prophecy
(first made when Odysseus set out for Troy) tallies with the prophecy of Teiresias, and the
prayer of the Cyclops. The reader will observe a series of portents, prophecies, and omens,
which grow more numerous and admonishing as their doom draws nearer to the wooers. Their hearts,
however, are hardened, and they mock at Telemachus, who, after an interview with Athene, borrows
a ship and secretly sets out for Pylos. Athene accompanies him, and his friends man his galley.

  DAY 3 (Book iii).

They reach Pylos, and are kindly received by the aged Nestor, who has no news about Odysseus.
After sacrifice, Athene disappears.

  DAY 4 (Book iii).

The fourth day is occupied with sacrifice, and the talk of Nestor. In the evening Telemachus
(leaving his ship and friends at Pylos) drives his chariot into Pherae, half way to Sparta;
Peisistratus, the soil of Nestor, accompanies him.

  DAY 5 (Book iv).

Telemachus and Peisistratus arrive at Sparta, where Menelaus and Helen receive them kindly.

  DAY 6 (Book iv).

Menelaus tells how he himself came home in the eighth year after the fall of Troy. He had heard
from Proteus, the Old Man of the Sea, that Odysseus was alive, and a captive on an island of
the deep. Menelaus invites Telemachus to Stay with him for eleven days or twelve, which Telemachus
declines to do. It will later appear that he made an even longer stay at Sparta, though whether
he changed his mind, or whether we have here an inadvertence of the poet's it is hard to determine.
This blemish has been used as an argument against the unity of authorship, but writers of all
ages have made graver mistakes.

On this same day (the sixth) the wooers in Ithaca learned that Telemachus had really set out
to I cruise after his father.' They sent some of their number to lie in ambush for him, in
a certain strait which he was likely to pass on his return to Ithaca. Penelope also heard of
her son's departure, but was consoled by a dream.

  DAY 7 (Book v).

The seventh day finds us again in Olympus. Athene again urges the release of Odysseus; and
Hermes is sent to bid Calypso let the hero go. Zeus prophecies that after twenty days sailing,
Odysseus will reach Scheria, and the hospitable Phaeacians, a people akin to the Gods, who
will convey him to Ithaca. Hermes accomplishes the message to Calypso.

  DAYS 8-12-32 (Book v).

These days are occupied by Odysseus in making and launching a raft; on the twelfth day from
the beginning of the action he leaves Calypso's isle. He sails for eighteen days, and on the
eighteenth day of his voyage (the twenty-ninth from the beginning of the action), he sees Scheria.
Poseidon raises a storm against him, and it is not till the thirty-second day from that in
which Athene visited  Telemachus, that he lands in Scheria, the country of the Phaeacians.
Here he is again in fairy land. A rough, but perfectly recognisable form of the Phaeacian myth,
is found in an Indian collection of marchen (already referred to) of the twelfth century A.D.
Here the Phaeacians are the Vidyidhiris, and their old enemies the Cyclopes, are the Rakshashas,
a sort of giants. The Indian Odysseus, who seeks the city of gold, passes by the home of an
Indian Aeolus, Satyavrata. His later adventures are confused, and the Greek version retains
only the more graceful fancies of the marchen.

  DAY 33 (Book vi).

Odysseus meets Nausicaa, daughter of Alcinous, the Phaeacian King, and by her aid, and that
of Athene, is favourably received at the palace, and tells how he came from Calypso's island.
His name is still unknown to his hosts.

  DAY 34 (Books vii, viii, ix, x, xi, xii).

The Phaeacians and Odysseus display their skill in sports. Nausicaa bids Odysseus farewell.
Odysseus recounts to Alcinous, and Arete, the Queen, those adventures in the two years between
the fall of Troy and his captivity in the island of Calypso, which we have already described
(pp. xiii-xvii).

  DAY 35 (Book xiii).

Odysseus is conveyed to Ithaca, in the evening, on one of the magical barques of the Phaeacians.

  DAY 36 (Books xiii, xiv, xv).

He wakens in Ithaca, which he does not at first recognise He learns from Athene, for the first
time, that the wooers beset his house. She disguises him as an old man, and bids him go to
the hut of the swineherd Eumaeus, who is loyal to his absent lord. Athene then goes to Lacedaemon,
to bring back Telemachus, who has now resided there for a month. Odysseus won the heart of
Eumaeus, who of course did not recognise him, and slept in the swineherd's hut, while Athene
was waking Telemachus, in Lacedaemon, and bidding him 'be mindful of his return.'

  DAY 37 (Book xv).

Is spent by Odysseus in the swineherd's hut. Telemachus reaches Pherae, half-way to Pylos.

  DAY 38 (Book xv).

Telemachus reaches Pylos, but does not visit Nestor. To save time he goes at once on board
ship, taking with him an unfortunate outlaw, Theoclymenus, a second-sighted man, or the family
of Melampus, in which the gift of prophecy was hereditary. The ship passed the Elian coast
at night, and evaded the ambush of the wooers. Meanwhile Odysseus was sitting up almost till
dawn, listening to the history of Eumaeus, the swineherd.

  DAY 39 (Books xv, xvi).

Telemachus reaches the Isle of Ithaca, sends his ship to the city, but himself, by advice of
Athene, makes for the hut of Eumaeus, where he meets, but naturally does not recognise, his
disguised father. He sends Eumaeus to Penelope with news of his arrival, and then Athene reveals
Odysseus to Telemachus. The two plot the death of the wooers. Odysseus bids Telemachus remove,
on a favourable opportunity, the arms which were disposed as trophies on the walls of the hall
at home. (There is a slight discrepancy between the words of this advice and the manner in
which it is afterwards executed.) During this interview, the ship of Telemachus, the wooers
who had been in ambush, and Eumaeus, all reached the town of Ithaca. In the evening Eumaeus
returned to his hut, where Athene had again disguised Odysseus.

  DAY 40 (Books xvii, xviii, xix, xx).

The story is now hastening to its close, and many events are crowded into the fortieth day.
Telemachus goes from the swineherd's hut to the city, and calls his guest,  Theoclymenus, to
the palace. The second-sighted man prophesies of the near revenge of Odysseus. In the afternoon,
Odysseus (still disguised) and Eumaeus reach the city, the dog Argos recognises the hero, and
dies. Odysseus goes begging through his own hall, and is struck by Antinous, the proudest of
the wooers. Late in the day Eumaeus goes home, and Odysseus fights with the braggart beggar
Irus. Still later, Penelope appears among the wooers, and receives presents from them. When
the wooers have withdrawn, Odysseus and Telemachus remove the weapons from the hall to the
armoury. Afterwards Odysseus has an interview with Penelope (who does not recognise him), but
he is recognised by his old nurse Eurycleia. Penelope mentions her purpose to wed the man who
on the following day, the feast of the Archer-god Apollo, shall draw the bow of Odysseus, and
send an arrow through the holes in twelve axe-blades, set up in a row. Thus the poet shows
that Odysseus has arrived in Ithaca not a day too soon. Odysseus is comforted by a vision of
Athene, and

  DAY 41 (Books xx, xxi, xxii, xxiii).

by the ominous prayer uttered by a weary woman grinding at the mill. The swineherd and the
disloyal Melanthius arrive at the palace. The wooers defer the plot to kill Telemachus, as
the day is holy to Apollo. Odysseus is led up from his seat near the door to a place beside
Telemachus at the chief's table. The wooers mock Telemachus, and the second-sighted Theoclymenus
sees the ominous shroud of death covering their bodies, and the walls dripping with blood.
He leaves the doomed company. In the trial of the bow, none of the wooers can draw it; meanwhile
Odysseus has declared himself to the neatherd and the swineherd. The former bars and fastens
the outer gates of the court, the latter bids Eurycleia bar the doors of the womens' chambers
which lead out of the hall. Odysseus now gets the bow into his hands, strings it, sends the
arrow through the axe-blades, and then leaping on the threshold of stone, deals his shafts
among the wooers. Telemachus, the neatherd, and Eumaeus, aiding him, he slaughters all the
crew, despite the treachery of Melanthius. The paramours of the wooers are hanged, and Odysseus,
after some delay, is recognised by Penelope.

  DAY 42 (Books xxiii, xxiv).

This day is occupied with the recognition of Odysseus by his aged father Laertes, and with
the futile attempt of the kinsfolk of the wooers to avenge them on Odysseus. Athene reconciles
the feud, and the toils of Odysseus are accomplished.

The reader has now before him a chronologically arranged sketch of the action of the Odyssey.
It is, perhaps, apparent, even from this bare outline, that the composition is elaborate and
artistic, that the threads of the plot are skilfully separated and combined. The germ of the
whole epic is probably the popular tale, known all over the world, of the warrior who, on his
return from a long expedition, has great difficulty in making his prudent wife recognise him.
The incident occurs as a detached story in China, and in most European countries it is told
of a crusader. 'We may suppose it to be older than the legend of Troy, and to have gravitated
into the cycle of that legend. The years of the hero's absence are then filled up with adventures
(the Cyclops, Circe, the Phaeacians, the Sirens, the descent into hell) which exist as scattered
tales, or are woven into the more elaborate epics of Gaels, Aztecs, Hindoos, Tartars, South-Sea
Islanders, Finns, Russians, Scandinavians, and Eskimo. The whole is surrounded with the atmosphere
of the kingly age of Greece, and the result is the Odyssey, with that unity of plot and variety
of character which must have been given by one masterly constructive genius. The date at which
the poet of the Odyssey lived may be approximately determined by his consistent descriptions
of a peculiar and definite condition of society, which had ceased to exist in the ninth century
B.C., and of a stage of art in which Phoenician and Assyrian influences predominated. (Die
Kunst bei Homer. Brunn.) As to the mode of composition, it would not be difficult to show that
at least the a priori Wolfian arguments against the early use of writing for literary purposes
have no longer the cogency which they were once thought to possess. But this is matter for
a separate investigation.

The Odyssey

Book I

  In a Council of the Gods, Poseidon absent, Pallas procureth
  an order for the restitution of Odysseus; and appearing to
  his son Telemachus, in human shape, adviseth him to
  complain of the Wooers before the Council of the people,
  and then go to Pylos and Sparta to inquire about his
  father.

Tell me, Muse, of that man, so ready at need, who wandered far and wide, after he had sacked
the sacred citadel of Troy, and many were the men whose towns he saw and whose mind he learnt,
yea, and many the woes he suffered in his heart upon the deep, striving to win his own life
and the return of his company.  Nay, but even so he saved not his company, though he desired
it sore. For through the blindness of their own hearts they perished, fools, who devoured the
oxen of Helios Hyperion: but the god took from them their day of returning. Of these things,
goddess, daughter of Zeus, whencesoever thou hast heard thereof, declare thou even unto us.

Now all the rest, as many as fled from sheer destruction, were at home, and had escaped both
war and sea, but Odysseus only, craving for his wife and for his homeward path, the lady nymph
Calypso held, that fair goddess, in her hollow caves, longing to have him for her lord. But
when now the year had come in the courses of the seasons, wherein the gods had ordained that
he should return home to Ithaca, not even there was he quit of labours, not even among his
own; but all the gods had pity on him save Poseidon, who raged continually against godlike
Odysseus, till he came to his own country. Howbeit Poseidon had now departed for the distant
Ethiopians, the Ethiopians that are sundered in twain, the uttermost of men, abiding some where
Hyperion sinks and some where he rises.  There he looked to receive his hecatomb of bulls and
rams, there he made merry sitting at the feast, but the other gods were gathered in the halls
of Olympian Zeus. Then among them the father of gods and men began to speak, for he bethought
him in his heart of noble Aegisthus, whom the son of Agamemnon, far-famed Orestes, slew. Thinking
upon him he spake out among the Immortals:

'Lo you now, how vainly mortal men do blame the gods! For of us they say comes evil, whereas
they even of themselves, through the blindness of their own hearts, have sorrows beyond that
which is ordained. Even as of late Aegisthus, beyond that which was ordained, took to him the
wedded wife of the son of Atreus, and killed her lord on his return, and that with sheer doom
before his eyes, since we had warned him by the embassy of Hermes the keen-sighted, the slayer
of Argos, that he should neither kill the man, nor woo his wife. For the son of Atreus shall
be avenged at the hand of Orestes, so soon as he shall come to man's estate and long for his
own country. So spake Hermes, yet he prevailed not on the heart of Aegisthus, for all his good
will; but now hath he paid one price for all.'

And the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, answered him, saying: 'O father, our father Cronides, throned
in the highest; that man assuredly lies in a death that is his due; so perish likewise all
who work such deeds! But my heart is rent for wise Odysseus, that hapless one, who far from
his friends this long while suffereth affliction in a seagirt isle, where is the navel of the
sea, a woodland isle, and therein a goddess hath her habitation, the daughter of the wizard
Atlas, who knows the depths of every sea, and himself upholds the tall pillars which keep earth
and sky asunder. His daughter it is that holds the hapless man in sorrow: and ever with soft
and guileful tales she is wooing him to forgetfulness of Ithaca. But Odysseus yearning to see
if it were but the smoke leap upwards from his own land, hath a desire to die. As for thee,
thine heart regardeth it not at all, Olympian! What! did not Odysseus by the ships of the Argives
make thee free offering of sacrifice in the wide Trojan land? Wherefore wast thou then so wroth
with him, O Zeus?'

And Zeus the cloud-gatherer answered her, and said, 'My child, what word hath escaped the door
of thy lips? Yea, how should I forget divine Odysseus, who in understanding is beyond mortals
and beyond all men hath done sacrifice to the deathless gods, who keep the wide heaven? Nay,
but it is Poseidon, the girdler of the earth, that hath been wroth continually with quenchless
anger for the Cyclops' sake whom he blinded of his eye, even godlike Polyphemus whose power
is mightiest amongst all the Cyclopes. His mother was the nymph Thoosa, daughter of Phorcys,
lord of the unharvested sea, and in the hollow caves she lay with Poseidon. From that day forth
Poseidon the earth-shaker doth not indeed slay Odysseus, but driveth him wandering from his
own country. There with all speed let him declare to the lady of the braided tresses our unerring
counsel, even the return of the patient Odysseus, that so he may come to his home. But as for
me I will go to Ithaca that I may rouse his son yet the more, planting might in his heart,
to call an assembly of the long-haired Achaeans and speak out to all the wooers who slaughter
continually the sheep of his thronging flocks, and his kine with trailing feet and shambling
gait. And I will guide him to Sparta and to sandy Pylos to seek tidings of his dear father's
return, if peradventure he may hear thereof and that so he may be had in good report among men.'

She spake and bound beneath her feet her lovely golden sandals that wax not old, and bare her
alike over the wet sea and over the limitless land, swift as the breath of the wind. And she
seized her doughty spear, shod with sharp bronze, weighty and huge and strong, wherewith she
quells the ranks of heroes with whomsoever she is wroth, the daughter of the mighty sire. Then
from the heights of Olympus she came glancing down, and she stood in the land of Ithaca, at
the entry of the gate of Odysseus, on the threshold of the courtyard, holding in her hand the
spear of bronze, in the semblance of a stranger, Mentes the captain of the Taphians. And there
she found the lordly wooers: now they were taking their pleasure at draughts in front of the
doors, sitting on hides of oxen, which themselves had slain. And of the henchmen and the ready
squires, some were mixing for them wine and water in bowls, and some again were washing the
tables with porous sponges and were setting them forth, and others were carving flesh in plenty.

And godlike Telemachus was far the first to descry her, for he was sitting with a heavy heart
among the wooers dreaming on his good father, if haply he might come somewhence, and make a
scattering of the wooers there throughout the palace, and himself get honour and bear rule
among his own possessions. Thinking thereupon, as he sat among wooers, he saw Athene--and he
went straight to the outer porch, for he thought it blame in his heart that a stranger should
stand long at the gates: and halting nigh her he clasped her right hand and took from her the
spear of bronze, and uttered his voice and spake unto her winged words:

'Hail, stranger, with us thou shalt be kindly entreated, and thereafter, when thou hast tasted
meat, thou shalt tell us that whereof thou hast need.'

Therewith he led the way, and Pallas Athene followed. And when they were now within the lofty
house, he set her spear that he bore against a tall pillar, within the polished spear-stand,
where stood many spears besides, even those of Odysseus of the hardy heart; and he led the
goddess and seated her on a goodly carven chair, and spread a linen cloth thereunder, and beneath
was a footstool for the feet. For himself he placed an inlaid seat hard by, apart from the
company of the wooers, lest the stranger should be disquieted by the noise and should have
a loathing for the meal, being come among overweening men, and also that he might ask him about
his father that was gone from his home.

Then a handmaid bare water for the washing of hands in a goodly golden ewer, and poured it
forth over a silver basin to wash withal, and drew to their side a polished table. And a grave
dame bare wheaten bread and set it by them, and laid on the board many dainties, giving freely
of such things as she had by her. And a carver lifted and placed by them platters of divers
kinds of flesh, and nigh them he set golden bowls, and a henchman walked to and fro pouring
out to them the wine.

Then in came the lordly wooers; and they sat them down in rows on chairs, and on high seats,
and henchmen poured water on their hands, and maidservants piled wheaten bread by them in baskets,
and pages crowned the bowls with drink; and they stretched forth their hands upon the good
cheer spread before them. Now when the wooers had put from them the desire of meat and drink,
they minded them of other things, even of the song and dance: for these are the crown of the
feast. And a henchman placed a beauteous lyre in the hands of Phemius, who was minstrel to
the wooers despite his will. Yea and as he touched the lyre he lifted up his voice in sweet
songs.{*}

{* Or, according to the ordinary interpretation of [Greek]: So he touched the chords in prelude
to his sweet singing.} 

But Telemachus spake unto grey-eyed Athene, holding his head close to her that those others
might not hear: 'Dear stranger, wilt thou of a truth be wroth at the word that I shall say?
Yonder men verily care for such things as these, the lyre and song, lightly, as they that devour
the livelihood of another without atonement, of that man whose white bones, it may be, lie
wasting in the rain upon the mainland, or the billow rolls them in the brine. Were but these
men to see him returned to Ithaca, they all would pray rather for greater speed of foot than
for gain of gold and raiment. But now he hath perished, even so, an evil doom, and for us is
no comfort, no, not though any of earthly men should say that he will come again. Gone is the
day of his returning! But come declare me this, and tell me all plainly: Who art thou of the
sons of men, and whence? Where is thy city, where are they that begat thee? Say, on what manner
of ship didst thou come, and how did sailors bring thee to Ithaca, and who did they avow themselves
to be, for in nowise do I deem that thou camest hither by land.  And herein tell me true, that
I may know for a surety whether thou art a newcomer, or whether thou art a guest of the house,
seeing that many were the strangers that came to our home, for that HE too had voyaged much
among men.'

Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, answered him: 'Yea now, I will plainly tell thee all. I
avow me to be Mentes, son of wise Anchialus, and I bear rule among the Taphians, lovers of
the oar. And now am I come to shore, as thou seest, with ship and crew, sailing over the wine-dark
sea, unto men of strange speech, even to Temesa, {*} in quest of copper, and my cargo is shining
iron. And there my ship is lying toward the upland, away from the city, in the harbour of Rheithron
beneath wooded Neion: and we declare ourselves to be friends one of the other, and of houses
friendly, from of old. Nay, if thou wouldest be assured, go ask the old man, the hero Laertes,
who they say no more comes to the city, but far away toward the upland suffers affliction,
with an ancient woman for his handmaid, who sets by him meat and drink, whensoever weariness
takes hold of his limbs, as he creeps along the knoll of his vineyard plot.  And now am I come;
for verily they said that HE, thy father, was among his people; but lo, the gods withhold him
from his way. For goodly Odysseus hath not yet perished on the earth; but still, methinks,
he lives and is kept on the wide deep in a seagirt isle, and hard men constrain him, wild folk
that hold him, it may be, sore against his will.  But now of a truth will I utter my word of
prophecy, as the Immortals bring it into my heart and as I deem it will be accomplished, though
no soothsayer am I, nor skilled in the signs of birds. Henceforth indeed for no long while
shall he be far from his own dear country, not though bonds of iron bind him; he will advise
him of a way to return, for he is a man of many devices. But come, declare me this, and tell
me all plainly, whether indeed, so tall as thou art, thou art sprung from the loins of Odysseus.
Thy head surely and they beauteous eyes are wondrous like to his, since full many a time have
we held converse together ere he embarked for Troy, whither the others, aye the bravest of
the Argives, went in hollow ships. From that day forth neither have I seen Odysseus, nor he me.'

{* Tamasia, in the mountainous centre of Cyprus.}

Then wise Telemachus answered her, and said: 'Yea, sir, now will I plainly tell thee all. My
mother verily saith that I am his; for myself I know not, for never man yet knew of himself
his own descent. O that I had been the son of some blessed man, whom old age overtook among
his own possessions! But now of him that is the most hapless of mortal men, his son they say
that I am, since thou dost question me hereof.'

Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, spake unto him, and said: 'Surely no nameless lineage have
the gods ordained for thee in days to come, since Penelope bore thee so goodly a man. But come,
declare me this, and tell it all plainly. What feast, nay, what rout is this? What hast thou
to do therewith? Is it a clan drinking, or a wedding feast, for here we have no banquet where
each man brings his share? In such wise, flown with insolence, do they seem to me to revel
wantonly through the house: and well might any man be wroth to see so many deeds of shame,
whatso wise man came among them.'

Then wise Telemachus answered her, and said: 'Sir, forasmuch as thou questionest me of these
things and inquirest thereof, our house was once like to have been rich and honourable, while
yet that man was among his people. But now the gods willed it otherwise, in evil purpose, who
have made him pass utterly out of sight as no man ever before.  Truly I would not even for
his death make so great sorrow, had he fallen among his fellows in the land of the Trojans,
or in the arms of his friends when he had wound up the clew of war. Then would the whole Achaean
host have builded him a barrow, and even for his son would he have won great glory in the after
days. But now the spirits of the storm have swept him away inglorious. He is gone, lost to
sight and hearsay, but for me hath he left anguish and lamentation; nor henceforth is it for
him alone that I mourn and weep, since the gods have wrought for me other sore distress. For
all the noblest that are princes in the isles, in Dulichium and Same and wooded Zacynthus,
and as many as lord it in rocky Ithaca, all these woo my mother and waste my house. But as
for her she neither refuseth the hated bridal, nor hath the heart to make an end: so they devour
and minish my house, and ere long will they make havoc likewise of myself.'

Then in heavy displeasure spake unto him Pallas Athene: 'God help thee! thou art surely sore
in need of Odysseus that is afar, to stretch forth his hands upon the shameless wooers. But
my father gave it him, for he bare him wondrous love. O that Odysseus might in such strength
consort with the wooers: so should they all have swift fate and bitter wedlock! Howbeit these
things surely lie on the knees of the gods, whether he shall return or not, and take vengeance
in his halls. But I charge thee to take counsel how thou mayest thrust forth the wooers from
the hall. Come now, mark and take heed unto my words. On the morrow call the Achaean lords
to the assembly, and declare thy saying to all, and take the gods to witness. As for the wooers
bid them scatter them each one to his own, and for thy mother, if her heart is moved to marriage,
let her go back to the hall of that mighty man her father, and her kinsfolk will furnish a
wedding feast, and array the gifts of wooing exceeding many, all that should go back with a
daughter dearly beloved. And to thyself I will give a word of wise counsel, if perchance thou
wilt hearken. Fit out a ship, the best thou hast, with twenty oarsmen, and go to inquire concerning
thy father that is long afar, if perchance any man shall tell thee aught, or if thou mayest
hear the voice from Zeus, which chiefly brings tidings to men. Get thee first to Pylos and
inquire of goodly Nestor, and from thence to Sparta to Menelaus of the fair hair, for he came
home the last of the mail-coated Achaeans. If thou shalt hear news of the life and the returning
of thy father, then verily thou mayest endure the wasting for yet a year. But if thou shalt
hear that he is dead and gone, return then to thine own dear country and pile his mound, and
over it pay burial rites, full many as is due, and give thy mother to a husband. But when thou
hast done this and made an end, thereafter take counsel in thy mind and heart, how thou mayest
slay the wooers in thy halls, whether by guile or openly; for thou shouldest not carry childish
thoughts, being no longer of years thereto. Or hast thou not heard what renown the goodly Orestes
gat him among all men in that he slew the slayer of his father, guileful Aegisthus, who killed
his famous sire? And thou, too, my friend, for I see that thou art very comely and tall, be
valiant, that even men unborn may praise thee. But I will now go down to the swift ship and
to my men, who methinks chafe much at tarrying for me; and do thou thyself take heed and give
ear unto my words.'

Then wise Telemachus answered her, saying: 'Sir, verily thou speakest these things out of a
friendly heart, as a father to his son, and never will I forget them. But now I pray thee abide
here, though eager to be gone, to the end that after thou hast bathed and had all thy heart's
desire, thou mayest wend to the ship joyful in spirit, with a costly gift and very goodly,
to be an heirloom of my giving, such as dear friends give to friends.'

Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, answered him: 'Hold me now no longer, that am eager for
the way. But whatsoever gift thine heart shall bid thee give me, when I am on my way back let
it be mine to carry home: bear from thy stores a gift right goodly, and it shall bring thee
the worth thereof in return.'

So spake she and departed, the grey-eyed Athene, and like an eagle of the sea she flew away,
but in his spirit she planted might and courage, and put him in mind of his father yet more
than heretofore. And he marked the thing and was amazed, for he deemed that it was a god; and
anon he went among the wooers, a godlike man.

Now the renowned minstrel was singing to the wooers, and they sat listening in silence; and
his song was of the pitiful return of the Achaeans, that Pallas Athene laid on them as they
came forth from Troy. And from her upper chamber the daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope, caught
the glorious strain, and she went down the high stairs from her chamber, not alone, for two
of her handmaids bare her company. Now when the fair lady had come unto the wooers, she stood
by the pillar of the well-builded roof holding up her glistening tire before her face; and
a faithful maiden stood on either side her. Then she fell a weeping, and spake unto the divine
minstrel:

'Phemius, since thou knowest many other charms for mortals, deeds of men and gods, which bards
rehearse, some one of these do thou sing as thou sittest by them, and let them drink their
wine in silence; but cease from this pitiful strain, that ever wastes my heart within my breast,
since to me above all women hath come a sorrow comfortless. So dear a head do I long for in
constant memory, namely, that man whose fame is noised abroad from Hellas to mid Argos.'

Then wise Telemachus answered her, and said: 'O my mother, why then dost thou grudge the sweet
minstrel to gladden us as his spirit moves him? It is not minstrels who are in fault, but Zeus,
methinks, is in fault, who gives to men, that live by bread, to each one as he will. As for
him it is no blame if he sings the ill-faring of the Danaans; for men always prize that song
the most, which rings newest in their ears. But let thy heart and mind endure to listen, for
not Odysseus only lost in Troy the day of his returning, but many another likewise perished.
Howbeit go to thy chamber and mind thine own housewiferies, the loom and distaff, and bid thy
handmaids ply their tasks. But speech shall be for men, for all, but for me in chief; for mine
is the lordship in the house.'

Then in amaze she went back to her chamber, for she laid up the wise saying of her son in her
heart. She ascended to her upper chamber with the women her handmaids, and then was bewailing
Odysseus, her dear lord, till grey-eyed Athene cast sweet sleep upon her eyelids.

Now the wooers clamoured throughout the shadowy halls, and each one uttered a prayer to be
her bedfellow. And wise Telemachus first spake among them:

'Wooers of my mother, men despiteful out of measure, let us feast now and make merry and let
there be no brawling; for, lo, it is a good thing to list to a minstrel such as him, like to
the gods in voice. But in the morning let us all go to the assembly and sit us down, that I
may declare my saying outright, to wit that ye leave these halls: and busy yourselves with
other feasts, eating your own substance, going in turn from house to house. And ruthless as
was the destruction of Vandal and Goth in the city itself and in the peninsula, they could not
destroy the heritage that had been spread from Britain to the Black Sea and from the Elbe to
the upper waters of the Nile.

REFERENCES

HISTORY OF ROME, Theodor Mommsen, tr. by W. P. Dickson, 1867. GENERAL HISTORY, Polybius, transl.
by Hampton, 1823. HISTORY OF THE ROMANS UNDER THE EMPIRE, Chas.

Merivale (vol. III.), 1866. THE GREATNESS AND DECLINE OF ROME, G. Ferrero, tr. by A. E. Zemmern,
1909. FLEETS OF THE FIRST PUNIC WAR, W. W. Tarn, in Journal of Hellenic Studies, 1907. HERESIES
OF SEA POWER (pp. 40-71), Fred Jane, 1906. INFLUENCE OF SEA POWER ON HISTORY (pp. 15 ff.), A.
T. Mahan, 1889. For a complete bibliography of Roman sea power, v. INFLUENCE OF SEA POWER ON THE
ROMAN REPUBLIC (Doctoral Dissertation), F. W. Clark, 1915.

CHAPTER IV

THE NAVIES OF THE MIDDLE AGES: THE EASTERN EMPIRE

The thousand years following the collapse of the Roman empire, a period generally referred to
as the Middle Ages, are characterized by a series of barbarian invasions. Angles, Saxons, Goths,
Visigoths, Huns, Vandals, Vikings, Slavs, Arabs, and Turks poured over the broken barriers
of the empire and threatened to extinguish the last spark of western and Christian civilization.
Out of this welter of invasions and the anarchy of petty kingdoms arose finally the powerful
nations that perpetuated the inheritance from Athens, Rome, and Jerusalem,
and developed on this foundation the newer institutions of political
and intellectual freedom that have made western civilization mistress
of the world.

For this triumph of West over East, of Christianity over barbarism,
we have to thank partly the courage and genius of great warriors and
statesmen who arose here and there, like Alfred of England and Martel
of France, but chiefly the Eastern Empire, with its capital at Constantinople,
which stood through this entire epoch as the one great bulwark against
which the invasions dashed in vain.

In this story of defense, the Christian fleets won more than one Salamis, as we shall see in the
course of this chapter.

In the year 328 A.D. the Emperor Constantine the Great moved his capital to Byzantium and named
it "New Rome." In honor of its founder, however, the name was changed soon to "Constantinople,"
which it has retained ever since.

It may seem strange that after so many glorious centuries Rome should have been deprived of
the honor of being the center of the great empire which bore its own name, but in the fourth
century the city itself had no real significance. All power rested in the person of the Emperor
himself, and wherever he went became for the time being the capital
for all practical purposes.

At this time the empire was already on the defensive and the danger lay in the east. Constantine
needed a capital nearer the scene of future campaigns, nearer his weakest frontier, the Danube,
and nearer the center of the empire. Byzantium not only served these purposes but also possessed
natural advantages of a very high order. It was situated where Europe and Asia meet, it commanded
the waterway between the Black Sea and the Mediterranean, and it was a natural citadel. Whoever
captured the city must needs be powerful by land and sea. Under the emperor's direction the
new capital was greatly enlarged and protected by a system of massive walls. Behind these walls
the city stood fast for over a thousand years against wave after wave of barbarian invasion.

Of
the wars with the Persians, the Vandals, and the Huns nothing need be said here, for they do
not involve the operations of fleets. The city was safe so long as no enemy appeared with
the power to hold the sea. That power appeared in the seventh century when the Arabs, or "Saracens,"
as they were called in Europe, swept westward and northward in the first great Mohammedan
invasion.

  Most migrations are to be explained by the pressure of enemies,
  or the lack of food and pasturage in the countries left behind, or
the discovery of better living conditions in the neighboring countries.

But the impulse behind the two tremendous assaults of Islam upon Europe seems to have been
religious fanaticism of a character and extent unmatched in history. The founder of the Faith, Mohammed,
taught from 622 to 632. He succeeded in imbuing his followers with the passion of winning the
world to the knowledge of Allah and Mohammed his prophet. The unbeliever was to be offered
the alternatives of conversion or death, and the believer who fell in the holy wars would be
instantly transported to Paradise. Men who actually believe that they will be sent to a blissful
immortality after death are the most terrible soldiers to face, for they would as readily die
as live. In fact Cromwell's "Ironsides" of a later day owed their invincibility to very much
the same spirit.

At all events, by the time of Mohammed's death all Arabia had been converted to his faith and,
fired with zeal, turned to conquer the world. Hitherto the tribes of Arabia were scattered
and disorganized, and Arabia as a country meant nothing to the outside world. Now under the leadership
of the Prophet it had become a driving force of tremendous power. Mohammedan armies swept over
Syria into Persia. In 637, only five years after Mohammed's death, Jerusalem surrendered,
and shortly afterwards Egypt was conquered. Early in the eighth century the Arabs ruled from the
Indus on the east, and the Caucasus on the north, to the shores of
the Atlantic on the west.

Their empire curved westward along the coast of northern Africa, through Spain, like one of
their own scimitars, threatening all Christendom. Indeed, the Arab invasion stands unparalleled
in history for its rapidity and extent.

The one great obstacle in the way was the Christian, or Roman, empire with its center at Constantinople.
Muaviah, the Emir of Syria, was the first to perceive that nothing could be done against the
empire until the Arabs had wrested from it the command of the sea.

Accordingly he set about building a great naval armament. In 649 this fleet made an attack
on Cyprus but was defeated. The following year, however, it took an important island, Aradus,
off the coast of Syria, once a stronghold of the Phnicians, and sacked it with savage barbarity.
An expedition sent from Constantinople to recover Alexandria was
met by this fleet and routed.

This first naval victory over the Christians gave the Saracens unbounded confidence in their
ability to fight on the sea. They sailed into the Ægean, took Rhodes, plundered Cos, and returned
loaded with booty. Muaviah, elated with these successes, planned a great combined land and
water expedition against the Christian capital.

At this point it is worth pausing to consider what the fighting ship of this period was like.
As we have seen in the preceding chapter the Roman navy sank into complete decay. At the end of
the fourth century there was practically no imperial navy in existence. The conquest of the
Vandals by Belisarius in the sixth century involved the creation of a fleet, but when that task
was over the navy again disappeared until the appearance of the Arabs compelled the building
of a new imperial fleet. The small provincial squadrons then used to patrol the coasts were
by no means adequate to meet the crisis.

The warships of this period were called "dromons," a term that persists even in the time of the Turkish
invasion eight centuries later. The word means "fast sailers" or "racers." The dromon was not
the low galley of the later Middle Ages but a two-banked ship, probably quite as large as the
Roman quinquereme, carrying a complement of about 300 men. Amidships was built a heavy castle
or redoubt of timbers, pierced with loopholes for archery. On the forecastle rose a kind of turret,
possibly revolving, from which, after Greek fire was invented, the tubes or primitive cannon projected
the substance on the decks of the enemy. The dromon had two masts, lateen rigged, and between
thirty and forty oars to a side.

There were two classes of dromons, graded according to size, and a
third class of ship known as the "pamphylian," which was apparently
of a cruiser type, less cumbered with superstructure.

In addition there were small scout and dispatch boats of various shapes and sizes.

Both Christian and Saracen fought with these kinds of warships. Apparently the Arabs simply copied
the vessels they found already in use by their enemies, and added no new device of their own.

In
655 Muaviah started his great double invasion against Constantinople.

He sent his fleet into the Ægean, while he himself with an army tried to force the passes of
the Taurus mountains. Before the Arab fleet had gone far it met the Christian fleet, commanded
by the Emperor himself, off the town of Phaselis on the southwestern coast of Asia Minor. A great
battle followed. The Christian emperor, Constantine II, distinguished himself by personal
courage throughout the action, but the day went sorely against the Christians. At last the flagship
was captured and he himself survived only by leaping into a vessel that came to his rescue while
his men fought to cover his escape. It was a terrible defeat, for 20,000 Christians had been
killed and the remnants of their fleet were in full retreat.

But the Saracens had bought their victory at such a price that they were themselves in no condition
to profit by it, and the naval expedition went no further. Meanwhile Muaviah had not succeeded
in forcing the Taurus with his army, so that the grand assault came to nothing after all.

The following year the murder of the Caliph brought on a civil war among the Saracens, in consequence
of which Muaviah arranged a truce with Constantine.

The latter was thus enabled to turn his attention to the beating back of the Slavs in the east
and the recovery of imperial possessions in the west, notably the city and province of Carthage.
During the last of these campaigns he was killed by a slave.

The death of this energetic and able ruler seemed to Muaviah the opportunity to begin fresh
operations against the Christian empire. Three great armies invaded the territory of the Cross.
One plundered Syracuse, another seized and fortified a post that threatened the existence of
Carthage, a third pushed to the shores of the Sea of Marmora. These were, however, only preliminary
to the grand assault on the capital itself.

In 673 a great Arab armada forced the Hellespont and captured Cyzicus. With this as a base,
the fleet landed an army on the northern shore of the Sea of Marmora. By these means Constantinople
was invested by land and sea. But the great walls proved impregnable against the attacks of
the army, and the Christian fleet, sheltered in the Golden Horn, was able to sally out from
time to time and make successful raids on detachments of the Saracen ships. This state of affairs
continued for six months, after which Muaviah retired with his army to Cyzicus, leaving a strong
naval guard to hold the straits.

The next spring Muaviah again landed his army on the European side and besieged the city for
several months. The second year's operations were no more successful than the first, and again
the Arab force retired to Cyzicus for the winter.

The Arab commander was determined to stick it out until he had forced the surrender of the city
by sheer exhaustion, but his plan had a fatal error. During the winter months the land blockade
was abandoned, with the result that supplies for the next year's siege were readily collected for
the beleaguered city. Emperor and citizens alike rose to the emergency with a spirit of devotion
that burned brighter with every year of the siege. Meanwhile the Christians of the outlying provinces
of Syria and Africa were also fighting stubbornly and with considerable success against the enemy.
The year 676 passed without any material change in the situation.

During the siege a Syrian architect named Callinicus is said to have come to Constantinople with
a preparation of his own invention, "Greek fire," which he offered the Emperor for use against
the Saracen. This, according to one historian, "was a semi-liquid substance, composed of sulphur,
pitch, dissolved niter, and petroleum boiled together and mixed with certain less important and
more obscure substances.... When ejected it caught the woodwork which it fell and set it so thoroughly
on fire that there was no possibility of extinguishing the conflagration. It could only be put
out, it is said, by pouring vinegar, wine, or sand upon it."[1]

[Footnote 1: THE ART OF WAR, Oman, p. 546.]

Constantine IV, the Emperor, was quick to see the possibilities of the innovation and equipped his
dromons with projecting brass tubes for squirting the substance upon
the enemy's ships.

These are sometimes referred to as "siphons," but it is not clear just how they were operated. One
writer[2] is of the opinion that something of the secret of gunpowder had been obtained from
the East and that the substance was actually projected by a charge of gunpowder; in short, that
these "siphons" were primitive cannon. In addition to these tubes other means were prepared for
throwing the fire. Earthenware jars containing it were to be flung by hand or arbalist, and darts
and arrows were wrapped with tow soaked in the substance.

[Footnote 2: THE BYZANTINE EMPIRE, Foord, p. 139.]

The Christian fleet was no match for the Saracen in numbers, but Constantine pinned his faith
on the new invention. Accordingly, during the fourth year of the siege, 677, he boldly led his
fleet to the attack. We have no details of this battle beyond the fact that the Greek fire struck
such terror by its destructive effect that the Saracens were utterly defeated. This unexpected
blow completed the growing demoralization of the besiegers. The army returned to the Asiatic
shore of the Bosphorus, and the survivors of the fleet turned homewards. Constantine followed
up his victory with splendid energy. He landed troops on the Asiatic shore, pursued the retreating
Arabs and drove the shattered remnant of their army back into Syria. The fleet was overtaken
by a storm in the Ægean and suffered heavily.

Before the ships could reassemble, the Christians were upon them and almost nothing was left
of the great Saracen armada. Thus the second great assault on Constantinople was shattered
by the most staggering disaster that had ever befallen the cause of Islam.

The Christian empire once more stood supreme, and that supremacy was attested by the terms
of peace which the defeated Muaviah was glad to accept. There was to be a truce of thirty years,
during which the Christian emperor was to receive an annual tribute of 3000 pounds of gold, fifty
Arab horses and fifty slaves.

It is unfortunate that there was no Herodotus to tell the details of this victory, for it was
tremendously important to European civilization. Western Europe was then a welter of barbarism
and anarchy, and if Constantinople had fallen, in all probability the last vestige of Roman
civilization would have been destroyed. Moreover, the battle is of special interest from a
tactical point of view because it was won by a new device, Greek fire, which was the most destructive
naval weapon up to the time when gunpowder and artillery took its place. Indeed this substance
may be said to have saved Christian civilization for several centuries,
for the secret of its composition was carefully preserved at Constantinople
and the Arabs never recovered from their fear of it.

The victory did not, however, mark the crisis of the struggle. In the half century that followed,
Constantinople suffered from weak or imbecile emperors while the Caliphate gained ground under
able rulers and generals. In the first fifteen years of the eighth century the Saracens reached
the climax of their power. Under a great general, Muza, they conquered Spain and spread into
southern France. It was he who conceived the grandiose plan of conquering Christendom by a simultaneous
attack from the west and from the east, converging at the city of Rome. One army was to advance
from Asia Minor and take Constantinople; another was to cross the Pyrenees and overrun the
territory of the Franks.

Had the enterprise been started at the time proposed there could have been little opposition
in the west, for the Franks were then busy fighting each other, but
luckily Muza fell into disgrace with the Caliph at this time and his
great project was undertaken by less able hands and on a piecemeal
plan.

The eastern line of invasion was undertaken first in the year 717. A fleet of warships and transports
to the number of 1800 sailed to the Hellespont, carrying about 80,000 troops, while a great army
collected at Tarsus and marched overland toward the same destination.

Meanwhile two more fleets were being prepared in the ports of Africa and Egypt, and a third
army was being collected to reënforce the first expedition.

This army was to be under the personal command of the Caliph himself. The third attack on the
Christian capital was intended to be the supreme effort.

Fortunately, the ruler of Constantinople at this hour of peril was a man of ability and energy,
Leo III; but the empire had sunk so low as a result of the misrule of his predecessors that
his authority scarcely extended beyond the shores of the Sea of Marmora, and his resources were
at a low ebb. The navy on which so much depended was brought to a high point of efficiency,
but it was so inferior in numbers to the Saracen armada that he dared not attempt even a defense
of the Dardanelles.

For the Arabs all went well at first. Unopposed they transported a part of their army to the
European shore, moved toward Constantinople and invested it by land and sea. One detachment was
sent to cover Adrianople, which was occupied by a Christian garrison; the rest of the force concentrated
on the capital itself.

Meanwhile the Christian fleet lay anchored in the shelter of the Golden Horn, protected by a
boom of chains and logs.

As the Saracen ships came up to occupy the straits above the city they fell into confusion
in trying to stem the rapid current. Seeing his opportunity, the emperor ordered the boom opened,
and leading the way in his flagship, he fell upon the huddle of Saracen vessels in the channel.
The latter could make little resistance, and before the main body
of the fleet could work up to the rescue, the Christians had destroyed
twenty and taken a number of prizes back to the Horn.

Again Greek fire had proved its deadly efficacy. Elated with this success, Leo ordered the
boom opened wide and, lying in battle order at the mouth of the Horn, he challenged the Arab
fleet to attack. But such was the terror inspired by Greek fire that the Grand Vizier, in spite
of his enormous superiority in numbers, declined to close.

Instead he withdrew his dromons out of the Bosphorus and thereafter followed the less risky
policy of a blockade. This initial success of the Christian fleet had the important effect
of leaving open the sea route to the Black Sea, through which supplies could still reach the
beleaguered city.

The Arabs then sat down to wear out the defenders by a protracted siege on land and sea. In the
spring of 718 the new army and the two new fleets arrived on the scene. One of the latter succeeded,
probably by night, in passing through the Bosphorus and closing the
last inlet to the city.

The situation for the defenders became desperate. Many of the men serving on these new fleets,
however, were Christians. These took every opportunity to desert, and gave important information
to the emperor as to the disposition of the Arab ships.

Acting on this knowledge, Leo took his fleet out from the shelter of the boom and moved up the
straits against the African and Egyptian squadrons that were blockading the northern exit.
The deserters guided him to where these squadrons lay, at anchor and unprepared for action.
What followed was a massacre rather than a battle.

The Christian members of the crews deserted wholesale and turned upon their Moslem officers.
Ship after ship was rammed by the Christian dromons or set on fire by the terrible substance
which every Arab regarded with superstitious dread. Some were driven ashore, others captured,
many more sunk or burnt to the water's edge.

Of a total of nearly 800 vessels practically nothing was left.
Leo followed up this spectacular naval victory by transporting a
force from the garrison of the city to the opposite shore of the Bosphorus,
attacking the army encamped there and driving it in rout. Meanwhile
the Bulgarian chieftain had responded to Leo's appeal and, relieving
the siege of Adrianople, beat back the Saracen army at that point
with great slaughter. The fugitives of that army served to throw into
panic the troops encamped round the walls of Constantinople, already
demoralized by disease, the death of their leaders, and the annihilation
of the African and Egyptian fleets in the Bosphorus.

The great retreat
began. The Arab soldiers started back through Asia Minor, but only
30,000 out of the original force of 180,000 lived to reach Tarsus.
The fleet set sail for the Ægean, and as in the similar retreat of
a half century before, the Arabs were overwhelmed by a storm with
terrible losses. The Christian ships picked off many survivors, and
the Christians of the islands destroyed others that sought shelter
in any port. It is said that out of the original armada of 1800 vessels
only five returned to Syria! Thus the third and supreme effort of
the Saracen ended in one of the greatest military disasters in history.

The
service of the Christian fleet in the salvation of the empire at this
time is thus summarized by a historian:

"The fleet won most of the
credit for the fine defense; it invariably fought with admirable readiness
and discipline, and was handled in the most masterful manner. It checked
the establishment of a naval blockade at the very outset, and broke
it when it was temporarily formed in 718; it enabled the army to operate
at will on either shore of the Bosphorus, and it followed up the retreating
Saracens and completed the ruin of the great armament."[1]

[Footnote
1: THE BYZANTINE EMPIRE, Foard, p. 170.]

The winning stroke in this
campaign was the tremendous naval victory at the mouth of the Bosphorus,
and this, even more emphatically than Constantine's victory in 677,
deserves to be called another Salamis. Not only did it save the Christian
empire but it checked the Caliphate at the summit of its power and
started it on its decline. Not for thirty years afterwards was the
Saracen able to put any considerable fleet upon the sea.

It was ten
years after the Arab defeat at Constantinople that the armies of the
west began the other part of Muza's project--the conquest of the Franks.
By this time the Frankish power was united and able to present a powerful
defense.
And there stood casks of sweet wine and old, full of the unmixed drink divine, all orderly
ranged by the wall, ready if ever Odysseus should come home, albeit after travail and much
pain. And the close-fitted doors, the folding doors, were shut, and night and day there abode
within a dame in charge, who guarded all in the fulness of her wisdom, Eurycleia, daughter
of Ops son of Peisenor. Telemachus now called her into the chamber and spake unto her, saying:

'Mother, come draw off for me sweet wine in jars, the choicest next to that thou keepest mindful
ever of that ill-fated one, Odysseus, of the seed of Zeus, if perchance he may come I know
not whence, having avoided death and the fates. So fill twelve jars, and close each with his
lid, and pour me barley-meal into well-sewn skins, and let there be twenty measures of the
grain of bruised barley-meal. Let none know this but thyself! As for these things let them
all be got together; for in the evening I will take them with me, at the time that my mother
hath gone to her upper chamber and turned her thoughts to sleep. How shouldst thou fare over
wide lands, thou that art an only child and well-beloved? As for him he hath perished, Odysseus
of the seed of Zeus, far from his own country in the land of strangers. And yonder men, so
soon as thou art gone, will devise mischief against thee thereafter, that thou mayest perish
by guile, and they will share among them all this wealth of thine. Nay, abide here, settled
on thine own lands: thou hast no need upon the deep unharvested to suffer evil and go wandering.'

Then wise Telemachus answered her, saying: 'Take heart, nurse, for lo, this my purpose came
not but of a god. But swear to tell no word thereof to my dear mother, till at least it shall
be the eleventh or twelfth day from hence, or till she miss me of herself, and hear of my departure,
that so she may not mar her fair face with her tears.'

Thus he spake, and the old woman sware a great oath by the gods not to reveal it. But when
she had sworn and done that oath, straightway she drew off the wine for him in jars, and poured
barley-meal into well-sewn skins, and Telemachus departed to the house and consorted with the
wooers.

Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, turned to other thoughts. In the likeness of Telemachus
she went all through the city, and stood by each one of the men and spake her saying, and bade
them gather at even by the swift ship. In the end, Scipio, after having driven the Carthaginians
out of Spain, dislodged Hannibal from Italy by carrying an invasion
into Africa.

At the battle of Zama the Romans defeated Hannibal and won the war.

It is difficult to see any significant use of sea power in this second Punic war. Neither side seemed
to realize what might be done in cutting the communications of the
other, and both sides seemed to be able to use the sea at will. Of
course due allowance must be made for the limitations of naval activity.
 Now grey
eyed Athene spake unto Telemachus, and called him from out the fair-lying halls, taking the
likeness of Mentor, both in fashion and in voice:

'Telemachus, thy goodly-greaved companions are sitting already at their oars, it is thy despatch
they are awaiting. Nay then, let us go, that we delay them not long from the way.'

Therewith Pallas Athene led the way quickly, and he followed hard in the steps of the goddess.
Now when they had come down to the ship and to the sea, they found the long-haired youths of
the company on the shore; and the mighty prince Telemachus spake among them:

'Come hither, friends, let us carry the corn on board, for all is now together in the room,
and my mother knows nought thereof, nor any of the maidens of the house: one woman only heard
my saying.'

Thus he spake and led the way, and they went with him. So they brought all and stowed it in
the decked ship, according to the word of the dear son of Odysseus. Then Telemachus climbed
the ship, and Athene went before him, and behold, she sat her down in the stern, and near her
sat Telemachus. And the men loosed the hawsers and climbed on board themselves and sat down
upon the benches. And grey-eyed Athene sent them a favourable gale, a fresh West Wind, singing
over the wine-dark sea.

And Telemachus called unto his company and bade them lay hands on the tackling, and they hearkened
to his call. And the wind filled the belly of the sail, and the dark wave seethed loudly round
the stem of the running ship, and she fleeted over the wave, accomplishing her path. Then they
made all fast in the swift black ship, and set mixing bowls brimmed with wine, and poured drink
offering to the deathless gods that are from everlasting, and in chief to the grey eyed daughter
of Zeus. So all night long and through the dawn the ship cleft her way.

Book III

  Nestor entertains Telemachus at Pylos and tells him how the
  Greeks departed from Troy; and sends him for further
  information to Sparta.

Now the sun arose and left the lovely mere, speeding to the brazen heaven, to give light to
the immortals and to mortal men on the earth, the graingiver, and they reached Pylos, the stablished
castle of Neleus. There the people were doing sacrifice on the sea shore, slaying black bulls
without spot to the dark-haired god, the shaker of the earth. Nine companies there were, and
five hundred men sat in each, and in every company they held nine bulls ready to hand. Just
as they had tasted the inner parts, and were burning the slices of the thighs on the altar
to the god, the others were bearing straight to land, and brailed up the sails of the gallant
ship, and moored her, and themselves came forth. And Telemachus too stept forth from the ship,
and Athene led the way. And the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, spake first to him, saying:

'Telemachus, thou needst not now be abashed, no, not one whit. For to this very end didst thou
sail over the deep, that thou mightest hear tidings of thy father, even where the earth closed
over him, and what manner of death he met. But come now, go straight to Nestor, tamer of horses:
let us learn what counsel he hath in the secret of his heart. And beseech him thyself that
he may give unerring answer; and he will not lie to thee, for he is very wise.'

The wise Telemachus answered, saying: 'Mentor, and how shall I go, how shall I greet him, I,
who am untried in words of wisdom? Moreover a young man may well be abashed to question an elder.'

Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, spake to him again: 'Telemachus, thou shalt bethink thee
of somewhat in thine own breast, and somewhat the god will give thee to say. For thou, methinks,
of all men wert not born and bred without the will of the gods.'

So spake Pallas Athene and led the way quickly; and he followed hard in the steps of the goddess.
And they came to the gathering and the session of the men of Pylos. There was Nestor seated
with his sons, and round him his company making ready the feast, and roasting some of the flesh
and spitting other. Now when they saw the strangers, they went all together, and clasped their
hands in welcome, and would have them sit down. First Peisistratus, son of Nestor, drew nigh,
and took the hands of each, and made them to sit down at the feast on soft fleeces upon the
sea sand, beside his brother Thrasymedes and his father. And he gave them messes of the inner
meat, and poured wine into a golden cup, and pledging her, he spake unto Pallas Athene, daughter
of Zeus, lord of the aegis:

'Pray now, my guest, to the lord Poseidon, even as it is his feast whereon ye have chanced
in coming hither. And when thou hast made drink offering and prayed, as is due, give thy friend
also the cup of honeyed wine to make offering thereof, inasmuch as he too, methinks, prayeth
to the deathless gods, for all men stand in need of the gods. Howbeit he is younger and mine
own equal in years, therefore to thee first will I give the golden chalice.'

Therewith he placed in her hand the cup of sweet wine. And Athene rejoiced in the wisdom and
judgment of the man, in that he had given to her first the chalice of gold. And straightway
she prayed, and that instantly, to the lord Poseidon:

'Hear me, Poseidon, girdler of the earth, and grudge not the fulfilment of this labour in answer
to our prayer. To Nestor first and to his sons vouchsafe renown, and thereafter grant to all
the people of Pylos a gracious recompense for this splendid hecatomb. Grant moreover that Telemachus
and I may return, when we have accomplished that for which we came hither with our swift black
ship.'

Now as she prayed on this wise, herself the while was fulfilling the prayer. And she gave Telemachus
the fair two-handled cup; and in like manner prayed the dear son of Odysseus. Then, when the
others had roasted the outer parts and drawn them off the spits, they divided the messes and
shared the glorious feast. But when they had put from them the desire of meat and drink, Nestor
of Gerenia, lord of chariots, first spake among them:

'Now is the better time to enquire and ask of the strangers who they are, now that they have
had their delight of food. Strangers, who are ye? Whence sail ye over the wet ways? On some
trading enterprise, or at adventure do ye rove, even as sea-robbers, over the brine, for they
wander at hazard of their own lives bringing bale to alien men?'

Then wise Telemachus answered him and spake with courage, for Athene herself had put boldness
in his heart, that he might ask about his father who was afar, and that he might be had in
good report among men:

'Nestor, son of Neleus, great glory of the Achaeans, thou askest whence we are, and I will
surely tell thee all. We have come forth out of Ithaca that is below Neion; and this our quest
whereof I speak is a matter of mine own, and not of the common weal. I follow after the far-spread
rumour of my father, if haply I may hear thereof, even of the goodly steadfast Odysseus, who
upon a time, men say, fought by thy side and sacked the city of the Trojans. For of all the
others, as many as warred with the Trojans, we hear tidings, and where each one fell by a pitiful
death; but even the death of this man Cronion hath left untold. For none can surely declare
the place where he hath perished, whether he was smitten by foemen on the mainland, or lost
upon the deep among the waves of Amphitrite. So now am I come hither to thy knees, if perchance
thou art willing to tell me of his pitiful death, as one that saw it with thine own eyes, or
heard the story from some other wanderer,-- for his mother bare him to exceeding sorrow. And
speak me no soft words in ruth or pity, but tell me plainly what sight thou didst get of him.
Ah! I pray thee, if ever at all my father, noble Odysseus, made promise to thee of word or
work, and fulfilled the same in the land of the Trojans, where ye Achaeans suffered affliction;
these things, I pray thee, now remember and tell me truth.'

Then Nestor of Gerenia, lord of chariots, answered him: 'My friend, since thou hast brought
sorrow back to mind, behold, this is the story of the woe which we endured in that land, we
sons of the Achaeans, unrestrained in fury, and of all that we bore in wanderings after spoil,
sailing with our ships over the misty deep, wheresoever Achilles led; and of all our war round
the mighty burg of king Priam. Yea and there the best of us were slain. There lies valiant
Aias, and there Achilles, and there Patroclus, the peer of the gods in counsel, and there my
own dear son, strong and noble, Antilochus, that excelled in speed of foot and in the fight.
And many other ills we suffered beside these; who of mortal men could tell the tale? Nay none,
though thou wert to abide here for five years, ay and for six, and ask of all the ills which
the goodly Achaeans then endured. Ere all was told thou wouldst be weary and turn to thine
own country. For nine whole years we were busy about them, devising their ruin with all manner
of craft; and scarce did Cronion bring it to pass. There never a man durst match with him in
wisdom, for goodly Odysseus very far outdid the rest in all manner of craft, Odysseus thy father,
if indeed thou art his son,--amazement comes upon me as I look at thee; for verily thy speech
is like unto his; none would say that a younger man would speak so like an elder. Now look
you, all the while that myself and goodly Odysseus were there, we never spake diversely either
in the assembly or in the council, but always were of one mind, and advised the Argives with
understanding and sound counsel, how all might be for the very best. But after we had sacked
the steep city of Priam, and had departed in our ships, and a god had scattered the Achaeans,
even then did Zeus devise in his heart a pitiful returning for the Argives, for in no wise
were they all discreet or just. Wherefore many of them met with an ill faring by reason of
the deadly wrath of the grey-eyed goddess, the daughter of the mighty sire, who set debate
between the two sons of Atreus. And they twain called to the gathering of the host all the
Achaeans, recklessly and out of order, against the going down of the sun; and lo, the sons
of the Achaeans came heavy with wine. And the Atreidae spake out and told the reason wherefore
they had assembled the host. Then verily Menelaus charged all the Achaeans to bethink them
of returning over the broad back of the sea, but in no sort did he please Agamemnon, whose
desire was to keep back the host and to offer holy hecatombs, that so he might appease that
dread wrath of Athene. Fool! for he knew not this, that she was never to be won; for the mind
of the everlasting gods is not lightly turned to repentance. So these twain stood bandying
hard words; but the goodly-greaved Achaeans sprang up with a wondrous din, and twofold counsels
found favour among them. So that one night we rested, thinking hard things against each other,
for Zeus was fashioning for us a ruinous doom. But in the morning, we of the one part drew
our ships to the fair salt sea, and put aboard our wealth, and the low-girdled Trojan women.
Now one half the people abode steadfastly there with Agamemnon, son of Atreus, shepherd of
the host; and half of us embarked and drave to sea and swiftly the ships sailed, for a god
made smooth the sea with the depths thereof. And when we came to Tenedos, we did sacrifice
to the gods, being eager for the homeward way; but Zeus did not yet purpose our returning,
nay, hard was he, that roused once more an evil strife among us. Then some turned back their
curved ships, and went their way, even the company of Odysseus, the wise and manifold in counsel,
once again showing a favour to Agamemnon, son of Atreus. But I fled on with the squadron that
followed me, for I knew how now the god imagined mischief. And the warlike son of Tydeus fled
and roused his men thereto. And late in our track came Menelaus of the fair hair, who found
us in Lesbos, considering about the long voyage, whether we should go sea-ward of craggy Chios,
by the isle of Psyria, keeping the isle upon our left, or inside Chios past windy Mimas. So
we asked the god to show us a sign, and a sign he declared to us, and bade us cleave a path
across the middle sea to Euboea, that we might flee the swiftest way from sorrow. And a shrill
wind arose and blew, and the ships ran most fleetly over the teeming ways, and in the night
they touched at Geraestus. So there we sacrificed many thighs of bulls to Poseidon, for joy
that we had measured out so great a stretch of sea. It was the fourth day when the company
of Diomede son of Tydeus, tamer of horses, moored their gallant ships at Argos; but I held
on for Pylos, and the breeze was never quenched from the hour that the god sent it forth to
blow. Even so I came, dear child, without tidings, nor know I aught of those others, which
of the Achaeans were saved and which were lost. But all that I hear tell of as I sit in our
halls, thou shalt learn as it is meet, and I will hide nothing from thee. Safely, they say,
came the Myrmidons the wild spearsmen, whom the famous son of high-souled Achilles led; and
safely Philoctetes, the glorious son of Poias. And Idomeneus brought all his company to Crete,
all that escaped the war, and from him the sea gat none. And of the son of Atreus even yourselves
have heard, far apart though ye dwell, how he came, and how Aegisthus devised his evil end;
but verily he himself paid a terrible reckoning. So good a thing it is that a son of the dead
should still be left, even as that son also took vengeance on the slayer of his father, guileful
Aegisthus, who slew his famous sire. And thou too, my friend, for I see thee very comely and
tall, be valiant, that even men unborn may praise thee.'

And wise Telemachus answered him, and said: 'Nestor, son of Neleus, great glory of the Achaeans,
verily and indeed he avenged himself, and the Achaeans shall noise his fame abroad, that even
those may hear who are yet for to be. Oh that the gods would clothe me with such strength as
his, that I might take vengeance on the wooers for their cruel transgression, who wantonly
devise against me infatuate deeds! But the gods have woven for me the web of no such weal,
for me or for my sire. But now I must in any wise endure it.'

Then Nestor of Gerenia, lord of chariots, made answer: 'Dear friend, seeing thou dost call
these things to my remembrance and speak thereof, they tell me that many wooers for thy mother's
hand plan mischief within the halls in thy despite. Say, dost thou willingly submit thee to
oppression, or do the people through the land hate thee, obedient to the voice of a god? Who
knows but that Odysseus may some day come and requite their violence, either himself alone
or all the host of the Achaeans with him? Ah, if but grey-eyed Athene were inclined to love
thee, as once she cared exceedingly for the renowned Odysseus in the land of the Trojans, where
we Achaeans were sore afflicted, for never yet have I seen the gods show forth such manifest
love, as then did Pallas Athene standing manifest by him,-- if she would be pleased so to love
thee and to care for thee, then might certain of them clean forget their marriage.'

And wise Telemachus answered him, saying: 'Old man, in no wise methinks shall this word be
accomplished. This is a hard saying of thine, awe comes over me. Not for my hopes shall this
thing come to pass, not even if the gods so willed it.'

Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, spake to him again: 'Telemachus, what word hath escaped
the door of thy lips? Lightly might a god, if so he would, bring a man safe home even from
afar. Rather myself would I have travail and much pain ere I came home and saw the day of my
returning, than come back and straightway perish on my own hearth-stone, even as Agamemnon
perished by guile at the hands of his own wife and of Aegisthus. There is none assurance any
more of his returning, but already have the deathless gods devised for him death and black
fate. But now I would question Nestor, and ask him of another matter, as one who above all
men knows judgments  and wisdom: for thrice, men say, he hath been king through the generations
of men; yea, like an immortal he seems to me to look upon. Nestor, son of Neleus, now tell
me true: how died the son of Atreus, Agamemnon of the wide domain? Where was Menelaus? What
death did crafty Aegisthus plan for him, in that he killed a man more valiant far than he?
Or was Menelaus not in Argos of Achaia but wandering elsewhere among men, and that other took
heart and slew Agamemnon?'

Then Nestor of Gerenia, lord of chariots, answered him: 'Yea now, my child, I will tell thee
the whole truth. Verily thou guessest aright even of thyself how things would have fallen out,
if Menelaus of the fair hair, the son of Atreus, when he came back from Troy, had found Aegisthus
yet alive in the halls. Then even in his death would they not have heaped the piled earth over
him, but dogs and fowls of the air would have devoured him as he lay on the plain far from
the town. {*} Nor would any of the Achaean women have bewailed him; so dread was the deed he
contrived. Now we sat in leaguer there, achieving many adventures; but he the while in peace
in the heart of Argos, the pastureland of horses, spake ofttimes, tempting her, to the wife
of Agamemnon. Verily at the first she would none of the foul deed, the fair Clytemnestra, for
she had a good understanding. Moreover there was with her a minstrel, whom the son of Atreus
straitly charged as he went to Troy to have a care of his wife. But when at last the doom of
the gods bound her to her ruin, then did Aegisthus carry the minstrel to a lonely isle, and
left him there to be the prey and spoil of birds; while as for her, he led her to his house,
a willing lover with a willing lady. And he burnt many thigh slices upon the holy altars of
the gods, and hung up many offerings, woven-work and gold, seeing that he had accomplished
a great deed, beyond all hope. Now we, I say, were sailing together on our way from Troy, the
son of Atreus and I, as loving friends. But when we had reached holy Sunium, the headland of
Athens, there Phoebus Apollo slew the pilot of Menelaus with the visitation of his gentle shafts,
as he held between his hands the rudder of the running ship, even Phrontis, son of Onetor,
who excelled the tribes of men in piloting a ship, whenso the storm-winds were hurrying by.
Thus was Menelaus holden there, though eager for the way, till he might bury his friend and
pay the last rites over him. But when he in his turn, faring over the wine-dark sea in hollow
ships, reached in swift course the steep mount of Malea, then it was that Zeus of the far-borne
voice devised a hateful path, and shed upon them the breath of the shrill winds, and great
swelling waves arose like unto mountains. There sundered he the fleet in twain, and part thereof
he brought nigh to Crete, where the Cydonians dwelt about the streams of Iardanus. Now there
is a certain cliff, smooth and sheer towards the sea, on the border of Gortyn, in the misty
deep, where the South-West Wind drives a great wave against the left headland, towards Phaestus,
and a little rock keeps back the mighty water. Thither came one part of the fleet, and the
men scarce escaped destruction, but the ships were broken by the waves against the rock; while
those other five dark-prowed ships the wind and the water bare and brought nigh to Egypt. Thus
Menelaus, gathering much livelihood and gold, was wandering there with his ships among men
of strange speech, and even then Aegisthus planned that pitiful work at home. And for seven
years he ruled over Mycenae, rich in gold, after he slew the son of Atreus, and the people
were subdued unto him. Now when he had slain him, he made a funeral feast to the Argives over
his hateful mother, and over the craven Aegisthus. And on the selfsame day there came to him
Menelaus of the loud war-cry, bringing much treasure, even all the freight of his ships. So
thou, my friend, wander not long far away from home, leaving thy substance behind thee and
men in thy house so wanton, lest they divide and utterly devour all thy wealth, and thou shalt
have gone on a vain journey. Rather I bid and command thee to go to Menelaus, for he hath lately
come from a strange country, from the land of men whence none would hope in his heart to return,
whom once the storms have driven wandering into so wide a sea. Thence not even the birds can
make their way in the space of one year, so great a sea it is and terrible. But go now with
thy ship and with thy company, or if thou hast a mind to fare by land, I have a chariot and
horses at thy service, yea and my sons to do thy will, who will be thy guides to goodly Lacedaemon,
where is Menelaus of the fair hair. Do thou thyself entreat him, that he may give thee unerring
answer. He will not lie to thee, for he is very wise.'

{* Reading [Greek]. v. 1. '[Greek], which must be wrong.}

Thus he spake, and the sun went down and darkness came on. Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene,
spake among them, saying: 'Yea, old man, thou hast told all this thy tale aright. But come,
cut up the tongues of the victims and mix the wine, that we may pour forth before Poseidon
and the other deathless gods, and so may bethink us of sleep, for it is the hour for sleep.
For already has the light gone beneath the west, and it is not seemly to sit long at a banquet
of the gods, but to be going home.'

So spake the daughter of Zeus, and they hearkened to her voice. And the henchmen poured water
over their hands, and pages crowned the mixing bowls with drink, and served out the wine to
all, after they had first poured for libation into each cup in turn; and they cast the tongues
upon the fire, and stood up and poured the drink-offering thereon. But when they had poured
forth and had drunken to their heart's content, Athene and godlike Telemachus were both set
on returning to the hollow ship; but Nestor would have stayed them, and accosted them, saying:
'Zeus forfend it, and all the other deathless gods, that ye should depart from my house to
the swift ship, as from the dwelling of one that is utterly without raiment or a needy man,
who hath not rugs or blankets many in his house whereon to sleep softly, he or his guests.
Nay not so, I have rugs and fair blankets by me. Never, methinks, shall the dear son of this
man, even of Odysseus, lay him down upon the ship's deck, while as yet I am alive, and my children
after me are left in my hall to entertain strangers, whoso may chance to come to my house.'

Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, spake to him again: 'Yea, herein hast thou spoken aright,
dear father: and Telemachus may well obey thee, for before all things this is meet. Behold,
he shall now depart with thee, that he may sleep in thy halls; as for me I will go to the black
ship, that I may cheer my company and tell them all. For I avow me to be the one elder among
them; those others are but younger men, who follow for love of him, all of them of like age
with the high-souled Telemachus. There will I lay me down by the black hollow ship this night;
but in the morning I will go to the Cauconians high of heart, where somewhat of mine is owing
to me, no small debt nor of yesterday. But do thou send this man upon his way with thy chariot
and thy son, since he hath come to thy house, and give him horses the lightest of foot and
chief in strength.'

Therewith grey-eyed Athene departed in the semblance of a sea-eagle; and amazement fell on
all that saw it, and the old man he marvelled when his eyes beheld it. And he took the hand
of Telemachus and spake and hailed him:

'My friend, methinks that thou wilt in no sort be a coward and a weakling, if indeed in thy
youth the gods thus follow with thee to be thy guides. For truly this is none other of those
who keep the mansions of Olympus, save only the daughter of Zeus, the driver of the spoil,
the maiden Trito-born, she that honoured thy good father too among the Argives. Nay be gracious,
queen, and vouchsafe a goodly fame to me, even to me and to my sons and to my wife revered.
And I in turn will sacrifice to thee a yearling heifer, broad of brow, unbroken, which man
never yet hath led beneath the yoke. Such an one will I offer to thee, and gild her horns with
gold.'

Even so he spake in prayer, and Pallas Athene heard him. Then Nestor of Gerenia, lord of chariots,
led them, even his sons and the husbands of his daughters, to his own fair house. But when
they had reached this prince's famous halls, they sat down all orderly on seats and high chairs;
and when they were come, the old man mixed well for them a bowl of sweet wine, which now in
the eleventh year from the vintaging the housewife opened, and unloosed the string that fastened
the lid. The old man let mix a bowl thereof, and prayed instantly to Athene as he poured forth
before her, even to the daughter of Zeus, lord of the aegis. 

CIVILIZATION DURING THE MIDDLE AGES, George Burton Adams, 1918. CAMBRIDGE MODERN HISTORY, Vols.
I and II.

Dutch Sea Power

MOTLEY'S RISE OF THE DUTCH REPUBLIC (still the best source in English
for political and naval history of the period).

HISTORY OF THE PEOPLE OF THE NETHERLANDS, P. J. Blok, trans. Ruth Putnam, 1898-1912. HISTORY
OF COMMERCE IN EUROPE, W. H. Gibbins, 1917. THE SEA BEGGARS, Dingman Versteg, 1901. SOME EXPLOITS
OF THE OLD DUTCH NAVY, Lieut. H. H. Frost, U. S. Naval Institute Proceedings, January, 1919.

CHAPTER VIII

ENGLAND AND THE ARMADA

By reason of England's insularity, it is an easy matter to find instances
from even her early history of the salutary or fatal influence of
sea power.

Romans, Saxons, Danes swept down upon England from the sea. By building a fleet, King Alfred,
said to have been the true father of the British navy, kept back the Danes. It was the dispersion
of the English fleet by reason of the lateness of the season that enabled William the Conqueror,
in the small open vessels interestingly pictured in the Bayeux tapestry, to win a footing
on the English shore.

But during the next three centuries, with little shipping and little trade save that carried
on by the Hansa, with no enemy that dangerously threatened her by
sea, England had neither the motives nor the national strength and
unity to develop naval power.

She claimed, it is true, dominion over the narrow waters between her and her possessions in
France, and also over the "four seas" surrounding her; and as early as 1201 an ordinance was passed
requiring vessels in these waters to lower sails ("vail the bonnet") and also to "lie by the
lee" when so ordered by King's ships. But though these claims were revived in the 17th century
against the Dutch, and though the requirement that foreign vessels strike their topsails to the
British flag remained in the Admiralty Instructions until after Trafalgar, they were at this
time enforced chiefly to rid the seas of pirates--the common enemies of nations. During this
period there were a few "king's ships," the sovereign's personal property, forming a nucleus
around which a naval force of fishing and merchant vessels could be assembled in time of war.
The Cinque Ports, originally Dover, Sandwich, Hastings, Romney and Hythe, long enjoyed certain
trading privileges in return for the agreement that when the king passed overseas they would
"rigge up fiftie and seven ships" (according to a charter of Edward I) with 20 armed soldiers
each, and maintain them for 15 days.

An attack in 1217 by such a fleet, under the Governor of Dover Castle, affords perhaps the
earliest instance of maneuvering for the weather-gage. The English came down from the windward
and, as they scrambled aboard the enemy, threw quicklime into the Frenchmen's eyes. At Sluis,
in 1340, to take another instance of early English naval warfare, Edward III defeated a large
French fleet and a number of hired Genoese galleys lashed side by side in the little river
Eede in Flanders. Edward came in with a fair wind and tide and fell upon the enemy as they lay
aground at the stem and unmanageable. This victory gave control of the Channel for the transport
of troops in the following campaign. But like most early naval combats, it was practically a land
battle over decks, and, although sanguinary enough, it is from a naval stand paint interesting
chiefly for such novelties as a scouting force of knights on horseback along the shore.

The beginnings of a permanent and strong naval establishment, as distinct from merchant vessels
owned by the king or in his service, must be dated, however, from the Tudors and the period
of national rehabilitation following the Hundred Years' War (1337-1453) and the War of the Roses
(1455-1485).

One reason for this was that the employment of artillery on shipboard and the introduction of
port-holes made it increasingly difficult to convert merchant craft into dependable men-of-war.
Henry VIII took a keen interest in his navy, devoted the revenues of forfeited church property
to its expansion, established the first Navy Board (1546), and is even credited with the adoption
of sailing vessels as the major units of his fleet.

From Oar to Sail

The use of heavy ordnance, already mentioned, as well as the increasing size and efficiency of sail-craft
that came with the spread of ocean commerce and navigation, naturally pointed the way to this
transition in warfare from oar to sail.

The galley was at best a frail affair, cumbered with oars, benches and rowers, unable to carry
heavy guns or withstand their fire. Once sailing vessels had attained reasonable maneuvering qualities,
their superior strength and size, reduced number of non-combatant personnel, and increased seaworthiness
and cruising radius gave them a tremendous superiority. That the change should have begun
in the north rather than in the Mediterranean, where naval and military
science had reached its highest development, must be attributed not
only to the rougher weather conditions of the northern seas, and the
difficulty of obtaining slaves as rowers, but also to the fact that
the southern nations were more completely shackled by the traditions
of galley warfare.

  
  Yet for the new type it was the splendid trading vessels
  of Venice that supplied the design. For the Antwerp and
  London trade, and in protection against the increasing danger from
pirates, the Venetians had developed a compromise between the war-galley
and the round-ship of commerce, a type with three masts and propelled
at least primarily by sails, with a length about three times its beam
and thus shorter and more seaworthy than the galley, but longer, lower
and swifter than the clumsy round-ship.

To this new type the names galleass and galleon were bath given, but in English and later usage
galleass came to be applied to war vessels combining oar and sail, and galleon to either war
or trading vessels of medium size and length and propelled by sail alone.

The Spanish found the galleon useful in the Atlantic carrying trade, but, as shown at Lepanto,
they retained the galley in warfare; whereas Henry VIII of England was probably the first definitely
to favor sail for his men-of-war. An English navy list of 1545 shows four clumsy old-fashioned
"great-ships" of upwards of 1000 tons, but second to these a dozen newer vessels of distinctly
galleon lines, lower than the great-ships, flush-decked, and sail-driven. Though in engagements
with French galleys during the campaign of 1545 these were handicapped by calm weather, they
seem to have held their own both in battle and in naval opinion. Of the royal ships at the opening
of Elizabeth's reign (1558), there were 11 large sailing vessels of 200 tans and upwards, and
10 smaller ones, but only two galleys, and these "of no continuance
and not worth repair."[1] In comment on these figures, it should be
added that there were half a hundred large ships available from the
merchant service, and also that pinnaces and other small craft still
combined oar and sail.

[Footnote 1: DRAKE AND THE TUDOR NAVY, Corbett, Vol. I, p. 133.]

In England the superiority of sail propulsion was soon definitely
recognized, and discussion later centered on the relative merits of
the medium-sized galleon and the big "great-ship."

The characteristics of each are well set forth in a contemporary naval treatise by Sir William
Monson: the former with "flush deck fore and aft, sunk and low in the water; the other lofty
and high-charged, with a half-deck, forecastle, and copperidge-heads
[athwortship bulkheads where light guns were mounted to command the
space between decks]."

The advantages of the first were that she was speedy and "a fast ship by the wind" so as to
avoid boarding by the enemy, and could run in close and fire effective broadsides between wind
and water without being touched; whereas the big ship was more terrifying, more commodious,
stronger, and could carry more and heavier guns. Monson, like many a later expert, suspended judgment
regarding the two types; but Sir Walter Raleigh came out strongly
for the smaller design.

"The greatest ships," he writes, "are the least serviceable...., less nimble, less maniable;
'Grande navi grande fatiga,' saith the Spaniard. A ship of 600 tons will carry as good ordnance
as a ship of 1200 tons; and though the greater have double her number, the lesser will turn her
broadsides twice before the greater can wind once." And elsewhere: "The high charging of ships
makes them extreme leeward, makes them sink deep in the water, makes them labor, and makes them
overset. Men may not expect the ease of many cabins and safety at once in sea-service."[1]

[Footnote 1: WORKS, Oxford ed. 1829, Vol. VIII, p. 338.]

These statements were made after the Armada; but the trend of English
naval construction away from unwieldy ships such as used by the Spanish
in the Armada, is clearly seen in vessels dating from 1570-1580--the
Foresight, Bull, and Tiger (rebuilt from galleasses), the Swiftsure,
Dreadnought, Revenge, and others of names renowned in naval annals.

These were all of about the dimensions of the Revenge, which was of 440 tons, 92 feet over all,
32 feet beam, and 15 feet from deck to keel. That is to say, their length was not more than three
times their beam, and their beam was about twice their depth in the
hold--the characteristic proportions of the galleon type.

The progressiveness of English ship construction is highly significant, for to it may be attributed
in large measure the Armada victory.

Spain had made no such advances; in fact, until the decade of the Armada, she hardly had such
a thing as a royal navy. The superiority of the English ships was generally recognized. An English
naval writer in 1570 declared the ships of his nation so fine "none of any other region may
seem comparable to them"; and a Spaniard some years later testified
that his people regarded "one English ship worth four of theirs."

Though not larger than frigates of Nelson's time, these ships were crowded with an even heavier
armament, comprising guns of all sizes and of picturesque but bewildering nomenclature. According
to Corbett,[1] the ordnance may be divided into four main classes based on caliber, the first
two of the "long gun" and the other two of the carronade or mortar type.

[Footnote 1: DRAKE AND THE TUDOR NAVY, Vol. I, p. 384.]

I. Cannon proper, from 16 to 28 caliber, of 8.5-inch bore and 12 feet in length, firing 65-pound
shot. The demi-cannon, which was the largest gun carried on ships of the time, was 6.5 inches
by 9 feet and fired 30-pound shot.

II. Culverins, 28 to 34 caliber long guns, 5 inches by 12 feet, firing 17-pound shot. Demi-culverins
were 9-pounders. Slings, bases, sakers, port-pieces, and fowlers belonged to this class.

III. Perriers, from 6 to 8 caliber, firing stone-balls, shells, fire-balls, etc.

IV. Mortars, of 1.5 caliber, including petards and murderers.

The "great ordnance," or cannon, were muzzle-loading. The secondary armament, mounted in tops,
cageworks, bulkheads, etc., were breech-loading; but these smaller pieces fell out of favor
as time went on owing to reliance on long-range fire and rareness of boarding actions. Down to
the middle of the 19th century there was no great improvement in
ordnance, save in the way of better powder and boring.

Even in Elizabeth's day the heaviest cannon had a range of three miles.

These advances in ship design and armament were accompanied by some changes in naval administration.
In 1546 the Navy Board was created, which continued to handle matters of what may be termed civil
administration until its functions were taken over by the Board of
Admiralty in the reorganization of 1832.

The chief members of the Navy Board, the Treasurer, Comptroller, Surveyor of Ships, Surveyor
of Ordnance, and Clerk of Ships, were in Elizabethan times usually experienced in sea affairs.
To John Hawkins, Treasurer from 1578 to 1595, belongs chief credit for the excellent condition of
ships in his day. The Lord High Admiral, a member of the nobility, exercised at least nominal
command of the fleet in peace and war. For vice admiral under him a man of practical experience
was ordinarily chosen. On shipboard, the only "gentleman" officers were the captains; the rest--masters,
master's mates, pilots, carpenters, boatswains, coxswains, and gunners--were, to quote a contemporary
description, "mechanick men that had been bred up from swabbers." But owing to the small proportion
of soldiers on board, the English ships were not like those of Spain, which were organized like
a camp, with the soldier element supreme and the sailors "slaves to the rest."

The Political Situation

The steps taken to build up the navy in the decade or more preceding the Armada were well justified
by the political and religious strife in western Europe and the dangers which on all sides threatened
the English realm. France, the Netherlands, and Scotland were torn by religious warfare. In England
the party with open or secret Catholic sympathies was large, amounting
to perhaps half the population, the strength of whose loyalty to Elizabeth
it was difficult to gage.

Since 1568 Elizabeth had held captive Mary Queen of Scots, driven out of her own country by
the Presbyterian hierarchy, and a Catholic with hereditary claims to the English throne. Before
her death, Philip of Spain had conspired with her to assassinate the heretic Elizabeth; after
Mary's execution in 1587 he became heir to her claims and entered the more willingly upon
the task of conquering England and restoring it to the faith.

For years, in fact, there had been a state of undeclared hostility between England and Spain,
and acts which, with sovereigns less cautious and astute than both Elizabeth and Philip, would
have meant war. In 1585 Elizabeth formed an alliance with the Netherlands, and sent her favorite,
Leicester, there as governor-general, and Sir Philip Sidney as Governor of Flushing, which
with two other "cautionary towns" she took as pledges of Dutch loyalty. The motives for this
action are well stated in a paper drawn up by the English Privy Council in 1584, presenting a situation
interesting in its analogy to that which faced the United States when it entered the World
War:

"The conclusion of the whole was this: Although her Majesty should thereby enter into the war
presently, yet were she better to do it now, while she may make the same out of her realm, having
the help of the people of Holland, and before the King of Spain shall have consummated his conquest
of those countries, whereby he shall be so provoked by pride, solicited by the Pope, and tempted
by the Queen's own subjects, and shall be so strong by sea; and so free from all other actions
and quarrels--yea, shall be so formidable to all the rest of Christendom, as that her Majesty shall
no wise be able, with her own power, nor with the aid of any other, neither by land nor sea,
to withstand his attempts, but shall be forced to give place to his insatiable malice, which is most
terrible to be thought of, but miserable to suffer."

These were the compelling reasons for England's entry into the war. The aid to Holland and the
execution of Mary, on the other hand, were sufficient to explain Philip's attempted invasion.
The grievance of Spain owing to the incursions of Hawkins and Drake
into her American possessions, and England's desire to break Spain's
commercial monopoly, were at the time relatively subordinate, though
from a naval standpoint the voyages are interesting in themselves
and important in the history of sea control and sea trade.

Hawkins and Drake

John Hawkins was a well-to-do ship-owner of Plymouth, and as already stated, Treasurer of the
Royal Navy, with a contract for the upkeep of ships. His first venture to the Spanish Main was
in 1562, when he kidnapped 300 negroes on the Portuguese coast of Africa and exchanged them
at Hispanola (Haiti), for West Indian products, chartering two additional vessels to take his
cargo home. Though he might have been put to death if caught by either Portugal or Spain,
his profits were so handsome by the double exchange that he tried it again in 1565, this time
taking his "choice negroes at £160 each" to Terra Firme, or the Spanish Main, including the
coasts of Venezuela, Colombia, and the Isthmus. When the Spanish authorities, warned by their
home government, made some show of resistance, Hawkins threatened
bombardment, landed his men, and did business by force, the inhabitants
conniving in a contraband trade very profitable to them.

On his third voyage he had six vessels, two of which, the Jesus of Lubeck and the Minion, were
Queen's ships hired out for the voyage. The skipper of one of the smaller vessels, the Judith,
was Francis Drake, a relative and protégé of the Hawkins family, and then a youth of twenty-two.
On September 16, 1567, after a series of encounters stormier than ever in the Spanish settlements,
the squadron homeward bound was driven by bad weather into the port of Mexico City in San Juan
de Ulua Bay. Here, having a decided superiority over the vessels in the harbor, Hawkins secured
the privilege of mooring and refitting his ships inside the island
that formed a natural breakwater, and mounted guns on the island itself.
To his surprise next morning, he beheld in the offing 13 ships of
Spain led by an armed galleon and having on board the newly appointed
Mexican viceroy. Hawkins, though his guns commanded the entrance,
took hostages and made some sort of agreement by which the Spanish
ships were allowed to come in and moor alongside. But the situation
was too tense to carry off without an explosion. Three days later
the English were suddenly attacked on sea and shore. They at once
leaped into their ships and cut their cables, but though they hammered
the Spanish severely in the fight that followed, only two English
vessels, the Minion and the Judith, escaped, the Minion so overcrowded
that Hawkins had to drop 100 of his crew on the Mexican coast. Drake
made straight for Plymouth, nursing a bitter grievance at the alleged
breach of faith, and vowing vengeance on the whole Spanish race. "The
case," as Drake's biographer, Thomas Fuller, says, "was clear in sea-divinity,
and few are such infidels as not to believe doctrines which make for
their own profit."[1]

[Footnote 1: THE HOLY STATE, Bk. II, Ch. And again in the morning there will be tales for Telemachus
and me to tell one to the other, even to the end.'

So spake he, and Asphalion poured water over their hands, the ready squire of renowned Menelaus.
And they put forth their hands upon the good cheer spread before them.

Then Helen, daughter of Zeus, turned to new thoughts. Whoso should drink a draught thereof,
when it is mingled in the bowl, on that day he would let no tear fall down his cheeks, not
though his mother and his father died, not though men slew his brother or dear son with the
sword before his face, and his own eyes beheld it. There each man is a leech skilled beyond
all human kind; yea, for they are of the race of Paeeon. Now after she had cast in the drug
and bidden pour forth of the wine, she made answer once again, and spake unto her lord:

'Son of Atreus, Menelaus, fosterling of Zeus, and lo, ye sons of noble men, forasmuch as now
to one and now to another Zeus gives good and evil, for to him all things are possible,--now,
verily, sit ye down and feast in the halls, and take ye joy in the telling of tales, and I
will tell you one that fits the time. Now all of them I could not tell or number, so many as
were the adventures of Odysseus of the hardy heart; but, ah, what a deed was this he wrought
and dared in his hardiness in the land of the Trojans, where ye Achaeans suffered affliction.
He subdued his body with unseemly stripes, and a sorry covering he cast about his shoulders,
and in the fashion of a servant he went down into the wide-wayed city of the foemen, and he
hid himself in the guise of another, a beggar, though in no wise such an one was he at the
ships of the Achaeans. In this semblance he passed into the city of the Trojans, and they wist
not who he was, and I alone knew him in that guise, and I kept questioning him, but in his
subtlety he avoided me. But when at last I was about washing him and anointing him with olive
oil, and had put on him raiment, and sworn a great oath not to reveal Odysseus amid the Trojans,
ere he reached the swift ships and the huts, even then he told me all the purpose of the Achaeans.
And after slaying many of the Trojans with the long sword, he returned to the Argives and brought
back word again of all. Then the other Trojan women wept aloud, but my soul was glad, for already
my heart was turned to go back again even to my home: and now at the last I groaned for the
blindness that Aphrodite gave me, when she led me thither away from mine own country, forsaking
my child and my bridal chamber and my lord, that lacked not aught whether for wisdom or yet
for beauty.'

And Menelaus of the fair hair answered her, saying: 'Verily all this tale, lady, thou hast
duly told. Ere now have I learned the counsel and the thought of many heroes, and travelled
over many a land, but never yet have mine eyes beheld any such man of heart as was Odysseus;
such another deed as he wrought and dared in his hardiness even in the shapen horse, wherein
sat all we chiefs of the Argives, bearing to the Trojans death and doom. Anon thou camest thither,
and sure some god must have bidden thee, who wished to bring glory to the Trojans. Yea and
godlike Deiphobus went with thee on thy way. Thrice thou didst go round about the hollow ambush
and handle it, calling aloud on the chiefs of the Argives by name, and making thy voice like
the voices of the wives of all the Argives. Now I and the son of Tydeus and goodly Odysseus
sat in the midst and heard thy call; and verily we twain had a desire to start up and come
forth or presently to answer from within; but Odysseus stayed and held us there, despite our
eagerness. Then all the other sons of the Achaeans held their peace, but Anticlus alone was
still minded to answer thee. But come, bid us to bed, that forthwith we may take our joy of
rest beneath the spell of sleep.'

So spake he, and Argive Helen bade her handmaids set out bedsteads beneath the gallery, and
fling on them fair purple blankets and spread coverlets above, and thereon lay thick mantles
to be a clothing over all. So they went from the hall with torch in hand, and spread the beds,
and the henchman led forth the guests. Thus they slept there in the vestibule of the house,
the hero Telemachus and the splendid son of Nestor. But the son of Atreus slept, as his custom
was, in the inmost chamber of the lofty house, and by him lay long-robed Helen, that fair lady.
Is it a matter of the common weal or of thine own? My dwelling is being devoured and my fat
lands are ruined, and of unfriendly men my house is full,--who slaughter continually my thronging
flocks, and my kine with trailing feet and shambling gait,--none other than the wooers of my
mother, despiteful out of measure. Even as when a hind hath couched her newborn fawns unweaned
in a strong lion's lair, and searcheth out the mountain knees and grassy hollows, seeking pasture,
and afterward the lion cometh back to his bed, and sendeth forth unsightly death upon that
pair, even so shall Odysseus send forth unsightly death upon the wooers. Would to our father
Zeus and Athene and Apollo, would that in such might as when of old in stablished Lesbos he
rose up and wrestled a match with Philomeleides and threw him mightily, and all the Achaeans
rejoiced; would that in such strength Odysseus might consort with the wooers: then should they
all have swift fate, and bitter wedlock! But for that whereof thou askest and entreatest me,
be sure I will not swerve from the truth in aught that I say, nor deceive thee; but of all
that the ancient one of the sea, whose speech is sooth, declared to me, not a word will I hide
or keep from thee.

'In the river Aegyptus, {*} though eager I was to press onward home, the gods they stayed me,
for that I had not offered them the acceptable sacrifice of hecatombs, and the gods ever desired
that men should be mindful of their commandments. Now there is an island in the wash of the
waves over against Aegyptus, and men call it Pharos, within one day's voyage of a hollow ship,
when shrill winds blow fair in her wake. And therein is a good haven, whence men launch the
gallant ships into the deep when they have drawn a store of deep black water. There the gods
held me twenty days, nor did the sea-winds ever show their breath, they that serve to waft
ships over the broad back of the sea. And now would all our corn have been spent, and likewise
the strength of the men, except some goddess had taken pity on me and saved me, Eidothee, daughter
of mighty Proteus, the ancient one of the sea. For most of all I moved her heart, when she
met me wandering alone apart from my company, who were ever roaming round the isle, fishing
with bent hooks, for hunger was gnawing at their belly. So she stood by, and spake and uttered
her voice saying:

{* The only name for the Nile in Homer. Cf. Wilkinson, Ancient Egyptians (1878), vol. i. p. 7.}

'"Art thou so very foolish, stranger, and feeble-witted, or art thou wilfully remiss, and hast
pleasure in suffering? So long time art thou holden in the isle and canst find no issue therefrom,
while the heart of thy company faileth within them?"

'Even so she spake, and I answered her saying: "I will speak forth, what goddess soever thou
art, and tell thee that in no wise am I holden here by mine own will, but it needs must be
that I have sinned against the deathless gods, who keep the wide heaven. Howbeit, do thou tell
me--for the gods know all things--which of the immortals it is that binds me here and hath
hindered me from my way, and declare as touching my returning how I may go over the teeming deep."

'So I spake, and straightway the fair goddess made answer: "Yea now, sir, I will plainly tell
thee all. Hither resorteth that ancient one of the sea, whose speech is sooth, the deathless
Egyptian Proteus, who knows the depths of every sea, and is the thrall of Poseidon, and who,
they say, is my father that begat me. If thou couldst but lay an ambush and catch him, he will
surely declare to thee the way and the measure of thy path, and will tell thee of thy returning,
how thou mayest go over the teeming deep. Yea, and he will show thee, O fosterling of Zeus,
if thou wilt, what good thing and what evil hath been wrought in thy halls, whilst thou has
been faring this long and grievous way."

'So she spake, but I answered and said unto her: "Devise now thyself the ambush to take this
ancient one divine, lest by any chance he see me first, or know of my coming, and avoid me.
For a god is hard for mortal man to quell." So often as the sun in his course stands high in
mid heaven, then forth from the brine comes the ancient one of the sea, whose speech is sooth,
before the breath of the West Wind he comes, and the sea's dark ripple covers him. And when
he is got forth, he lies down to sleep in the hollow of the caves. And around him the seals,
the brood of the fair daughter of the brine, sleep all in a flock, stolen forth from the grey
sea water, and bitter is the scent they breathe of the deeps of the salt sea. There will I
lead thee at the breaking of the day, and couch you all orderly; so do thou choose diligently
three of thy company, the best thou hast in thy decked ships. And I will tell thee all the
magic arts of that old man. First, he will number the seals and go over them; but when he has
told their tale and beheld them, he will lay him down in the midst, as a shepherd mid the sheep
of his flock. So soon as ever ye shall see him couched, even then mind you of your might and
strength, and hold him there, despite his eagerness and striving to be free. And he will make
assay, and take all manner of shapes of things that creep upon the earth, of water likewise,
and of fierce fire burning. But do ye grasp him steadfastly and press him yet the more, and
at length when he questions thee in his proper shape, as he was when first ye saw him laid
to rest, then, hero, hold thy strong hands, and let the ancient one go free, and ask him which
of the gods is hard upon thee, and as touching thy returning, how thou mayest go over the teeming
deep."

'Therewith she dived beneath the heaving sea, but I betook me to the ships where they stood
in the sand, and my heart was darkly troubled as I went. But after I had come down to the ship
and to the sea, and we had made ready our supper and immortal night had come on, then did we
lay us to rest upon the sea-beach. So soon as early Dawn shone forth, the rosy fingered, in
that hour I walked by the shore of the wide-wayed sea, praying instantly to the gods; and I
took with me three of my company, in whom I trusted most for every enterprise.

'Meanwhile, so it was that she had plunged into the broad bosom of the sea, and had brought
from the deep the skins of four sea-calves, and all were newly flayed, for she was minded to
lay a snare for her father. She scooped lairs on the sea-sand, and sat awaiting us, and we
drew very nigh her, and she made us all lie down in order, and cast a skin over each. There
would our ambush have been most terrible, for the deadly stench of the sea bred seals distressed
us sore: nay, who would lay him down by a beast of the sea? But herself she wrought deliverance,
and devised a great comfort. She took ambrosia of a very sweet savour, and set it beneath each
man's nostril, and did away with the stench of the beast. So all the morning we waited with
steadfast heart, and the seals came forth in troops from the brine, and then they couched them
all orderly by the sea-beach. And at high day the ancient one came forth from out of the brine,
and found his fatted seals, yea and he went along their line and told their tale; and first
among the sea-beasts he reckoned us, and guessed not that there was guile, and afterward he
too laid him down. Then we rushed upon him with a cry, and cast our hands about him, nor did
that ancient one forget his cunning. Now behold, at the first he turned into a bearded lion,
and thereafter into a snake, and a pard, and a huge boar; then he took the shape of running
water, and of a tall and flowering tree. We the while held him close with steadfast heart.
But when now that ancient one of the magic arts was aweary, then at last he questioned me and
spake unto me, saying:

'"Which of the gods was it, son of Atreus, that aided thee with his counsel, that thou mightest
waylay and take me perforce? What wouldest thou thereby?"

'Even so he spake, but I answered him saying; "Old man, thou knowest all, wherefore dost thou
question me thereof with crooked words? For lo, I am holden long time in this isle, neither
can I find any issue therefrom, and my heart faileth within me. For it is not thy fate to see
thy friends, and come to thy stablished house and thine own country, till thou hast passed
yet again within the waters of Aegyptus, the heaven-fed stream, and offered holy hecatombs
to the deathless gods who keep the wide heaven. So shall the gods grant thee the path which
thou desirest."

'So spake he, but my spirit within me was broken, for that he bade me again to go to Aegyptus
over the misty deep, a long and grievous way.

'Yet even so I answered him saying: "Old man, all this will I do, according to thy word. But
come, declare me this, and tell it all plainly. Did all those Achaeans return safe with their
ships, all whom Nestor and I left as we went from Troy, or perished any by a shameful death
aboard his own ship, or in the arms of his friends, after he had wound up the clew of war?"

'So spake I, and anon he answered me, saying: "Son of Atreus, why dost thou straitly question
me hereof? Nay, it is not for thy good to know or learn my thought; for I tell thee thou shalt
not long be tearless, when thou hast heard it all aright. For many of these were taken, and
many were left; but two only of the leaders of the mail-coated Achaeans perished in returning;
as for the battle, thou thyself wast there. And one methinks is yet alive, and is holden on
the wide deep. Aias in truth was smitten in the midst of his ships of the long oars. Poseidon
at first brought him nigh to Gyrae, to the mighty rocks, and delivered him from the sea. And
so he would have fled his doom, albeit hated by Athene, had he not let a proud word fall in
the fatal darkening of his heart. He said that in the gods' despite he had escaped the great
gulf of the sea; and Poseidon heard his loud boasting, and presently caught up his trident
into his strong hands, and smote the rock Gyraean and cleft it in twain. And the one part abode
in his place, but the other fell into the sea, the broken piece whereon Aias sat at the first,
when his heart was darkened. And the rock bore him down into the vast and heaving deep; so
there he perished when he had drunk of the salt sea water. But thy brother verily escaped the
fates and avoided them in his hollow ships, for queen Hera saved him. But now when he was like
soon to reach the steep mount of Malea, lo, the storm wind snatched him away and bore him over
the teeming deep, making great moan, to the border of the country whereof old Thyestes dwelt,
but now Aegisthus abode there, the son of Thyestes. But when thence too there showed a good
prospect of safe returning, and the gods changed the wind to a fair gale, and they had reached
home, then verily did Agamemnon set foot with joy upon his country's soil, and as he touched
his own land he kissed it, and many were the hot tears he let fall, for he saw his land and
was glad. And it was so that the watchman spied him from his tower, the watchman whom crafty
Aegisthus had led and posted there, promising him for a reward two talents of gold. Now he
kept watch for the space of a year, lest Agamemnon should pass by him when he looked not, and
mind him of his wild prowess. So he went to the house to bear the tidings to the shepherd of
the people. And straightway Aegisthus contrived a cunning treason. He chose out twenty of the
best men in the township, and set an ambush, and on the further side of the hall he commanded
to prepare a feast. Then with chariot and horses he went to bid to the feast Agamemnon, shepherd
of the people; but caitiff thoughts were in his heart. He brought him up to his house, all
unwitting of his doom, and when he had feasted him slew him, as one slayeth an ox at the stall.
And none of the company of Atreides that were of his following were left, nor any of the men
of Aegisthus, but they were all killed in the halls."

'So spake he, and my spirit within me was broken, and I wept as I sat upon the sand, nor was
I minded any more to live and see the light of the sun. But when I had taken my fill of weeping
and grovelling on the ground, then spake the ancient one of the sea, whose speech is sooth:

'"No more, son of Atreus, hold this long weeping without cease, for we shall find no help therein.
Rather with all haste make essay that so thou mayest come to thine own country. For either
thou shalt find Aegisthus yet alive, or it may be Orestes was beforehand with thee and slew
him; so mayest thou chance upon his funeral feast."

'So he spake, and my heart and lordly soul again were comforted for all my sorrow, and I uttered
my voice and I spake to him winged words:

'"Their fate I now know; but tell me of the third; who is it that is yet living and holden
on the wide deep, or perchance is dead? and fain would I hear despite my sorrow."

'So spake I, and straightway he answered, and said: "It is the son of Laertes, whose dwelling
is in Ithaca; and I saw him in an island shedding big tears in the halls of the nymph Calypso,
who holds him there perforce; so he may not come to his own country, for he has by him no ships
with oars, and no companions to send him on his way over the broad back of the sea. But thou,
Menelaus, son of Zeus, art not ordained to die and meet thy fate in Argos, the pasture-land
of horses, but the deathless gods will convey thee to the Elysian plain and the world's end,
where is Rhadamanthus of the fair hair, where life is easiest for men. No snow is there, nor
yet great storm, nor any rain; but always ocean sendeth forth the breeze of the shrill West
to blow cool on men; yea, for thou hast Helen to wife, and thereby they deem thee to be son
of Zeus." Then back I went to the waters of Aegyptus, the heaven-fed stream, and there I moored
the ships and offered the acceptable sacrifice of hecatombs. So when I had appeased the anger
of the everlasting gods, I piled a barrow to Agamemnon, that his fame might never be quenched.
So having fulfilled all, I set out for home, and the deathless gods gave me a fair wind, and
brought me swiftly to mine own dear country. But lo, now tarry in my halls till it shall be
the eleventh day hence or the twelfth. Then will I send thee with all honour on thy way, and
give thee splendid gifts, three horses and a polished car; and moreover I will give thee a
goodly chalice, that thou mayest pour forth before the deathless gods, and be mindful of me
all the days of thy life.'

Then wise Telemachus answered him, saying: 'Son of Atreus, nay, hold me not long time here.
Yea even for a year would I be content to sit by thee, and no desire for home or parents would
come upon me; for I take wondrous pleasure in thy tales and talk. But already my company wearieth
in fair Pylos, and yet thou art keeping me long time here. And whatsoever gift thou wouldest
give me, let it be a thing to treasure; but horses I will take none to Ithaca, but leave them
here to grace thine own house, for thou art lord of a wide plain wherein is lotus great plenty,
and therein is spear-reed and wheat and rye, and white and spreading barley. In Ithaca there
are no wide courses, nor meadow land at all. It is a pasture-land of goats, and more pleasant
in my sight than one that pastureth horses; for of the isles that lie and lean upon the sea,
none are fit for the driving of horses, or rich in meadow land, and least of all is Ithaca.'

So spake he, and Menelaus, of the loud war cry, smiled, and caressed him with his hand, and
spake and hailed him:

'Thou art of gentle blood, dear child, so gentle the words thou speakest. Therefore I will
make exchange of the presents, as I may. Of the gifts, such as are treasures stored in my house,
I will give thee the goodliest and greatest of price. I will give thee a mixing bowl beautifully
wrought; it is all of silver, and the lips thereof are finished with gold, the work of Hephaestus;
and the hero Phaedimus, the king of the Sidonians, gave it me, when his house sheltered me
on my coming thither, and to thee now would I give it.'

Even so they spake one to another, while the guests came to the palace of the divine king.
They drave their sheep, and brought wine that maketh glad the heart of man: and their wives
with fair tire sent them wheaten bread. Thus were these men preparing the feast in the halls.

But the wooers meantime were before the palace of Odysseus, taking their pleasure in casting
of weights and spears, on a levelled place, as heretofore, in their insolence. And Antinous
and god-like Eurymachus were seated there, the chief men of the wooers, who were far the most
excellent of all. And Noemon, son of Phromius, drew nigh to them and spake unto Antinous and
questioned him, saying:

'Antinous, know we at all, or know we not, when Telemachus will return from sandy Pylos? He
hath departed with a ship of mine, and I have need thereof, to cross over into spacious Elis,
where I have twelve brood mares with hardy mules unbroken at the teat; I would drive off one
of these and break him in.'

So spake he, and they were amazed, for they deemed not that Telemachus had gone to Neleian
Pylos, but that he was at home somewhere in the fields, whether among the flocks, or with the
swineherd.

Then Antinous, son of Eupeithes, spake to him in turn: 'Tell me the plain truth; when did he
go, and what noble youths went with him? Were they chosen men of Ithaca or hirelings and thralls
of his own? He was in case to bring even that about. And tell me this in good sooth, that I
may know for a surety: did he take thy black ship from thee perforce against thy will? or didst
thou give it him of free will at his entreaty?

Then Noemon, son of Phromius, answered him saying: 'I gave it him myself of free will. What
can any man do, when such an one, so bestead with care, begs a favour? it were hard to deny
the gift. The youths who next to us are noblest in the land, even these have gone with him;
and I marked their leader on board ship, Mentor, or a god who in all things resembled Mentor.
But one matter I marvel at: I saw the goodly Mentor here yesterday toward dawn, though already
he had embarked for Pylos.'

He spake and withal departed to his father's house. And the proud spirits of these twain were
angered, and they made the wooers sit down together and cease from their games. And among them
spake Antinous, son of Eupeithes, in displeasure; and his black heart was wholly filled with
rage, and his eyes were like flaming fire:

'Out on him, a proud deed hath Telemachus accomplished with a high hand, even this journey,
and we thought that he would never bring it to pass! This lad hath clean gone without more
ado, in spite of us all; his ship he hath let haul to the sea, and chosen the noblest in the
township. He will begin to be our bane even more than heretofore; but may Zeus destroy his
might, not ours, ere he reach the measure of manhood! But come, give me a swift ship and twenty
men, that I may lie in watch and wait even for him on his way home, in the strait between Ithaca
and rugged Samos, that so he may have a woeful end of his cruising in quest of his father.'

So spake he, and they all assented thereto, and bade him to the work. And thereupon they arose
and went to the house of Odysseus.

Now it was no long time before Penelope heard of the counsel that the wooers had devised in
the deep of their heart. For the henchman Medon told her thereof, who stood without the court
and heard their purposes, while they were weaving their plot within. So he went on his way
through the halls to bring the news to Penelope; and as he stept down over the threshold, Penelope
spake unto him:

'Henchman, wherefore have the noble wooers sent thee forth? Was it to tell the handmaids of
divine Odysseus to cease from their work, and prepare a banquet for them? Nay, after thus much
wooing, never again may they come together, but here this day sup for their last and latest
time; all ye who assemble so often, and waste much livelihood, the wealth of wise Telemachus!
Long ago when ye were children, ye marked not your fathers' telling, what manner of man was
Odysseus among them, one that wrought no iniquity toward any man, nor spake aught unrighteous
in the township, as is the wont of divine kings. One man a king is like to hate, another he
might chance to love. But never did he do aught at all presumptuously to any man. Nay, it is
plain what spirit ye are of, and your unseemly deeds are manifest to all, nor is there any
gratitude left for kindness done.'

Then Medon, wise of heart, answered her: 'Would, oh queen, that this were the crowning evil!
But the wooers devise another far greater and more grievous, which I pray the son of Cronos
may never fulfil! They are set on slaying Telemachus with the edge of the sword on his homeward
way; for he is gone to fair Pylos and goodly Lacedaemon, to seek tidings of his father.'

So spake he, but her knees were loosened where she stood, and her heart melted within her,
and long time was she speechless, and lo, her eyes were filled with tears and the voice of
her utterance was stayed. And at the last she answered him and said:

'Henchman, wherefore I pray thee is my son departed? There is no need that he should go abroad
on swift ships, that serve men for horses on the sea, and that cross the great wet waste. Is
it that even his own name may no more be left upon earth?'

Then Medon, wise of heart, answered her: 'I know not whether some god set him on or whether
his own spirit stirred him to go to Pylos to seek tidings of his father's return, or to hear
what end he met.'

He spake, and departed through the house of Odysseus, and on her fell a cloud of consuming
grief; so that she might no more endure to seat her on a chair, whereof there were many in
the house, but there she crouched on the threshold of her well-builded chamber, wailing piteously,
and her handmaids round her made low moan, as many as were in the house with her, young and
old. And Penelope spake among them pouring forth her lamentation:

'Hear me, my friends, for the Olympian sire hath given me pain exceedingly beyond all women
who were born and bred in my day. For erewhile I lost my noble lord of the lion heart, adorned
with all perfection among the Danaans, my good lord, whose fame is noised abroad from Hellas
to mid Argos. And now again the storm-winds have snatched away my well-beloved son without
tidings from our halls, nor heard I of his departure. Oh, women, hard of heart, that even ye
did not each one let the thought come into your minds, to rouse me from my couch when he went
to the black hollow ship, though ye knew full well thereof! For had I heard that he was purposing
this journey, verily he should have stayed here still, though eager to be gone, or have left
me dead in the halls. Howbeit let some one make haste to call the ancient Dolius, my thrall,
whom my father gave me ere yet I had come hither, who keepeth my garden of trees. So shall
he go straightway and sit by Laertes, and tell him all, if perchance Laertes may weave some
counsel in his heart, and go forth and make his plaint to the people, who are purposed to destroy
his seed, and the seed of god-like Odysseus.'

Then the good nurse Eurycleia answered her: 'Dear lady, aye, slay me if thou wilt with the
pitiless sword or let me yet live on in the house,--yet will I not hide my saying from thee.
I knew all this, and gave him whatsoever he commanded, bread and sweet wine. And he took a
great oath of me not to tell thee till at least the twelfth day should come, or thou thyself
shouldst miss him and hear of his departure, that thou mightest not mar thy fair flesh with
thy tears. But now, wash thee in water, and take to thee clean raiment and ascend to thy upper
chamber with the women thy handmaids, and pray to Athene, daughter of Zeus, lord of the aegis.
For so may she save him even from death. And heap not troubles on an old man's trouble; for
the seed of the son of Arceisius, is not, methinks, utterly hated by the blessed gods, but
someone will haply yet remain to possess these lofty halls, and the fat fields far away.'

So spake she, and lulled her queen's lamentation, and made her eyes to cease from weeping.
So she washed her in water, and took to her clean raiment, and ascended to the upper chamber
with the women her handmaids, and placed the meal for sprinkling in a basket, and prayed unto
Athene:

'Hear me, child of Zeus, lord of the aegis, unwearied maiden! If ever wise Odysseus in his
halls burnt for thee fat slices of the thighs of heifer or of sheep, these things, I pray thee,
now remember, and save my dear son, and ward from him the wooers in the naughtiness of their
pride.'

Therewith she raised a cry, and the goddess heard her prayer. But the wooers clamoured through
the shadowy halls, and thus would some proud youth say:

'Verily this queen of many wooers prepareth our marriage, nor knoweth at all how that for her
son death hath been ordained.'

Thus would certain of them speak, but they knew not how these things were ordained. And Antinous
made harangue and spake among them:

'Good sirs, my friends, shun all disdainful words alike, lest someone hear and tell it even
in the house. But come let us arise, and in silence accomplish that whereof we spake, for the
counsel pleased us every one.'

Therewith he chose twenty men that were the best, and they departed to the swift ship and the
sea-banks.

But the wise Penelope lay there in her upper chamber, fasting and tasting neither meat nor
drink, musing whether her noble son should escape death, or even fall before the proud wooers.
And as a lion broods all in fear among the press of men, when they draw the crafty ring around
him, so deeply was she musing when deep sleep came over her. And she sank back in sleep and
all her joints were loosened.

Now the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, turned to other thoughts. She made a phantom, and fashioned
it after the likeness of a woman, Iphthime, daughter of great-hearted Icarius, whom Eumelus
wedded, whose dwelling was in Pherae. And she sent it to the house of divine Odysseus to bid
Penelope, amid her sorrow and lamenting, to cease from her weeping and tearful lamentation.
So the phantom passed into the chamber by the thong of the bolt, and stood above her head and
spake unto her, saying:

'Sleepest thou, Penelope, stricken at heart? Nay, even the gods who live at ease suffer thee
not to wail or be afflicted, seeing that thy son is yet to return; for no sinner is he in the
eyes of the gods.'

Then wise Penelope made her answer as she slumbered very softly at the gates of dreams:

'Wherefore, sister, hast thou come hither, that before wert not wont to come, for thou hast
thine habitation very far away? Biddest thou me indeed to cease from the sorrows and pains,
so many that disquiet my heart and soul? And now, again, my well-beloved son is departed on
his hollow ship, poor child, not skilled in toils or in the gatherings of men. For him I sorrow
yet more than for my lord, and I tremble and fear for him lest aught befal him, whether, it
may be, amid that folk where he is gone, or in the deep. For many foemen devise evil against
him, and go about to kill him, or ever he come to his own country.'

And the dim phantom answered her, and said: 'Take courage, and be not so sorely afraid. For
lo, such a friend goes to guide him, as all men pray to stand by them, for that she hath the
power, even Pallas Athene. And she pitieth thee in thy sorrow, and now hath sent me forth to
speak these words to thee.'

And wise Penelope answered her, saying: 'If thou art indeed a god, and hast heard the word
of a god, come, I pray thee, and tell me tidings concerning that ill-fated man, whether perchance
he is yet alive and sees the light of the sun, or hath already died, and is a dweller in the
house of Hades.'

And the dim phantom answered her and said: 'Concerning him I will not tell thee all the tale,
whether he be alive or dead; it is ill to speak words light as wind.'

Therewith the phantom slipped away by the bolt of the door and passed into the breath of the
wind. And the daughter of Icarius started up from sleep; and her heart was cheered, so clear
was the vision that sped toward her in the dead of the night.

Meanwhile the wooers had taken ship and were sailing over the wet ways, pondering in their
hearts sheer death for Telemachus. Now there is a rocky isle in the mid sea, midway between
Ithaca and rugged Samos, Asteris, a little isle; and there is a harbour therein with a double
entrance, where ships may ride. There the Achaeans abode lying in wait for Telemachus.

Book V

  The Gods in council command Calypso by Hermes to send away
  Odysseus on a raft of trees; and Poseidon, returning from
  Ethiopia and seeing him on the coast of Phaeacia, scattered
  his raft; and how by the help of Ino he was thrown ashore,
  and slept on a heap of dry leaves till the next day.

Now the Dawn arose from her couch, from the side of the lordly Tithonus, to bear light to the
immortals and to mortal men. And lo, the gods were gathering to session, and among them Zeus,
that thunders on high, whose might is above all. Howbeit, as for him he lieth in an island
suffering strong pains, in the halls of the nymph Calypso, who holdeth him perforce; so he
may not reach his own country, for he hath no ships by him with oars, and no companions to
send him on his way over the broad back of the sea. Nay, didst thou not thyself plan this device,
that Odysseus may assuredly take vengeance on those men at his coming? Nay, he shall sail on
a well-bound raft, in sore distress, and on the twentieth day arrive at fertile Scheria, even
at the land of the Phaeacians, who are near of kin to the gods. And they shall give him all
worship heartily as to a god, and send him on his way in a ship to his own dear country, with
gifts of bronze and gold, and raiment in plenty, much store, such as never would Odysseus have
won for himself out of Troy, yea, though he had returned unhurt with the share of the spoil
that fell to him. On such wise is he fated to see his friends, and come to his high-roofed
home and his own country.'

So spake he, nor heedless was the messenger, the slayer of Argos. And he took the wand wherewith
he lulls the eyes of whomso he will, while others again he even wakes from out of sleep. With
this rod in his hand flew the strong slayer of Argos. Above Pieria he passed and leapt from
the upper air into the deep. Then he sped along the wave like the cormorant, that chaseth the
fishes through the perilous gulfs of the unharvested sea, and wetteth his thick plumage in
the brine. Such like did Hermes ride upon the press of the waves. But when he had now reached
that far-off isle, he went forth from the sea of violet blue to get him up into the land, till
he came to a great cave, wherein dwelt the nymph of the braided tresses: and he found her within.
And on the hearth there was a great fire burning, and from afar through the isle was smelt
the fragrance of cleft cedar blazing, and of sandal wood. And the nymph within was singing
with a sweet voice as she fared to and fro before the loom, and wove with a shuttle of gold.
And round about the cave there was a wood blossoming, alder and poplar and sweet-smelling cypress.
And therein roosted birds long of wing, owls and falcons and chattering sea-crows, which have
their business in the waters. And lo, there about the hollow cave trailed a gadding garden
vine, all rich with clusters. And fountains four set orderly were running with clear water,
hard by one another, turned each to his own course. And all around soft meadows bloomed of
violets and parsley, yea, even a deathless god who came thither might wonder at the sight and
be glad at heart. There the messenger, the slayer of Argos, stood and wondered. Now when he
had gazed at all with wonder, anon he went into the wide cave; nor did Calypso, that fair goddess,
fail to know him, when she saw him face to face; for the gods use not to be strange one to
another, the immortals, not though one have his habitation far away. But he found not Odysseus,
the greathearted, within the cave, who sat weeping on the shore even as aforetime, straining
his soul with tears and groans and griefs, and as he wept he looked wistfully over the unharvested
deep. And Calypso, that fair goddess, questioned Hermes, when she had made him sit on a bright
shining seat:

'Wherefore, I pray thee, Hermes, of the golden wand, hast thou come hither, worshipful and
welcome, whereas as of old thou wert not wont to visit me? Tell me all thy thought; my heart
is set on fulfilling it, if fulfil it I may, and if it hath been fulfilled in the counsel of
fate. But now follow me further, that I may set before thee the entertainment of strangers.'

Therewith the goddess spread a table with ambrosia and set it by him, and mixed the ruddy nectar.
So the messenger, the slayer of Argos, did eat and drink. Now after he had supped and comforted
his soul with food, at the last he answered, and spake to her on this wise:

'Thou makest question of me on my coming, a goddess of a god, and I will tell thee this my
saying truly, at thy command. 'Twas Zeus that bade me come hither, by no will of mine; nay,
who of his free will would speed over such a wondrous space of brine, whereby is no city of
mortals that do sacrifice to the gods, and offer choice hecatombs? But surely it is in no wise
possible for another god to go beyond or to make void the purpose of Zeus, lord of the aegis.
He saith that thou hast with thee a man most wretched beyond his fellows, beyond those men
that round the burg of Priam for nine years fought, and in the tenth year sacked the city and
departed homeward. Yet on the way they sinned against Athene, and she raised upon them an evil
blast and long waves of the sea. Then all the rest of his good company was lost, but it came
to pass that the wind bare and the wave brought him hither. And now Zeus biddeth thee send
him hence with what speed thou mayest, for it is not ordained that he die away from his friends,
but rather it is his fate to look on them even yet, and to come to his high-roofed home and
his own country.'

So spake he, and Calypso, that fair goddess, shuddered and uttered her voice, and spake unto
him winged words: 'Hard are ye gods and jealous exceeding, who ever grudge goddesses openly
to mate with men, if any make a mortal her dear bed-fellow. Even so when rosy-fingered Dawn
took Orion for her lover, ye gods that live at ease were jealous thereof, till chaste Artemis,
of the golden throne, slew him in Ortygia with the visitation of her gentle shafts. So too
when fair-tressed Demeter yielded to her love, and lay with Iasion in the thrice-ploughed fallow-field,
Zeus was not long without tidings thereof, and cast at him with his white bolt and slew him.
So again ye gods now grudge that a mortal man should dwell with me. Him I saved as he went
all alone bestriding the keel of a bark, for that Zeus had crushed {*} and cleft his swift
ship with a white bolt in the midst of the wine-dark deep. And him have I loved and cherished,
and I said that I would make him to know not death and age for ever. But I will give him no
despatch, not I, for I have no ships by me with oars, nor company to bear him on his way over
the broad back of the sea. Yet will I be forward to put this in his mind, and will hide nought,
that all unharmed he may come to his own country.'

{* It seems very doubtful whether [Greek] can bear this meaning. The reading [Greek], 'smote,'
preserved by the Schol. is highly probable.}

Then the messenger, the slayer of Argos, answered her: 'Yea, speed him now upon his path and
have regard unto the wrath of Zeus, lest haply he be angered and bear hard on thee hereafter.'

Therewith the great slayer of Argos departed, but the lady nymph went on her way to the great-hearted
Odysseus, when she had heard the message of Zeus. And there she found him sitting on the shore,
and his eyes were never dry of tears, and his sweet life was ebbing away as he mourned for
his return; for the nymph no more found favour in his sight. Howsoever by night he would sleep
by her, as needs he must, in the hollow caves, unwilling lover by a willing lady. And in the
day-time he would sit on the rocks and on the beach, straining his soul with tears, and groans,
and griefs, and through his tears he would look wistfully over the unharvested deep. So standing
near him that fair goddess spake to him:

'Hapless man, sorrow no more I pray thee in this isle, nor let thy good life waste away, for
even now will I send thee hence with all my heart. Nay, arise and cut long beams, and fashion
a wide raft with the axe, and lay deckings high thereupon, that it may bear thee over the misty
deep. And I will place therein bread and water, and red wine to thy heart's desire, to keep
hunger far away. And I will put raiment upon thee, and send a fair gale in thy wake, that so
thou mayest come all unharmed to thine own country, if indeed it be the good pleasure of the
gods who hold wide heaven, who are stronger than I am both to will and to do.'

So she spake, and the steadfast goodly Odysseus shuddered, and uttering his voice spake to
her winged words: 'Herein, goddess, thou hast plainly some other thought, and in no wise my
furtherance, for that thou biddest me to cross in a raft the great gulf of the sea so dread
and difficult, which not even the swift gallant ships pass over rejoicing in the breeze of
Zeus. He arrived in the Golden Horn laden with booty, and delivered to his master, the Sultan,
18,000 captives.

This exploit changed the complexion of affairs.

During the winter of 1537-1538 the naval yards of Constantinople were busy with the preparations
for a new fleet which should take the offensive against the Venetians and the Christians generally.
In the spring Barbarossa got out into the Archipelago and, raiding at will, swept up another
batch of prisoners to serve as galley slaves for the new ships. Meanwhile the Mediterranean states
nerved themselves for a final effort. Venice contributed 81 galleys, the Pope sent 36, and Spain,
30.

Later the Emperor sent 50 transports with 10,000 soldiers, and 49 galleys, together with a number
of large sailing ships.

Venice also added 14 sailing ships of war, or "nefs," and Doria 22; these formed a special squadron.
The Venetian nefs were headed by Condalmiero in his flagship the Galleon of Venice, the most
formidable warship in the Mediterranean, and the precursor of a revolution in naval architecture
and naval tactics.

Although the sailing ship was coming more and more into favor because of the discoveries across
the Atlantic, the galley was the man of war of this period.

The dromons of the Eastern empire, with their stout build and two banks of oars, had given
way to a long, narrow vessel with a single bank of oars which had been developed by men who lived
on the shores of the sheltered lagoons of the Adriatic. The prime characteristic of this type
was its mobility. For the pirate whose business it was to lie in wait and dash out on a merchantman,
this quality of mobility--independence of wind and speed of movement--was of chief importance.
Similarly, in order to combat the pirate it was necessary to possess the same characteristic.
Of course, as in all the days of rowed ships, this freedom of movement was limited by the physical
exhaustion of the rowers.

In the ships of Greek and Roman days these men had some protection from the weapons of the enemy
and from the weather, but in the 16th century galley, whether Turkish or Christian, they were chained
naked to their benches day and night, with practically nothing to shelter them from the weather
or from the weapons of an enemy. So frightful were the hardships of the life that the rowers
were almost always captives, or felons who worked out their sentences on the rowers' bench. An important
difference between the galley of this period and the earlier types of rowed ship is the fact
that in the galley there was but one row of oars on a side, but these
oars were very long and manned by four or five men apiece.

A typical galley was about 180 feet over all with a beam of 19 feet and a depth of hold of about
7-1/2 feet. A single deck sloped from about the water line to a structure that ran fore and aft
amidships, about six feet wide, which served as a gangway between forecastle and poop and gave
access to the hold. The forecastle carried the main battery of guns, and was closed in below
so as to provide quarters for the fighting men. The poop had a deck house and a smaller battery;
this deck also was closed in, furnishing quarters for the officers. There were two or three masts,
lateen rigged, adorned in peace or war with the greatest profusion of banners and streamers. Indeed
huge sums of money were expended on the mere ornament of these war galleys, particularly in
the elaborate carvings that adorned the stern and prow.

In the conflict of Christian and Moslem, when Constantinople was the capital of Christendom, Greek
fire on two critical occasions routed the Saracens. This substance was never understood in
western Europe, and for centuries the secret was carefully preserved in the eastern capital. In
the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, it was used by the Moslem against the Christian, but
the discovery of gunpowder soon made the earlier substance obsolete. In the 16th century cannon
had already reached considerable dimensions, but in a naval battle between galleys these weapons
were not used after the first volley or so. The tactics were little different from those of the
day of the trireme, consisting simply of ramming, and fighting at close quarters with arquebus,
bows, pike, and sword.

Twenty feet from the bows of every galley projected her metal beak,
and all her guns pointed forward; hence in the naval tactics of the
period everything turned on a head-on attack.

The battle line, therefore, was line abreast. For the same reasons a commander had to fear
an attack on his flank, and he maneuvered usually to get at least one flank protected by the
shore. The battle line in the days of the galley could be dressed as accurately as a file
of soldiers, but the fighting was settled in a close mêlée in which all formation was lost from
the moment of collision between the two fleets.

The Campaign of Prevesa

Such were the men of war and the tactics common to Christian and corsair during the 16th century.
While the Christians were slowly collecting their armada, Barbarossa, with a force of 122
galleys, set out to catch his enemy in detail if he could. Pirate as he was, the old ruffian
had a clear strategic grasp of what he might do with a force that was inferior to the fleet
collecting against him. The Christians were to mobilize at Corfu. The Papal squadron had collected
in the Gulf of Arta, and Barbarossa made for it.

By sheer luck just before he arrived it had moved to the rendezvous. If he had followed it up
immediately, he might have crushed both the Papal and Venetian contingents, because Doria and
the Spanish fleet had not yet arrived; but apparently he felt uncertain as to just how far off
these reënforcements were and therefore did not attempt the stroke. Instead, he took up a defensive
position in the Gulf of Arta, exactly where Antony had collected his fleet before the battle
of Actium.

In September (1538) the Christian fleet under Doria left Corfu and crossed to the Gulf. Barbarossa
had drawn up his force in battle array inside the entrance, under the guns of the Turkish fortress
at Prevesa.

Since this entrance is obstructed by a bar with too little water for Doria's heavier ships,
he lay outside. Thus the two fleets faced each other, each waiting for the other to make the
next move. For the first time in their careers the greatest admiral on the Christian side was
face to face with the greatest on the Moslem side. Both were old men, Doria over seventy and Barbarossa
eighty-two. The stage was set for another decisive battle on the scene of Actium. The town of
Prevesa stood on the site of Octavius's camp, and again East and West faced each other for the
mastery of the sea. With the vastly greater strength of the Christian fleet, and the known
skill of its leader, everything pointed to an overwhelming victory for the Cross. What followed
is one of the most amazing stories in history.

Having the interior lines and the smooth anchorage, Barbarossa had only to watch his enemy go
to pieces in the open roadstead in trying to maintain a blockade. His officers, however, scorned
such a policy, and, being appointees of the Sultan and far from subordinate
in spirit to their chief, they were finally able to force his hand
and compel him to offer battle to the Christians by leaving the security
of the gulf and the fortress and going out into the open, exactly
where Doria wanted him.

Accordingly on the 27th of September, the Turkish fleet sailed out to offer battle. It happened
that Doria had gone ten miles away to Sessola for anchorage, and the Galleon of Venice lay becalmed
right in the path of the advancing fleet. Condalmiero sent word for help, and Doria ordered him
to begin fighting, assuring him that he would soon be reënforced.

The Turkish galleys, advancing in a crescent formation, soon enveloped the lonely ship. Her captain
ordered his crew to lie down on her deck while he alone stood, in full armor, a target to
the host of Moslems who pushed forward in their galleys anxious for the honor of capturing
this great ship. Condalmiero ordered his gunners to hold their fire until the enemy were within
arquebus range. Then the broadsides of the galleon blazed and the surrounding galleys crumpled
and sank. A single shot weighing 120 pounds sank a galley with practically all on board. The
signal to retreat was given and speedily obeyed.

Thereafter there were to be no more rushing tactics.

Barbarossa organized his galleys in squadrons of twenty, which advanced, one after the other,
delivered their fire, and retired. All the rest of the day, from about noon till sunset, this
strange conflict between the single galleon and the Turkish fleet
went on.

The ship was cumbered with her fallen spars; she had lost thirteen men killed and forty wounded.
The losses would have been far greater but for the extraordinarily thick sides of the galleon.
After sundown the Turkish fleet appeared to be drawing up in line
for the last assault.

On the Galleon of Venice there was no thought of surrender; the ammunition was almost spent
and the men were exhausted with their tremendous efforts, but they stood at their posts determined
to defend their ship to the last man.

Then, to their astonishment Barbarossa drew off, sending some of his galleys to pursue and cut
off certain isolated Christian units, but leaving the field to the
Venetian galleon.

Meanwhile, during all that long, hot afternoon the great fleet of Andrea Doria, instead of pressing
forward to the relief of the Galleon of Venice and crushing Barbarossa with its great superiority
in numbers, was going through strange parade maneuvers about ten miles away. Doria's explanation
was that he was trying to decoy Barbarossa out into deeper water where the guns of the nefs could
be used, but there is no other conclusion to be reached than that Doria did not want to fight.
Fortune that day offered him everything for an overwhelming victory, one that might have ranked
with the decisive actions of the world's history, and he threw it away under circumstances peculiarly
disgraceful and humiliating. Never did commander in chief so richly deserve to be shot on his
own deck. The following day as a fair wind blew for Corfu, Doria spread sail and retired from
the gulf, while Barbarossa, roaring with laughter, called on his men to witness the cowardice
of this Christian admiral.

The victory lay with Barbarossa. With a greatly inferior force he had challenged Doria and attacked.
Doria had not only declined the challenge but fled back to Corfu. No wonder the Sultan ordered the cities
of his domain to be illuminated.

Barbarossa's prizes included two galleys and five nefs, but he, too, had failed in an inexplicable
fashion in drawing off from the assault on the Galleon of Venice at the end of the day's fighting.
It is with her, with the gallant Condalmiero and his men, that all the honor of the day belongs.
Nothing in the adventurous 16th century surpasses their splendid, disciplined valor on this
occasion.

The astonishing powers of resistance and the deadly effect of the broadsides of the Galleon
of Venice displayed in a long and successful fight against an entire fleet of galleys should
have had the effect of making a revolution in naval architecture fifty years before that change actually
occurred. But men of war of those days were built after the models of Venetian architects,
and the latter clung doggedly to the galley. They overlooked the great defensive and offensive powers
of the galleon displayed in this story and saw only the fact that
she was becalmed and unable to move.

Doria's failure left conditions in the Mediterranean as bad as ever. Barbarossa died at the age
of ninety, but one of the last acts of his life was to ransom a follower of his, Dragut, Pasha
of Tripoli, who had served under him at Prevesa and, having been captured two years later,
served four years as a galley slave on the ship of Gian Andrea Doria, the grandnephew and heir
of Andrea Doria. Dragut soon assumed the leadership laid down by Barbarossa, his master, fighting
first the elder Doria and then his namesake with great skill and audacity. For years the Knights
of Malta had been a thorn in the side of the Moslems who roamed the sea, and in 1565 a gigantic effort
was made by the Sultan, together with his tributaries from the Barbary
states, to wipe out this naval stronghold.

The siege that followed was distinguished by the most reckless courage and the most desperate
fighting on both sides. It extended from May 18 to September 8, costing the Christians 8000
and the Moslems 30,000 lives. In the midst of the siege Dragut himself was slain, and the conduct
of the siege fell into less capable hands. Finally the Turks withdrew.

The death of Soliman the Magnificent, in 1566, brought to the head of the Turkish state a ruler
known by the significant name, Selim the Drunkard. Weak and debauched as he was, nevertheless
he aspired to add to the Turkish dominions as his father had done. Accordingly, he informed Venice
that she must evacuate Cyprus. Previous to this time Venice had succeeded, by means of heavy
bribes to the Sultan's ministers, in keeping her hold on this important island, but this policy
only tempted further arrogance on the part of the Turk. Further, the time was propitious for such
a stroke because Venice was impoverished by bad harvests and the loss of her naval arsenal
by fire, Spain was occupied in troubles with the Moors, and France, torn with civil war, wanted
to keep peace with the Sultan at any price.

During the terrible siege of Malta Venice had remained neutral; now that the danger came home
to her she cried for help, and not unnaturally there were those who sneered at her in this crisis
and bade her save herself.

The Pope, however, had long been anxious to organize a league of Christian peoples to win back
the Mediterranean to the Cross and draw a line beyond which the Crescent should never pass. In
this plight of Venice he saw an opportunity, because hitherto the persistent neutrality or the
unwillingness of the Venetians to fight the Turk to the finish had been one of the chief obstacles
to concerted action. He therefore pledged his own resources to Venice and attempted to collect
allies by the appeal to the Cross. The results were discouraging, but a force of Spanish,
Papal, and Venetian galleys was finally collected and after endless delays dispatched to the
scene in the summer of 1570.

Meanwhile the Turks had been pressing their attack on Cyprus and were besieging the city of
Nicosia. If the Christians had been moved by any united spirit they could have relieved Nicosia
and struck a heavy blow at the Turkish fleet, which lay unready and stripped of its men in the
harbor. But Gian Doria, who inherited from his great uncle his great dislike of Venetians, and who
probably had secret instructions from his master, Philip II, to help as little as possible,
succeeded in blocking any vigorous move on the part of the other
commanders.

Finally, after a heated quarrel, he sailed back to Sicily with his entire fleet, and the rest
followed. The allies had gone no nearer Cyprus than the port of Suda in Crete. The whole expedition,
therefore, came to nothing.

In September Nicosia fell to the Turk, who then turned to the conquest of Famagusta, the last
stronghold of the Venetians on the island. Bragadino, the commander of the besieged forces, fought
against desperate odds with a courage and skill worthy of the best traditions of his native
city, hoping to repulse the Turks until help could arrive. But Doria's defection in 1570 decided
the fate of the city the following year. After fifty-five days of siege, with no resources
left, Bragadino was compelled, on August 4, 1571, to accept an offer of surrender on honorable
terms. The Turkish commander, enraged at the loss of 50,000 men, which Bragadino's stubborn defense
had cost, no sooner had the Venetians in his power than he massacred officers and men and flayed
their commander alive.

This news did not reach the Christians, however, until their second
expedition was almost at grips with the Turks at Lepanto.

  
  
  The Campaign of Lepanto
  
  Undismayed by the failure of his first attempt, Pope Pius had immediately
gone to work to reorganize his Holy League.

He had to overcome the mutual hatred and mistrust that lay between Spain and Venice, aggravated by
the recent conduct of Doria, but neither the Pope nor Venice could do without the help of Spain. There
was much bickering between the envoys in the Papal chambers, and it was not till February,
1571, that the terms of the new enterprise were agreed upon. By this contract no one of the powers
represented was to make a separate peace with the Porte. The costs were divided into six parts,
of which Spain undertook three, Venice, two, and the Pope, one. Don Juan, the illegitimate
brother of Philip II, was to be commander in chief. Although only twenty-four, this prince
had won a military reputation in suppressing the Moorish rebellion in Spain, and, having been
recognized by Philip as a half brother, he had a princely rank that would subordinate the claims of all
the rival admirals. Finally, the rendezvous was appointed at Messina.

The aged Venetian admiral, Veniero, had been compelled by the situation
in the east to divide his force into two parts, one at Crete, and
the other under himself at Corfu.

By the time he received orders to proceed to the rendezvous, he learned that Ali, the corsair
king of Algiers, known better by his nickname of "Uluch" Ali, was operating at the mouth of the
Adriatic with a large force. To reach Messina with his divided fleet, Veniero ran the risk
of being caught by Ali and destroyed in detail, but the situation
was so critical that he took the risk and succeeded in slipping past
the corsair undiscovered.

In permitting this escape, and in fact in allowing all the other units of the Christian fleet
to assemble at Messina, Ali missed a golden opportunity to destroy the whole force before it ever
collected. Instead, he continued his ravages on the coasts of the Adriatic, bent only on plunder.
He carried his raids almost to the lagoons of Venice itself, and indeed might have attacked
the city had he not been hampered by a shortage of men.

Although the Turks were having their own way, unopposed, and the situation was growing daily
more critical, the Christian fleet was slow in assembling. For a whole month Veniero waited in Messina
for the arrival of Don Juan and the Spanish squadrons. Philip, apparently, used one pretext
after another to delay the prince, and once on his way Don Juan had to tarry at every stage of the
journey to witness ceremonial fêtes held in his honor. Philip acted in good faith as far as his
preparations went, but he wanted to save his galleys for use against
the Moors of the Barbary coast, which was nearer the ports of Spain,
and was indifferent to the outcome of the quarrel between Venice and
the Porte.

Undoubtedly Doria and the other Spanish officers were fully informed of their royal master's
desires in this expedition as in the one of the year before. They
were to avoid battle if they could.

On August 25 Don Juan arrived
at Messina and was joyously received by the city and the fleet. Nevertheless,
it was the 12th of September before the decision was finally reached
to seek out the Turkish fleet and offer battle. Fortunately Don Juan
was a high-spirited youth who shared none of his brother's half-heartedness;
he went to work to organize the discordant elements under his command
into as much of a unit as he could, and to imbue them with the idea
of aggressive action. In this spirit he was seconded by thousands
of young nobles and soldiers of fortune from Spain and Italy, who
had flocked to his standard like the knight errants of the age of
chivalry, burning to distinguish themselves against the infidel. Among
these, oddly enough, was a young Spaniard, Cervantes, who was destined
in later years to laugh chivalry out of Europe by his immortal "Don
Quixote."

In order to knit together the three elements, Spanish,
Venetian, and Papal, Don Juan so distributed their forces that no
single squadron could claim to belong to any one nation. As the Venetian
galleys lacked men, he put aboard them Spanish and Italian infantry.
Before leaving Messina, he had given every commander written instructions
as to his cruising station and his place in the battle line. The fighting
formation was to consist of three squadrons of the line and one of
reserve. The left wing was to be commanded by the Venetian Barbarigo;
the center, by Don Juan himself, in the flagship Real, with Colonna,
the Papal commander on his right and Veniero, the Venetian commander,
on his left, in their respective flagships. Not by winds is it shaken, nor ever wet with rain, nor
doth the snow come nigh thereto, but most clear air is spread about it cloudless, and the white
light floats over it. Therein the blessed gods are glad for all their days, and thither Athene
went when she had shown forth all to the maiden.

Anon came the throned Dawn, and awakened Nausicaa of the fair robes, who straightway marvelled
on the dream, and went through the halls to tell her parents, her father dear and her mother.
And she found them within, her mother sitting by the hearth with the women her handmaids, spinning
yarn of sea-purple stain, but her father she met as he was going forth to the renowned kings
in their council, whither the noble Phaeacians called him. Standing close by her dear father
she spake, saying: 'Father, dear, couldst thou not lend me a high waggon with strong wheels,
that I may take the goodly raiment to the river to wash, so much as I have lying soiled? Yea
and it is seemly that thou thyself, when thou art with the princes in council, shouldest have
fresh raiment to wear. Also, there are five dear sons of thine in the halls, two married, but
three are lusty bachelors, and these are always eager for new-washen garments wherein to go
to the dances; for all these things have I taken thought.'

This she said, because she was ashamed to speak of glad marriage to her father; but he saw
all and answered, saying:

'Neither the mules nor aught else do I grudge thee, my child. Go thy ways, and the thralls
shall get thee ready a high waggon with good wheels, and fitted with an upper frame.'

Therewith he called to his men, and they gave ear, and without the palace they made ready the
smooth-running mule-wain, and led the mules beneath the yoke, and harnessed them under the
car, while the maiden brought forth from her bower the shining raiment. This she stored in
the polished car, and her mother filled a basket with all manner of food to the heart's desire,
dainties too she set therein, and she poured wine into a goat-skin bottle, while Nausicaa climbed
into the wain. And her mother gave her soft olive oil also in a golden cruse, that she and
her maidens might anoint themselves after the bath. Then Nausicaa took the whip and the shining
reins, and touched the mules to start them; then there was a clatter of hoofs, and on they
strained without flagging, with their load of the raiment and the maiden. Not alone did she
go, for her attendants followed with her.

Now when they were come to the beautiful stream of the river, where truly were the unfailing
cisterns, and bright water welled up free from beneath, and flowed past, enough to wash the
foulest garments clean, there the girls unharnessed the mules from under the chariot, and turning
them loose they drove them along the banks of the eddying river to graze on the honey-sweet
clover. Then they took the garments from the wain, in their hands, and bore them to the black
water, and briskly trod them down in the trenches, in busy rivalry. Now when they had washed
and cleansed all the stains, they spread all out in order along the shore of the deep, even
where the sea, in beating on the coast, washed the pebbles clean. Then having bathed and anointed
them well with olive oil, they took their mid-day meal on the river's banks, waiting till the
clothes should dry in the brightness of the sun. Anon, when they were satisfied with food,
the maidens and the princess, they fell to playing at ball, casting away their tires, and among
them Nausicaa of the white arms began the song. And even as Artemis, the archer, moveth down
the mountain, either along the ridges of lofty Taygetus or Erymanthus, taking her pastime in
the chase of boars and swift deer, and with her the wild wood-nymphs disport them, the daughters
of Zeus, lord of the aegis, and Leto is glad at heart, while high over all she rears her head
and brows, and easily may she be known,--but all are fair; even so the girl unwed outshone
her maiden company.

But when now she was about going homewards, after yoking the mules and folding up the goodly
raiment, then grey-eyed Athene turned to other thoughts, that so Odysseus might awake, and
see the lovely maiden, who should be his guide to the city of the Phaeacian men. So then the
princess threw the ball at one of her company; she missed the girl, and cast the ball into
the deep eddying current, whereat they all raised a piercing cry. Then the goodly Odysseus
awoke and sat up, pondering in his heart and spirit:

'Woe is me! to what men's land am I come now? say, are they froward, and wild, and unjust,
or are they hospitable, and of God-fearing mind? How shrill a cry of maidens rings round me,
of the nymphs that hold the steep hill-tops, and the river-springs, and the grassy water meadows!
It must be, methinks, that I am near men of human speech. Go to, I myself will make trial and see.'

Therewith the goodly Odysseus crept out from under the coppice, having broken with his strong
hand a leafy bough from the thick wood, to hold athwart his body, that it might hide his nakedness
withal. And forth he sallied like a lion mountain-bred, trusting in his strength, who fares
out blown and rained upon, with flaming eyes; amid the kine he goes or amid the sheep or in
the track of the wild deer; yea, his belly bids him go even to the good homestead to make assay
upon the flocks. Even so Odysseus was fain to draw nigh to the fair-tressed maidens, all naked
as he was, such need had come upon him. But he was terrible in their eyes, being marred with
the salt sea foam, and they fled cowering here and there about the jutting spits of shore.
And the daughter of Alcinous alone stood firm, for Athene gave her courage of heart, and took
all trembling from her limbs. So she halted and stood over against him, and Odysseus considered
whether he should clasp the knees of the lovely maiden, and so make his prayer, or should stand
as he was, apart, and beseech her with smooth words, if haply she might show him the town,
and give him raiment. And as he thought within himself, it seemed better to stand apart, and
beseech her with smooth words, lest the maiden should be angered with him if he touched her
knees: so straightway he spake a sweet and cunning word:

'I supplicate thee, O queen, whether thou art a goddess or a mortal! If indeed thou art a goddess
of them that keep the wide heaven; to Artemis, then, the daughter of great Zeus, I mainly liken
thee, for beauty and stature and shapeliness. But if thou art one of the daughters of men who
dwell on earth, thrice blessed are thy father and thy lady mother, and thrice blessed thy brethren.
Surely their souls ever glow with gladness for thy sake, each time they see thee entering the
dance, so fair a flower of maidens. But he is of heart the most blessed beyond all other who
shall prevail with gifts of wooing, and lead thee to his home. Never have mine eyes beheld
such an one among mortals, neither man nor woman; great awe comes upon me as I look on thee.
Yet in Delos once I saw as goodly a thing: a young sapling of a palm tree springing by the
altar of Apollo. For thither too I went, and much people with me, on that path where my sore
troubles were to be. Yea, and when I looked thereupon, long time I marvelled in spirit,--for
never grew there yet so goodly a shoot from ground,--even in such wise as I wonder at thee,
lady, and am astonied and do greatly fear to touch thy knees, though grievous sorrow is upon
me. Yesterday, on the twentieth day, I escaped from the wine-dark deep, but all that time continually
the wave bare me, and the vehement winds drave, from the isle Ogygia. And now some god has
cast me on this shore, that here too, methinks, some evil may betide me; for I trow not that
trouble will cease; the gods ere that time will yet bring many a thing to pass. But, queen,
have pity on me, for after many trials and sore to thee first of all am I come, and of the
other folk, who hold this city and land, I know no man. Nay show me the town, give me an old
garment to cast about me, if thou hadst, when thou camest here, any wrap for the linen. And
may the gods grant thee all thy heart's desire: a husband and a home, and a mind at one with
his may they give--a good gift, for there is nothing mightier and nobler than when man and
wife are of one heart and mind in a house, a grief to their foes, and to their friends great
joy, but their own hearts know it best.'

Then Nausicaa of the white arms answered him, and said: 'Stranger, forasmuch as thou seemest
no evil man nor foolish--and it is Olympian Zeus himself that giveth weal to men, to the good
and to the evil, to each one as he will, and this thy lot doubtless is of him, and so thou
must in anywise endure it:--and now, since thou hast come to our city and our land, thou shalt
not lack raiment, nor aught else that is the due of a hapless suppliant, when he has met them
who can befriend him. And I will show thee the town, and name the name of the people. The Phaeacians
hold this city and land, and I am the daughter of Alcinous, great of heart, on whom all the
might and force of the Phaeacians depend.'

Thus she spake, and called to her maidens of the fair tresses: 'Halt, my maidens, whither flee
ye at the sight of a man? Ye surely do not take him for an enemy? That mortal breathes not,
and never will be born, who shall come with war to the land of the Phaeacians, for they are
very dear to the gods. Far apart we live in the wash of the waves, the outermost of men, and
no other mortals are conversant with us. Nay, but this man is some helpless one come hither
in his wanderings, whom now we must kindly entreat, for all strangers and beggars are from
Zeus, and a little gift is dear. So, my maidens, give the stranger meat and drink, and bathe
him in the river, where withal is a shelter from the winds.'

So she spake, but they had halted and called each to the other, and they brought Odysseus to
the sheltered place, and made him sit down, as Nausicaa bade them, the daughter of Alcinous,
high of heart. Beside him they laid a mantle, and a doublet for raiment, and gave him soft
olive oil in the golden cruse, and bade him wash in the streams of the river. Then goodly Odysseus
spake among the maidens, saying: 'I pray you stand thus apart, while I myself wash the brine
from my shoulders, and anoint me with olive oil, for truly oil is long a stranger to my skin.
But in your sight I will not bathe, for I am ashamed to make me naked in the company of fair-tressed
maidens.'

Then they went apart and told all to their lady. But with the river water the goodly Odysseus
washed from his skin the salt scurf that covered his back and broad shoulders, and from his
head he wiped the crusted brine of the barren sea. But when he had washed his whole body, and
anointed him with olive oil, and had clad himself in the raiment that the unwedded maiden gave
him, then Athene, the daughter of Zeus, made him greater and more mighty to behold, and from
his head caused deep curling locks to flow, like the hyacinth flower. And as when some skilful
man overlays gold upon silver--one that Hephaestus and Pallas Athene have taught all manner
of craft, and full of grace is his handiwork--even so did Athene shed grace about his head
and shoulders.

Then to the shore of the sea went Odysseus apart, and sat down, glowing in beauty and grace,
and the princess marvelled at him, and spake among her fair-tressed maidens, saying:

'Listen, my white-armed maidens, and I will say somewhat. Not without the will of all the gods
who hold Olympus hath this man come among the godlike Phaeacians. Erewhile he seemed to me
uncomely, but now he is like the gods that keep the wide heaven. Would that such an one might
be called my husband, dwelling here, and that it might please him here to abide! But come,
my maidens, give the stranger meat and drink.'

Thus she spake, and they gave ready ear and hearkened, and set beside Odysseus meat and drink,
and the steadfast goodly Odysseus did eat and drink eagerly, for it was long since he had tasted
food.

Now Nausicaa of the white arms had another thought. She folded the raiment and stored it in
the goodly wain, and yoked the mules strong of hoof, and herself climbed into the car. Then
she called on Odysseus, and spake and hailed him: 'Up now, stranger, and rouse thee to go to
the city, that I may convey thee to the house of my wise father, where, I promise thee, thou
shalt get knowledge of all the noblest of the Phaeacians. But do thou even as I tell thee,
and thou seemest a discreet man enough. So long as we are passing along the fields and farms
of men, do thou fare quickly with the maidens behind the mules and the chariot, and I will
lead the way. But when we set foot within the city,--whereby goes a high wall with towers,
and there is a fair haven on either side of the town, and narrow is the entrance, and curved
ships are drawn up on either hand of the mole, for all the folk have stations for their vessels,
each man one for himself. And there is the place of assembly about the goodly temple of Poseidon,
furnished with heavy stones, deep bedded in the earth. There men look to the gear of the black
ships, hawsers and sails, and there they fine down the oars. For the Phaeacians care not for
bow nor quiver, but for masts, and oars of ships, and gallant barques, wherein rejoicing they
cross the grey sea. Their ungracious speech it is that I would avoid, lest some man afterward
rebuke me, and there are but too many insolent folk among the people. And some one of the baser
sort might meet me and say: "Who is this that goes with Nausicaa, this tall and goodly stranger?
Where found she him? Her husband he will be, her very own. Either she has taken in some shipwrecked
wanderer of strange men,--for no men dwell near us; or some god has come in answer to her instant
prayer; from heaven has he descended, and will have her to wife for evermore. Better so, if
herself she has ranged abroad and found a lord from a strange land, for verily she holds in
no regard the Phaeacians here in this country, the many men and noble who are her wooers."
So will they speak, and this would turn to my reproach. Yea, and I myself would think it blame
of another maiden who did such things in despite of her friends, her father and mother being
still alive, and was conversant with men before the day of open wedlock. But, stranger, heed
well what I say, that as soon as may be thou mayest gain at my father's hands an escort and
a safe return. Thou shalt find a fair grove of Athene, a poplar grove near the road, and a
spring wells forth therein, and a meadow lies all around. There is my father's demesne, and
his fruitful close, within the sound of a man's shout from the city. Sit thee down there and
wait until such time as we may have come into the city, and reached the house of my father.
But when thou deemest that we are got to the palace, then go up to the city of the Phaeacians,
and ask for the house of my father Alcinous, high of heart. It is easily known, and a young
child could be thy guide, for nowise like it are builded the houses of the Phaeacians, so goodly
is the palace of the hero Alcinous. But when thou art within the shadow of the halls and the
court, pass quickly through the great chamber, till thou comest to my mother, who sits at the
hearth in the light of the fire, weaving yarn of sea-purple stain, a wonder to behold. Her
chair is leaned against a pillar, and her maidens sit behind her. And there my father's throne
leans close to hers, wherein he sits and drinks his wine, like an immortal. Pass thou by him,
and cast thy hands about my mother's knees, that thou mayest see quickly and with joy the day
of thy returning, even if thou art from a very far country. If but her heart be kindly disposed
toward thee, then is there hope that thou shalt see thy friends, and come to thy well-builded
house, and to thine own country.'

She spake, and smote the mules with the shining whip, and quickly they left behind them the
streams of the river. And well they trotted and well they paced, and she took heed to drive
in such wise that the maidens and Odysseus might follow on foot, and cunningly she plied the
lash. Then the sun set, and they came to the famous grove, the sacred place of Athene; so there
the goodly Odysseus sat him down. Then straightway he prayed to the daughter of mighty Zeus:
'Listen to me, child of Zeus, lord of the aegis, unwearied maiden; hear me even now, since
before thou heardest not when I was smitten on the sea, when the renowned Earth-shaker smote
me. Grant me to come to the Phaeacians as one dear, and worthy of pity.'

So he spake in prayer, and Pallas Athene heard him; but she did not yet appear to him face
to face, for she had regard unto her father's brother, who furiously raged against the godlike
Odysseus, till he should come to his own country.

Book VII

  Odysseus being received at the house of the king Alcinous,
  the queen after supper, taking notice of his garments,
  gives him occasion to relate his passage thither on the
  raft. Alcinous promises him a convoy for the morrow.

So he prayed there, the steadfast goodly Odysseus, while the two strong mules bare the princess
to the town. And when she had now come to the famous palace of her father, she halted at the
gateway, and round her gathered her brothers, men like to the immortals, and they loosed the
mules from under the car, and carried the raiment within. But the maiden betook her to her
chamber; and an aged dame from Aperaea kindled the fire for her, Eurymedusa, the handmaid of
the chamber, whom the curved ships upon a time had brought from Aperaea; and men chose her
as a prize for Alcinous, seeing that he bare rule over all the Phaeacians, and the people hearkened
to him as to a god. She waited on the white-armed Nausicaa in the palace halls; she was wont
to kindle the fire and prepare the supper in the inner chamber.

At that same hour Odysseus roused him to go to the city, and Athene shed a deep mist about
Odysseus for the favour that she bare him, lest any of the Phaeacians, high of heart, should
meet him and mock him in sharp speech, and ask him who he was. But when he was now about to
enter the pleasant city, then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, met him, in the fashion of a young
maiden carrying a pitcher, and she stood over against him, and goodly Odysseus inquired of her:

'My child, couldst thou not lead me to the palace of the lord Alcinous, who bears sway among
this people? Lo, I am come here, a stranger travel-worn from afar, from a distant land; wherefore
of the folk who possess this city and country I know not any man.'

Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, answered him saying: 'Yea now, father and stranger, I will
show thee the house that thou bidst me declare, for it lies near the palace of my noble father;
behold, be silent as thou goest, and I will lead the way. And look on no man, nor question
any. For these men do not gladly suffer strangers, nor lovingly entreat whoso cometh from a
strange land. They trust to the speed of their swift ships, wherewith they cross the great
gulf, for the Earth-shaker hath vouchsafed them this power. Their ships are swift as the flight
of a bird, or as a thought.'

Therewith Pallas Athene led the way swiftly, and he followed hard in the footsteps of the goddess.
And it came to pass that the Phaeacians, mariners renowned, marked him not as he went down
the city through their midst, for the fair tressed Athene suffered it not, that awful goddess,
who shed a wondrous mist about him, for the favour that she bare him in her heart. And Odysseus
marvelled at the havens and the gallant ships, yea and the places of assembly of the heroes,
and the long high walls crowned with palisades, a marvel to behold. But when they had now come
to the famous palace of the king, the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, spake first and said:

'Lo, here, father and stranger, is the house that thou wouldst have me show thee: and thou
shalt find kings at the feast, the fosterlings of Zeus; enter then, and fear not in thine heart,
for the dauntless man is the best in every adventure, even though he come from a strange land.
Thou shalt find the queen first in the halls; Arete is the name whereby men call her, and she
came even of those that begat the king Alcinous. First Nausithous was son of Poseidon, the
Earth-shaker, and of Periboea, the comeliest of women, youngest daughter of great-hearted Eurymedon,
who once was king among the haughty Giants. Howbeit, he destroyed his infatuate people, and
was himself destroyed; but Poseidon lay with Periboea and begat a son, proud Nausithous, who
sometime was prince among the Phaeacians; and Nausithous begat Rhexenor and Alcinous. While
Rhexenor had as yet no son, Apollo of the silver bow smote him, a groom new wed, leaving in
his halls one only child Arete; and Alcinous took her to wife, and honoured her as no other
woman in the world is honoured, of all that now-a-days keep house under the hand of their lords.
Thus she hath, and hath ever had, all worship heartily from her dear children and from her
lord Alcinous and from all the folk, who look on her as on a goddess, and greet her with reverend
speech, when she goes about the town. Yea, for she too hath no lack of understanding. To whomso
she shows favour, even if they be men, she ends their feuds. {*} If but her heart be kindly
disposed to thee, then is there good hope that thou mayest see thy friends, and come to thy
high-roofed home and thine own country.'

{* And for the women she favours, she ends the feuds of their lords also.}

Therewith grey-eyed Athene departed over the unharvested seas, and left pleasant Scheria, and
came to Marathon and wide-wayed Athens, and entered the good house of Erechtheus. Meanwhile
Odysseus went to the famous palace of Alcinous, and his heart was full of many thoughts as
he stood there or ever he had reached the threshold of bronze. For there was a gleam as it
were of sun or moon through the high-roofed hall of great-hearted Alcinous. Brazen were the
walls which ran this way and that from the threshold to the inmost chamber, and round them
was a frieze of blue, and golden were the doors that closed in the good house. Silver were
the door-posts that were set on the brazen threshold, and silver the lintel thereupon, and
the hook of the door was of gold. And on either side stood golden hounds and silver, which
Hephaestus wrought by his cunning, to guard the palace of great-hearted Alcinous, being free
from death and age all their days. And within were seats arrayed against the wall this way
and that, from the threshold even to the inmost chamber, and thereon were spread light coverings
finely woven, the handiwork of women. There the Phaeacian chieftains were wont to sit eating
and drinking, for they had continual store. Yea, and there were youths fashioned in gold, standing
on firm-set bases, with flaming torches in their hands, giving light through the night to the
feasters in the palace. And he had fifty handmaids in the house, and some grind the yellow
grain on the millstone, and others weave webs and turn the yarn as they sit, restless as the
leaves of the tall poplar tree: and the soft olive oil drops off that linen, so closely is
it woven. For as the Phaeacian men are skilled beyond all others in driving a swift ship upon
the deep, even so are the women the most cunning at the loom, for Athene hath given them notable
wisdom in all fair handiwork and cunning wit. And without the courtyard hard by the door is
a great garden, off our ploughgates, and a hedge runs round on either side. And there grow
tall trees blossoming, pear-trees and pomegranates, and apple-trees with bright fruit, and
sweet figs, and olives in their bloom. The fruit of these trees never perisheth neither faileth,
winter nor summer, enduring through all the year. Evermore the West Wind blowing brings some
fruits to birth and ripens others. Pear upon pear waxes old, and apple on apple, yea and cluster
ripens upon cluster of the grape, and fig upon fig. There too hath he a fruitful vineyard planted,
whereof the one part is being dried by the heat, a sunny plot on level ground, while other
grapes men are gathering, and yet others they are treading in the wine-press. In the foremost
row are unripe grapes that cast the blossom, and others there be that are growing black to
vintaging. There too, skirting the furthest line, are all manner of garden beds, planted trimly,
that are perpetually fresh, and therein are two fountains of water, whereof one scatters his
streams all about the garden, and the other runs over against it beneath the threshold of the
courtyard, and issues by the lofty house, and thence did the townsfolk draw water. These were
the splendid gifts of the gods in the palace of Alcinous.

There the steadfast goodly Odysseus stood and gazed. But when he had gazed at all and wondered,
he passed quickly over the threshold within the house. And he found the captains and the counsellors
of the Phaeacians pouring forth wine to the keen-sighted god, the slayer of Argos; for to him
they poured the last cup when they were minded to take rest. Now the steadfast goodly Odysseus
went through the hall, clad in a thick mist, which Athene shed around him, till he came to
Arete and the king Alcinous. And Odysseus cast his hands about the knees of Arete, and then
it was that the wondrous mist melted from off him, and a silence fell on them that were within
the house at the sight of him, and they marvelled as they beheld him. Then Odysseus began his
prayer:

'Arete, daughter of god-like Rhexenor, after many toils am I come to thy husband and to thy
knees and to these guests, and may the gods vouchsafe them a happy life, and may each one leave
to his children after him his substance in his halls and whatever dues of honour the people
have rendered unto him. But speed, I pray you, my parting, that I may come the more quickly
to mine own country, for already too long do I suffer affliction far from my friends.'

Therewith he sat him down by the hearth in the ashes at the fire, and behold, a dead silence
fell on all. And at the last the ancient lord Echeneus spake among them, an elder of the Phaeacians,
excellent in speech and skilled in much wisdom of old time. With good will he made harangue
and spake among them:

'Alcinous, this truly is not the more seemly way, nor is it fitting that the stranger should
sit upon the ground in the ashes by the hearth, while these men refrain them, waiting thy word.
Nay come, bid the stranger arise, and set him on a chair inlaid with silver, and command the
henchmen to mix the wine, that we may pour forth likewise before Zeus, whose joy is in the
thunder, who attendeth upon reverend suppliants. And let the housewife give supper to the stranger
out of such stores as be within.'

Now when the mighty king Alcinous heard this saying, he took Odysseus, the wise and crafty,
by the hand, and raised him from the hearth, and set him on a shining chair, whence he bade
his son give place, valiant Laodamas, who sat next him and was his dearest. But when they had
poured forth and had drunken to their heart's content, Alcinous made harangue and spake among them:

'Hear me, ye captains and counsellors of the Phaeacians, that I may speak as my spirit bids
me. Now that the feast is over, go ye home and lie down to rest; and in the morning we will
call yet more elders together, and entertain the stranger in the halls and do fair sacrifice
to the gods, and thereafter we will likewise bethink us of the convoy, that so without pain
or grief yonder stranger may by our convoy reach his own country speedily and with joy, even
though he be from very far away. So shall he suffer no hurt or harm in mid passage, ere he
set foot on his own land; but thereafter he shall endure such things as Fate and the stern
spinning women drew off the spindles for him at his birth when his mother bare him. But if
he is some deathless god come down from heaven, then do the gods herein imagine some new device
against us. For always heretofore the gods appear manifest amongst us, whensoever we offer
glorious hecatombs, and they feast by our side, sitting at the same board; yea, and even if
a wayfarer going all alone has met with them, they use no disguise, since we are near of kin
to them, even as are the Cyclopes and the wild tribes of the Giants.'

And Odysseus of many counsels answered him, saying: 'Alcinous, that thought be far from thee!
for I bear no likeness either in form or fashion to the deathless gods, who keep wide heaven,
but to men that die. Whomsoever ye know of human kind the heaviest laden with sorrow, to them
might I liken myself in my griefs. Yea, and I might tell of yet other woes, even the long tale
of toil that by the gods' will I endured. But as for me, suffer me to sup, afflicted as I am;
for nought is there more shameless than a ravening belly, which biddeth a man perforce be mindful
of him, though one be worn and sorrowful in spirit, even as I have sorrow of heart; yet evermore
he biddeth me eat and drink and maketh me utterly to forget all my sufferings, and commandeth
me to take my fill. But do ye bestir you at the breaking of the day, that so ye may set me,
hapless as I am, upon my country's soil, albeit after much suffering. Ah, and may life leave
me when I have had sight of mine own possessions, my thralls, and my dwelling that is great
and high!'

So spake he, and they all assented thereto, and bade send the stranger on his way, for that
he had spoken aright. Now when they had poured forth and had drunken to their hearts' content,
they went each one to his house to lay them to rest. But goodly Odysseus was left behind in
the hall, and by him sat Arete and godlike Alcinous; and the maids cleared away the furniture
of the feast; and white-armed Arete first spake among them. For she knew the mantle and the
doublet, when she saw the goodly raiment that she herself had wrought with the women her handmaids.
So she uttered her voice and spake to him winged words:

'Sir, I am bold to ask thee first of this. Who art thou of the sons of men, and whence? Who
gave thee this raiment? Didst thou not say indeed that thou camest hither wandering over the deep?'

Then Odysseus of many counsels answered her, and said: ''Tis hard, O queen, to tell my griefs
from end to end, for that the gods of heaven have given me griefs in plenty. But this will
I declare to thee, whereof thou dost question and inquire. There is an isle, Ogygia, that lies
far off in the sea; there dwells the daughter of Atlas, crafty Calypso, of the braided tresses,
an awful goddess, nor is any either of gods or mortals conversant with her. And on the tenth
dark night the gods brought me nigh the isle Ogygia, where Calypso of the braided tresses dwells,
an awful goddess. She took me in, and with all care she cherished me and gave me sustenance,
and said that she would make me to know not death nor age for all my days; but never did she
win my heart within me. There I abode for seven years continually, and watered with my tears
the imperishable raiment that Calypso gave me. But when the eighth year came round in his course,
then at last she urged and bade me to be gone, by reason of a message from Zeus, or it may
be that her own mind was turned. So she sent me forth on a well-bound raft, and gave me plenteous
store, bread and sweet wine, and she clad me in imperishable raiment, and sent forth a warm
and gentle wind to blow. For ten days and seven I sailed, traversing the deep, and on the eighteenth
day the shadowy hills of your land showed in sight, and my heart was glad,--wretched that I
was--for surely I was still to be the mate of much sorrow. For Poseidon, shaker of the earth,
stirred up the same, who roused against me the winds and stopped my way, and made a wondrous
sea to swell, nor did the wave suffer me to be borne upon my raft, as I made ceaseless moan. She
had poised there for the mere survey of a new gown, but after a moment of dwelling on her own
reflection she found herself considering it only as an object in the foreground of a picture.
That picture, seen through the open door, reflected in the glass, was all of a bright, hard glitter,
all a high, harsh tone of newness. In its paneled oak, in its glare of cut-glass and silver,
in the shining vacant faces of its floors and walls, there was not a color that filled the
eye, not a shadow where imagination could find play. As a background for herself it struck
her as incongruous. Like a child looking at the landscape upside down, she felt herself in a foreign
country. Yet it was hers. She turned about to bring it into familiar association. There was nothing
wrong with it. But its great capacity suggested large parties rather than close intimacies.
In the high lift of its ceilings, the ample openings of its doors, the swept, garnished, polished
beauty of its cold surfaces, it proclaimed itself conceived, created and decorated for large,
fine functions. She thought whimsically that any one who knew her, coming into her house, would
realize that some one other than herself had the ordering of it.

She glanced over the table. It was set for three.

It lacked nothing but the serving of dinner. She looked at the clock. It wanted a few minutes
to the hour. Shima, the Japanese butler, came in softly with the evening papers. She took them
from him.

Nothing bored her so much as a paper, but to-night she knew it contained something she really
wanted to see. She opened one of the damp sheets at the page of sales.

There it was at the head of the column in thick black type:

AT AUCTION,
FEBRUARY 18 PERSONAL ESTATE OF ELIZABETH HUNTER CHATWORTH CONSISTING
OF----

She read the details with interest down to the end, where
the name of the "famous Chatworth ring" finished the announcement
with a flourish.

Why "famous"? It was very provoking to advertise with that vague adjective and not explain
it.

She turned indifferently to the first page. She read a sentence, re-read it, read it again.
Then, as if she could not read fast enough, her eyes galloped down the column. Color came into
her cheeks. The grasp of her hands on the edges of the paper tightened. It was the most extraordinary
thing! She was bewildered with the feeling that what was blazing at her from the columns of the paper
was at once the wildest thing that could possibly have happened, and yet the one most to have been
expected.

For, from the first the business had been sinister, from as far back as the tragedy--the end
of poor young Chatworth and his wife--the Bessie, who, before her English marriage, they had
all known so well. Her death, that had befallen in far Italian Alps, had made a sensation
in their little city, and the large announcements of auction that
had followed hard upon it had bred among the women who had known her
a morbid excitement, a feverish desire to buy, as if there might be
some special luck in them, the jewels of a woman who had so tragically
died.

They had been ready to make a social affair of the private view held in the "Maple Room" before
the auction. And now the whole spectacular business was capped by a sensation so dramatic
as to strain credulity to its limit. She could not believe it; yet here it was glaring at her
from the first page.

Still--it might be an exaggeration, a mistake. She must go back to the beginning and read it
over slowly.

The striking of the hour hurried her. Shima's announcement of dinner
only sent her eyes faster down the page. But when, with a faint, smooth
rustle, Mrs. Britton came in, she let the paper fall. So he slept there, the steadfast
goodly Odysseus, on the jointed bedstead, beneath the echoing gallery. But Alcinous laid him
down in the innermost chamber of the high house, and by him the lady his wife arrayed bedstead
and bedding.

Book VIII

  The next day's entertainment of Odysseus, where he sees
  them contend in wrestling and other exercises, and upon
  provocation took up a greater stone than that which they
  were throwing, and overthrew them all. Alcinous and the
  lords give him presents. And how the king asked his name,
  his country, and his adventures.

Now when early Dawn shone forth, the rosy-fingered, then the mighty king Alcinous gat him up
from his bed; and Odysseus, of the seed of Zeus, likewise uprose, the waster of cities. And
the mighty king Alcinous led the way to the assembly place of the Phaeacians, which they had
established hard by the ships. So when they had come thither, and sat them down on the polished
stones close by each other, Pallas Athene went on her way through the town, in the semblance
of the herald of wise Alcinous, devising a return for the great-hearted Odysseus. Then standing
by each man she spake, saying:

'Hither now get ye to the assembly, ye captains and counsellors of the Phaeacians, that ye
may learn concerning the stranger, who hath lately come to the palace of wise Alcinous, in
his wanderings over the deep, and his form is like the deathless gods.'

Therewith she aroused the spirit and desire of each one, and speedily the meeting-places and
seats were filled with men that came to the gathering: yea, and many an one marvelled at the
sight of the wise son of Laertes, for wondrous was the grace Athene poured upon his head and
shoulders, and she made him greater and more mighty to behold, that he might win love and worship
and honour among all the Phaeacians, and that he might accomplish many feats, wherein the Phaeacians
made trial of Odysseus. Now when they were gathered and come together, Alcinous made harangue
and spake among them:

'Harken, ye captains and counsellors of the Phaeacians, and I will say that which my spirit
within me bids me utter. This stranger, I know not who he is, hath come to my house in his
wandering, whether from the men of the dawning or the westward, and he presses for a convoy,
and prays that it be assured to him. So let us, as in time past, speed on the convoy. For never,
nay never, doth any man who cometh to my house, abide here long in sorrow for want of help
upon his way. Nay, come let us draw down a black ship to the fair salt sea, for her first voyage,
and let them choose fifty and two noble youths throughout the township, who have been proved
heretofore the best. And when ye have made fast the oars upon the benches, step all a shore,
and thereafter come to our house, and quickly fall to feasting; and I will make good provision
for all. To the noble youths I give this commandment; but ye others, sceptred kings, come to
my fair dwelling, that we may entertain the stranger in the halls, and let no man make excuse.
Moreover, bid hither the divine minstrel, Demodocus, for the god hath given minstrelsy to him
as to none other, to make men glad in what way soever his spirit stirs him to sing.'

He spake and led the way, and the sceptred kings accompanied him, while the henchmen went for
the divine minstrel. And chosen youths, fifty and two, departed at his command, to the shore
of the unharvested sea. And they moored her high out in the shore water, and thereafter went
on their way to the great palace of the wise Alcinous. Now the galleries and the courts and
the rooms were thronged with men that came to the gathering, for there were many, young and
old. Then Alcinous sacrificed twelve sheep among them, and eight boars with flashing tusks,
and two oxen with trailing feet. These they flayed and made ready, and dressed a goodly feast.

Then the henchman drew near, leading with him the beloved minstrel, whom the muse loved dearly,
and she gave him both good and evil; of his sight she reft him, but granted him sweet song.
Then Pontonous, the henchman, set for him a high chair inlaid with silver, in the midst of
the guests, leaning it against the tall pillar, and he hung the loud lyre on a pin, close above
his head, and showed him how to lay his hands on it. And close by him he placed a basket, and
a fair table, and a goblet of wine by his side, to drink when his spirit bade him. So they
stretched forth their hands upon the good cheer spread before them. But after they had put
from them the desire of meat and drink, the Muse stirred the minstrel to sing the songs of
famous men, even that lay whereof the fame had then reached the wide heaven, namely, the quarrel
between Odysseus and Achilles, son of Peleus; how once on a time they contended in fierce words
at a rich festival of the gods, but Agamemnon, king of men, was inly glad when the noblest
of the Achaeans fell at variance. For so Phoebus Apollo in his soothsaying had told him that
it must be, in goodly Pytho, what time he crossed the threshold of stone, to seek to the oracle.
For in those days the first wave of woe was rolling on Trojans and Danaans through the counsel
of great Zeus.

This song it was that the famous minstrel sang; but Odysseus caught his great purple cloak
with his stalwart hands, and drew it down over his head, and hid his comely face, for he was
ashamed to shed tears beneath his brows in presence of the Phaeacians. Yea, and oft as the
divine minstrel paused in his song, Odysseus would wipe away the tears, and draw the cloak
from off his head, and take the two-handled goblet and pour forth before the gods. But whensoever
he began again, and the chiefs of the Phaeacians stirred him to sing, in delight at the lay,
again would Odysseus cover up his head and make moan. Now none of all the company marked him
weeping, but Alcinous alone noted it and was ware thereof as he sat by him and heard him groaning
heavily. And presently he spake among the Phaeacians, masters of the oar:

'Hearken, ye captains and counsellors of the Phaeacians, now have our souls been satisfied
with the good feast, and with the lyre, which is the mate of the rich banquet. Let us go forth
anon, and make trial of divers games, that the stranger may tell his friends, when home he
returneth, how greatly we excel all men in boxing, and wrestling, and leaping, and speed of foot.'

He spake, and led the way, and they went with him. And the henchman hung the loud lyre on the
pin, and took the hand of Demodocus, and let him forth from the hall, and guided him by the
same way, whereby those others, the chiefs of the Phaeacians, had gone to gaze upon the games.
So they went on their way to the place of assembly, and with them a great company innumerable;
and many a noble youth stood up to play. There rose Acroneus, and Ocyalus, and Elatreus, and
Nauteus, and Prymneus, and Anchialus, and Eretmeus, and Ponteus, and Proreus, Thoon, and Anabesineus,
and Amphialus, son of Polyneus, son of Tekton, and likewise Euryalus, the peer of murderous
Ares, the son of Naubolus, who in face and form was goodliest of all the Phaeacians next to
noble Laodamas. And there stood up the three sons of noble Alcinous, Laodamas, and Halius,
and god-like Clytoneus. And behold, these all first tried the issue in the foot race. From
the very start they strained at utmost speed: and all together they flew forward swiftly, raising
the dust along the plain. And noble Clytoneus was far the swiftest of them all in running,
and by the length of the furrow that mules cleave in a fallow field, {*} so far did he shoot
to the front, and came to the crowd by the lists, while those others were left behind. Then
they made trial of strong wrestling, and here in turn Euryalus excelled all the best. And in
leaping Amphialus was far the foremost, and Elatreus in weight-throwing, and in boxing Laodamas,
the good son of Alcinous. Now when they had all taken their pleasure in the games, Laodamas,
son of Alcinous, spake among them:

{* The distance here indicated seems to be that which the mule goes in ploughing, without pausing
to take breath.}

'Come, my friends, let us ask the stranger whether he is skilled or practised in any sport.
Ill fashioned, at least, he is not in his thighs and sinewy legs and hands withal, and his
stalwart neck and mighty strength: yea and he lacks not youth, but is crushed by many troubles.
For I tell thee there is nought else worse than the sea to confound a man, how hardy soever
he may be.'

And Euryalus in turn made answer, and said: 'Laodamas, verily thou hast spoken this word in
season. Go now thyself and challenge him, and declare thy saying.'

Now when the good son of Alcinous heard this, he went and stood in the midst, and spake unto
Odysseus: 'Come, do thou too, father and stranger, try thy skill in the sports, if haply thou
art practised in any; and thou art like to have knowledge of games, for there is no greater
glory for a man while yet he lives, than that which he achieves by hand and foot. Come, then,
make essay, and cast away care from thy soul: thy journey shall not now be long delayed; lo,
thy ship is even now drawn down to the sea, and the men of thy company are ready.'

And Odysseus of many counsels answered him, saying; 'Laodamas, wherefore do ye mock me, requiring
this thing of me? Sorrow is far nearer my heart than sports, for much have I endured and laboured
sorely in time past, and now I sit in this your gathering, craving my return, and making my
prayer to the king and all the people.'

And Euryalus answered, and rebuked him to his face: 'No truly, stranger, nor do I think thee
at all like one that is skilled in games, whereof there are many among men, rather art thou
such an one as comes and goes in a benched ship, a master of sailors that are merchantmen,
one with a memory for his freight, or that hath the charge of a cargo homeward bound, and of
greedily gotten gains; thou seemest not a man of thy hands.'

Then Odysseus of many counsels looked fiercely on him and said: 'Stranger, thou hast not spoken
well; thou art like a man presumptuous. So true it is that the gods do not give every gracious
gift to all, neither shapeliness, nor wisdom, nor skilled speech. For one man is feebler than
another in presence, yet the god crowns his words with beauty, and men behold him and rejoice,
and his speech runs surely on his way with a sweet modesty, and he shines forth among the gathering
of his people, and as he passes through the town men gaze on him as a god. Another again is
like the deathless gods for beauty, but his words have no crown of grace about them; even as
thou art in comeliness pre-eminent, nor could a god himself fashion thee for the better, but
in wit thou art a weakling. Yea, thou hast stirred my spirit in my breast by speaking thus
amiss. I am not all unversed in sports, as thy words go, but methinks I was among the foremost
while as yet I trusted in my youth and my hands, but now am I holden in misery and pains: for
I have endured much in passing through the wars of men and the grievous waves of the sea. Yet
even so, for all my affliction, I will essay the games, for thy word hath bitten to the quick,
and thou hast roused me with thy saying.'

He spake, and clad even as he was in his mantle leaped to his feet, and caught up a weight
larger than the rest, a huge weight heavier far than those wherewith the Phaeacians contended
in casting. With one whirl he sent it from his stout hand, and the stone flew hurtling: and
the Phaeacians, of the long oars, those mariners renowned, crouched to earth beneath the rushing
of the stone. Beyond all the marks it flew, so lightly it sped from his hand, and Athene in
the fashion of a man marked the place, and spake and hailed him:

'Yea, even a blind man, stranger, might discern that token if he groped for it, for it is in
no wise lost among the throng of the others, but is far the first; for this bout then take
heart: not one of the Phaeacians shall attain thereunto or overpass it.'

So spake she; and the steadfast goodly Odysseus rejoiced and was glad, for that he saw a true
friend in the lists. Then with a lighter heart he spake amid the Phaeacians:

'Now reach ye this throw, young men, if ye may; and soon, methinks, will I cast another after
it, as far or yet further. And whomsoever of the rest his heart and spirit stir thereto, hither
let him come and try the issue with me, in boxing or in wrestling or even in the foot race,
I care not which, for ye have greatly angered me: let any of all the Phaeacians come save Laodamas
alone, for he is mine host: who would strive with one that entreated him kindly? Witless and
worthless is the man, whoso challengeth his host that receiveth him in a strange land, he doth
but maim his own estate. But for the rest, I refuse none and hold none lightly, but I fain
would know and prove them face to face. For I am no weakling in all sports, even in the feats
of men. I know well how to handle the polished bow, and ever the first would I be to shoot
and smite my man in the press of foes, even though many of my company stood by, and were aiming
at the enemy. Alone Philoctetes in the Trojan land surpassed me with the bow in our Achaean
archery. But I avow myself far more excellent than all besides, of the mortals that are now
upon the earth and live by bread. Yet with the men of old time I would not match me, neither
with Heracles nor with Eurytus of Oechalia, who contended even with the deathless gods for
the prize of archery. Wherefore the great Eurytus perished all too soon, nor did old age come
on him in his halls, for Apollo slew him in his wrath, seeing that he challenged him to shoot
a match. And with the spear I can throw further than any other man can shoot an arrow. Only
I doubt that in the foot race some of the Phaeacians may outstrip me, for I have been shamefully
broken in many waters, seeing that there was no continual sustenance on board; wherefore my
knees are loosened.'

So spake he and all kept silence; and Alcinous alone answered him, saying:

'Stranger, forasmuch as these thy words are not ill-taken in our gathering, but thou wouldest
fain show forth the valour which keeps thee company, being angry that yonder man stood by thee
in the lists, and taunted thee, in such sort as no mortal would speak lightly of thine excellence,
who had knowledge of sound words; nay now, mark my speech; so shalt thou have somewhat to tell
another hero, when with thy wife and children thou suppest in thy halls, and recallest our
prowess, what deeds Zeus bestoweth even upon us from our fathers' days even until now. For
we are no perfect boxers, nor wrestlers, but speedy runners, and the best of seamen; and dear
to us ever is the banquet, and the harp, and the dance, and changes of raiment, and the warm
bath, and love, and sleep. Lo, now arise, ye dancers of the Phaeacians, the best in the land,
and make sport, that so the stranger may tell his friends, when he returneth home, how far
we surpass all men besides in seamanship, and speed of foot, and in the dance and song. And
let one go quickly, and fetch for Demodocus the loud lyre which is lying somewhere in our halls.'

So spake Alcinous the godlike, and the henchman rose to bear the hollow lyre from the king's
palace. Then stood up nine chosen men in all, the judges of the people, who were wont to order
all things in the lists aright. So they levelled the place for the dance, and made a fair ring
and a wide. And the henchman drew near bearing the loud lyre to Demodocus, who gat him into
the midst, and round him stood boys in their first bloom, skilled in the dance, and they smote
the good floor with their feet. And Odysseus gazed at the twinklings of the feet, and marvelled
in spirit.

Now as the minstrel touched the lyre, he lifted up his voice in sweet song, and he sang of
the love of Ares and Aphrodite, of the fair crown, how at the first they lay together in the
house of Hephaestus privily; and Ares gave her many gifts, and dishonoured the marriage bed
of the lord Hephaestus. And anon there came to him one to report the thing, even Helios, that
had seen them at their pastime. Now when Hephaestus heard the bitter tidings, he went his way
to the forge, devising evil in the deep of his heart, and set the great anvil on the stithy,
and wrought fetters that none might snap or loosen, that the lovers might there unmoveably
remain. Now when he had forged the crafty net in his anger against Ares, he went on his way
to the chamber where his marriage bed was set out, and strewed his snares all about the posts
of the bed, and many too were hung aloft from the main beam, subtle as spiders' webs, so that
none might see them, even of the blessed gods: so cunningly were they forged. Now after he
had done winding the snare about the bed, he made as though he would go to Lemnos, that stablished
castle, and this was far the dearest of all lands in his sight. But Ares of the golden rein
kept no blind watch, what time he saw Hephaestus, the famed craftsman, depart afar. So he went
on his way to the house of renowned Hephaestus, eager for the love of crowned Cytherea. Now
she was but newly come from her sire, the mighty Cronion, and as it chanced had sat her down;
and Ares entered the house, and clasped her hand, and spake, and hailed her:

'Come, my beloved, let us to bed, and take our pleasure of love, for Hephaestus is no longer
among his own people; methinks he is already gone to Lemnos, to the Sintians, men of savage
speech.'

So spake he, and a glad thing it seemed to her to lie with him. So they twain went to the couch,
and laid them to sleep, and around them clung the cunning bonds of skilled Hephaestus, so that
they could not move nor raise a limb. Then at the last they knew it, when there was no way
to flee. Now the famous god of the strong arms drew near to them, having turned him back ere
he reached the land of Lemnos. For Helios had kept watch, and told him all. So heavy at heart
he went his way to his house, and stood at the entering in of the gate, and wild rage gat hold
of him, and he cried terribly, and shouted to all the gods:

'Father Zeus, and ye other blessed gods, that live for ever, come hither, that ye may see a
mirthful thing and a cruel, for that Aphrodite, daughter of Zeus, ever dishonours me by reason
of my lameness, and sets her heart on Ares the destroyer, because he is fair and straight of
limb, but as for me, feeble was I born. Howbeit, there is none to blame but my father and mother,--would
they had never begotten me! But now shall ye see where these have gone up into my bed, and
sleep together in love; and I am troubled at the sight. Yet, methinks, they will not care to
lie thus even for a little while longer, despite their great love. Soon will they have no desire
to sleep together, but the snare and the bond shall hold them, till her sire give back to me
the gifts of wooing, one and all, those that I bestowed upon him for the hand of his shameless
girl; for that his daughter is fair, but without discretion.'

So spake he; and lo, the gods gathered together to the house of the brazen floor. Poseidon
came, the girdler of the earth, and Hermes came, the bringer of luck, and prince Apollo came,
the archer. But the lady goddesses abode each within her house for shame. So the gods, the
givers of good things, stood in the porch: and laughter unquenchable arose among the blessed
gods, as they beheld the sleight of cunning Hephaestus. And thus would one speak, looking to
his neighbour:

'Ill deed, ill speed! The slow catcheth the swift! Lo, how Hephaestus, slow as he is, hath
overtaken Ares, albeit he is the swiftest of the gods that hold Olympus, by his craft hath
he taken him despite his lameness; wherefore surely Ares oweth the fine of the adulterer.'
Thus they spake one to the other. But the lord Apollo, son of Zeus, spake to Hermes:

'Hermes, son of Zeus, messenger and giver of good things, wouldst thou be fain, aye, pressed
by strong bonds though it might be, to lie on the couch by golden Aphrodite?'

Then the messenger, the slayer of Argos, answered him: 'I would that this might be, Apollo,
my prince of archery! So might thrice as many bonds innumerable encompass me about, and all
ye gods be looking on and all the goddesses, yet would I lie by golden Aphrodite.'

So spake he, and laughter rose among the deathless gods. Howbeit, Poseidon laughed not, but
was instant with Hephaestus, the renowned artificer, to loose the bonds of Ares: and he uttered
his voice, and spake to him winged words:

'Loose him, I pray thee, and I promise even as thou biddest me, that he shall himself pay all
fair forfeit in the presence of the deathless gods.'

Then the famous god of the strong arms answered him: 'Require not this of me, Poseidon, girdler
of the earth. Evil are evil folk's pledges to hold. How could I keep thee bound among the deathless
gods, if Ares were to depart, avoiding the debt and the bond?'

Then Poseidon answered him, shaker of the earth: 'Hephaestus, even if Ares avoid the debt and
flee away, I myself will pay thee all.'

Then the famous god of the strong arms answered him: 'It may not be that I should say thee
nay, neither is it meet.'

Therewith the mighty Hephaestus loosed the bonds, and the twain, when they were freed from
that strong bond, sprang up straightway, and departed, he to Thrace, but laughter-loving Aphrodite
went to Paphos of Cyprus, where is her precinct and fragrant altar. There the Graces bathed
and anointed her with oil imperishable, such as is laid upon the everlasting gods. And they
clad her in lovely raiment, a wonder to see.

This was the song the famous minstrel sang; and Odysseus listened and was glad at heart, and
likewise did the Phaeacians, of the long oars, those mariners renowned.

Then Alcinous bade Halius and Laodamas dance alone, for none ever contended with them. So when
they had taken in their hands the goodly ball of purple hue, that cunning Polybus had wrought
for them, the one would bend backwards, and throw it towards the shadowy clouds; and the other
would leap upward from the earth, and catch it lightly in his turn, before his feet touched
the ground. Now after they had made trial of throwing the ball straight up, the twain set to
dance upon the bounteous earth, tossing the ball from hand to hand, and the other youths stood
by the lists and beat time, and a great din uprose. Come then, let us give him a stranger's
gift, as is meet. Behold, there are twelve glorious princes who rule among this people and
bear sway, and I myself am the thirteenth. Now each man among you bring a fresh robe and a
doublet, and a talent of fine gold, and let us speedily carry all these gifts together, that
the stranger may take them in his hands, and go to supper with a glad heart. As for Euryalus,
let him yield amends to the man himself, with soft speech and with a gift, for his was no gentle
saying.'

So spake he, and they all assented thereto, and would have it so. And each one sent forth his
henchman to fetch his gift, and Euryalus answered the king and spake, saying:

'My lord Alcinous, most notable among all the people, I will make atonement to thy guest according
to thy word. I will give him a hanger all of bronze, with a silver hilt thereto, and a sheath
of fresh-sawn ivory covers it about, and it shall be to him a thing of price.'

Therewith he puts into his hands the hanger dight with silver, and uttering his voice spake
to him winged words: 'Hail, stranger and father; and if aught grievous hath been spoken, may
the storm-winds soon snatch and bear it away. But may the gods grant thee to see thy wife and
to come to thine own country, for all too long has thou endured affliction away from thy friends.'

And Odysseus of many counsels answered him saying: 'Thou too, my friend, all hail; and may
the gods vouchsafe thee happiness, and mayst thou never miss this sword which thou hast given
me, thou that with soft speech hast yielded me amends.'

He spake and hung about his shoulders the silver-studded sword. And the sun sank, and the noble
gifts were brought him. Then the proud henchmen bare them to the palace of Alcinous, and the
sons of noble Alcinous took the fair gifts, and set them by their reverend mother. And the
mighty king Alcinous led the way, and they came in and sat them down on the high seats. And
the mighty Alcinous spake unto Arete:

'Bring me hither, my lady, a choice coffer, the best thou hast, and thyself place therein a
fresh robe and a doublet, and heat for our guest a cauldron on the fire, and warm water, that
after the bath the stranger may see all the gifts duly arrayed which the noble Phaeacians bare
hither, and that he may have joy in the feast, and in hearing the song of the minstrelsy. Also
I will give him a beautiful golden chalice of mine own, that he may be mindful of me all the
days of his life when he poureth the drink-offering to Zeus and to the other gods.'

So spake he, and Arete bade her handmaids to set a great cauldron on the fire with what speed
they might. And they set the cauldron for the filling of the bath on the blazing fire, and
poured water therein, and took faggots and kindled them beneath. So the fire began to circle
round the belly of the cauldron, and the water waxed hot. Meanwhile Arete brought forth for
her guest the beautiful coffer from the treasure chamber, and bestowed fair gifts therein,
raiment and gold, which the Phaeacians gave him. And with her own hands she placed therein
a robe and goodly doublet, and uttering her voice spake to him winged words:

'Do thou now look to the lid, and quickly tie the knot, lest any man spoil thy goods by the
way, when presently thou fallest on sweet sleep travelling in thy black ship.'

Now when the steadfast goodly Odysseus heard this saying, forthwith he fixed on the lid, and
quickly tied the curious knot, which the lady Circe on a time had taught him. Then straightway
the housewife bade him go to the bath and bathe him; and he saw the warm water and was glad,
for he was not wont to be so cared for, from the day that he left the house of fair-tressed
Calypso, but all that while he had comfort continually as a god.

Now after the maids had bathed him and anointed him with olive oil, and had cast a fair mantle
and a doublet upon him, he stept forth from the bath, and went to be with the chiefs at their
wine. And Nausicaa, dowered with beauty by the gods, stood by the pillar of the well-builded
roof, and marvelled at Odysseus, beholding him before her eyes, and she uttered her voice and
spake to him winged words:

'Farewell, stranger, and even in thine own country bethink thee of me upon a time, for that
to me first thou owest the ransom of life.'

And Odysseus of many counsels answered her saying: 'Nausicaa, daughter of great-hearted Alcinous,
yea, may Zeus, the thunderer, the lord of Here, grant me to reach my home and see the day of
my returning; so would I, even there, do thee worship as to a god, all my days for evermore,
for thou, lady, hast given me my life.'

He spake and sat him in the high seat by king Alcinous. And now they were serving out the portions
and mixing the wine. Then the henchmen drew nigh leading the sweet minstrel, Demodocus, that
was had in honour of the people. So he set him in the midst of the feasters, and made him lean
against a tall column. Then to the henchman spake Odysseus of many counsels, for he had cut
off a portion of the chine of a white-toothed boar, whereon yet more was left, with rich fat
on either side:

'Lo, henchman, take this mess, and hand it to Demodocus, that he may eat, and I will bid him
hail, despite my sorrow. For minstrels from all men on earth get their meed of honour and worship;
inasmuch as the Muse teacheth them the paths of song, and loveth the tribe of minstrels.'

Thus he spake, and the henchman bare the mess, and set it upon the knees of the lord Demodocus,
and he took it, and was glad at heart. Come now, change thy strain, and sing of the fashioning
of the horse of wood, which Epeius made by the aid of Athene, even the guileful thing, that
goodly Odysseus led up into the citadel, when he had laden it with the men who wasted Ilios.
If thou wilt indeed rehearse me this aright, so will I be thy witness among all men, how the
god of his grace hath given thee the gift of wondrous song.'

So spake he, and the minstrel, being stirred by the god, began and showed forth his minstrelsy.
He took up the tale where it tells how the Argives of the one part set fire to their huts,
and went aboard their decked ships and sailed away, while those others, the fellowship of renowned
Odysseus, were now seated in the assembly-place of the Trojans, all hidden in the horse, for
the Trojans themselves had dragged him to the citadel. So the horse stood there, while seated
all around him the people spake many things confusedly and three ways their counsel looked;
either to cleave the hollow timber with the pitiless spear, or to drag it to the brow of the
hill, and hurl it from the rocks, or to leave it as a mighty offering to appease the gods.
And on this wise it was to be at the last. For the doom was on them to perish when their city
should have closed upon the great horse of wood, wherein sat all the bravest of the Argives,
bearing to the Trojans death and destiny. And he sang how the sons of the Achaeans poured forth
from the horse, and left the hollow lair, and sacked the burg. And he sang how and where each
man wasted the town, and of Odysseus, how he went like Ares to the house of Deiphobus with
godlike Menelaus. It was there, he said, that Odysseus adventured the most grievous battle,
and in the end prevailed, by grace of great-hearted Athene.

This was the song that the famous minstrel sang. But the heart of Odysseus melted, and the
tear wet his cheeks beneath the eyelids. And as a woman throws herself wailing about her dear
lord, who hath fallen before his city and the host, warding from his town and his children
the pitiless day; and she beholds him dying and drawing difficult breath, and embracing his
body wails aloud, while the foemen behind smite her with spears on back and shoulders and lead
her up into bondage, to bear labour and trouble, and with the most pitiful grief her cheeks
are wasted; even so pitifully fell the tears beneath the brows of Odysseus. From the time that
we began to sup, and that the divine minstrel was moved to sing, ever since hath yonder stranger
never ceased from woeful lamentation: sore grief, methinks, hath encompassed his heart. Nay,
but let the minstrel cease, that we may all alike make merry, hosts and guest, since it is
far meeter so. For all these things are ready for the sake of the honourable stranger, even
the convoy and the loving gifts which we give him out of our love. In a brother's place stand
the stranger and the suppliant, to him whose wits have even a little range, wherefore do thou
too hide not now with crafty purpose aught whereof I ask thee; it were more meet for thee to
tell it out. Say, what is the name whereby they called thee at home, even thy father and thy
mother, and others thy townsmen and the dwellers round about? For there is none of all mankind
nameless, neither the mean man nor yet the noble, from the first hour of his birth, but parents
bestow a name on every man so soon as he is born. Tell me too of thy land, thy township, and
thy city, that our ships may conceive of their course to bring thee thither. For the Phaeacians
have no pilots nor any rudders after the manner of other ships, but their barques themselves
understand the thoughts and intents of men; they know the cities and fat fields of every people,
and most swiftly they traverse the gulf of the salt sea, shrouded in mist and cloud, and never
do they go in fear of wreck or ruin. Howbeit I heard upon a time this word thus spoken by my
father Nausithous, who was wont to say that Poseidon was jealous of us for that we give safe
escort to all men. He said that the god would some day smite a well-wrought ship of the Phaeacians
as she came home from a convoy over the misty deep, and would overshadow our city with a great
mountain. Thus that ancient one would speak, and thus the god may bring it about, or leave
it undone, according to the good pleasure of his will. But come now, declare me this and plainly
tell it all; whither wast thou borne wandering, and to what shores of men thou camest; tell
me of the people and of their fair-lying cities, of those whoso are hard and wild and unjust,
and of those likewise who are hospitable and of a god-fearing mind. At this time Tromp lay off
Land's End waiting for the Dutch merchant fleet which he expected to convoy to Holland. On
the 18th the two forces sighted each other about 15 miles off Portland. Then followed the
"Three Days' Battle," or the battle of Portland, one of the most stubbornly contested fights in
the war and its turning point.

In order to be sure to catch Tromp, Blake had extended his force of
70 or 80 ships in a cross Channel position.

Under cover of a fog Tromp suddenly appeared and caught the English
fleet divided.

  Less than half were collected under the immediate command
  of Blake, only about ten were in the actual vicinity
  of his flagship, and the rest were to eastward, especially Monk's
division which he had carelessly permitted to drift to leeward four
or five miles.

As the wind was from the west and very light, Monk's position made it impossible for him to
support his chief for some time. Tromp saw his opportunity to concentrate on the part of the
English fleet nearest him, the handful of ships with Blake. The latter had the choice of either
bearing up to make a junction with Monk and the others before accepting battle or of grappling
with Tromp at once, trusting to his admirals to arrive in time to win a victory. It was characteristic
of Blake that he chose the bolder course.

The fighting began early in the afternoon and was close and furious from the outset. Again Blake's
ship was compelled to engage several Dutch, including Tromp's flagship. De Ruyter, the brilliant
lieutenant of Tromp, attempted to cut Blake off from his supports on the north, and Evertsen
steered between Blake and Penn's squadron on the south. (See diagram 1.) Blake's dozen ships
might well have been surrounded and taken if his admirals had not known their business. Penn tacked
right through Evertsen's squadron to come to the side of Blake, and Lawson foiled de Ruyter
by bearing away till he had enough southing to tack in the wake of Penn and fall upon Tromp's
rear (diagram 2). Evertsen then attempted to get between Monk and the rest of the fleet and
two hours after the fight in the center began Monk also was engaged. When the lee vessels of
the "red" or center squadron came on the scene about four o'clock, they threatened to weather
the Dutch and put them between two fires. To avoid this and to protect his convoy, Tromp tacked
his whole fleet together--an exceedingly difficult maneuver under the circumstances--and drew
off to windward. Darkness stopped the fighting for that day. All night the two fleets sailed
eastward watching each other's lights, and hastily patching up damages.

Morning discovered them off the Isle of Wight, with the English on
the north side of the Channel.

As Tromp's chief business was to save his convoy and as the English force was now united, he
took a defensive position. He formed his own ships in a long crescent, with the outward curve
toward his enemy, and in the lee of this line he placed his convoy. The wind was so light that
the English were unable to attack until late. The fighting, though energetic, had not proved
decisive when darkness fell.

The following day, the 20th, brought a fresh wind that enabled the English to overhaul the
Dutch, who could not move faster than the heavily laden merchantmen, and force a close action.
Blake tried to cut off Tromp from the north so as to block his road home. Vice Admiral Penn,
leading the van, broke through the Dutch battle line and fell upon the convoy, but Blake was
unable to reach far enough to head off his adversary before he rounded Cape Gris Nez under
cover of darkness and found anchorage in Calais roads. That night, favored by the tide and
thick weather, Tromp succeeded in carrying off the greater part of his convoy unobserved. Nevertheless
he had left in Blake's hand some fifty merchantmen and a number of men of war variously estimated
from five to eighteen. At the same time the English had suffered heavily in men and ships. On
Blake's flagship alone it is said that 100 men had been killed and
Blake and his second in command, Deane, were both wounded, the former
seriously.

The result of this three days' action was to encourage the English to press the war with energy
and take the offensive to the enemy's own coast. English crews had shown that they could fight
with a spirit fully equal to that of the Dutch, and English ships and weight of broadside,
as de Ruyter frankly declared to his government, were decidedly superior. The fact that the shallow
waters of the Dutch coast made necessary a lighter draft man of war than that of the English
proved a serious handicap to the Dutch in all their conflicts with the British. Both fleets were
so badly shot up by this prolonged battle that there was a lull in operations until May.

In that month Tromp suddenly arrived off Dover and bombarded the defenses. The English quickly
took the sea to hunt him down. As Blake was still incapacitated by his wound, the command was
given to Monk. The latter, with a fleet of over a hundred ships, brought Tromp to action on June
2 (1653) in what is known as the "Battle of the Gabbard" after a shoal near the mouth of the Thames,
where the action began. Tromp was this time not burdened with a convoy but his fleet was smaller
in numbers than Monk's and, as he well knew, inferior in other elements of force. Accordingly,
he adapted defensive tactics of a sort that was copied afterwards by the French as a fixed policy.
He accepted battle to leeward, drawing off in a slanting line from his enemy with the idea of
catching the English van as it advanced to the attack unsupported by the rest of the fleet,
and crippling it so severely that the attack would not be pressed. As it turned out, a shift
of the wind gave him the chance to fall heavily upon the English
van, but a second shift gave back the weather gage to the English
and the two fleets became fiercely engaged at close quarters.

Blake, hearing the guns, left his sick bed and with his own available force of 18 ships sailed
out to join battle. The sight of this fresh squadron flying Blake's flag, turned the fortune of
battle decisively. The Dutch escaped destruction only by finding safety in the shallows of
the Flemish coast, where the English ships could not follow.

After this defeat the Dutch were almost at the end of their resources and sued far peace, but
Cromwell's ruthless demands amounted to a practical loss of independence, which even a bankrupt
nation could not accept. Accordingly, every nerve was strained to build a fleet that might yet
beat the English. The latter, for their part, were equally determined not to lose the fruits
of their hard won victories. Since Blake's active share in the battle of the Gabbard aggravated
his wound so severely that he was carried ashore more nearly dead than alive, Monk retained actual
command.

Monk attempted to maintain a close blockade of the Dutch coast and to prevent a junction between
Tromp's main fleet at Flushing and a force of thirty ships at Amsterdam. In this, however, he
was outgeneraled by Tromp, who succeeded in taking the sea with the greatest of all Dutch fleets,
120 men of war. The English and the Dutch speedily clashed in the last, and perhaps the most
furiously contested, battle of the war, the "Battle of Scheveningen." The action began at six
in the morning of July 30, 1653. Tromp had the weather gage, but Monk, instead of awaiting
his onslaught, tacked towards him and actually cut through the Dutch line. Tromp countered
by tacking also, in order to keep his windward position, and this maneuver was repeated three
times by Tromp and Monk, and the two great fleets sailed in great
zigzag courses down the Dutch coast a distance of forty miles, with
bitter fighting going on at close range between the two lines.

Early in the action the renowned Tromp was killed, but his flag was kept flying and there was
no flinching on the part of his admirals. About one o'clock a shift of the wind gave the weather
gage to the English. Some of the Dutch captains then showed the white feather and tried to escape.
This compelled the retirement of DeWith, who had succeeded to the command, and who, as he retreated,
fired on his own fugitives as well as on the English. As usual in those battles with the Dutch,
the English had been forced to pay a high price for their victory.

Their fleet was so shattered that they were obliged to lift the blockade and return home to refit.
But for the Dutch it was the last effort. Again they sued for peace. Cromwell drove a hard
bargain; he insisted on every claim England had ever made against the Netherlands before the war,
but on this occasion he agreed to leave Holland her independence.

Thus in less than two years the First Dutch War came to an end. In the words of Mr. Hannay,[1]
the English historian, its "importance as an epoch in the history of the English Navy can hardly
be exaggerated. Though short, for it lasted barely twenty-two months, it was singularly fierce
and full of battles. Yet its interest is not derived mainly from the mere amount of fighting
but from the character of it. This was the first of our naval wars conducted by steady, continuous,
coherent campaigns. Hitherto our operations on the sea had been of the nature of adventures
by single ships and small squadrons, with here and there a great expedition sent out to capture
some particular port or island."

[Footnote 1: A SHORT HISTORY OF THE ROYAL NAVY, Vol. I, p. 217.]

As to the intensity of the fighting, it is worth noting that in this short period six great
battles took place between fleets numbering as a rule from 70 to 120 ships on a side. By comparison
it may be remarked that at Trafalgar the total British force numbered 27 ships of the line and the
Allies, 33. Nor were the men of war of Blake and Tromp the small types of an earlier day. In
1652 the ship of the line had become the unit of the fleet as truly as it was in 1805. It
is true that Blake's ships were not the equal of Nelson's huge "first rates," because the "two-decker"
was then the most powerful type. The first three-decker in the English navy was launched in the
year of Blake's death, 1657. The fact remains, however, that these fleet actions of the Dutch
Wars took place on a scale unmatched by any of the far better known engagements of the 18th
or early 19th century.

A curious naval weapon survived from the day when Howard drove Medina Sidonia from Calais roads,
the fireship, or "brander." This was used by both English and Dutch. Its usefulness, of course, was
confined to the side that held the windward position, and even an
opponent to leeward could usually, if he kept his head, send out boats
to grapple and tow the brander out of harm's way.

In the battle of Scheveningen, however, Dutch fireships cost the
English two fine ships, together with a Dutch prize, and very nearly
destroyed the old flagship of Blake, the Triumph.

She was saved only by the extraordinary exertions of her captain, who received mortal injury
from the flames he fought so courageously.

This First Dutch War is interesting in what it reveals of the advance in tactics. Tromp well
deserves his title as the "Father of Naval Tactics," and he undoubtedly taught Blake and Monk a good
deal by the rough schooling of battle, but they proved apt pupils. From even the brief summary
of these great battles just given, it is evident that Dutch and English did not fight each other
in helter skelter fashion. In fact, there is revealed a great advance in coördination over the
work of the English in the campaign of the Armada. These fleets worked as units. This does not
mean that they were not divided into squadrons.

A force of 100 ships of the line required division and subdivision, and considerable freedom
of movement was left to division and squadron commanders under the general direction of the
commander in chief, but they were all working consciously together. Just as at Trafalgar Nelson
formed his fleet in two lines (originally planned as three) and allowed his second in command
a free hand in carrying out the task assigned him, so Tromp and Blake operated their fleets
in squadrons--Tromp usually had five--and expected of their subordinates responsibility and
initiative. All this is in striking contrast with the practice that paralyzed tactics in the latter
17th and 18th centuries, which sacrificed everything to a rigid line of battle in column ahead,
and required every movement to emanate from the commander in chief.

Although details about the great battles of the First Dutch War are scanty, there is enough recorded
to show that both sides used the line ahead as the normal battle
line.

It is equally clear, however, that they repeatedly broke through each other's lines and aimed
at concentration, or destroying in detail.

These two related principles, which had to be rediscovered toward the end of the 18th century,
were practiced by Tromp, de Ruyter, and Blake. Their work has not the advantage of being as near
our day as the easy, one-sided victories over the demoralized French navy in the Revolutionary
and Napoleonic era, but the day may come when the British will regard the age of Blake as the
naval epoch of which they have the most reason to be proud. Then England met the greatest seamen
of the day led by one of the greatest admirals of history and won a bitterly fought contest by virtue
of better ships and the spirit of Cromwell's "Ironsides."

Porto Farina and Santa Cruz

Nor did the age of Blake end with the First Dutch War. As soon as the admiral was able to go aboard
ship, Cromwell sent him with a squadron into the Mediterranean to enforce respect for the Commonwealth
from the Italian governments and the Barbary states. He conducted his mission with eminent success.
Although the Barbary pirates did not course the sea in great fleets
as in the palmy days of Barbarossa, they were still a source of peril
to Christian traders.

Blake was received civilly by the Dey of Algiers but negotiations did not result satisfactorily.
At Tunis he was openly flouted.

The Pasha drew up his nine cruisers inside Porto Farina and defied the English admiral to do
his worst. Blake left for a few days to gain the effect of surprise and replenish provisions.
On April 4, 1655, he suddenly reappeared and stood in to the attack.

The harbor of Porto Farina was regarded as impregnable. The entrance was narrow and the shores
lined with castles and batteries. As Blake foresaw, the wind that took him in would roll the
battle smoke upon the enemy. In a short time he had silenced the fire of the forts and then sent
boarding parties against the Tunisian ships, which were speedily taken and burnt. Then he took
his squadron out again, having destroyed the entire Tunisian navy, shattered the forts, and
suffered only a trifling loss. This exploit resounded throughout the Mediterranean. Algiers was
quick to follow Tunis in yielding to Blake's demands.

It is characteristic of this officer that he should have made the attack on Tunis entirely
without orders from Cromwell, and it is equally characteristic of the latter that he was heartily
pleased with the initiative of his admiral in carrying out the spirit rather than the letter of
his instructions.

Meanwhile Cromwell had been wavering between a war against France
or Spain.

The need of a capture of money perhaps influenced him to turn against Spain, for this country
still drew from her western colonies a tribute of gold and silver, which naturally would fall
a prey to the power that controlled the sea. One month after Blake's exploit at Tunis, another
English naval expedition set out to the West Indies to take Santo Domingo. Although Jamaica was
seized and thereafter became an English possession, the expedition as a whole was a disgraceful
failure, and the leaders, Penn and Venables, were promptly clapped by Cromwell into the Tower
on their return. This stroke against Spain amounted to a declaration
of war, and on Blake's return to England he was ordered to blockade
Cadiz.

One detachment of the plate fleet fell into the hands of his blockading ships and the silver ingots
were dispatched to London. Blake continued his blockade in an open roadstead for six months,
through autumn and winter, an unheard of thing in those days and exceedingly difficult. Blake
was himself ill, his ships were not the copper-bottomed ones of a hundred years later, and there
was not, as in later days, an English base at Gibraltar. But he never relaxed his vigilance.

In April (1657) he learned that another large plate fleet had arrived at Santa Cruz, Teneriffe.
Immediately he sailed thither to take or destroy it. If Porto Farina had been regarded as safe
from naval attack, Santa Cruz was far more so. A deep harbor, with a narrow, funnel entrance,
and backed by mountains, it is liable to dead calms or squally bursts of wind from the land.
In addition to its natural defenses it was heavily fortified. Blake, however, reckoned on coming
in with a flowing tide and a sea breeze that, as at Porto Farina, would blow his smoke upon
the defenses. He rightly guessed that if he sailed close enough under the castles at the harbor
entrance their guns could not be sufficiently depressed to hit his ships, and as he saw the galleons
and their escorts lined up along the shore he perceived also that they were masking the fire
of their own shore batteries. For the most difficult part of his undertaking, the exit from
the harbor, he trusted to the ebbing tide with the chance of a shift
in the wind in his favor.

Early on the morning of April 20th (1657) he sailed in. As he had judged, the fire of the forts did
little damage. By eight o'clock the English ships were all at their appointed stations and fighting.
During the entire day Blake continued his work of destruction till
it was complete, and at dusk drifted out on the ebb.

Some writers mention a favoring land breeze that helped to extricate the English, but according
to Blake's own words, "the wind blew right into the bay."

In spite of this head wind the ships that were crippled were warped or towed out and not one was lost.
The English suffered in the entire action only 50 killed and 120 wounded, and repairs were so
easily made that Blake returned to his blockading station at once.

This was the greatest of Blake's feats as it also was his last. All who heard of it--friend or
enemy--pronounced it as without parallel in the history of ships. A few months later Blake was
given leave to return home.

He had long been a sick man, but his name alone was worth a fleet and Cromwell had not been able
to spare him. As it happened, he did not live long enough to see England again. Cromwell, who knew
the worth of his faithful admiral, gave him a funeral of royal dignity
and interment in Westminster Abbey.

Blake never showed, perhaps, great strategic insight--Tromp and de
Ruyter were his superiors there, as was also Nelson--but he, more
than any other, won for England her mastery of the sea, and no other
can boast his record of great victories.

These he won partly by skill and forethought but chiefly by intrepidity. We can do no better than
leave his fame in the words of the Royalist historian, Clarendon--a political enemy--who says:
"He quickly made himself signal there (on the sea) and was the first man who declined the old track
... and disproved those rules that had long been in practice, to keep his ships and men out
of danger, which had been held in former times a point of great ability and circumspection, as
if the principal requisite in the captain of a ship had been to come home safe again. And though
he hath been very well imitated and followed, he was the first that drew the copy of naval courage
and bold resolute achievement."

The chaos that followed the death
of the Protector resulted in Monk's bringing over the exiled Stuart
king--Charles II. Thereafter Round Head and Royalist served together
in the British navy. An important effect of the Restoration was organization
of a means of training the future officers of the fleet. The Navy
as a profession may be said to date from this time, in contrast with
the practice of using merchant skippers and army officers, which had
prevailed to so great a degree hitherto. Under the new system "young
gentlemen" were sent to sea as "King's Letter Boys"--midshipmen--to
learn the ways of the navy and to grow up in it as a preparation for
command. This was an excellent reform but it resulted in making the
navy the property of a social caste from that day to this, and it
made promotion, for a century and more, largely subject to family
influence.

Another effect of the Restoration was to break down the
fighting efficiency of the fleet as it had been in the days of Blake.
The veterans of the First Dutch War fought with their old time courage
and discipline, but the newer elements did not show the same devotion
and initiative. For their part they seized the bar of olive wood, that
was sharpened at the point, and thrust it into his eye, while I from my place aloft turned
it about, as when a man bores a ship's beam with a drill while his fellows below spin it with
a strap, which they hold at either end, and the auger runs round continually. Even so did we
seize the fiery-pointed brand and whirled it round in his eye, and the blood flowed about the
heated bar. And the breath of the flame singed his eyelids and brows all about, as the ball
of the eye burnt away, and the roots thereof crackled in the flame. And as when a smith dips
an axe or adze in chill water with a great hissing, when he would temper it--for hereby anon
comes the strength of iron--even so did his eye hiss round the stake of olive. And he raised
a great and terrible cry, that the rock rang around, and we fled away in fear, while he plucked
forth from his eye the brand bedabbled in much blood. Then maddened with pain he cast it from
him with his hands, and called with a loud voice on the Cyclopes, who dwelt about him in the
caves along the windy heights. And they heard the cry and flocked together from every side,
and gathering round the cave asked him what ailed him:

'"What hath so distressed thee, Polyphemus, that thou criest thus aloud through the immortal
night, and makest us sleepless? Surely no mortal driveth off thy flocks against thy will: surely
none slayeth thyself by force or craft?"

'And the strong Polyphemus spake to them again from out the cave: "My friends, Noman is slaying
me by guile, nor at all by force."

'And they answered and spake winged words: "If then no man is violently handling thee in thy
solitude, it can in no wise be that thou shouldest escape the sickness sent by mighty Zeus.
Nay, pray thou to thy father, the lord Poseidon."

'On this wise they spake and departed; and my heart within me laughed to see how my name and
cunning counsel had beguiled them. But the Cyclops, groaning and travailing in pain, groped
with his hands, and lifted away the stone from the door of the cave, and himself sat in the
entry, with arms outstretched to catch, if he might, any one that was going forth with his
sheep, so witless, methinks, did he hope to find me. But I advised me how all might be for
the very best, if perchance I might find a way of escape from death for my companions and myself,
and I wove all manner of craft and counsel, as a man will for his life, seeing that great mischief
was nigh. And this was the counsel that showed best in my sight. The rams of the flock were
well nurtured and thick of fleece, great and goodly, with wool dark as the violet. Quietly
I lashed them together with twisted withies, whereon the Cyclops slept, that lawless monster.
Three together I took: now the middle one of the three would bear each a man, but the other
twain went on either side, saving my fellows. Thus every three sheep bare their man. But as
for me I laid hold of the back of a young ram who was far the best and the goodliest of all
the flock, and curled beneath his shaggy belly there I lay, and so clung face upward, grasping
the wondrous fleece with a steadfast heart. So for that time making moan we awaited the bright
Dawn.

'So soon as early Dawn shone forth, the rosy-fingered, then did the rams of the flock hasten
forth to pasture, but the ewes bleated unmilked about the pens, for their udders were swollen
to bursting. Then their lord, sore stricken with pain, felt along the backs of all the sheep
as they stood up before him, and guessed not in his folly how that my men were bound beneath
the breasts of his thick-fleeced flocks. Last of all the sheep came forth the ram, cumbered
with his wool, and the weight of me and my cunning. And the strong Polyphemus laid his hands
on him and spake to him saying:

'"Dear ram, wherefore, I pray thee, art thou the last of all the flocks to go forth from the
cave, who of old wast not wont to lag behind the sheep, but wert ever the foremost to pluck
the tender blossom of the pasture, faring with long strides, and wert still the first to come
to the streams of the rivers, and first did long to return to the homestead in the evening?
But now art thou the very last. Surely thou art sorrowing for the eye of thy lord, which an
evil man blinded, with his accursed fellows, when he had subdued my wits with wine, even Noman,
whom I say hath not yet escaped destruction. Ah, if thou couldst feel as I, and be endued with
speech, to tell me where he shifts about to shun my wrath; then should he be smitten, and his
brains be dashed against the floor here and there about the cave, and my heart be lightened
of the sorrows which Noman, nothing worth, hath brought me!"

'Therewith he sent the ram forth from him, and when we had gone but a little way from the cave
and from the yard, first I loosed myself from under the ram and then I set my fellows free.
And swiftly we drave on those stiff-shanked sheep, so rich in fat, and often turned to look
about, till we came to the ship. And a glad sight to our fellows were we that had fled from
death, but the others they would have bemoaned with tears; howbeit I suffered it not, but with
frowning brows forbade each man to weep. Rather I bade them to cast on board the many sheep
with goodly fleece, and to sail over the salt sea water. But when I had not gone so far, but
that a man's shout might be heard, then I spoke unto the Cyclops taunting him:

'"Cyclops, so thou wert not to eat the company of a weakling by main might in thy hollow cave!
Thine evil deeds were very sure to find thee out, thou cruel man, who hadst no shame to eat
thy guests within thy gates, wherefore Zeus hath requited thee, and the other gods."

'So I spake, and he was mightily angered at heart, and he brake off the peak of a great hill
and threw it at us, and it fell in front of the dark-prowed ship. {*} And the sea heaved beneath
the fall of the rock, and the backward flow of the wave bare the ship quickly to the dry land,
with the wash from the deep sea, and drave it to the shore. Then I caught up a long pole in
my hands, and thrust the ship from off the land, and roused my company, and with a motion of
the head bade them dash in with their oars, that so we might escape our evil plight. So they
bent to their oars and rowed on. But when we had now made twice the distance over the brine,
I would fain have spoken to the Cyclops, but my company stayed me on every side with soft words,
saying:

{* We have omitted line 483, as required by the sense. It is introduced here from line 540.}

'"Foolhardy that thou art, why wouldst thou rouse a wild man to wrath, who even now hath cast
so mighty a throw towards the deep and brought our ship back to land, yea and we thought that
we had perished {*} even there? If he had heard any of us utter sound or speech he would have
crushed our heads and our ship timbers with a cast of a rugged stone, so mightily he hurls."

{* Neither in this passage nor in B ii.171 nor in B xx.121 do we think that the aorist infinitive
after a verb of saying can bear a future sense. The aorist infinitive after [Greek] (ii.280,
vii.76) is hardly an argument in its favour; the infinitive there is in fact a noun in the
genitive case.}

'So spake they, but they prevailed not on my lordly spirit, and I answered him again from out
an angry heart:

'"Cyclops, if any one of mortal men shall ask thee of the unsightly blinding of thine eye,
say that it was Odysseus that blinded it, the waster of cities, son of Laertes, whose dwelling
is in Ithaca."

'So I spake, and with a moan he answered me, saying:

'"Lo now, in very truth the ancient oracles have come upon me. There lived here a soothsayer,
a noble man and a mighty, Telemus, son of Eurymus, who surpassed all men in soothsaying, and
waxed old as a seer among the Cyclopes. He told me that all these things should come to pass
in the aftertime, even that I should lose my eyesight at the hand of Odysseus. But I ever looked
for some tall and goodly man to come hither, clad in great might, but behold now one that is
a dwarf, a man of no worth and a weakling, hath blinded me of my eye after subduing me with
wine. Nay come hither, Odysseus, that I may set by thee a stranger's cheer, and speed thy parting
hence, that so the Earth-shaker may vouchsafe it thee, for his son am I, and he avows him for
my father. And he himself will heal me, if it be his will; and none other of the blessed gods
or of mortal men."

'Even so he spake, but I answered him, and said: "Would god that I were as sure to rob thee
of soul and life, and send thee within the house of Hades, as I am that not even the Earth-shaker
will heal thine eye!"

'So I spake, and then he prayed to the lord Poseidon stretching forth his hands to the starry
heaven: "Hear me, Poseidon, girdler of the earth, god of the dark hair, if indeed I be thine,
and thou avowest thee my sire,--grant that he may never come to his home, even Odysseus, waster
of cities, the son of Laertes, whose dwelling is in Ithaca; yet if he is ordained to see his
friends and come unto his well-builded house, and his own country, late may he come in evil
case, with the loss of all his company, in the ship of strangers, and find sorrows in his house."

'So he spake in prayer, and the god of the dark locks heard him. And once again he lifted a
stone, far greater than the first, and with one swing he hurled it, and he put forth a measureless
strength, and cast it but a little space behind the dark-prowed ship, and all but struck the
end of the rudder. And the sea heaved beneath the fall of the rock, but the wave bare on the
ship and drave it to the further shore.

'But when he had now reached that island, where all our other decked ships abode together,
and our company were gathered sorrowing, expecting us evermore, on our coming thither we ran
our ship ashore upon the sand, and ourselves too stept forth upon the sea beach. Next we took
forth the sheep of the Cyclops from out the hollow ship, and divided them, that none through
me might go lacking his proper share. But the ram for me alone my goodly-greaved company chose
out, in the dividing of the sheep, and on the shore I offered him up to Zeus, even to the son
of Cronos, who dwells in the dark clouds, and is lord of all, and I burnt the slices of the
thighs. But he heeded not the sacrifice, but was devising how my decked ships and my dear company
might perish utterly.

Book X

  Odysseus, his entertainment by Aeolus, of whom he received
  a fair wind for the present, and all the rest of the winds
  tied up in a bag; which his men untying, flew out, and
  carried him back to Aeolus, who refused to receive him. His
  adventure at Laestrygonia with Antiphates, where of twelve
  ships he lost eleven, men and all. How he went thence to
  the Isle of Aea, where half of his men were turned by Circe
  into swine, and how he went himself, and by the help of
  Hermes recovered them and stayed with Circe a year.

'Then we came to the isle Aeolian, where dwelt Aeolus, son of Hippotas, dear too the deathless
gods, in a floating island, and all about it is a wall of bronze unbroken, and the cliff runs
up sheer from the sea. His twelve children to abide there in his halls, six daughters and six
lusty sons; and, behold, he gave his daughters to his sons to wife. And they feast evermore
by their dear father and their kind mother, and dainties innumerable lie ready to their hands.
And the house is full of the savour of feasting, and the noise thereof rings round, yea in
the courtyard, by day, and in the night they sleep each one by his chaste wife in coverlets
and on jointed bedsteads. So then we came to their city and their goodly dwelling, and the
king entreated me kindly for a whole month, and sought out each thing, Ilios and the ships
of the Argives, and the return of the Achaeans. So I told him all the tale in order duly. But
when I in turn took the word and asked of my journey, and bade him send me on my way, he too
denied me not, but furnished an escort. He gave me a wallet, made of the hide of an ox of nine
seasons old, which he let flay, and therein he bound the ways of all the noisy winds; for him
the son of Cronos made keeper of the winds, either to lull or to rouse what blasts he will.
And he made it fast in the hold of the ship with a shining silver thong, that not the faintest
breath might escape. Then he sent forth the blast of the West Wind to blow for me, to bear
our ships and ourselves upon our way; but this he was never to bring to pass, for we were undone
through our own heedlessness.

'For nine whole days we sailed by night and day continually, and now on the tenth day my native
land came in sight, and already we were so near that we beheld the folk tending the beacon
fires. Then over me there came sweet slumber in my weariness, for all the time I was holding
the sheet, nor gave it to any of my company, that so we might come quicker to our own country.
Meanwhile my company held converse together, and said that I was bringing home for myself gold
and silver, gifts from Aeolus the high-hearted son of Hippotas. And thus would they speak looking
each man to his neighbour:

'"Lo now, how beloved he is and highly esteemed among all men, to the city and land of whomsoever
he may come. Many are the goodly treasures he taketh with him out of the spoil from Troy, while
we who have fulfilled like journeying with him return homeward bringing with us but empty hands.
And now Aeolus hath given unto him these things freely in his love. Nay come, let us quickly
see what they are, even what wealth of gold and silver is in the wallet."

'So they spake, and the evil counsel of my company prevailed. They loosed the wallet, and all
the winds brake forth. And the violent blast seized my men, and bare them towards the high
seas weeping, away from their own country; but as for me, I awoke and communed with my great
heart, whether I should cast myself from the ship and perish in the deep, or endure in silence
and abide yet among the living. Howbeit I hardened my heart to endure, and muffling my head
I lay still in the ship. But the vessels were driven by the evil storm-wind back to the isle
Aeolian, and my company made moan.

'There we stepped ashore and drew water, and my company presently took their midday meal by
the swift ships. Now when we had tasted bread and wine, I took with me a herald and one of
my company, and went to the famous dwelling of Aeolus: and I found him feasting with his wife
and children. So we went in and sat by the pillars of the door on the threshold, and they all
marvelled and asked us:

'"How hast thou come hither, Odysseus? What evil god assailed thee? Surely we sent thee on
thy way with all diligence, that thou mightest get thee to thine own country and thy home,
and whithersoever thou wouldest."

'Even so they said, but I spake among them heavy at heart: "My evil company hath been my bane,
and sleep thereto remorseless. Come, my friends, do ye heal the harm, for yours is the power."

'So I spake, beseeching them in soft words, but they held their peace. And the father answered,
saying: "Get thee forth from the island straightway, thou that art the most reprobate of living
men. Far be it from me to help or to further that man whom the blessed gods abhor! Get thee
forth, for lo, thy coming marks thee hated by the deathless gods."

'Therewith he sent me forth from the house making heavy moan. Thence we sailed onwards stricken
at heart. And the spirit of the men was spent beneath the grievous rowing by reason of our
vain endeavour, for there was no more any sign of a wafting wind. So for the space of six days
we sailed by night and day continually, and on the seventh we came to the steep stronghold
of Lamos, Telepylos of the Laestrygons, where herdsman hails herdsman as he drives in his flock,
and the other who drives forth answers the call. There might a sleepless man have earned a
double wage, the one as neat-herd, the other shepherding white flocks: so near are the outgoings
of the night and of the day. Thither when he had come to the fair haven, whereabout on both
sides goes one steep cliff unbroken and jutting headlands over against each other stretch forth
at the mouth of the harbour, and strait is the entrance; thereinto all the others steered their
curved ships. Now the vessels were bound within the hollow harbour each hard by other, for
no wave ever swelled within it, great or small, but there was a bright calm all around. But
I alone moored my dark ship without the harbour, at the uttermost point thereof, and made fast
the hawser to a rock. And I went up a craggy hill, a place of out-look, and stood thereon:
thence there was no sign of the labour of men or oxen, only we saw the smoke curling upward
from the land. Then I sent forth certain of my company to go and search out what manner of
men they were who here live upon the earth by bread, choosing out two of my company and sending
a third with them as herald. Now when they had gone ashore, they went along a level road whereby
wains were wont to draw down wood from the high hills to the town. And without the town they
fell in with a damsel drawing water, the noble daughter of Laestrygonian Antiphates. She had
come down to the clear-flowing spring Artacia, for thence it was custom to draw water to the
town. So they stood by her and spake unto her, and asked who was king of that land, and who
they were he ruled over. Then at once she showed them the high-roofed hall of her father. Now
when they had entered the renowned house, they found his wife therein: she was huge of bulk
as a mountain peak and was loathly in their sight. Straightway she called the renowned Antiphates,
her lord, from the assembly-place, and he contrived a pitiful destruction for my men. Forthwith
he clutched up one of my company and made ready his midday meal, but the other twain sprang
up and came in flight to the ships. Then he raised the war cry through the town, and the valiant
Laestrygons at the sound thereof, flocked together from every side, a host past number, not
like men but like the Giants. They cast at us from the cliffs with great rocks, each of them
a man's burden, and anon there arose from the fleet an evil din of men dying and ships shattered
withal. And like folk spearing fishes they bare home their hideous meal. While as yet they
were slaying my friends within the deep harbour, I drew my sharp sword from my thigh, and with
it cut the hawsers of my dark-prowed ship. Quickly then I called to my company, and bade them
dash in with the oars, that we might clean escape this evil plight. And all with one accord
they tossed the sea water with the oar-blade, in dread of death, and to my delight my barque
flew forth to the high seas away from the beetling rocks, but those other ships were lost there,
one and all. And we came to the isle Aeaean, where dwelt Circe of the braided tresses, an awful
goddess of mortal speech, own sister to the wizard Aeetes. Both were begotten of Helios, who
gives light to all men, and their mother was Perse, daughter of Oceanus. There on the shore
we put in with our ship into the sheltering haven silently, and some god was our guide. Then
we stept ashore, and for two days and two nights lay there, consuming our own hearts for weariness
and pain. But when now the fair-tressed Dawn had brought the full light of the third day, then
did I seize my spear and my sharp sword, and quickly departing from the ship I went up unto
a place of wide prospect, if haply I might see any sign of the labour of men and hear the sound
of their speech. So I went up a craggy hill, a place of out-look, and I saw the smoke rising
from the broad-wayed earth in the halls of Circe, through the thick coppice and the woodland.
Then I mused in my mind and heart whether I should go and make discovery, for that I had seen
the smoke and flame. And as I thought thereon this seemed to me the better counsel, to go first
to the swift ship and to the sea-banks, and give my company their midday meal, and then send
them to make search. But as I came and drew nigh to the curved ship, some god even then took
pity on me in my loneliness, and sent a tall antlered stag across my very path. He was coming
down from his pasture in the woodland to the river to drink, for verily the might of the sun
was sore upon him. And as he came up from out of the stream, I smote him on the spine in the
middle of the back, and the brazen shaft went clean through him, and with a moan he fell in
the dust, and his life passed from him. Then I set my foot on him and drew forth the brazen
shaft from the wound, and laid it hard by upon the ground and let it lie. Next I broke withies
and willow twigs, and wove me a rope a fathom in length, well twisted from end to end, and
bound together the feet of the huge beast, and went to the black ship bearing him across my
neck, and leaning on a spear, for it was in no wise possible to carry him on my shoulder with
the one hand, for he was a mighty quarry. And I threw him down before the ship and roused my
company with soft words, standing by each man in turn:

'"Friends, for all our sorrows we shall not yet a while go down to the house of Hades, ere
the coming of the day of destiny; go to then, while as yet there is meat and drink in the swift
ship, let us take thought thereof, that we be not famished for hunger."

'Even so I spake, and they speedily hearkened to my words. They unmuffled their heads, and
there on the shore of the unharvested sea gazed at the stag, for he was a mighty quarry. But
after they had delighted their eyes with the sight of him, they washed their hands and got
ready the glorious feast. So for that time we sat the livelong day till the going down of the
sun, feasting on abundant flesh and sweet wine. My friends, lo, now we know not where is the
place of darkness or of dawning, nor where the Sun, that gives light to men, goes beneath the
earth, nor where he rises; therefore let us advise us speedily if any counsel yet may be: as
for me, I deem there is none. For I went up a craggy hill, a place of out-look, and saw the
island crowned about with the circle of the endless sea, the isle itself lying low; and in
the midst thereof mine eyes beheld the smoke through the thick coppice and the woodland."

'Even so I spake, but their spirit within them was broken, as they remembered the deeds of
Antiphates the Laestrygonian, and all the evil violence of the haughty Cyclops, the man-eater.
So they wept aloud shedding big tears. Howbeit no avail came of their weeping.

'Then I numbered my goodly-greaved company in two bands, and appointed a leader for each, and
I myself took the command of the one part, and godlike Eurylochus of the other. And anon we
shook the lots in a brazen-fitted helmet, and out leapt the lot of proud Eurylochus. So he
went on his way, and with him two and twenty of my fellowship all weeping; and we were left
behind making lament. In the forest glades they found the halls of Circe builded, of polished
stone, in a place with wide prospect. And all around the palace mountain-bred wolves and lions
were roaming, whom she herself had bewitched with evil drugs that she gave them. Yet the beasts
did not set on my men, but lo, they ramped about them and fawned on them, wagging their long
tails. And as when dogs fawn about their lord when he comes from the feast, for he always brings
them the fragments that soothe their mood, even so the strong-clawed wolves and the lions fawned
around them; but they were affrighted when they saw the strange and terrible creatures. So
they stood at the outer gate of the fair-tressed goddess, and within they heard Circe singing
in a sweet voice, as she fared to and fro before the great web imperishable, such as is the
handiwork of goddesses, fine of woof and full of grace and splendour. Then Polites, a leader
of men, the dearest to me and the trustiest of all my company, first spake to them:

'"Friends, forasmuch as there is one within that fares to and fro before a mighty web singing
a sweet song, so that all the floor of the hall makes echo, a goddess she is or a woman; come
quickly and cry aloud to her."

'He spake the word and they cried aloud and called to her. And straightway she came forth and
opened the shining doors and bade them in, and all went with her in their heedlessness. But
Eurylochus tarried behind, for he guessed that there was some treason. So she led them in and
set them upon chairs and high seats, and made them a mess of cheese and barley-meal and yellow
honey with Pramnian wine, and mixed harmful drugs with the food to make them utterly forget
their own country. Now when she had given them the cup and they had drunk it off, presently
she smote them with a wand, and in the styes of the swine she penned them. So they had the
head and voice, the bristles and the shape of swine, but their mind abode even as of old. Thus
were they penned there weeping, and Circe flung them acorns and mast and fruit of the cornel
tree to eat, whereon wallowing swine do always batten.

'Now Eurylochus came back to the swift black ship to bring tidings of his fellows, and of their
unseemly doom. Not a word could he utter, for all his desire, so deeply smitten was he to the
heart with grief, and his eyes were filled with tears and his soul was fain of lamentation.
But when we all had pressed him with our questions in amazement, even then he told the fate
of the remnant of our company.

'"We went, as thou didst command, through the coppice, noble Odysseus: we found within the
forest glades the fair halls, builded of polished stone, in a place with wide prospect. But
I tarried behind, for I guessed that there was some treason. Then they vanished away one and
all, nor did any of them appear again, though I sat long time watching."

'So spake he, whereon I cast about my shoulder my silver-studded sword, a great blade of bronze,
and slung my bow about me and bade him lead me again by the way that he came. But he caught
me with both hands, and by my knees he besought me, and bewailing him spake to me winged words:

'"Lead me not thither against my will, oh fosterling of Zeus, but leave me here! For well I
know thou shalt thyself return no more, nor bring any one of all thy fellowship; nay, let us
flee the swifter with those that be here, for even yet may we escape the evil day."

'On this wise he spake, but I answered him, saying: "Eurylochus, abide for thy part here in
this place, eating and drinking by the black hollow ship: but I will go forth, for a strong
constraint is laid on me."

'With that I went up from the ship and the sea-shore. But lo, when in my faring through the
sacred glades I was now drawing near to the great hall of the enchantress Circe, then did Hermes,
of the golden wand, meet me as I approached the house, in the likeness of a young man with
the first down on his lip, the time when youth is most gracious. So he clasped my hand and
spake and hailed me:

'"Ah, hapless man, whither away again, all alone through the wolds, thou that knowest not this
country? And thy company yonder in the hall of Circe are penned in the guise of swine, in their
deep lairs abiding. Is it in hope to free them that thou art come hither? Nay, methinks, thou
thyself shalt never return but remain there with the others. Come then, I will redeem thee
from thy distress, and bring deliverance. Lo, take this herb of virtue, and go to the dwelling
of Circe, that it may keep from thy head the evil day. And I will tell thee all the magic sleight
of Circe. She will mix thee a potion and cast drugs into the mess; but not even so shall she
be able to enchant thee; so helpful is this charmed herb that I shall give thee, and I will
tell thee all. When it shall be that Circe smites thee with her long wand, even then draw thou
thy sharp sword from thy thigh, and spring on her, as one eager to slay her. And she will shrink
away and be instant with thee to lie with her. Thenceforth disdain not thou the bed of the
goddess, that she may deliver thy company and kindly entertain thee. But command her to swear
a mighty oath by the blessed gods, that she will plan nought else of mischief to thine own
hurt, lest she make thee a dastard and unmanned, when she hath thee naked."

'Then Hermes departed toward high Olympus, up through the woodland isle, but as for me I held
on my way to the house of Circe, and my heart was darkly troubled as I went. So I halted in
the portals of the fair-tressed goddess; there I stood and called aloud and the goddess heard
my voice, who presently came forth and opened the shining doors and bade me in, and I went
with her heavy at heart. So she led me in and set me on a chair with studs of silver, a goodly
carven chair, and beneath was a footstool for the feet. And she made me a potion in a golden
cup, that I might drink, and she also put a charm therein, in the evil counsel of her heart.

'Now when she had given it and I had drunk it off and was not bewitched, she smote me with
her wand and spake and hailed me:

'"Go thy way now to the stye, couch thee there with the rest of thy company."

'So spake she, but I drew my sharp sword from my thigh and sprang upon Circe, as one eager
to slay her. I marvel to see how thou hast drunk of this charm, and wast nowise subdued. Nay,
for there lives no man else that is proof against this charm, whoso hath drunk thereof, and
once it hath passed his lips. But thou hast, methinks, a mind within thee that may not be enchanted.
Verily thou art Odysseus, ready at need, whom he of the golden wand, the slayer of Argos, full
often told me was to come hither, on his way from Troy with his swift black ship. Nay come,
put thy sword into the sheath, and thereafter let us go up into my bed, that meeting in love
and sleep we may trust each the other."

'So spake she, but I answered her, saying: "Nay, Circe, how canst thou bid me be gentle to
thee, who hast turned my company into swine within thy halls, and holding me here with a guileful
heart requirest me to pass within thy chamber and go up into thy bed, that so thou mayest make
me a dastard and unmanned when thou hast me naked? Nay, never will I consent to go up into
thy bed, except thou wilt deign, goddess, to swear a mighty oath, that thou wilt plan nought
else of mischief to mine own hurt."

'So I spake, and she straightway swore the oath not to harm me, as I bade her. But when she
had sworn and had done that oath, then at last I went up into the beautiful bed of Circe.

'Now all this while her handmaids busied them in the halls, four maidens that are her serving
women in the house. They are born of the wells and of the woods and of the holy rivers, that
flow forward into the salt sea. Of these one cast upon the chairs goodly coverlets of purple
above, and spread a linen cloth thereunder. And lo, another drew up silver tables to the chairs,
and thereon set for them golden baskets. And a third mixed sweet honey-hearted wine in a silver
bowl, and set out cups of gold. And a fourth bare water, and kindled a great fire beneath the
mighty cauldron. So the water waxed warm; but when it boiled in the bright brazen vessel, she
set me in a bath and bathed me with water from out a great cauldron, pouring it over head and
shoulders, when she had mixed it to a pleasant warmth, till from my limbs she took away the
consuming weariness. And she bade me eat, but my soul found no pleasure therein. I sat with
other thoughts, and my heart had a boding of ill.

'Now when Circe saw that I sat thus, and that I put not forth my hands to the meat, and that
I was mightily afflicted, she drew near to me and spake to me winged words:

'"Wherefore thus, Odysseus, dost thou sit there like a speechless man, consuming thine own
soul, and dost not touch meat nor drink? Dost thou indeed deem there is some further guile?
Nay, thou hast no cause to fear, for already I have sworn thee a strong oath not to harm thee."

'So spake she, but I answered her, saying: "Oh, Circe, what righteous man would have the heart
to taste meat and drink ere he had redeemed his company, and beheld them face to face? But
if in good faith thou biddest me eat and drink, then let them go free, that mine eyes may behold
my dear companions."

'So I spake, and Circe passed out through the hall with the wand in her hand, and opened the
doors of the stye, and drave them forth in the shape of swine of nine seasons old. There they
stood before her, and she went through their midst, and anointed each one of them with another
charm. And lo, from their limbs the bristles dropped away, wherewith the venom had erewhile
clothed them, that lady Circe gave them. And they became men again, younger than before they
were, and goodlier far, and taller to behold. And they all knew me again and each one took
my hands, and wistful was the lament that sank into their souls, and the roof around rang wondrously.
And even the goddess herself was moved with compassion. And first of all, draw ye up the ship
ashore, and bestow the goods in the caves and all the gear. And thyself return again, and bring
with thee thy dear companions."

'So spake she, and my lordly spirit consented thereto. So I went on my way to the swift ship
and the sea-banks, and there I found my dear company on the swift ship lamenting piteously,
shedding big tears. And as when calves of the homestead gather round the droves of kine that
have returned to the yard, when they have had their fill of pasture, and all with one accord
frisk before them, and the folds may no more contain them, but with a ceaseless lowing they
skip about their dams, so flocked they all about me weeping, when their eyes beheld me. Yea,
and to their spirit it was as though they had got to their dear country, and the very city
of rugged Ithaca, where they were born and reared.

'Then making lament they spake to me winged words: "O fosterling of Zeus, we were none otherwise
glad at thy returning, than if we had come to Ithaca, our own country. Nay come, of our other
companions tell us the tale of their ruin."

'So spake they, but I answered them with soft words: "Behold, let us first of all draw up the
ship ashore, and bestow our goods in the caves and all our gear. And do ye bestir you, one
and all, to go with me, that ye may see your fellows in the sacred dwelling of Circe, eating
and drinking, for they have continual store."

'So spake I, and at once they hearkened to my words, but Eurylochus alone would have holden
all my companions, and uttering his voice he spake to them winged words:

'"Wretched men that we are! whither are we going? Why are your hearts so set on sorrow that
ye should go down to the hall of Circe, who will surely change us all to swine, or wolves,
or lions, to guard her great house perforce, according to the deeds that the Cyclops wrought,
when certain of our company went to his inmost fold, and with them went Odysseus, ever hardy,
for through the blindness of his heart did they too perish?"

'So spake he, but I mused in my heart whether to draw my long hanger from my stout thigh, and
therewith smite off his head and bring it to the dust, albeit he was very near of kin to me;
but the men of my company stayed me on every side with soothing words:

'"Prince of the seed of Zeus, as for this man, we will suffer him, if thou wilt have it so,
to abide here by the ship and guard the ship; but as for us, be our guide to the sacred house
of Circe." 

Under this intelligent stimulus, Portuguese navigators within a century rounded the Cape of Good
Hope, opened the sea route to the Indies, discovered Brazil, circumnavigated
the globe, and made Portugal the richest nation in Europe, with a
great colonial empire and claims to dominion over half the seas of
the world.

Portuguese ships carried her flag from Labrador (which reveals its discoverers in its name)
and Nova Zembla to the Malay Archipelago and Japan.

It is characteristic of the crusading spirit of the age that Prince Henry's first ventures down
the African coast were in pursuance of a vague plan to ascend one of the African rivers and
unite with the legendary Christian monarch Prester John (Presbyter or Bishop John, whose realm
was then supposed to be located in Abyssinia) in a campaign against
the Turk.

But crusading zeal changed to dreams of wealth when his ships returned from the Senegal coast
between 1440 and 1445 with elephants' tusks, gold, and negro slaves. The Gold Coast was already
reached; the fabled dangers of equatorial waters--serpent rocks, whirlpools, liquid sun's
rays and boiling rivers--were soon proved unreal; and before 1480
the coast well beyond the Congo was known.

The continental limits of Africa to southward, long clearly surmised,
were verified by the voyage of Bartolomeo Diaz, in 1487.

Diaz rounded the cape, sailed northward some 200 miles, and then, troubled by food shortage and
heavy weather, turned backward. But he had blazed the trail. The cape he called Tormentoso (tempestuous)
was renamed by his sovereign, João II, Cape Bon Esperanto--the Cape of Goad Hope. The Florentine
professor Politian wrote to congratulate the king upon opening to Christianity "new lands, new
seas, new worlds, dragged from secular darkness into the light of
day."

It was not until ten years later that Vasco da Gama set out to complete the work of Diaz and establish
contact between east and west. The contour of the African coast was now so well understood and
the art of navigation so advanced that Vasco could steer a direct course across the open sea
from the Cape Verde Islands to the southern extremity of Africa,
a distance of 3770 miles (more than a thousand miles greater than
that of Columbus' voyage from the Canaries to the Bahamas), which
he covered in one hundred days.

After touching at Mozambique, he caught the steady monsoon winds for Calicut, on the western
coast of the peninsula of India, then a great entrepôt where Mohammedan and Chinese fleets
met each year to exchange wares. Thwarted here by the intrigues of Mohammedan traders, who were
quick to realize the danger threatening their commercial monopoly, he moved on to Cannanore,
a port further north along the coast, took cargo, and set sail for home, reaching the Azores
in August of 1499, with 55 of his original complement of 148 men. They came back, in the picturesque
words of the Admiral, "With the pumps in their hands and the Virgin Mary in their mouths," completing
a total voyage of 13,000 miles. The profits are said to have been sixty-fold.

The ease with which in the next two decades Portugal extended and consolidated her conquest
of eastern trade is readily accounted for. She was dependent indeed solely upon sea communications,
over a distance so great as to make the task seem almost impossible. But the craft of the east were
frail in construction and built for commerce rather than for warfare. The Chinese junks that
came to India are described as immense in size, with large cabins for the officers and their families,
vegetable gardens growing on board, and crews of as many as a thousand men; but they had sails
of matted reed that could not be lowered, and their timbers were loosely fastened together with
pegs and withes. The Arab ships, according to Marco Polo, were also built without the use of nails.
Like the Portuguese themselves, the Arab or Mohammedan merchants belonged to a race of alien
invaders, little liked by the native princes who retained petty sovereignties along the coast.
But the real secret of Portuguese success lay in the fact that their rivals were traders rather
than fighters, who had enjoyed a peaceful monopoly for centuries, and who could expect little
aid from their own countries harassed by the Turk. The Portuguese on the other hand inherited the
traditions of Mediterranean seamanship and warfare, and, above all,
were engaged in a great national enterprise, led by the best men in
the land, with enthusiastic government support.

After Vasco's return, fleets were sent out each year, to open the Indian ports by either force
or diplomacy, destroy Moslem merchant vessels, and establish factories
and garrisons.

In 1505 Francisco de Almeida set sail with the largest fleet as yet fitted out (sixteen ships
and sixteen caravels), an appointment as Viceroy of Cochin, Cannanore, and Quilon, and supreme
authority from the Cape to the Malay Peninsula. Almeida in the next four years defeated the Mohammedan
traders, who with the aid of Egypt had by this time organized to protect themselves, in a series
of naval engagements, culminating on February 3, 1509, in the decisive battle of Diu.

Mir Hussain, Admiral of the Gran Soldan of Egypt and commander in chief of the Mohammedan fleet
in this battle, anchored his main force of more than a hundred ships
in the mouth of the channel between the island of Diu and the mainland,
designing to fall back before the Portuguese attack towards the island,
where he could secure the aid of shore batteries and a swarm of 300
or more foists and other small craft in the harbor.

Almeida had only 19 ships and 1300 men, but against his vigorous attack the flimsy vessels
of the east were of little value.

The battle was fought at close quarters in the old Mediterranean style, with saber, cutlass, and
culverin; ramming, grappling, and boarding. Before nightfall Almeida had won. This victory ensured
Portugal's commercial control in the eastern seas.

  Alfonso d'Albuquerque, greatest of the Portuguese conquistadores,
  succeeded Almeida in 1509.

Establishing headquarters in a central position at Goa, he sent a fleet eastward to Malacca,
where he set up a fort and factory, and later fitted out expeditions against Ormuz and Aden,
the two strongholds protecting respectively the entrances to the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea.
The attack on Aden failed, but Ormuz fell in 1515. Albuquerque died in the same year and was
buried in his capital at Goa. His successor opened trade and founded factories in Ceylon.
In 1526 a trading post was established at Hugli, near the mouth of the Ganges. Ormuz became
a center for the Persian trade, Malacca for trade with Java, Sumatra, and the Spice Islands.
A Portuguese envoy, Fernam de Andrada, reached Canton in 1517--in
the first European ship to enter Chinese waters--and Pekin three years
later.

Another adventurer named Mendez Pinto spent years in China and in 1548 established a factory
near Yokohama, Japan. Brazil, where a squadron under Cabral had touched as early as 1502, was
by 1550 a prosperous colony, and in later centuries a chief source of wealth. Mozambique, Mombassa,
and Malindi, on the southeastern coast of Africa, were taken and fortified as intermediate
bases to protect the route to Asia. The muslins of Bengal, the calicoes of Calicut, the spices
from the islands, the pepper of Malabar, the teas and silks of China and Japan, now found
their way by direct ocean passage to the Lisbon quays.

A few strips along the African coast, tenuously held by sufferance of the great powers, and bits
of territory at Goa, Daman, and Diu in India, are the twentieth century remnants of Portugal's
colonial empire. The greater part of it fell away between 1580 and 1640, when Portugal was under
Spanish rule. But her own system of colonial administration, or rather exploitation, was if possible
worse than Spain's. Her scanty resources of man power were exhausted in colonial warfare. The
expulsion of Protestants and Jews deprived her of elements in her population that might have
known how to utilize wealth from the colonies to build up home trade and industries. Her situation
was too distant from the European markets; and the raw materials
landed at Lisbon were transshipped in Dutch bottoms for Amsterdam
and Antwerp, which became the true centers of manufacturing and exchange.

Cervantes, in 1607, could still speak of Lisbon as the greatest city in Europe,[1] but her greatness
was already decaying; and her fate was sealed when Philip of Spain closed her ports to Dutch
shipping, and Dutch ships themselves set sail for the east.

[Footnote 1: PERSILES AND SIGISMUDA, III, i.]

But the period of Portugal's maritime ascendancy cannot be left without recording, even if in
barest outline, the circumnavigation of the globe by Fernão da Magalhães, or Magellan, who, though
he made this last voyage of his under the Spanish flag, was Portuguese by birth and had proved
his courage and iron resolution under Almeida and Albuquerque in Portugal's eastern campaigns.
Seeking a westward passage to the Spice Islands, the five vessels of 75 to 100 tons composing
his squadron cleared the mouth of the Guadalquivir on September 20, 1519. They established winter
quarters in the last of March at Port St. Julian on the coast of Patagonia. Here, on Easter Sunday,
three of his Spanish captains mutinied. Magellan promptly threw a boat's crew armed with cutlasses
aboard one of the mutinous ships, killed the leader, and overcame the unruly element in the
crew. The two other ships he forced to surrender within 24 hours.

One of the guilty captains was beheaded and the other marooned on the coast when the expedition
left in September.

Five weeks were now spent in the labyrinths of the strait which has since borne the leader's
name.

He had sworn he would go on if he had to eat the leather from the ships' yards. With three vessels--one
had been shipwrecked in the preceding winter and the other deserted in the straits--they set
out across the vast unknown expanse of the Pacific.

"In three monethes and xx dayes they sailed foure thousande leagues in one goulfe by the sayde
sea called Pacificum.... And havying in this tyme consumed all their bysket and other vyttayles,
they fell into such necessitie that they were in forced to eate the pouder that remayned thereof
being now full of woormes.... Theyre freshe water was also putryfyed and become yellow. They
dyd eate skynnes and pieces of lether which were foulded about certeyne
great ropes of the shyps."

On March 6, 1521, they reached the Ladrones, and ten days later, the Philippines, even these
islands having never before been visited by Europeans. Here the leader was killed in a conflict
with the natives. One ship was now abandoned, and another was later captured by the Portuguese.
Of the five ships that had left Spain with 280 men, a single vessel, "with tackle worn and weather-beaten
yards," and 18 gaunt survivors reached home. II, p. 210.]

2. SPAIN AND THE NEW WORLD

It is generally taken for granted that the great movement of the Renaissance, which spread through
western Europe in the 15th and the 16th centuries, quickening men's interest in the world about
them rather than the world to come, and inspiring them with an eagerness and a confident belief
in their own power to explore its hidden secrets, was among the forces which brought about
the great geographical discoveries of the period. Its influence in this direction is evident
enough in England and elsewhere later on; but, judging by the difficulties of Columbus in
securing support, it was not in his time potent with those in control of government policy and government
funds. The Italian navigator John Cabot and his son Sebastian made their voyages from England
in 1498 and 1500 with very feeble support from Henry VII, though it was upon their discoveries
that England later based her American claims. Even in Spain there seems to have been little eagerness
to emulate the methods by which her neighbor Portugal had so rapidly risen to wealth and power.

But
the influence of revived classical information on geographical matters was keenly felt; and
the idea of a direct westerly passage to India was suggested, not only by Portugal's monopoly
of the Cape route, but by classical authority, generally accepted by the best geographers
of the time. The Imago Mundi of 1410, already mentioned, embodying Roger Bacon's arguments that
the Atlantic washed the shores of Asia and that the voyage thither was not long, was a book
carefully studied by Columbus.

Paul Toscanelli, a Florentine physicist and astronomer, adopting and developing this theory,
sent in 1474 to Alfonso V of Portugal a map of the world in which he demonstrated the possibilities
of the western route. The distance round the earth at the equator he estimated almost exactly
to be 24,780 statute miles, and in the latitude of Lisbon 19,500
miles; but he so exaggerated the extent of Europe and Asia as to reduce
the distance between them by an Atlantic voyage to about 6500 miles,
putting the east coast of China in about the longitude of Oregon.

This distance he still further shortened by locating Cipango (Japan) far to the eastward of
Asia, in about the latitude of the Canary Islands and distant from them only 3250 miles.

With all these opinions Columbus was familiar, for the list of his library and the annotations
still preserved in his own handwriting, show that he was not an ignorant sailor, nor yet a wild
visionary, but prepared by closest study for the task to which he gave his later years. His earlier
career, on the other hand, had supplied him with abundant practical
knowledge.

Born in Genoa, a mother city of great seamen, probably in the year 1436, he had received a fair
education in Latin, geography, astronomy, drafting, and other subjects useful to the master-mariner
of those days. He had sailed the Mediterranean, and prior to his great adventure, had been
as far north as Iceland, and on many voyages down the African coast. Following his brother
Bartholomew, who was a map-maker in the Portuguese service, he came about 1470 to Lisbon, even
then a center of geographical knowledge and maritime activity.

Probably as early as this time the idea of a western voyage was in his mind.

Skepticism may account for Portugal's failure to listen to his proposals; and her interest was already
centered in the route around Africa under her exclusive control. The tale of his years of search
for assistance is well known. Indeed, while the fame of Columbus rests rightly enough upon his
discovery of a new world, of whose existence he had never dreamed and which he never admitted
in his lifetime, his greatness is best shown by his faith in his vision, and the steadfast energy
and fortitude with which he pushed towards its practical accomplishment, during years of vain
supplication, and amid the trials of the voyage itself. He had actually left Granada, when
Isabella of Spain at last agreed to support his venture. In the contract later drawn up he drove
a good bargain, contingent always upon success; he was to be admiral
and viceroy of islands and continents discovered and their surrounding
waters, with control of trading privileges and a tenth part of the
wealth of all kinds derived.

With the explorations of Columbus on his first and his three later voyages (in 1496, 1498, and
1502) we are less concerned than with the first voyage itself as an illustration of the problems
and dangers faced by the navigator of the time, and with the effect of the discovery of the
new world upon Spain's rise as a sea power. The three caravels in which he sailed were typical
craft of the period. The Santa Maria, the largest, was like the other two, a single-decked, lateen-rigged,
three-masted vessel, with a length of about 90 feet, beam of about 20 feet, and a maximum speed
of perhaps 6-1/2 knots. She was of 100 tons burden and carried 52 men. The Pinta was somewhat
smaller. The Niña (Baby) was a tiny, half-decked vessel of 40 tons. Heavily timbered and seaworthy
enough, the three caravels were short provisioned and manned in part from the rakings of the
Palos jail.

Leaving Palos August 3, 1492, Columbus went first to the Canaries, and thence turned his prow
directly westward, believing that he was on the parallel that touched the northern end of Japan.
By a reckoning even more optimistic than Toscanelli's, he estimated
the distance thither to be only 2500 miles.

Thence he would sail to Quinsay (Hang Chow), the ancient capital of China, and deliver the letter
he carried to the Khan of Cathay. The northeast trade winds bore them steadily westward, raising
in the minds of the already fear-stricken sailors the certainty that against these head winds
they could never beat back. At last they entered the vast expanse of the Sargasso Sea, six times
as large as France, where they lay for a week almost becalmed, amid tangled masses of floating
seaweeds.

To add to their perplexities, they had passed the line of no variation, and the needle now
swung to the left of the pole-star instead of the right. On the last day of the outward voyage they
were 2300 miles to the westward according to the information Columbus shared with his officers
and men; according to his secret log they were 2700 miles from the Canaries, and well beyond the paint
where he had expected to strike the islands of the Asiatic coast. The mutinous and panic-stricken
spirit of his subordinates, the uncertainty of Columbus himself, turned to rejoicing when at
2:00 A.M. of Friday, October 12, a sailor on the Pinta sighted the little island of the Bahamas,
which, since the time of the Vikings, was the first land sighted
by white men in the new world.

The three vessels cruised southward, in the belief, expressed by
the name Indian which they gave the natives, that they were in the
archipelago east of Asia. Skirting the northern coast of Cuba and
Hayti, they sought for traces of gold, and information as to the way
to the mainland. And
now go home and hold thy peace, and tell it not: but behold, I am Poseidon, shaker of the earth."

'Therewith he plunged beneath the heaving deep. And she conceived and bare Pelias and Neleus,
who both grew to be mighty men, servants of Zeus. Pelias dwelt in wide Iolcos, and was rich
in flocks; and that other abode in sandy Pylos. And the queen of women bare yet other sons
to Cretheus, even Aeson and Pheres and Amythaon, whose joy was in chariots.

'And after her I saw Antiope, daughter of Asopus, and her boast was that she had slept even
in the arms of Zeus, and she bare two sons, Amphion and Zethus, who founded first the place
of seven-gated Thebes, and they made of it a fenced city, for they might not dwell in spacious
Thebes unfenced, for all their valiancy.

'Next to her I saw Alcmene, wife of Amphitryon, who lay in the arms of mighty Zeus, and bare
Heracles of the lion-heart, steadfast in the fight. And I saw Megara, daughter of Creon, haughty
of heart, whom the strong and tireless son of Amphitryon had to wife.

'And I saw the mother of Oedipodes, fair Epicaste, who wrought a dread deed unwittingly, being
wedded to her own son, and he that had slain his own father wedded her, and straightway the
gods made these things known to men. Yet he abode in pain in pleasant Thebes, ruling the Cadmaeans,
by reason of the deadly counsels of the gods. But she went down to the house of Hades, the
mighty warder; yea, she tied a noose from the high beam aloft, being fast holden in sorrow;
while for him she left pains behind full many, even all that the Avengers of a mother bring
to pass.

'And I saw lovely Chloris, whom Neleus wedded on a time for her beauty, and brought gifts of
wooing past number. She was the youngest daughter of Amphion, son of Iasus, who once ruled
mightily in Minyan Orchomenus. And she was queen of Pylos, and bare glorious children to her
lord, Nestor and Chromius, and princely Periclymenus, and stately Pero too, the wonder of all
men. All that dwelt around were her wooers; but Neleus would not give her, save to him who
should drive off from Phylace the kine of mighty Iphicles, with shambling gait and broad of
brow, hard cattle to drive. And none but the noble seer {*} took in hand to drive them; but
a grievous fate from the gods fettered him, even hard bonds and the herdsmen of the wild. But
when at length the months and days were being fulfilled, as the year returned upon his course,
and the seasons came round, then did mighty Iphicles set him free, when he had spoken out all
the oracles; and herein was the counsel of Zeus being accomplished.

{* Melampus}

'And I saw Lede, the famous bed-fellow of Tyndareus, who bare to Tyndareus two sons, hardy
of heart, Castor tamer of steeds, and Polydeuces the boxer. These twain yet live, but the quickening
earth is over them; and even in the nether world they have honour at the hand of Zeus. And
they possess their life in turn, living one day and dying the next, and they have gotten worship
even as the gods.

'And after her I beheld Iphimedeia, bed-fellow of Aloeus, who said that she had lain with Poseidon,
and she bare children twain, but short of life were they, godlike Otus and far-famed Ephialtes.
Now these were the tallest men that earth, the graingiver, ever reared, and far the goodliest
after the renowned Orion. At nine seasons old they were of breadth nine cubits, and nine fathoms
in height. They it was who threatened to raise even against the immortals in Olympus the din
of stormy war. They strove to pile Ossa on Olympus, and on Ossa Pelion with the trembling forest
leaves, that there might be a pathway to the sky. Yea, and they would have accomplished it,
had they reached the full measure of manhood. But the son of Zeus, whom Leto of the fair locks
bare, destroyed the twain, ere the down had bloomed beneath their temples, and darkened their
chins with the blossom of youth.

'And Phaedra and Procris I saw, and fair Ariadne, the daughter of wizard Minos, whom Theseus
on a time was bearing from Crete to the hill of sacred Athens, yet had he no joy of her; for
Artemis slew her ere that in sea-girt Dia, by reason of the witness of Dionysus.

'And Maera and Clymene I saw, and hateful Eriphyle, who took fine gold for the price of her
dear lord's life. But I cannot tell or name all the wives and daughters of the heroes that
I saw; ere that, the immortal night would wane. Nay, it is even now time to sleep, whether
I go to the swift ship to my company or abide here: and for my convoy you and the gods will care.'

So spake he, and dead silence fell on all, and they were spell-bound throughout the shadowy
halls. Then Arete of the white arms first spake among them: 'Phaeacians, what think you of
this man for comeliness and stature, and within for wisdom of heart? Moreover he is my guest,
though every one of you hath his share in this honour. Wherefore haste not to send him hence,
and stint not these your gifts for one that stands in such sore need of them; for ye have much
treasure stored in your halls by the grace of the gods.'

Then too spake among them the old man, lord Echeneus, that was an elder among the Phaeacians:
'Friends, behold, the speech of our wise queen is not wide of the mark, nor far from our deeming,
so hearken ye thereto. But on Alcinous here both word and work depend.'

Then Alcinous made answer, and spake unto him: 'Yea, the word that she hath spoken shall hold,
if indeed I am yet to live and bear rule among the Phaeacians, masters of the oar. Howbeit
let the stranger, for all his craving to return, nevertheless endure to abide until the morrow,
till I make up the full measure of the gift; and men shall care for his convoy, all men, but
I in chief, for mine is the lordship in the land.'

And Odysseus of many counsels answered him, saying: My lord Alcinous, most notable of all the
people, if ye bade me tarry here even for a year, and would speed my convoy and give me splendid
gifts, even that I would choose; and better would it be for me to come with a fuller hand to
mine own dear country, so should I get more love and worship in the eyes of all men, whoso
should see me after I was returned to Ithaca.'

And Alcinous answered him, saying: 'Odysseus, in no wise do we deem thee, we that look on thee,
to be a knave or a cheat, even as the dark earth rears many such broadcast, fashioning lies
whence none can even see his way therein. But beauty crowns thy words, and wisdom is within
thee; and thy tale, as when a minstrel sings, thou hast told with skill, the weary woes of
all the Argives and of thine own self. But come, declare me this and plainly tell it all. Didst
thou see any of thy godlike company who went up at the same time with thee to Ilios and there
met their doom? Behold, the night is of great length, unspeakable, and the time for sleep in
the hall is not yet; tell me therefore of those wondrous deeds. I could abide even till the
bright dawn, so long as thou couldst endure to rehearse me these woes of thine in the hall.'

And Odysseus of many counsels answered him, saying: 'My lord Alcinous, most notable of all
the people, there is a time for many words and there is a time for sleep. But if thou art eager
still to listen, I would not for my part grudge to tell thee of other things more pitiful still,
even the woes of my comrades, those that perished afterward, for they had escaped with their
lives from the dread war-cry of the Trojans, but perished in returning by the will of an evil
woman.

'Now when holy Persephone had scattered this way and that the spirits of the women folk, thereafter
came the soul of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, sorrowing; and round him others were gathered, the
ghosts of them who had died with him in the house of Aegisthus and met their doom. And he knew
me straightway when he had drunk the dark blood, yea, and he wept aloud, and shed big tears
as he stretched forth his hands in his longing to reach me. But it might not be, for he had
now no steadfast strength nor power at all in moving, such as was aforetime in his supple limbs.

'At the sight of him I wept and was moved with compassion, and uttering my voice, spake to
him winged words: "Most renowned son of Atreus, Agamemnon, king of men, say what doom overcame
thee of death that lays men at their length? Did Poseidon smite thee in thy ships, raising
the dolorous blast of contrary winds, or did unfriendly men do thee hurt upon the land, whilst
thou wert cutting off their oxen and fair flocks of sheep, or fighting to win a city and the
women thereof?"

'So spake I, and straightway he answered, and said unto me: "Son of Laertes, of the seed of
Zeus, Odysseus of many devices, it was not Poseidon that smote me in my ships, and raised the
dolorous blast of contrary winds, nor did unfriendly men do me hurt upon the land, but Aegisthus
it was that wrought me death and doom and slew me, with the aid of my accursed wife, as one
slays an ox at the stall, after he had bidden me to his house, and entertained me at a feast.
Even so I died by a death most pitiful, and round me my company likewise were slain without
ceasing, like swine with glittering tusks which are slaughtered in the house of a rich and
mighty man, whether at a wedding banquet or a joint-feast or a rich clan-drinking. Ere now
hast thou been at the slaying of many a man, killed in single fight or in strong battle, yet
thou wouldst have sorrowed the most at this sight, how we lay in the hall round the mixing-bowl
and the laden boards, and the floor all ran with blood. And most pitiful of all that I heard
was the voice of the daughter of Priam, of Cassandra, whom hard by me the crafty Clytemnestra
slew. Then I strove to raise my hands as I was dying upon the sword, but to earth they fell.
And that shameless one turned her back upon me, and had not the heart to draw down my eyelids
with her fingers nor to close my mouth. So surely is there nought more terrible and shameless
than a woman who imagines such evil in her heart, even as she too planned a foul deed, fashioning
death for her wedded lord. Verily I had thought to come home most welcome to my children and
my thralls; but she, out of the depth of her evil knowledge, hath shed shame on herself and
on all womankind, which shall be for ever, even on the upright."

'Even so he spake, but I answered him, saying: "Lo now, in very sooth, hath Zeus of the far-borne
voice wreaked wondrous hatred on the seed of Atreus through the counsels of woman from of old.
For Helen's sake so many of us perished, and now Clytemnestra hath practised treason against
thee, while yet thou wast afar off."

'Even so I spake, and anon he answered me, saying: "Wherefore do thou too, never henceforth
be soft even to thy wife, neither show her all the counsel that thou knowest, but a part declare
and let part be hid. Yet shalt not thou, Odysseus, find death at the hand of thy wife, for
she is very discreet and prudent in all her ways, the wise Penelope, daughter of Icarius. Verily
we left her a bride new wed when we went to the war, and a child was at her breast, who now,
methinks, sits in the ranks of men, happy in his lot, for his dear father shall behold him
on his coming, and he shall embrace his sire as is meet. But us for my wife, she suffered me
not so much as to have my fill of gazing on my son; ere that she slew me, even her lord. And
yet another thing will I tell thee, and do thou ponder it in thy heart. Put thy ship to land
in secret, and not openly, on the shore of thy dear country; for there is no more faith in
woman. But come, declare me this and plainly tell it all, if haply ye hear of my son as yet
living, either, it may be, in Orchomenus or in sandy Pylos, or perchance with Menelaus in wide
Sparta, for goodly Orestes hath not yet perished on the earth."

'Even so he spake, but I answered him, saying: "Son of Atreus, wherefore dost thou ask me straitly
of these things? Nay I know not at all, whether he be alive or dead; it is ill to speak words
light as wind."

'Thus we twain stood sorrowing, holding sad discourse, while the big tears fell fast: and therewithal
came the soul of Achilles, son of Peleus, and of Patroclus and of noble Antilochus and of Aias,
who in face and form was goodliest of all the Danaans, after the noble son of Peleus. And the
spirit of the son of Aeacus, fleet of foot, knew me again, and making lament spake to me winged
words:

'"Son of Laertes, of the seed of Zeus, Odysseus of many devices, man overbold, what new deed
and hardier than this wilt thou devise in thy heart? How durst thou come down to the house
of Hades, where dwell the senseless dead, the phantoms of men outworn?"

'So he spake, but I answered him: "Achilles, son of Peleus, mightiest far of the Achaeans,
I am come hither to seek to Teiresias, if he may tell me any counsel, how I may come to rugged
Ithaca. For not yet have I come nigh the Achaean land, nor set foot on mine own soil, but am
still in evil case; while as for thee, Achilles, none other than thou wast heretofore the most
blessed of men, nor shall any be hereafter. For of old, in the days of thy life, we Argives
gave thee one honour with the gods, and now thou art a great prince here among the dead. Wherefore
let not thy death be any grief to thee, Achilles."

'Even so I spake, and he straightway answered me, and said: "Nay, speak not comfortably to
me of death, oh great Odysseus. But come, tell me tidings of that lordly son of mine--did he
follow to the war to be a leader or not? And tell me of noble Peleus, if thou hast heard aught,--is
he yet held in worship among the Myrmidons, or do they dishonour him from Hellas to Phthia,
for that old age binds him hand and foot? For I am no longer his champion under the sun, so
mighty a man as once I was, when in wide Troy I slew the best of the host, and succoured the
Argives. Ah! could I but come for an hour to my father's house as then I was, so would I make
my might and hands invincible, to be hateful to many an one of those who do him despite and
keep him from his honour."

{* [Greek] seems to mean 'upon the earth,' 'above ground,' as opposed to the dead who are below,
rather than 'bound to the soil,' in which sense most commentators take it.}

'Even so he spake, but I answered him saying: "As for noble Peleus, verily I have heard nought
of him; but concerning thy dear son Neoptolemus, I will tell thee all the truth, according
to thy word. It was I that led him up out of Scyros in my good hollow ship, in the wake of
the goodly-greaved Achaeans. Now oft as we took counsel around Troy town, he was ever the first
to speak, and no word missed the mark; the godlike Nestor and I alone surpassed him. But whensoever
we Achaeans did battle on the plain of Troy, he never tarried behind in the throng or the press
of men, but ran out far before us all, yielding to none in that might of his. And many men
he slew in warfare dread; but I could not tell of all or name their names, even all the host
he slew in succouring the Argives; but, ah, how he smote with the sword that son of Telephus,
the hero Eurypylus, and many Ceteians {*} of his company were slain around him, by reason of
a woman's bribe. He truly was the comeliest man that ever I saw, next to goodly Memnon. And
again when we, the best of the Argives, were about to go down into the horse which Epeus wrought,
and the charge of all was laid on me, both to open the door of our good ambush and to shut
the same, then did the other princes and counsellors of the Danaans wipe away the tears, and
the limbs of each one trembled beneath him, but never once did I see thy son's fair face wax
pale, nor did he wipe the tears from his cheeks: but he besought me often to let him go forth
from the horse, and kept handling his sword-hilt, and his heavy bronze-shod spear, and he was
set on mischief against the Trojans. But after we had sacked the steep city of Priam, he embarked
unscathed with his share of the spoil, and with a noble prize; he was not smitten with the
sharp spear, and got no wound in close fight: and many such chances there be in war, for Ares
rageth confusedly."

{* See Lenormant, Premieres Civilisations, vol. i. p.289.}

'So I spake, and the spirit of the son of Aeacus, fleet of foot, passed with great strides
along the mead of asphodel, rejoicing in that I had told him of his son's renown.

'But lo, other spirits of the dead that be departed stood sorrowing, and each one asked of
those that were dear to them. The soul of Aias, son of Telamon, alone stood apart being still
angry for the victory wherein I prevailed against him, in the suit by the ships concerning
the arms of Achilles, that his lady mother had set for a prize; and the sons of the Trojans
made award and Pallas Athene. Would that I had never prevailed and won such a prize! So goodly
a head hath the earth closed over, for the sake of those arms, even over Aias, who in beauty
and in feats of war was of a mould above all the other Danaans, next to the noble son of Peleus.
To him then I spake softly, saying:

'"Aias, son of noble Telamon, so art thou not even in death to forget thy wrath against me,
by reason of those arms accursed, which the gods set to be the bane of the Argives? What a
tower of strength fell in thy fall, and we Achaeans cease not to sorrow for thee, even as for
the life of Achilles, son of Peleus! Nay, there is none other to blame, but Zeus, who hath
borne wondrous hate to the army of the Danaan spearsmen, and laid on thee thy doom. Nay, come
hither, my lord, that thou mayest hear my word and my speech; master thy wrath and thy proud
spirit."

'So I spake, but he answered me not a word and passed to Erebus after the other spirits of
the dead that be departed. Even then, despite his anger, would he have spoken to me or I to
him, but my heart within me was minded to see the spirits of those others that were departed.

'There then I saw Minos, glorious son of Zeus, wielding a golden sceptre, giving sentence from
his throne to the dead, while they sat and stood around the prince, asking his dooms through
the wide-gated house of Hades.

'And after him I marked the mighty Orion driving the wild beasts together over the mead of
asphodel, the very beasts that himself had slain on the lonely hills, with a strong mace all
of bronze in his hands, {*} that is ever unbroken.

{* [Greek] in strict grammar agrees with [Greek] in 574, but this merely by attraction, for
in sense it refers not to the living man, but to his phantom.}

'And I saw Tityos, son of renowned Earth, lying on a levelled ground, and he covered nine roods
as he lay, and vultures twain beset him one on either side, and gnawed at his liver, piercing
even to the caul, but he drave them not away with his hands. For he had dealt violently with
Leto, the famous bedfellow of Zeus, as she went up to Pytho through the fair lawns of Panopeus.

'Moreover I beheld Tantalus in grievous torment, standing in a mere and the water came nigh
unto his chin. And he stood straining as one athirst, but he might not attain to the water
to drink of it. For often as that old man stooped down in his eagerness to drink, so often
the water was swallowed up and it vanished away, and the black earth still showed at his feet,
for some god parched it evermore.

'Yea and I beheld Sisyphus in strong torment, grasping a monstrous stone with both his hands.
He was pressing thereat with hands and feet, and trying to roll the stone upward toward the
brow of the hill. But oft as he was about to hurl it over the top, the weight would drive him
back, so once again to the plain rolled the stone, the shameless thing. And he once more kept
heaving and straining, and the sweat the while was pouring down his limbs, and the dust rose
upwards from his head.

'And after him I descried the mighty Heracles, his phantom, I say; but as for himself he hath
joy at the banquet among the deathless gods, and hath to wife Hebe of the fair ankles, child
of great Zeus, and of Here of the golden sandals. And all about him there was a clamour of
the dead, as it were fowls flying every way in fear, and he like black Night, with bow uncased,
and shaft upon the string, fiercely glancing around, like one in the act to shoot. And about
his breast was an awful belt, a baldric of gold, whereon wondrous things were wrought, bears
and wild boars and lions with flashing eyes, and strife and battles and slaughters and murders
of men. Nay, now that he hath fashioned this, never another may he fashion, whoso stored in
his craft the device of that belt! I was the son of Zeus Cronion, yet had I trouble beyond
measure, for I was subdued unto a man far worse than I. And he enjoined on me hard adventures,
yea and on a time he sent me hither to bring back the hound of hell; for he devised no harder
task for me than this. I lifted the hound and brought him forth from out of the house of Hades;
and Hermes sped me on my way and the grey-eyed Athene."

'Therewith he departed again into the house of Hades, but I abode there still, if perchance
some one of the hero folk besides might come, who died in old time. Yea and I should have seen
the men of old, whom I was fain to look on, Theseus and Peirithous, renowned children of the
gods. But ere that might be the myriad tribes of the dead thronged up together with wondrous
clamour: and pale fear gat hold of me, lest the high goddess Persephone should send me the
head of the Gorgon, that dread monster, from out of Hades.

'Straightway then I went to the ship, and bade my men mount the vessel, and loose the hawsers.
So speedily they went on board, and sat upon the benches. And the wave of the flood bore the
barque down the stream of Oceanus, we rowing first, and afterwards the fair wind was our convoy.

Book XII

  Odysseus, his passage by the Sirens, and by Scylla and
  Charybdis. The sacrilege committed by his men in the isle
  Thrinacia. The destruction of his ships and men. How he
  swam on a plank nine days together, and came to Ogygia,
  where he stayed seven years with Calypso.

'Now after the ship had left the stream of the river Oceanus, and was come to the wave of the
wide sea, and the isle Aeaean, where is the dwelling place of early Dawn and her dancing grounds,
and the land of sunrising, upon our coming thither we beached the ship in the sand, and ourselves
too stept ashore on the sea beach. And speedily we cut billets of wood and sadly we buried
him, where the furthest headland runs out into the sea, shedding big tears. But when the dead
man was burned and the arms of the dead, we piled a barrow and dragged up thereon a pillar,
and on the topmost mound we set the shapen oar.

'Now all that task we finished, and our coming from out of Hades was not unknown to Circe,
but she arrayed herself and speedily drew nigh, and her handmaids with her bare flesh and bread
in plenty and dark red wine. And the fair goddess stood in the midst and spake in our ears, saying:

'"Men overbold, who have gone alive into the house of Hades, to know death twice, while all
men else die once for all. Nay come, eat ye meat and drink wine here all day long; and with
the breaking of the day ye shall set sail, and myself I will show you the path and declare
each thing, that ye may not suffer pain or hurt through any grievous ill-contrivance by sea
or on the land."

'So spake she, and our lordly souls consented thereto. Then she took me by the hand and led
me apart from my dear company, and made me to sit down and laid herself at my feet, and asked
all my tale. And I told her all in order duly. Then at the last the Lady Circe spake unto me,
saying:

'"Even so, now all these things have an end; do thou then hearken even as I tell thee, and
the god himself shall bring it back to thy mind. But do thou drive thy ship past, and knead
honey-sweet wax, and anoint therewith the ears of thy company, lest any of the rest hear the
song; but if thou myself art minded to hear, let them bind thee in the swift ship hand and
foot, upright in the mast-stead, and from the mast let rope-ends be tied, that with delight
thou mayest hear the voice of the Sirens. And if thou shalt beseech thy company and bid them
to loose thee, then let them bind thee with yet more bonds. But when thy friends have driven
thy ship past these, I will not tell thee fully which path shall thenceforth be thine, but
do thou thyself consider it, and I will speak to thee of either way. On the one side there
are beetling rocks, and against them the great wave roars of dark-eyed Amphitrite. These, ye
must know, are they the blessed gods call the Rocks Wandering. By this way even winged things
may never pass, nay, not even the cowering doves that bear ambrosia to Father Zeus, but the
sheer rock evermore takes away one even of these, and the Father sends in another to make up
the tale. Thereby no ship of men ever escapes that comes thither, but the planks of ships and
the bodies of men confusedly are tossed by the waves of the sea and the storms of ruinous fire.
One ship only of all that fare by sea hath passed that way, even Argo, that is in all men's
minds, on her voyage from Aeetes. And even her the wave would lightly have cast there upon
the mighty rocks, but Here sent her by for love of Jason.

'"On the other part are two rocks, whereof the one reaches with sharp peak to the wide heaven,
and a dark cloud encompasses it; this never streams away, and there is no clear air about the
peak neither in summer nor in harvest tide. No mortal man may scale it or set foot thereon,
not though he had twenty hands and feet. For the rock is smooth, and sheer, as it were polished.
And in the midst of the cliff is a dim cave turned to Erebus, towards the place of darkness,
whereby ye shall even steer your hollow ship, noble Odysseus. Not with an arrow from a bow
might a man in his strength reach from his hollow ship into that deep cave. And therein dwelleth
Scylla, yelping terribly. Her voice indeed is no greater than the voice of a new-born whelp,
but a dreadful monster is she, nor would any look on her gladly, not if it were a god that
met her. Verily she hath twelve feet all dangling down; and six necks exceeding long, and on
each a hideous head, and therein three rows of teeth set thick and close, full of black death.
Up to her middle is she sunk far down in the hollow cave, but forth she holds her heads from
the dreadful gulf, and there she fishes, swooping round the rock, for dolphins or sea-dogs,
or whatso greater beast she may anywhere take, whereof the deep-voiced Amphitrite feeds countless
flocks. Thereby no sailors boast that they have fled scatheless ever with their ship, for with
each head she carries off a man, whom she hath snatched from out the dark-prowed ship.

'"But that other cliff, Odysseus, thou shalt note, lying lower, hard by the first: thou couldest
send an arrow across. And thereon is a great fig-tree growing, in fullest leaf, and beneath
it mighty Charybdis sucks down black water, for thrice a day she spouts it forth, and thrice
a day she sucks it down in terrible wise. Never mayest thou be there when she sucks the water,
for none might save thee then from thy bane, not even the Earth-Shaker! But take heed and swiftly
drawing nigh to Scylla's rock drive the ship past, since of a truth it is far better to mourn
six of thy company in the ship, than all in the selfsame hour."

'So spake she, but I answered, and said unto her: "Come I pray thee herein, goddess, tell me
true, if there be any means whereby I might escape from the deadly Charybdis and avenge me
on that other, when she would prey upon my company."

'So spake I, and that fair goddess answered me: "Man overbold, lo, now again the deeds of war
are in thy mind and the travail thereof. Wilt thou not yield thee even to the deathless gods?
As for her, she is no mortal, but an immortal plague, dread, grievous, and fierce, and not
to be fought with; and against her there is no defence; flight is the bravest way. For if thou
tarry to do on thine armour by the cliff, I fear lest once again she sally forth and catch
at thee with so many heads, and seize as many men as before. So drive past with all thy force,
and call on Cratais, mother of Scylla, which bore her for a bane to mortals. And she will then
let her from darting forth thereafter.

'"Then thou shalt come unto the isle Thrinacia; there are the many kine of Helios and his brave
flocks feeding, seven herds of kine and as many goodly flocks of sheep, and fifty in each flock.
They have no part in birth or in corruption, and there are goddesses to shepherd them, nymphs
with fair tresses, Phaethusa and Lampetie whom bright Neaera bare to Helios Hyperion. Now when
the lady their mother had borne and nursed them, she carried them to the isle Thrinacia to
dwell afar, that they should guard their father's flocks and his kine with shambling gait.

'So spake she, and anon came the golden-throned Dawn. Then the fair goddess took her way up
the island. But I departed to my ship and roused my men themselves to mount the vessel and
loose the hawsers.

'Then I spake among my company with a heavy heart: "Friends, forasmuch as it is not well that
one or two alone should know of the oracles that Circe, the fair goddess, spake unto me, therefore
will I declare them, that with foreknowledge we may die, or haply shunning death and destiny
escape. First she bade us avoid the sound of the voice of the wondrous Sirens, and their field
of flowers, and me only she bade listen to their voices. So bind ye me in a hard bond, that
I may abide unmoved in my place, upright in the mast-stead, and from the mast let rope-ends
be tied, and if I beseech and bid you to set me free, then do ye straiten me with yet more bonds."

'Thus I rehearsed these things one and all, and declared them to my company. Meanwhile our
good ship quickly came to the island of the Sirens twain, for a gentle breeze sped her on her
way. Then straightway the wind ceased, and lo, there was a windless calm, and some god lulled
the waves. Then my company rose up and drew in the ship's sails, and stowed them in the hold
of the ship, while they sat at the oars and whitened the water with their polished pine blades.
But I with my sharp sword cleft in pieces a great circle of wax, and with my strong hands kneaded
it. And soon the wax grew warm, for that my great might constrained it, and the beam of the
lord Helios, son of Hyperion. And I anointed therewith the ears of all my men in their order,
and in the ship they bound me hand and foot upright in the mast-stead, and from the mast they
fastened rope-ends and themselves sat down, and smote the grey sea water with their oars. But
when the ship was within the sound of a man's shout from the land, we fleeing swiftly on our
way, the Sirens espied the swift ship speeding toward them, and they raised their clear-toned song:

'"Hither, come hither, renowned Odysseus, great glory of the Achaeans, here stay thy barque,
that thou mayest listen to the voice of us twain. For none hath ever driven by this way in
his black ship, till he hath heard from our lips the voice sweet as the honeycomb, and hath
had joy thereof and gone on his way the wiser. For lo, we know all things, all the travail
that in wide Troy-land the Argives and Trojans bare by the gods' designs, yea, and we know
all that shall hereafter be upon the fruitful earth."

'So spake they uttering a sweet voice, and my heart was fain to listen, and I bade my company
unbind me, nodding at them with a frown, but they bent to their oars and rowed on. Then straight
uprose Perimedes and Eurylochus and bound me with more cords and straitened me yet the more.
Now when we had driven past them, nor heard we any longer the sound of the Sirens or their
song, forthwith my dear company took away the wax wherewith I had anointed their ears and loosed
me from my bonds.

'But so soon as we left that isle, thereafter presently I saw smoke and a great wave, and heard
the sea roaring. Then for very fear the oars flew from their hands, and down the stream they
all splashed, and the ship was holden there, for my company no longer plied with their hands
the tapering oars. But I paced the ship and cheered on my men, as I stood by each one and spake
smooth words:

'"Friends, forasmuch as in sorrow we are not all unlearned, truly this is no greater woe that
is upon us, {*} than when the Cyclops penned us by main might in his hollow cave; yet even
thence we made escape by my manfulness, even by my counsel and my wit, and some day I think
that this adventure too we shall remember. Come now, therefore, let us all give ear to do according
to my word. Do ye smite the deep surf of the sea with your oars, as ye sit on the benches,
if peradventure Zeus may grant us to escape from and shun this death. And as for thee, helmsman,
thus I charge thee, and ponder it in thine heart seeing that thou wieldest the helm of the
hollow ship. Keep the ship well away from this smoke and from the wave and hug the rocks, lest
the ship, ere thou art aware, start from her course to the other side, and so thou hurl us
into ruin."

{* Reading [Greek], not [Greek] with La Roche.}

'So I spake, and quickly they hearkened to my words. But of Scylla I told them nothing more,
a bane none might deal with, lest haply my company should cease from rowing for fear, and hide
them in the hold. In that same hour I suffered myself to forget the hard behest of Circe, in
that she bade me in nowise be armed; but I did on my glorious harness and caught up two long
lances in my hands, and went on the decking of the prow, for thence methought that Scylla of
the rock would first be seen, who was to bring woe on my company. Yet could I not spy her anywhere,
and my eyes waxed weary for gazing all about toward the darkness of the rock.

"Next we began to sail up the narrow strait lamenting. For on the one hand lay Scylla, and
on the other mighty Charybdis in terrible wise sucked down the salt sea water. And looking
into the swift ship to find my men, even then I marked their feet and hands as they were lifted
on high, and they cried aloud in their agony, and called me by my name for that last time of
all. Even as when as fisher on some headland lets down with a long rod his baits for a snare
to the little fishes below, casting into the deep the horn of an ox of the homestead, and as
he catches each flings it writhing ashore, so writhing were they borne upward to the cliff.
And there she devoured them shrieking in her gates, they stretching forth their hands to me
in the dread death-struggle.

'Now when we had escaped the Rocks and dread Charybdis and Scylla, thereafter we soon came
to the fair island of the god; where were the goodly kine, broad of brow, and the many brave
flocks of Helios Hyperion. Then while as yet I was in my black ship upon the deep, I heard
the lowing of the cattle being stalled and the bleating of the sheep, and on my mind there
fell the saying of the blind seer, Theban Teiresias, and of Circe of Aia, who charged me very
straitly to shun the isle of Helios, the gladdener of the world. Then I spake out among my
company in sorrow of heart:

'"Hear my words, my men, albeit in evil plight, that I may declare unto you the oracles of
Teiresias and of Circe of Aia, who very straitly charged me to shun the isle of Helios, the
gladdener of the world. For there she said the most dreadful mischief would befal us. Nay,
drive ye then the black ship beyond and past that isle."

'So spake I, and their heart was broken within them. And Eurylochus straightway answered me
sadly, saying:

'"Hardy art thou, Odysseus, of might beyond measure, and thy limbs are never weary; verily
thou art fashioned all of iron, that sufferest not thy fellows, foredone with toil and drowsiness,
to set foot on shore, where we might presently prepare us a good supper in this sea-girt island.
But even as we are thou biddest us fare blindly through the sudden night, and from the isle
go wandering on the misty deep. And strong winds, the bane of ships, are born of the night.
How could a man escape from utter doom, if there chanced to come a sudden blast of the South
Wind, or of the boisterous West, which mainly wreck ships, beyond the will of the gods, the
lords of all? Howbeit for this present let us yield to the black night, and we will make ready
our supper abiding by the swift ship, and in the morning we will climb on board, and put out
into the broad deep."

'So spake Eurylochus, and the rest of my company consented thereto. Then at the last I knew
that some god was indeed imagining evil, and I uttered my voice and spake unto him winged words:

'"Eurylochus, verily ye put force upon me, being but one among you all. But come, swear me
now a mighty oath, one and all, to the intent that if we light on a herd of kine or a great
flock of sheep, none in the evil folly of his heart may slay any sheep or ox; but in quiet
eat ye the meat which the deathless Circe gave."

'So I spake, and straightway they swore to refrain as I commanded them. Now after they had
sworn and done that oath, we stayed our well-builded ship in the hollow harbour near to a well
of sweet water, and my company went forth from out the ship and deftly got ready supper. But
when they had put from them the desire of meat and drink, thereafter they fell a weeping as
they thought upon their dear companions whom Scylla had snatched from out the hollow ship and
so devoured. And deep sleep came upon them amid their weeping. And when it was the third watch
of the night, and the stars had crossed the zenith, Zeus the cloud-gatherer roused against
them an angry wind with wondrous tempest, and shrouded in clouds land and sea alike, and from
heaven sped down the night. Now when early Dawn shone forth, the rosy-fingered, we beached
the ship, and dragged it up within a hollow cave, where were the fair dancing grounds of the
nymphs and the places of their session. Thereupon I ordered a gathering of my men and spake
in their midst, saying:

'"Friends, forasmuch as there is yet meat and drink in the swift ship, let us keep our hands
off those kine, lest some evil thing befal us. For these are the kine and the brave flocks
of a dread god, even of Helios, who overseeth all and overheareth all things."

'So I spake, and their lordly spirit hearkened thereto. Then for a whole month the South Wind
blew without ceasing, and no other wind arose, save only the East and the South. 

Flora flung out her hands.
"Well, it disappeared in the Maple Room, in the middle of the afternoon,
when everybody was there--and they haven't the faintest clue."

"But
how?" For a moment the preposterous fact left Clara too quick to be
calm. But when the corn was now all spent from out the ship, and they
went wandering with barbed hooks in quest of game, as needs they must, fishes and fowls, whatsoever
might come to their hand, for hunger gnawed at their belly, then at last I departed up the
isle, that I might pray to the gods, if perchance some one of them might show me a way of returning.
And now when I had avoided my company on my way through the island, I laved my hands where
was a shelter from the wind, and prayed to all the gods that hold Olympus. But they shed sweet
sleep upon my eyelids. And Eurylochus the while set forth an evil counsel to my company:

'"Hear my words, my friends, though ye be in evil case. Truly every shape of death is hateful
to wretched mortals, but to die of hunger and so meet doom is most pitiful of all. Nay come,
we will drive off the best of the kine of Helios and will do sacrifice to the deathless gods
who keep wide heaven. And if we may yet reach Ithaca, our own country, forthwith will we rear
a rich shrine to Helios Hyperion, and therein would we set many a choice offering. But if he
be somewhat wroth for his cattle with straight horns, and is fain to wreck our ship, and the
other gods follow his desire, rather with one gulp at the wave would I cast my life away, than
be slowly straitened to death in a desert isle."

'So spake Eurylochus, and the rest of the company consented thereto. Forthwith they drave off
the best of the kine of Helios that were nigh at hand, for the fair kine of shambling gait
and broad of brow were feeding no great way from the dark-prowed ship. Then they stood around
the cattle and prayed to the gods, plucking the fresh leaves from an oak of lofty boughs, for
they had no white barley on board the decked ship. Now after they had prayed and cut the throats
of the kine and flayed them, they cut out slices of the thighs and wrapped them in the fat,
making a double fold, and thereon they laid raw flesh. Yet had they no pure wine to pour over
the flaming sacrifices, but they made libation with water and roasted the entrails over the
fire. In the same hour deep sleep sped from my eyelids and I sallied forth to the swift ship
and the sea-banks. But on my way as I drew near to the curved ship, the sweet savour of the
fat came all about me; and I groaned and spake out before the deathless gods:

'"Father Zeus, and all ye other blessed gods that live for ever, verily to my undoing ye have
lulled me with a ruthless sleep, and my company abiding behind have imagined a monstrous deed."

'Then swiftly to Helios Hyperion came Lampetie of the long robes, with the tidings that we
had slain his kine. And straight he spake with angry heart amid the Immortals:

'"Father Zeus, and all ye other blessed gods that live for ever, take vengeance I pray you
on the company of Odysseus, son of Laertes, that have insolently slain my cattle, wherein I
was wont to be glad as I went toward the starry heaven, and when I again turned earthward from
the firmament. And if they pay me not full atonement for the cattle, I will go down to Hades
and shine among the dead."

'And Zeus the cloud-gatherer answered him, saying: "Helios, do thou, I say, shine on amidst
the deathless gods, and amid mortal men upon the earth, the grain-giver. But as for me, I will
soon smite their swift ship with my white bolt, and cleave it in pieces in the midst of the
wine-dark deep."

'This I heard from Calypso of the fair hair; and she said that she herself had heard it from
Hermes the Messenger.

'But when I had come down to the ship and to the sea, I went up to my companions and rebuked
them one by one; but we could find no remedy, the cattle were dead and gone. And soon thereafter
the gods showed forth signs and wonders to my company. The skins were creeping, and the flesh
bellowing upon the spits, both the roast and raw, and there was a sound as the voice of kine.

'Then for six days my dear company feasted on the best of the kine of Helios which they had
driven off. But when Zeus, son of Cronos, had added the seventh day thereto, thereafter the
wind ceased to blow with a rushing storm, and at once we climbed the ship and launched into
the broad deep, when we had set up the mast and hoisted the white sails.

'But now when we left that isle nor any other land appeared, but sky and sea only, even then
the son of Cronos stayed a dark cloud above the hollow ship, and beneath it the deep darkened.
And the ship ran on her way for no long while, for of a sudden came the shrilling West, with
the rushing of a great tempest, and the blast of wind snapped the two forestays of the mast,
and the mast fell backward and all the gear dropped into the bilge. And behold, on the hind
part of the ship the mast struck the head of the pilot and brake all the bones of his skull
together, and like a diver he dropt down from the deck, and his brave spirit left his bones.
In that same hour Zeus thundered and cast his bolt upon the ship, and she reeled all over being
stricken by the bolt of Zeus, and was filled with sulphur, and lo, my company fell from out
the vessel. Like sea-gulls they were borne round the black ship upon the billows, and the god
reft them of returning.

'But I kept pacing through my ship, till the surge loosened the sides from the keel, and the
wave swept her along stript of her tackling, and brake her mast clean off at the keel. Now
the backstay fashioned of an oxhide had been flung thereon; therewith I lashed together both
keel and mast, and sitting thereon I was borne by the ruinous winds.

'Then verily the West Wind ceased to blow with a rushing storm, and swiftly withal the South
Wind came, bringing sorrow to my soul, that so I might again measure back that space of sea,
the way to deadly Charybdis. All the night was I borne, but with the rising of the sun I came
to the rock of Scylla, and to dread Charybdis. Now she had sucked down her salt sea water,
when I was swung up on high to the tall fig-tree whereto I clung like a bat, and could find
no sure rest for my feet nor place to stand, for the roots spread far below and the branches
hung aloft out of reach, long and large, and overshadowed Charybdis. Steadfast I clung till
she should spew forth mast and keel again; and late they came to my desire. At the hour when
a man rises up from the assembly and goes to supper, one who judges the many quarrels of the
young men that seek to him for law, at that same hour those timbers came forth to view from
out Charybdis. And I let myself drop down hands and feet, and plunged heavily in the midst
of the waters beyond the long timbers, and sitting on these I rowed hard with my hands. But
the father of gods and of men suffered me no more to behold Scylla, else I should never have
escaped from utter doom.

'Thence for nine days was I borne, and on the tenth night the gods brought me nigh to the isle
of Ogygia, where dwells Calypso of the braided tresses, an awful goddess of mortal speech,
who took me in and entreated me kindly. But why rehearse all this tale? In the wars with Spain,
English and Dutch had been allies, but the shift of circumstances brought the two Protestant
nations into a series of fierce conflicts lasting throughout the
latter half of the 17th century.

The outcome of these was that England won the scepter of the sea
which she has ever since held.

  The main cause of the war was the rivalry of the two
  nations on the sea. There were various other specific reasons
  for bad feeling on both sides, as for instance a massacre
  by the Dutch of English traders at Amboyna in the East Indies,
  during the reign of James I, which still rankled because
  it had never been avenged.
The English on their side insisted on a salute to their men of war
from every ship that passed through the Channel, and claimed the rights
to a tribute, of all herrings taken within 30 miles off the English
coast.

Cromwell formulated the English demands in the Navigation Act of 1651. The chief of these required
that none but English ships should bring cargoes to England, save vessels of the country whence
the cargoes came. This was frankly a direct blow at the Dutch carrying trade, one to which the
Dutch could not yield without a struggle.

For this struggle the Netherlanders were ill prepared.

The Dutch Republic was a federation of seven sovereign states, lacking a strong executive and
torn by rival factions. Moreover, her geographical position was most vulnerable. Pressed by
enemies on her land frontiers, she was compelled to maintain an army of 57,000 men in addition
to her navy. As the resources of the country were wholly inadequate to support the population, her
very life depended on the sea. For the Holland of the 17th century, as for the England of the
20th, the fleets of merchantmen were the life blood of the nation. Unfortunately for the Dutch,
this life blood had to course either through the Channel or else round the north of Scotland. Either
way was open to attacks by the British, who held the interior position. Further, the shallows
of the coasts and bays made necessary a flat bottomed ship of war, lighter built than the
English and less weatherly in deep water.

In contrast the British had a unity of government under the iron hand
of Cromwell, they had the enormous advantage of position, they were
self-sustaining, and their ships were larger, stouter and better in
every respect than those of their enemies.

Hence, although the Dutch entered the conflict with the naval prestige on their side, it is
clear that the odds were decidedly against them.

The First Dutch War

The fighting did not wait for a declaration of war.

Blake met Tromp, who was convoying a fleet of merchantmen, off Dover on May 19, 1652. On coming
up with him Blake fired guns demanding the required salute. Tromp replied with a broadside.
Blake attacked with his flagship, well ahead of his own line, and fought for five hours with Tromp's
flagship and several others.

The English were outnumbered about three to one, and Blake might have been annihilated had
not the English admiral, Bourne, brought his squadron out from Dover at the sound of the firing
and fallen upon Tromp's flank.

As the Dutch Admiral's main business was to get his convoy home, he fell back slowly toward the
coast of France, both sides maintaining a cannonade until they lost each other in the darkness. Apparently
there was little attempt at formation after the first onset; it was close quarters fighting,
and only the wild gunnery of the day saved both fleets from enormous
losses. As it was, Blake's flagship was very severely hammered.

Following
this action, Tromp reappeared with 100 ships, but failed to keep Blake
from attacking and ruining the Dutch herring fisheries for that year.
This mistake temporarily cost Tromp his command. Now when they had
come down to the ship and to the sea, straightway the good men of the escort took these things
and laid them by in the hollow ship, even all the meat and drink. Then they strewed for Odysseus
a rug and a sheet of linen, on the decks of the hollow ship, in the hinder part thereof, that
he might sleep sound. Then he too climbed aboard and laid him down in silence, while they sat
upon the benches, every man in order, and unbound the hawser from the pierced stone. So soon
as they leant backwards and tossed the sea water with the oar blade, a deep sleep fell upon
his eyelids, a sound sleep, very sweet, and next akin to death. And even as on a plain a yoke
of four stallions comes springing all together beneath the lash, leaping high and speedily
accomplishing the way, so leaped the stern of that ship, and the dark wave of the sounding
sea rushed mightily in the wake, and she ran ever surely on her way, nor could a circling hawk
keep pace with her, of winged things the swiftest. Even thus she lightly sped and cleft the
waves of the sea, bearing a man whose counsel was as the counsel of the gods, one that erewhile
had suffered much sorrow of heart, in passing through the wars of men, and the grievous waves;
but for that time he slept in peace, forgetful of all that he had suffered.

So when the star came up, that is brightest of all, and goes ever heralding the light of early
Dawn, even then did the seafaring ship draw nigh the island. There is in the land of Ithaca
a certain haven of Phorcys, the ancient one of the sea, and thereby are two headlands of sheer
cliff, which slope to the sea on the haven's side and break the mighty wave that ill winds
roll without, but within, the decked ships ride unmoored when once they have reached the place
of anchorage. Now at the harbour's head is a long-leaved olive tree, and hard by is a pleasant
cave and shadowy, sacred to the nymphs, that are called the Naiads. And therein are mixing
bowls and jars of stone, and there moreover do bees hive. And there are great looms of stone,
whereon the nymphs weave raiment of purple stain, a marvel to behold, and therein are waters
welling evermore. Two gates there are to the cave, the one set toward the North Wind whereby
men may go down, but the portals toward the South pertain rather to the gods, whereby men may
not enter: it is the way of the immortals.

Thither they, as having knowledge of that place, let drive their ship; and now the vessel in
full course ran ashore, half her keel's length high; so well was she sped by the hands of the
oarsmen. Then they alighted from the benched ship upon the land, and first they lifted Odysseus
from out the hollow ship, all as he was in the sheet of linen and the bright rug, and laid
him yet heavy with slumber on the sand. And they took forth the goods which the lordly Phaeacians
had given him on his homeward way by grace of the great-hearted Athene. These they set in a
heap by the trunk of the olive tree, a little aside from the road, lest some wayfaring man,
before Odysseus awakened, should come and spoil them. Then themselves departed homeward again.
But the shaker of the earth forgat not the threats, wherewith at the first he had threatened
god like Odysseus, and he inquired into the counsel of Zeus, saying:

'Father Zeus, I for one shall no longer be of worship among the deathless gods, when mortal
men hold me in no regard, even Phaeacians, who moreover are of mine own lineage. The gods nowise
dishonour thee; hard would it be to assail with dishonour our eldest and our best. But if any
man, giving place to his own hardihood and strength, holds thee not in worship, thou hast always
thy revenge for the same, even in the time to come. Do thou as thou wilt, and as seems thee good.'

Then Poseidon, shaker of the earth, answered him: 'Straightway would I do even as thou sayest,
O god of the dark clouds; but thy wrath I always hold in awe and avoid. Howbeit, now I fain
would smite a fair ship of the Phaeacians, as she comes home from a convoy on the misty deep,
that thereby they may learn to hold their hands, and cease from giving escort to men; and I
would overshadow their city with a great mountain.'

And Zeus the gatherer of the clouds, answered him, saying: 'Friend, learn now what seems best
in my sight. At an hour when the folk are all looking forth from the city at the ship upon
her way, smite her into a stone hard by the land; a stone in the likeness of a swift ship,
that all mankind may marvel, and do thou overshadow their city with a great mountain.'

Now when Poseidon, shaker of the earth, heard this saying, he went on his way to Scheria, where
the Phaeacians dwell. There he abode awhile; and lo, she drew near, the seafaring ship, lightly
sped upon her way. Then nigh her came the shaker of the earth, and he smote her into a stone,
and rooted her far below with the down-stroke of his hand; and he departed thence again.

Then one to the other they spake winged words, the Phaeacians of the long oars, mariners renowned.
And thus would they speak, looking each man to his neighbour:

'Ah me! who is this that fettered our swift ship on the deep as she drave homewards? Even now
she stood full in sight.'

Even so they would speak; but they knew not how these things were ordained. And Alcinous made
harangue and spake among them:

'Lo now, in very truth the ancient oracles of my father have come home to me. He was wont to
say that Poseidon was jealous of us, for that we give safe escort to all men. But come, let
us all give ear and do according to my word. Cease ye from the convoy of mortals, whensoever
any shall come unto our town, and let us sacrifice to Poseidon twelve choice bulls, if perchance
he may take pity, neither overshadow our city with a great mountain.'

So spake he, and they were dismayed and got ready the bulls. Thus were they praying to the
lord Poseidon, the princes and counsellors of the land of the Phaeacians, as they stood about
the altar.

Even then the goodly Odysseus awoke where he slept on his native land; nor knew he the same
again, having now been long afar, for around him the goddess had shed a mist, even Pallas Athene,
daughter of Zeus, to the end that she might make him undiscovered for that he was, and might
expound to him all things, that so his wife should not know him neither his townsmen and kinsfolk,
ere the wooers had paid for all their transgressions. Wherefore each thing showed strange to
the lord of the land, the long paths and the sheltering havens and the steep rocks and the
trees in their bloom. Whither do I bear all this treasure? Yea, where am I wandering myself?
Oh that the treasure had remained with the Phaeacians where it was, so had I come to some other
of the mighty princes, who would have entreated me kindly and sent me on my way. But now I
know not where to bestow these things, nor yet will I leave them here behind, lest haply other
men make spoil of them. Ah then, they are not wholly wise or just, the princes and counsellors
of the Phaeacians, who carried me to a strange land. Verily they promised to bring me to clear-seen
Ithaca, but they performed it not. May Zeus requite them, the god of suppliants, seeing that
he watches over all men and punishes the transgressor! But come, I will reckon up these goods
and look to them, lest the men be gone, and have taken aught away upon their hollow ship.'

Therewith he set to number the fair tripods and the cauldrons and the gold and the goodly woven
raiment; and of all these he lacked not aught, but he bewailed him for his own country, as
he walked downcast by the shore of the sounding sea, and made sore lament. Then Athene came
nigh him in the guise of a young man, the herdsman of a flock, a young man most delicate, such
as are the sons of kings. And she had a well-wrought mantle that fell in two folds about her
shoulders, and beneath her smooth feet she had sandals bound, and a javelin in her hands. And
Odysseus rejoiced as he saw her, and came over against her, and uttering his voice spake to
her winged words:

'Friend, since thou art the first that I have chanced on in this land, hail to thee, and with
no ill-will mayest thou meet me! Nay, save this my substance and save me too, for to thee as
to a god I make prayer, and to thy dear knees have I come. And herein tell me true, that I
may surely know. What land, what people is this? what men dwell therein? Surely, methinks,
it is some clear seen isle, or a shore of the rich mainland that lies and leans upon the deep.'

Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, spake to him again: 'Thou art witless, stranger, or thou
art come from afar, if indeed thou askest of this land; nay, it is not so very nameless but
that many men know it, both all those who dwell toward the dawning and the sun, and they that
abide over against the light toward the shadowy west. Verily it is rough and not fit for the
driving of horses, yet is it not a very sorry isle, though narrow withal. For herein is corn
past telling, and herein too wine is found, and the rain is on it evermore, and the fresh dew.
And it is good for feeding goats and feeding kine; all manner of wood is here, and watering-places
unfailing are herein. Wherefore, stranger, the name of Ithaca hath reached even unto Troy-land,
which men say is far from this Achaean shore.'

So spake she, and the steadfast goodly Odysseus was glad, and had joy in his own country, according
to the word of Pallas Athene, daughter of Zeus, lord of the aegis. And he uttered his voice
and spake unto her winged words; yet he did not speak the truth, but took back the word that
was on his lips, for quick and crafty was his wit within his breast:

'Of Ithaca have I heard tell, even in broad Crete, far over the seas; and now have I come hither
myself with these my goods. And I left as much again to my children, when I turned outlaw for
the slaying of the dear son of Idomeneus, Orsilochus, swift of foot, who in wide Crete was
the swiftest of all men that live by bread. Now he would have despoiled me of all that booty
of Troy, for the which I had endured pain of heart, in passing through the wars of men, and
the grievous waves of the sea, for this cause that I would not do a favour to his father, and
make me his squire in the land of the Trojans, but commanded other fellowship of mine own.
So I smote him with a bronze-shod spear as he came home from the field, lying in ambush for
him by the wayside, with one of my companions. And dark midnight held the heavens, and no man
marked us, but privily I took his life away. Now after I had slain him with the sharp spear,
straightway I went to a ship and besought the lordly Phoenicians, and gave them spoil to their
hearts' desire. I charged them to take me on board, and land me at Pylos or at goodly Elis
where the Epeans bear rule. Howbeit of a truth, the might of the wind drave them out of their
course, sore against their will, nor did they wilfully play me false. Thence we were driven
wandering, and came hither by night. And with much ado we rowed onward into harbour, nor took
we any thought of supper, though we stood sore in need thereof, but even as we were we stept
ashore and all lay down. Then over me there came sweet slumber in my weariness, but they took
forth my goods from the hollow ship, and set them by me where I myself lay upon the sands.
Then they went on board, and departed for the fair-lying land of Sidon; while as for me I was
left stricken at heart.'

So spake he and the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, smiled, and caressed him with her hand; and
straightway she changed to the semblance of a woman, fair and tall, and skilled in splendid
handiwork. And uttering her voice she spake unto him winged words:

'Crafty must he be, and knavish, who would outdo thee in all manner of guile, even if it were
a god encountered thee. Hardy man, subtle of wit, of guile insatiate, so thou wast not even
in thine own country to cease from thy sleights and knavish words, which thou lovest from the
bottom of thine heart! But come, no more let us tell of these things, being both of us practised
in deceits, for that thou art of all men far the first in counsel and in discourse, and I in
the company of all the gods win renown for my wit and wile. Yet thou knewest not me, Pallas
Athene, daughter of Zeus, who am always by thee and guard thee in all adventures. Yea, and
I made thee to be beloved of all the Phaeacians. And now am I come hither to contrive a plot
with thee and to hide away the goods, that by my counsel and design the noble Phaeacians gave
thee on thy homeward way. And I would tell thee how great a measure of trouble thou art ordained
to fulfil within thy well-builded house. But do thou harden thy heart, for so it must be, and
tell none neither man nor woman of all the folk, that thou hast indeed returned from wandering,
but in silence endure much sorrow, submitting thee to the despite of men.'

And Odysseus of many counsels answered her saying: 'Hard is it, goddess, for a mortal man that
meets thee to discern thee, howsoever wise he be; for thou takest upon thee every shape. But
this I know well, that of old thou wast kindly to me, so long as we sons of the Achaeans made
war in Troy. But so soon as we had sacked the steep city of Priam and had gone on board our
ships, and the god had scattered the Achaeans, thereafter I have never beheld thee, daughter
of Zeus, nor seen thee coming on board my ship, to ward off sorrow from me--but I wandered
evermore with a stricken heart, till the gods delivered me from my evil case--even till the
day when, within the fat land of the men of Phaeacia, thou didst comfort me with thy words,
and thyself didst lead me to their city. And now I beseech thee in thy father's name to tell
me: for I deem not that I am come to clear-seen Ithaca, but I roam over some other land, and
methinks that thou speakest thus to mock me and beguile my mind. Tell me whether in very deed
I am come to mine own dear country.'

Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, answered him: 'Yea, such a thought as this is ever in thy
breast. Wherefore I may in no wise leave thee in thy grief, so courteous art thou, so ready
of wit and so prudent. Right gladly would any other man on his return from wandering have hasted
to behold his children and his wife in his halls; but thou hast no will to learn or to hear
aught, till thou hast furthermore made trial of thy wife, who sits as ever in her halls, and
wearily for her the nights wane always and the days, in shedding of tears. But of this I never
doubted, but ever knew it in my heart that thou wouldest come home with the loss of all thy
company. Yet, I tell thee, I had no mind to be at strife with Poseidon, my own father's brother,
who laid up wrath in his heart against thee, being angered at the blinding of his dear son.
But come, and I will show thee the place of the dwelling of Ithaca, that thou mayst be assured.
Yonder, behold, is the roofed cavern, where thou offeredst many an acceptable sacrifice of
hecatombs to the nymphs; and lo, this hill is Neriton, all clothed in forest.'

Therewith the goddess scattered the mist, and the land appeared. Then the steadfast goodly
Odysseus was glad rejoicing in his own land, and he kissed the earth, the grain-giver. And
anon he prayed to the nymphs, and lifted up his hands, saying:

'Ye Naiad nymphs, daughters of Zeus, never did I think to look on you again, but now be ye
greeted in my loving prayers: yea, and gifts as aforetime I will give, if the daughter of Zeus,
driver of the spoil, suffer me of her grace myself to live, and bring my dear son to manhood.'

Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, spake to him again: 'Be of good courage, and let not thy
heart be careful about these things. But come, let us straightway set thy goods in the secret
place of the wondrous cave, that there they may abide for thee safe. And let us for ourselves
advise us how all may be for the very best.'

Therewith the goddess plunged into the shadowy cave, searching out the chambers of the cavern.
Meanwhile Odysseus brought up his treasure, the gold and the unyielding bronze and fair woven
raiment, which the Phaeacians gave him. And these things he laid by with care, and Pallas Athene,
daughter of Zeus, lord of the aegis, set a stone against the door of the cave. Then they twain
sat down by the trunk of the sacred olive tree, and devised death for the froward wooers. And
the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, spake first, saying:

'Son of Laertes, of the seed of Zeus, Odysseus of many devices, advise thee how thou mayest
stretch forth thine hands upon the shameless wooers, who now these three years lord it through
thy halls, as they woo thy godlike wife and proffer the gifts of wooing. Come then, weave some
counsel whereby I may requite them; and thyself stand by me, and put great boldness of spirit
within me, even as in the day when we loosed the shining coronal of Troy. If but thou wouldest
stand by me with such eagerness, thou grey-eyed goddess, I would war even with three hundred
men, with thee my lady and goddess, if thou of thy grace didst succour me the while.'

Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, answered him: 'Yea, verily I will be near thee nor will
I forget thee, whensoever we come to this toil: and methinks that certain of the wooers that
devour thy livelihood shall bespatter the boundless earth with blood and brains. But come,
I will make thee such-like that no man shall know thee. Thy fair skin I will wither on thy
supple limbs, and make waste thy yellow hair from off thy head, and wrap thee in a foul garment,
such that one would shudder to see a man therein. And I will dim thy two eyes, erewhile so
fair, in such wise that thou mayest be unseemly in the sight of all the wooers and of thy wife
and son, whom thou didst leave in thy halls. And do thou thyself first of all go unto the swineherd,
who tends thy swine, loyal and at one with thee, and loves thy son and constant Penelope. Him
shalt thou find sitting by the swine, as they are feeding near the rock of Corax and the spring
Arethusa, and there they eat abundance of acorns and drink the black water, things whereby
swine grow fat and well-liking. There do thou abide and sit by the swine, and find out all,
till I have gone to Sparta, the land of fair women, to call Telemachus thy dear son, Odysseus,
who hath betaken himself to spacious Lacedaemon, to the house of Menelaus to seek tidings of
thee, whether haply thou are yet alive.'

And Odysseus of many counsels answered her saying: 'Nay, wherefore then didst thou not tell
him, seeing thou hast knowledge of all? Was it, perchance, that he too may wander in sorrow
over the unharvested seas, and that others may consume his livelihood?'

Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, answered him: 'Nay, let him not be heavy on thy heart.
I myself was his guide, that by going thither he might win a good report. Lo, he knows no toil,
but he sits in peace in the palace of the son of Atreus, and has boundless store about him.
Truly the young men with their black ship they lie in wait, and are eager to slay him ere he
come to his own country. But this, methinks, shall never be. Yea, sooner shall the earth close
over certain of the wooers that devour thy livelihood.'

Therewith Athene touched him with her wand. His fair flesh she withered on his supple limbs,
and made waste his yellow hair from off his head, and over all his limbs she cast the skin
of an old man, and dimmed his two eyes, erewhile so fair. The typical Viking ship was only about
75 feet in length; but a royal vessel--the Dragon of the chief--sometimes attained a length
of 300 feet, with sixty pairs of oars.

If the Vikings had had national organization under one head, they might well have laid the rest
of Europe under tribute.

In the 11th century, Cnut, a descendant of the Vikings, ruled in
person over England, Denmark, and Norway.

  But their ocean folk-wanderings seem to have ended as suddenly
  as they began, and the effects were social rather than
  political. Where they settled, they brought a strain of the
  hardiest racial stock in Europe to blend with that of the conquered
peoples.

The Hanseatic League

During the Middle Ages, peaceful trading gradually gained the upper hand over piracy and conquest.
From the Italian cities the wares of the south and the Orient came over the passes of the Alps
and down the German rivers, where trading cities grew up to act as carriers of merchandise
and civilization among the nations of the north. The merchant guilds of these cities, banded
together in the Hanseatic League, for at least three centuries dominated the northern seas.

Perhaps the most extensive commercial combination ever formed for the control of sea trade, the
Hanseatic League began with a treaty between Lübeck and Hamburg in 1174, and at the height of
its power in the 14th and 15th centuries it included from 60 to 80 cities, of which Lübeck, Cologne,
Brunswick, and Danzig were among the chief. The league cleared northern waters of pirates,
and used embargo and naval power to subdue rivals and promote trade. It established factories
or trading stations from Nishni Novgorod to Bergen, London, and Bruges. From Russia it took cargoes
of fats, tallows, wax, and wares brought into Russian markets from the east; from Scandinavia,
iron and copper; from England, hides and wool; from Germany, fish,
grain, beer, and manufactured goods of all kinds.

The British pound sterling (Österling) and pound avoirdupois, in fact the whole British system
of weights and coinage, are legacies from the German merchants who once had their headquarters
in the Steelyard, London.

In the early 15th century the league attempted to shut Dutch ships
from the Baltic trade by restricting their cargoes to wares produced
in their own country, and by coercing Denmark into granting the league
special privileges on the route through the Sound.

This policy, culminating in the destruction of the Dutch grain fleet in 1437, led to a naval
struggle which extended over four years and ended in a truce by which the Dutch secured the freedom
of the Baltic. It was a typical naval war for sea control and commercial advantage, in which the
Dutch as a rule seem to have got the better, and in which the legend first made its appearance
of a Dutch admiral sweeping the seas with a broom nailed to his mast.

From this time the power of the Hansa declined.

This was partly because the free cities came more and more under the rule of German princes with
no interest in, or knowledge of, commerce; partly because of rivalry arising from the union
of the Scandinavian states (1397) and the growth of England, France, and the Low Countries
to national strength and commercial independence; and partly also
because of the decline of German fisheries when the herring suddenly
shifted from the Baltic to the North Sea.

Underlying these varied causes, however, and significant of the far-reaching effect of changing
trade-routes upon the progress and prosperity of nations, was the
fact that, when the Mediterranean trade route was closed by the Turks,
and also the route through Russia by Ivan III, the German cities were
side-tracked.

Antwerp and Amsterdam were not only more centrally located for the distribution of trade, but
also much nearer for Atlantic traffic--an advantage which Germany has ever since keenly envied.

Long
before the rise of the Low Countries as a maritime power, Ghent and Bruges had enjoyed an
early preëminence owing to their development of cloth manufacture, and the latter city as
a terminus for the galleys of Venice and Genoa. After the silting up of the port of Bruges
(1432), Antwerp grew in importance, and in the 16th century became the chief market and money
center of Europe. Its inhabitants numbered about 100,000, with a floating population of upwards
of 50,000 more. It contained the counting-houses of the great bankers of Europe--the Fuggers of
Germany, the Pazzi of Florence, the Dorias of Genoa. Five thousand merchants were registered
on the Bourse, as many as 500 ships often left the city in a single day, and two or three
thousand more might be seen anchored in the Scheldt or lying along the quays.[1] Amsterdam
by 1560 was second to Antwerp with a population of 40,000, and forged
ahead after the sack of Antwerp by Spanish soldiers in 1576 and the
Dutch blockade of the Scheldt during the struggle with Spain.

[Footnote 1: Blok, HISTORY OF THE PEOPLE OF THE NETHERLANDS, Part II, Ch. XII.]

This early prosperity of the Netherland cities may be attributed less to aggressive maritime activity
than to their flourishing industries, their natural advantages as trading centers at the mouths
of the Rhine, Scheldt, and Meuse, and the privileges of self-government
enjoyed by the middle classes under the House of Burgundy and even
under Charles the Fifth.

Charles taxed them heavily--his revenues from the Low Countries in reality far exceeded the
treasure he drew from America; but he was a Fleming born, spoke their language, and accorded
them a large measure of political and religious freedom. The grievances which after his death
led to the Dutch War of Independence, are almost personified in the son who succeeded him in
1555--Philip II, a Spaniard born and bred, who spoke no Flemish and left Brussels for the last
time in 1573, dour, treacherous, distrustful, fanatical in religion; a tragic character, who, no
doubt with great injustice to the Spanish, has somehow come to represent the character of Spain
in his time.

The Dutch Struggle for Freedom

The causes of the long war in the Netherlands, which began in 1566 and ended with their independence
43 years later, is best explained in terms of general principles rather than specific grievances.
"A conflict in which the principle of Catholicism with unlimited royal autocracy as Spain recognized
it, was opposed to toleration in the realm of religion, with a national government according to
ancient principles and based on ancient privileges,"--so the Dutch historian Blok sums up the issues
at stake. The Prince of Orange, just before he was cut down by an assassin, asserted in his
famous Defense three fundamental principles: freedom to worship God;
withdrawal of foreigners; and restoration of the charters, privileges,
and liberties of the land.

The Dutch fought for political, religious, and also for economic independence. England gave aid,
not so much for religious motives as because she saw that her political safety and commercial prosperity
hinged on the weakening of Spain.

Resembling our American Revolution in the character of the struggle
as well as the issues at stake--though it was far more bloody and
desperate--the Dutch War of Independence was fought mainly within
the country itself, with the population divided, and the Spanish depending
on land forces to maintain their rule; but, as in the American war,
control of the sea was a vital factor.

For munitions, supplies, gold, for the transport of the troops themselves, Spain had to depend
primarily on the sea. It is true one could continue on Spanish territory from Genoa, which was
Spain's watergate into Italy, across the Mont Cenis Pass, and through Savoy, Burgundy, Lorraine,
and Luxembourg to Brussels, and it was by this route that Parma's splendid army of 10,000 "Blackbeards"
came in 1577.

But this was an arduous three months' march for troops and still more difficult for supplies.
To cross France was as a rule impossible; when Don Juan of Austria went to Flanders for the brief
period of leadership ended by his death of camp fever in 1578, he passed through French territory
disguised as a Moorish slave. By the sea route, upon which Spain was after all largely dependent,
and the complete control of which would have made her task infinitely easier, she was constantly
exposed to Huguenot, Dutch, and English privateers. These gentry cared little whether or not
their country was actually at war with Spain, but took their letters of marque, if they carried
them, from any prince or ruler who would serve their turn.

With this opportunity to strike at Spanish communications, it will appear strange that the Dutch
should not have immediately seized their advantage and made it decisive. One curious difficulty
lay in the fact that throughout the war Dutch shipping actually carried the bulk of Spanish trade
and drew from it immense profits. Even at the close of the century, while the war was still
continuing, nine-tenths of Spain's foreign trade and five-sixths of her home trade was in
foreign--and most of it in Dutch--hands. Hence any form of sea warfare was sure to injure
Dutch trade. The Revolution, moreover, began slowly and feebly, with no well-thought-out plan of
campaign, and could not at once fit out fully organized forces to
cope with those of Spain.

The Dutch early took to commerce warfare, but it was at first semi-piratical, and involved the
destruction of ships of their own countrymen.

The Sea Beggars--Zee Geuzen or Gueux der Mer--made their appearance shortly after the outbreak of
rebellion. "Vyve les geus par mer et par terre," wrote the patriot Count van Brederode as early
as 1566. The term "beggar" is said to have arisen from a contemptuous remark by a Spanish courtier
to Margaret of Parma, when the Dutch nobles presented their grievances in Brussels. Willingly
accepting the name, the patriots applied it to their forces both by land and by sea. Letters
of marque were first issued by Louis of Nassau, brother of William of Orange, and in 1569 there
were 18 ships engaged, increased in the next year to 84. The bloody and licentious De la Marek,
who wore his hair and beard unshorn till he had avenged the execution
of his relative, Egmont, was a typical leader of still more wild and
reckless crews.

It was no uncommon practice to go over the rail of a merchant ship with pike and ax and kill
every Spaniard on board. In 1569 William of Orange appointed the Seigneur de Lumbres as admiral
of the beggar fleet, and issued strict instructions to him to secure better order, avoid attacks
on vessels of friendly and neutral states, enforce the articles of war, and carry a preacher
on each ship. The booty was to be divided one-third to the Prince for the maintenance of the war, one-third
to the captains to supply their vessels, and one-third to the crews, one-tenth of this last
share going to the admiral in general command.

The events of commerce warfare, though they often involve desperate adventures and hard fighting,
are not individually impressive, and the effectiveness of this warfare is best measured by
collective results. On one occasion, when a fleet of transports fell into the hands of patriot forces
off Flushing in 1572, not only were 1000 troops taken, but also 500,000 crowns of gold and a
rich cargo, the proceeds of which, it is stated, were sufficient to carry on the whole war for
a period of two years. Again it was fear of pirates (Huguenot in this case) that in December
of 1568 drove a squadron of Spanish transports into Plymouth, England, with 450,000 ducats ($960,000)
aboard for the pay of Spanish troops. Elizabeth seized the money (on the ground that it was still
the property of the Genoese bankers who had lent it and that she might as well borrow it as
Philip), and minted it into English coin at a profit of £3000.

But Alva at Antwerp, with no money at all, was forced to the obnoxious "Hundreds" tax--requiring
a payment of one per cent on all possessions, five per cent on all real estate transfers, and
10 per cent every time a piece of merchandise was sold--a typical tax after the Spanish recipe,
which, though not finally enforced to its full extent, aroused every Netherlander as a fatal
blow at national prosperity. To return to the general effect of commerce destruction, it is
estimated that Spain thus lost annually 3,000,000 ducats ($6,400,000), a sum which of course
meant vastly more then than now. When the Duke of Alva retired from command in 1578, the pay
of Spanish troops was 6,500,000 ducats in arrears.

Among the exploits of organized naval forces, the earliest was the capture of Brill, by which,
according to Motley, "the foundations of the Dutch republic were laid." Driven out of England
by Elizabeth, who upon the representations of the Spanish ambassador ordered her subjects not
to supply the Beggars with "meat, bread or beer," a fleet of 25 vessels and 300 or 400 men
left Dover towards the end of March, 1572, with the project of seizing a base on their own
coast. On the afternoon of April 1, they appeared off the town of Brill, located on an island at
the mouth of the Meuse. The magistrates and most of the inhabitants fled; and the Beggars battered
down the gates, occupied the town, and put to death 13 monks and priests. When Spanish forces
attempted to recapture the city, the defenders opened sluice gates to cut off the northern approach,
and at the same time set fire to the boats which had carried the Spanish to the island. The
Spanish, terrorized by both fire and water, waded through mud and slime to the northern shore.
During the same week Flushing was taken, and before the end of June the Dutch were masters
of nearly the entire Zealand coast.

In the north the Spanish at first found an able naval leader in Admiral Bossu, himself a Hollander,
who for a time kept the coast clear of Beggars. In October, 1573, however, 30 of his ships were
beaten in the Zuyder Zee by 25 under Dirkzoon, who captured five of the Spanish vessels and scattered
the rest with the exception of the flagship. The latter, a 32-gun ship terrifyingly named
the Inquisition and much stronger than any of the others on either side, held out from three
o'clock in the afternoon until the next morning. Three patriot vessels closed in on her, attacking
with the vicious weapons of the period--pitch, boiling oil, and molten lead. By morning the four
combatants had drifted ashore in a tangled mass. When Bossu at last surrendered, 300 men, out
of 382 in his ship's complement, were dead or disabled.

Though not yet able to stand up against Spanish infantry, the Dutch in naval battles were usually
successful. In the Scheldt, January 29, 1574, 75 Spanish vessels were attacked by 64 Dutch under
Admiral Boisot. After a single broadside, the two fleets grappled, and in a two-hour fight at
close quarters eight of the Spanish ships were captured, seven destroyed, and 1200 Spaniards killed.
The Spanish commander, Julian Romero, escaped through a port-hole, is said to have remarked afterwards,
"I told you I was a land fighter and no sailor; give me a hundred fleets and I would fare no better."

In
September following, Admiral Boisot brought some of his victorious ships and sailors to the
relief of Leyden, whose inhabitants and garrison had been reduced by siege to the very last
extremities. The campaign that followed was typical of this amphibious war. Boisot's force,
with those already an the scene, numbered about 2500, equipped with some 200 shallow-draft boats
and row-barges mounting an average of ten guns each. Among them was the curious Ark of Delft,
with shot-proof bulwarks and paddle-wheels turned by a crank. As a result of ruthless flooding
of the country, ten of the fifteen miles between Leyden and the outer dyke were easily passed;
but five miles from the city ran the Landscheidung or inner dyke, which was above water, and beyond
this an intricate system of canals and flooded polders, with forts and villages held by a Spanish
force four times as strong. The most savage fighting on decks, dykes, and bridges marked every
step forward; the Dutch in their native element attacking with cutlass, boathook and harpoon,
while the superior military discipline of the Spanish could not come in play. But at least 20
inches of water were necessary to float the Dutch vessels, and it was not until October 3 that
a spring tide and a heavy northwest gale made it possible to reach the city walls. In storm
and darkness, terrified by the rising waters, the Spanish fled. The relief of the city marked
a turning-point in the history of the revolt.

During the six terrible years of Alva's rule in the Netherlands (1567-1573) the Dutch sea forces
contributed heavily toward the maintenance of the war, assured control of the Holland and
Zealand coasts, and more than once, as at Brill and Leyden, proved the salvation of the patriot
cause. Holland and Zealand, the storm-centers of rebellion, were not again so devastated, though
the war dragged on for many years, maintained by the indomitable spirit of William of Orange
until his assassination in 1584, and afterward by the military skill of Maurice of Nassau
and the aid of foreign powers. The seven provinces north of the Scheldt, separating from the Catholic
states of the south, prospered in trade and industry as they shook themselves free from the stifling
rule of Spain. By a twelve-year truce, finally ratified in 1609, they became "free states over
which Spain makes no pretensions," though their independence was not fully recognized until the
Peace of Westphalia in 1648. The war, while it ruined Antwerp, increased the prosperity of Holland
and Zealand, which for at least twenty years before the truce were busily extending their trade
to every part of the world.

Growth of Dutch Commerce

The story of this expansion of commerce is a striking record.

The grain and timber of the Baltic, the wines of France and Spain, the salt of the Cape Verde Islands,
the costly wares of the east, came to the ports of the Meuse and Zuyder Zee. In 1590 the first
Dutch traders entered the Mediterranean, securing, eight years later, the permission of the
Sultan to engage in Constantinople trade. In 1594 their ships reached the Gold Coast, and a year
later four vessels visited Madagascar, Goa, Java, and the Moluccas or Spice Islands. A rich Zealand
merchant had a factory at Archangel and a regular trade into the White Sea. Seeking a reward of
25,000 florins offered by the States for the discovery of a northeast passage, Jacob van Heimskirck
sailed into the Arctic and wintered in Nova Zembla; Henry Hudson, in quest of a route northwestward,
explored the river and the bay that bear his name and died in the Polar Seas.

Statistics, while not very trustworthy and not enlightening unless compared with those for other
nations, may give some idea of the preponderance of Dutch shipping. At the time of the truce she
is said to have had 16,300 ships, about 10,000 of which were small vessels in the coasting trade.
Of the larger, 3000 were in the Baltic trade, 2000 in the Spanish, 600 sailed to Italy, and the
remainder to the Mediterranean, South America, the Far East, and Archangel. The significance
of these figures may be made clearer by citing Colbert's estimate that at a later period (1664)
there were 20,000 ships in general European carrying trade, 16,000 of which were Dutch. Throughout
the 17th century Dutch commerce continued to prosper, and did not reach its zenith until early
in the century following.

In the closing years of the 16th century several private companies were founded in Amsterdam, Rotterdam
and Zealand to engage in eastern trade. These were combined in 1602 into the United East Indies
Company, which sent large fleets to the Orient each year, easily ousted the Portuguese from
their bases on the coast and islands, and soon established almost a monopoly, leaving to England
only a small share of trade with Persia and northwest India.

The relative resources invested by English and Dutch in Eastern ventures is suggested by the
fact that the British East Indies Company founded in 1600 had a capital of £80,000, while the
Dutch Company had £316,000. By 1620 the shares of the Dutch company had increased to three
times their original value, and they paid average dividends of 18 per cent for the next 200
years.

In this Dutch conquest of eastern trade, like that of the Portuguese a century earlier, we
have an illustration of what has since been a guiding principle in the history of sea power--a
national policy of commercial expansion sturdily backed by foreign policy and whenever necessary
by naval force. The element of national policy is evident in the fact that Holland--and England
until the accession of James I in 1603--preferred war rather than acceptance of Spanish pretensions
to exclusive rights in the southern seas. The Dutch, like the Portuguese, saw clearly the need
of political control. They made strongholds of their trading bases,
and gave their companies power to oust competitors by force. As a
concession to Spanish pride, the commerce clause in the Truce of 1609
was made intentionally unintelligible--but the Dutch interpreted it
to suit themselves. As for the element of force, every squadron that
sailed to the east was a semi-military expedition. The Dutch seaman
was sailor, fighter, and trader combined. The merchant was truly,
in the phrase of the age, a "merchant adventurer," lucky indeed and
enriched if, after facing the perils of navigation in strange waters,
the possible hostility of native rulers, and the still greater danger
from European rivals, half his ships returned. The last statement
is no hyperbole; of 9 ships sent to the East from Amsterdam in 1598,
four came back, and just half of the 22 sent out from the entire Netherlands.

From
time to time, either to maintain the blockade of the Scheldt and assist
in operations on the Flanders coast, or to protect their trade and
strike a direct blow at Spain, the Dutch fitted out purely naval expeditions.
One of the most effective, from the standpoint of actual fighting,
was that led by van Heimskirck, already famous for Arctic exploration
and exploits in the Far East. And thou too, old man of many sorrows, seeing
that some god hath brought thee to me, seek not my grace with lies, nor give me any such comfort;
not for this will I have respect to thee or hold thee dear, but only for the fear of Zeus,
the god of strangers, and for pity of thyself.'

And Odysseus of many counsels answered him saying: 'Verily thy heart within thee is slow to
believe, seeing that even with an oath I have not won thee, nor find credence with thee. But
come now, let us make a covenant; and we will each one have for witnesses the gods above, who
hold Olympus. If thy lord shall return to this house, put on me a mantle and doublet for raiment,
and send me on my way to Dulichium, whither I had a desire to go. But if thy lord return not
according to my word, set thy thralls upon me, and cast me down from a mighty rock, that another
beggar in his turn may beware of deceiving.'

And the goodly swineherd answered him, saying: 'Yea stranger, even so should I get much honour
and good luck among men both now and ever hereafter, if after bringing thee to my hut and giving
thee a stranger's cheer, I should turn again and slay thee and take away thy dear life. Eager
indeed thereafter should I be to make a prayer to Zeus the son of Cronos! But now it is supper-time,
and would that my fellows may speedily be at home, that we may make ready a dainty supper within
the hut.'

Thus they spake one to the other. And lo, the swine and the swineherds drew nigh. And the swine
they shut up to sleep in their lairs, and a mighty din arose as the swine were being stalled.
Then the goodly swineherd called to his fellows, saying:

'Bring the best of the swine, that I may sacrifice it for a guest of mine from a far land:
and we too will have good cheer therewith, for we have long suffered and toiled by reason of
the white-tusked swine, while others devour the fruit of our labour without atonement.'

Therewithal he cleft logs with the pitiless axe, and the others brought in a well-fatted boar
of five years old; and they set him by the hearth nor did the swineherd forget the deathless
gods, for he was of an understanding heart. But for a beginning of sacrifice he cast bristles
from the head of the white-tusked boar upon the fire, and prayed to all the gods that wise
Odysseus might return to his own house. Then he stood erect, and smote the boar with a billet
of oak which he had left in the cleaving, and the boar yielded up his life. Then they cut the
throat and singed the carcass and quickly cut it up, and the swineherd took a first portion
from all the limbs, and laid the raw flesh on the rich fat. And some pieces he cast into the
fire after sprinkling them with bruised barley-meal, and they cut the rest up small, and pierced
it, and spitted and roasted it carefully, and drew it all off from the spits, and put the whole
mess together on trenchers. Then the swineherd stood up to carve, for well he knew what was
fair, and he cut up the whole and divided it into seven portions. One, when he had prayed,
he set aside for the nymphs and for Hermes son of Maia, and the rest he distributed to each.
And he gave Odysseus the portion of honour, the long back of the white-tusked boar, and the
soul of his lord rejoiced at this renown, and Odysseus of many counsels hailed him saying:

'Eumaeus, oh that thou mayest so surely be dear to father Zeus, as thou art to me, seeing that
thou honourest me with a good portion, such an one as I am!'

Then didst thou make answer, swineherd Eumaeus:

'Eat, luckless stranger, and make merry with such fare as is here. And one thing the god will
give and another withhold, even as he will, for with him all things are possible.'

So he spake, and made burnt offering of the hallowed parts to the everlasting gods, and poured
the dark wine for a drink offering, and set the cup in the hands of Odysseus, the waster of
cities, and sat down by his own mess. And Mesaulius bare them wheaten bread, a thrall that
the swineherd had gotten all alone, while his lord was away, without the knowledge of his mistress
and the old Laertes: yea he had bought him of the Taphians with his own substance.

Now it was so that night came on foul with a blind moon, and Zeus rained the whole night through,
and still the great West Wind, the rainy wind, was blowing. Then Odysseus spake among them
that he might make trial of the swineherd, and see whether he would take off his own mantle
and give it to him or bid one of his company strip, since he cared for him so greatly:

'Listen now, Eumaeus, and all of you his companions, with a prayer will I utter my word; so
bids me witless wine, which drives even the wisest to sing and to laugh softly, and rouses
him to dance, yea and makes him to speak out a word which were better unspoken. Howbeit, now
that I have broken into speech, I will not hide aught. Oh that I were young, and my might were
steadfast, as in the day when we arrayed our ambush and led it beneath Troy town! And Odysseus,
and Menelaus son of Atreus, were leaders and with them I was a third in command; for so they
bade me. Now when we had come to the city and the steep wall, we lay about the citadel in the
thick brushwood, crouching under our arms among the reeds and the marsh land, and behold, the
night came on foul, with frost, as the North Wind went down, while the snow fell from above,
and crusted like rime, bitter cold, and the ice set thick about our shields. Now the others
all had mantles and doublets, and slept in peace with their shields buckled close about their
shoulders; but I as I went forth had left my mantle behind with my men, in my folly, thinking
that even so I should not be cold: so I came with only my shield and bright leathern apron.
But when it was now the third watch of the night and the stars had passed the zenith, in that
hour I spake unto Odysseus who was nigh me, and thrust him with my elbow, and he listened straightway:

'"Son of Laertes, of the seed of Zeus, Odysseus of many devices, verily I shall cease from
among living men, for this wintry cold is slaying me, seeing that I have no mantle. Some god
beguiled me to wear a doublet only, and henceforth is no way of escape."

'So I spake, and he apprehended a thought in his heart, such an one as he was in counsel and
in fight. So he whispered and spake to me, saying:

'"Be silent now, lest some other Achaeans hear thee." Therewith he raised his head upon his
elbow, and spake, saying: "Listen, friends, a vision from a god came to me in my sleep. Lo,
we have come very far from the ships; I would there were one to tell it to Agamemnon, son of
Atreus, shepherd of the host, if perchance he may send us hither a greater company from the ships."

'So spake he, and Thoas, son of Andraemon, rose up quickly and cast off his purple mantle.
And he started to run unto the ships, but I lay gladly in his garment, and the golden-throned
Dawn showed her light. Oh! that I were young as then and my might steadfast! Then should some
of the swineherds in the homestead give me a mantle, alike for love's sake and for pity of
a good warrior. But now they scorn me for that sorry raiment is about my body.'

Then didst thou make answer, O swineherd Eumaeus: 'Old man, the tale that thou hast told in
his praise is very good, and so far thou hast not misspoken aught, nor uttered a word unprofitably.
But in the morning thou shalt go shuffling in thine own rags, for there are not many mantles
here or changes of doublet; for each man hath but one coat. But when the dear son of Odysseus
comes, he himself will give thee a mantle and doublet for raiment, and send thee whithersoever
thy heart and spirit bid.'

With that he sprang up and set a bed for Odysseus near the fire, and thereon he cast skins
of sheep and goats. There Odysseus laid him down and Eumaeus cast a great thick mantle over
him, which he had ever by him for a change of covering, when any terrible storm should arise.

So there Odysseus slept, and the young men slept beside him. But the swineherd had no mind
to lie there in a bed away from the boars. So he made him ready to go forth and Odysseus was
glad, because he had a great care for his master's substance while he was afar. First he cast
his sharp sword about his strong shoulders, then he clad him in a very thick mantle, to keep
the wind away; and he caught up the fleece of a great and well-fed goat, and seized his sharp
javelin, to defend him against dogs and men. Then he went to lay him down even where the white-tusked
boars were sleeping, beneath the hollow of the rock, in a place of shelter from the North Wind.

Book XV

  Pallas sends home Telemachus from Lacedaemon with the
  presents given him by Menelaus. Telemachus landed, goes
  first to Eumaeus.

Now Pallas Athene went to the wide land of Lacedaemon, to put the noble son of the great-hearted
Odysseus in mind of his return, and to make him hasten his coming. And she found Telemachus,
and the glorious son of Nestor, couched at the vestibule of the house of famous Menelaus. The
son of Nestor truly was overcome with soft sleep, but sweet sleep gat not hold of Telemachus,
but, through the night divine, careful thoughts for his father kept him wakeful. But come,
rouse with all haste Menelaus, of the loud war-cry, to send thee on thy way, that thou mayest
even yet find thy noble mother in her home. For even now her father and her brethren bid her
wed Eurymachus, for he outdoes all the wooers in his presents, and hath been greatly increasing
his gifts of wooing. So shall she take no treasure from thy house despite thy will. Thou knowest
of what sort is the heart of a woman within her; all her desire is to increase the house of
the man who takes her to wife, but of her former children and of her own dear lord she has
no more memory once he is dead, and she asks concerning him no more. Go then, and thyself place
all thy substance in the care of the handmaid who seems to thee the best, till the day when
the gods shall show thee a glorious bride. Now another word will I tell thee, and do thou lay
it up in thine heart. Nay, keep thy well-wrought ship far from those isles, and sail by night
as well as day, and he of the immortals who hath thee in his keeping and protection will send
thee a fair breeze in thy wake. But when thou hast touched the nearest shore of Ithaca, send
thy ship and all thy company forward to the city, but for thy part seek first the swineherd
who keeps thy swine, loyal and at one with thee. There do thou rest the night, and bid him
go to the city to bear tidings of thy coming to the wise Penelope, how that she hath got thee
safe, and thou art come up out of Pylos.'

Therewith she departed to high Olympus. But Telemachus woke the son of Nestor out of sweet
sleep, touching him with his heel, and spake to him, saying:

'Awake, Peisistratus, son of Nestor, bring up thy horses of solid hoof, and yoke them beneath
the car, that we may get forward on the road.'

Then Peisistratus, son of Nestor, answered him, saying: 'Telemachus, we may in no wise drive
through the dark night, how eager soever to be gone; nay, soon it will be dawn. Tarry then,
till the hero, the son of Atreus, spear-famed Menelaus, brings gifts, and sets them on the
car, and bespeaks thee kindly, and sends thee on thy way. For of him a guest is mindful all
the days of his life, even of the host that shows him loving-kindness.'

So spake he, and anon came the golden-throned Dawn. And Menelaus, of the loud war cry, drew
nigh to them, new risen from his bed, by fair-haired Helen. Now when the dear son of Odysseus
marked him, he made haste and girt his shining doublet about him, and the hero cast a great
mantle over his mighty shoulders, and went forth at the door, and Telemachus, dear son of divine
Odysseus, came up and spake to Menelaus, saying:

'Menelaus, son of Atreus, fosterling of Zeus, leader of the people, even now do thou speed
me hence, to mine own dear country; for even now my heart is fain to come home again.'

Then Menelaus, of the loud war cry, answered him: 'Telemachus, as for me, I will not hold thee
a long time here, that art eager to return; nay, I think it shame even in another host, who
loves overmuch or hates overmuch. Measure is best in all things. He does equal wrong who speeds
a guest that would fain abide, and stays one who is in haste to be gone. Men should lovingly
entreat the present guest and speed the parting. But abide till I bring fair gifts and set
them on the car and thine own eyes behold them, and I bid the women to prepare the midday meal
in the halls, out of the good store they have within. Honour and glory it is for us, and gain
withal for thee, that ye should have eaten well ere ye go on your way, over vast and limitless
lands. What and if thou art minded to pass through Hellas and mid Argos? I would not that I
myself should perish on the quest of my godlike father, nor that any good heir-loom should
be lost from my halls.'

Now when Menelaus, of the loud war cry, heard this saying, straightway he bade his wife and
maids to prepare the midday meal in the halls, out of the good store they had by them. Then
Eteoneus, son of Boethous, came nigh him, just risen from his bed, for he abode not far from
him. Him Menelaus of the loud war cry bade kindle the fire and roast of the flesh; and he hearkened
and obeyed. Then the prince went down into the fragrant treasure chamber, not alone, for Helen
went with him, and Megapenthes. Now, when they came to the place where the treasures were stored,
then Atrides took a two-handled cup, and bade his son Megapenthes to bear a mixing bowl of
silver. And Helen stood by the coffers, wherein were her robes of curious needlework which
she herself had wrought. Then Helen, the fair lady, lifted one and brought it out, the widest
and most beautifully embroidered of all, and it shone like a star, and lay far beneath the rest.

Then they went forth through the house till they came to Telemachus; and Menelaus, of the fair
hair, spake to him saying:

'Telemachus, may Zeus the thunderer, and the lord of Here, in very truth bring about thy return
according to the desire of thy heart. This cup I would give to thee.'

Therewith the hero Atrides set the two-handled cup in his hands. And the strong Megapenthes
bare the shining silver bowl and set it before him. And Helen came up, beautiful Helen, with
the robe in her hands, and spake and hailed him:

'Lo! I too give thee this gift, dear child, a memorial of the hands of Helen, against the day
of thy desire, even of thy bridal, for thy bride to wear it. But meanwhile let it lie by thy
dear mother in her chamber. And may joy go with thee to thy well-builded house, and thine own
country.'

With that she put it into his hands, and he took it and was glad. And the hero Peisistratus
took the gifts and laid them in the chest of the car, and gazed on all and wondered. Then Menelaus
of the fair hair led them to the house. And the son of Boethous carved by the board and divided
the messes, and the son of renowned Menelaus poured forth the wine. And they drave forth from
the gateway and the echoing gallery. After these Menelaus, of the fair hair, the son of Atreus,
went forth bearing in his right hand a golden cup of honey-hearted wine, that they might pour
a drink-offering ere they departed. And he stood before the horses and spake his greeting:

'Farewell, knightly youths, and salute in my name Nestor, the shepherd of the people; for truly
he was gentle to me as a father, while we sons of the Achaeans warred in the land of Troy.'

And wise Telemachus answered him, saying: 'Yea verily, O fosterling of Zeus, we will tell him
all on our coming even as thou sayest. Would God that when I return to Ithaca I may find Odysseus
in his home and tell him all, so surely as now I go on my way having met with all loving-kindness
at thy hands, and take with me treasures many and goodly!'

And even as he spake a bird flew forth at his right hand, an eagle that bare in his claws a
great white goose, a tame fowl from the yard, and men and women followed shouting. But the
bird drew near them and flew off to the right, across the horses, and they that saw it were
glad, and their hearts were all comforted within them. And Peisistratus, son of Nestor, first
spake among them:

'Consider, Menelaus, fosterling of Zeus, leader of the people, whether god hath showed forth
this sign for us twain, or for thee thyself.'

So spake he, and the warrior Menelaus pondered thereupon, how he should take heed to answer,
and interpret it aright.

And long-robed Helen took the word and spake, saying: 'Hear me, and I will prophesy as the
immortals put it into my heart, and as I deem it will be accomplished. Even as yonder eagle
came down from the hill, the place of his birth and kin, and snatched away the goose that was
fostered in the house, even so shall Odysseus return home after much trial and long wanderings
and take vengeance; yea, or even now is he at home and sowing the seeds of evil for all the
wooers.'

Then wise Telemachus answered her, saying: 'Now may Zeus ordain it so, Zeus the thunderer and
the lord of Here. Then would I do thee worship, as to a god, even in my home afar.'

He spake and smote the horses with the lash, and they sped quickly towards the plain, in eager
course through the city. And soon thereafter they reached the steep hold of Pylos. Then Telemachus
spake unto the son of Nestor, saying:

'Son of Nestor, in what wise mightest thou make me a promise and fulfil my bidding? For we
claim to be friends by reason of our fathers' friendship from of old. Moreover we are equals
in age, and this journey shall turn to our greater love. Take me not hence past my ship, O
fosterling of Zeus, but leave me there, lest that old man keep me in his house in my despite,
out of his eager kindness, for I must go right quickly home.'

So spake he, and the some of Nestor communed with his own heart how he might make promise,
and duly fulfil the same. So as he thought thereon, in this wise it seemed to him best. He
turned back his horses toward the swift ship and the sea-banks, and took forth the fair gifts
and set them in the hinder part of the ship, the raiment and the gold which Menelaus gave him.
And he called to Telemachus and spake to him winged words:

'Now climb the ship with all haste, and bid all thy company do likewise, ere I reach home and
bring the old man word. For well I know in my mind and heart that, being so wilful of heart,
he will not let thee go, but he himself will come hither to bid thee to his house, and methinks
that he will not go back without thee; for very wroth will he be despite thine excuse.'

Thus he spake, and drave the horses with the flowing manes back to the town of the Pylians,
and came quickly to the halls. And Telemachus called to his companions and commanded them, saying:

'Set ye the gear in order, my friends, in the black ship, and let us climb aboard that we may
make way upon our course.'

So spake he, and they gave good heed and hearkened. Then straightway they embarked and sat
upon the benches.

Thus was he busy hereat and praying and making burnt-offering to Athene, by the stern of the
ship, when there drew nigh him one from a far country, that had slain his man and was fleeing
from out of Argos. He was a soothsayer, and by his lineage he came of Melampus, who of old
time abode in Pylos, mother of flocks, a rich man and one that had an exceeding goodly house
among the Pylians, but afterward he had come to the land of strangers, fleeing from his country
and from Neleus, the great-hearted, the proudest of living men, who kept all his goods for
a full year by force. All that time Melampus lay bound with hard bonds in the halls of Phylacus,
suffering strong pains for the sake of the daughter of Neleus, and for the dread blindness
of soul which the goddess, the Erinnys of the dolorous stroke, had laid on him. Howsoever he
escaped his fate, and drave away the lowing kine from Phylace to Pylos, and avenged the foul
deed upon godlike Neleus, and brought the maiden home to his own brother to wife. As for him,
he went to a country of other men, to Argos, the pastureland of horses; for there truly it
was ordained that he should dwell, bearing rule over many of the Argives. There he wedded a
wife, and builded him a lofty house, and begat Antiphates and Mantius, two mighty sons. Now
Antiphates begat Oicles the great-hearted, and Oicles Amphiaraus, the rouser of the host, whom
Zeus, lord of the aegis, and Apollo loved with all manner of love. Yet he reached not the threshold
of old age, but died in Thebes by reason of a woman's gifts. And the sons born to him were
Alcmaeon and Amphilochus. But Mantius begat Polypheides and Cleitus; but it came to pass that
the golden-throned Dawn snatched away Cleitus for his very beauty's sake, that he might dwell
with the Immortals.

And Apollo made the high-souled Polypheides a seer, far the chief of human kind, Amphiaraus
being now dead. He removed his dwelling to Hypheresia, being angered with his father, and here
he abode and prophesied to all men.

This man's son it was, Theoclymenus by name, that now drew nigh and stood by Telemachus. And
he found him pouring a drink-offering and praying by the swift black ship, and uttering his
voice he spake to him winged words:

'Friend, since I find thee making burnt-offering in this place, I pray thee, by thine offerings
and by the god, and thereafter by thine own head, and in the name of the men of thy company
answer my question truly and hide it not. Of Ithaca am I by lineage, and my father is Odysseus,
if ever such an one there was, but now hath he perished by an evil fate. Wherefore I have taken
my company and a black ship, and have gone forth to hear word of my father that has been long
afar.'

Then godlike Theoclymenus spake to him again: 'Even so I too have fled from my country, for
the manslaying of one of mine own kin. And many brethren and kinsmen of the slain are in Argos,
the pastureland of horses, and rule mightily over the Achaeans. Wherefore now am I an exile
to shun death and black fate at their hands, for it is my doom yet to wander among men. Now
set me on board ship, since I supplicate thee in my flight, lest they slay me utterly; for
methinks they follow hard after me.'

And wise Telemachus answered him, saying: 'Surely I will not drive thee away from our good
ship, if thou art fain to come. Follow thou with us then, and in Ithaca thou shalt be welcome
to such things as we have.'

Therewith he took from him his spear of bronze, and laid it along the deck of the curved ship,
and himself too climbed the seafaring ship. Then he sat him down in the stern and made Theoclymenus
to sit beside him; and his company loosed the hawsers. Then Telemachus called unto his company,
and bade them lay hands on the tackling, and speedily they hearkened to his call. And grey-eyed
Athene sent them a favouring breeze, rushing violently through the clear sky that the ship
might speedily finish her course over the salt water of the sea. So they passed by Crouni and
Chalcis, a land of fair streams.

And the sun set and all the ways were darkened. And the vessel drew nigh to Pheae, being sped
before the breeze of Zeus, and then passed goodly Elis where the Epeans bear rule. From thence
he drave on again to the Pointed Isles, pondering whether he should escape death or be cut off.

Now Odysseus and the goodly swineherd were supping in the hut, and the other men sat at meat
with them. So when they had put from them the desire of meat and drink, Odysseus spake among
them, to prove the swineherd, whether he would still entertain him diligently, and bid him
abide there in the steading or send him forward to the city:

'Listen now, Eumaeus, and all the others of the company. In the morning I would fain be gone
to the town to go a begging, that I be not ruinous to thyself and thy fellows. Now advise me
well, and lend me a good guide by the way to lead me thither; and through the city will I wander
alone as needs I must, if perchance one may give me a cup of water and a morsel of bread. Moreover
I would go to the house of divine Odysseus and bear tidings to the wise Penelope, and consort
with the wanton wooers, if haply they might grant me a meal out of the boundless store that
they have by them. Lightly might I do good service among them, even all that they would. For
lo! I will tell thee and do thou mark and listen. By the favour of Hermes, the messenger, who
gives grace and glory to all men's work, no mortal may vie with me in the business of a serving-man,
in piling well a fire, in cleaving dry faggots, and in carving and roasting flesh and in pouring
of wine, those offices wherein meaner men serve their betters.'

Then didst thou speak to him in heaviness of heart, swineherd Eumaeus: 'Ah! wherefore, stranger,
hath such a thought arisen in thine heart? Surely thou art set on perishing utterly there,
if thou wouldest indeed go into the throng of the wooers, whose outrage and violence reacheth
even to the iron heaven! Not such as thou are their servants; they that minister to them are
young and gaily clad in mantles and in doublets, and their heads are anointed with oil and
they are fair of face, and the polished boards are laden with bread and flesh and wine. Nay,
abide here, for none is vexed by thy presence, neither I nor any of my fellows that are with
me. For there is no other thing more mischievous to men than roaming; yet for their cursed
belly's need men endure sore distress, to whom come wandering and tribulation and pain. But
behold now, since thou stayest me here, and biddest me wait his coming, tell me of the mother
of divine Odysseus, and of the father whom at his departure he left behind him on the threshold
of old age; are they, it may be, yet alive beneath the sunlight, or already dead and within
the house of Hades?'

Then spake to him the swineherd, a master of men: 'Yea now, stranger, I will plainly tell thee
all. Laertes yet lives, and prays evermore to Zeus that his life may waste from out his limbs
within his halls. For he has wondrous sorrow for his son that is far away, and for the wedded
lady his wise wife, whose death afflicted him in chief and brought him to old age before his
day. Now she died of very grief for her son renowned, by an evil death, so may no man perish
who dwells here and is a friend to me in word and deed! So long as she was on earth, though
in much sorrow, I was glad to ask and enquire concerning her, for that she herself had reared
me along with long-robed Ctimene, her noble daughter, the youngest of her children. With her
I was reared, and she honoured me little less than her own. But when we both came to the time
of our desire, to the flower of age, thereupon they sent her to Same, and got a great bride-price;
but my lady clad me in a mantle and a doublet, raiment very fair, and gave me sandals for my
feet and sent me forth to the field, and right dear at heart she held me. But of these things
now at last am I lacking; yet the blessed gods prosper the work of mine own hands, whereat
I abide. Of this my substance I have eaten and drunken and given to reverend strangers. But
from my lady I may hear naught pleasant, neither word nor deed, for evil hath fallen on her
house, a plague of froward men; yet thralls have a great desire to speak before their mistress
and find out all eat and drink, and moreover to carry off somewhat with them to the field,
such things as ever comfort the heart of a thrall.'

And Odysseus of many counsels answered him saying: 'Ah, Eumaeus, how far then didst thou wander
from thine own country and thy parents while as yet thou wast but a child! But come, declare
me this and plainly tell it all. Was a wide-wayed town of men taken and sacked, wherein dwelt
thy father and thy lady mother, or did unfriendly men find thee lonely, tending sheep or cattle,
and shipped thee thence, and sold thee into the house of thy master here, who paid for thee
a goodly price?'

Then spake to him the swineherd, a master of men: Stranger, since thou askest and questionest
me hereof, give heed now in silence and make merry, and abide here drinking wine. Lo, the nights
now are of length untold. Time is there to sleep, and time to listen and be glad; thou needest
not turn to bed before the hour; even too much sleep is vexation of spirit. But for the rest,
let him whose heart and mind bid him, go forth and slumber, and at the dawning of the day let
him break his fast, and follow our master's swine. But let us twain drink and feast within
the steading, and each in his neighbour's sorrows take delight, recalling them, for even the
memory of griefs is a joy to a man who hath been sore tried and wandered far. Wherefore I will
tell thee that whereof thou askest and dost question me.

'There is a certain isle called Syria, if haply thou hast heard tell of it, over above Ortygia,
and there are the turning-places of the sun. It is not very great in compass, though a goodly
isle, rich in herds, rich in flocks, with plenty of corn and wine. Dearth never enters the
land, and no hateful sickness falls on wretched mortals. But when the tribes of men grow old
in that city, then comes Apollo of the silver bow, with Artemis, and slays them with the visitation
of his gentle shafts. In that isle are two cities, and the whole land is divided between them,
and my father was king over the twain, Ctesius son of Ormenus, a man like to the Immortals.

'Thither came the Phoenicians, mariners renowned, greedy merchant men, with countless gauds
in a black ship. Now in my father's house was a Phoenician woman, tall and fair and skilled
in bright handiwork; this woman the Phoenicians with their sleights beguiled. First as she
was washing clothes, one of them lay with her in love by the hollow ship, for love beguiles
the minds of womankind, even of the upright. Then he asked her who she was and whence she came,
and straightway she showed him the lofty home of my father, saying:

'"From out of Sidon I avow that I come, land rich in bronze, and I am the daughter of Arybas,
the deeply wealthy. But Taphians, who were sea-robbers, laid hands on me and snatched me away
as I came in from the fields, and brought me hither and sold me into the house of my master,
who paid for me a goodly price."

'Then the man who had lain with her privily, answered: "Say, wouldst thou now return home with
us, that thou mayst look again on the lofty house of thy father and mother and on their faces?
For truly they yet live, and have a name for wealth."

'Then the woman answered him and spake, saying: "Even this may well be, if ye sailors will
pledge me an oath to bring me home in safety."

'So spake she, and they all swore thereto as she bade them. Now when they had sworn and done
that oath, again the woman spake among them and answered, saying:

'"Hold your peace now, and let none of your fellows speak to me and greet me, if they meet
me in the street, or even at the well, lest one go and tell it to the old man at home, and
he suspect somewhat and bind me in hard bonds and devise death for all of you. But keep ye
the matter in mind, and speed the purchase of your homeward freight. And when your ship is
freighted with stores, let a message come quickly to me at the house; for I will likewise bring
gold, all that comes under my hand. Yea and there is another thing that I would gladly give
for my fare. I am nurse to the child of my lord in the halls, a most cunning little boy, that
runs out and abroad with me. Him would I bring on board ship, and he should fetch you a great
price, wheresoever ye take him for sale among men of strange speech."

'Therewith she went her way to the fair halls. But they abode among us a whole year, and got
together much wealth in their hollow ship. And when their hollow ship was now laden to depart,
they sent a messenger to tell the tidings to the woman. There came a man versed in craft to
my father's house, with a golden chain strung here and there with amber beads. Now the maidens
in the hall and my lady mother were handling the chain and gazing on it, and offering him their
price; but he had signed silently to the woman, and therewithal gat him away to the hollow
ship. Then she took me by the hand and led me forth from the house. And at the vestibule of
the house she found the cups and the tables of the guests that had been feasting, who were
in waiting on my father. They had gone forth to the session and the place of parley of the
people. And she straightway hid three goblets in her bosom, and bare them away, and I followed
in my innocence. Then the sun sank and all the ways were darkened and we went quickly and came
to the good haven, where was the swift ship of the Phoenicians. So they climbed on board and
took us up with them, and sailed over the wet ways, and Zeus sent us a favouring wind. For
six days we sailed by day and night continually; but when Zeus, son of Cronos, added the seventh
day thereto, then Artemis, the archer, smote the woman that she fell, as a sea-swallow falls,
with a plunge into the hold. And they cast her forth to be the prey of seals and fishes, but
I was left stricken at heart. And wind and water bare them and brought them to Ithaca, where
Laertes bought me with his possessions. And thus it chanced that mine eyes beheld this land.'

Then Odysseus, of the seed of Zeus, answered him saying:

'Eumaeus, verily thou hast stirred my heart within me with the tale of all these things, of
all the sorrow of heart thou hast endured. Yet surely Zeus hath given thee good as well as
evil, since after all these adventures thou hast come to the house of a kindly man, who is
careful to give thee meat and drink and right well thou livest. But I have come hither still
wandering through the many towns of men.'

Thus they spake one with the other. Then they laid them down to sleep for no long while, but
for a little space, for soon came the throned Dawn. But on the shore the company of Telemachus
were striking their sails, and took down the mast quickly and rowed the ship on to anchorage.
And they cast anchors and made fast the hawsers, and themselves too stept forth upon the strand
of the sea, and made ready the midday meal, and mixed the dark wine. Now when they had put
from them the desire of meat and drink, wise Telemachus first spake among them:

'Do ye now drive the black ship to the city, while I will go to the fields and to the herdsmen,
and at even I will return to the city, when I have seen my lands. And in the morning I will
set by you the wages of the voyage, a good feast of flesh and of sweet wine.'

Then godlike Theoclymenus answered him: 'And whither shall I go, dear child? To what man's
house shall I betake me, of such as are lords in rocky Ithaca? Shall I get me straight to thy
mother and to thy home?'

Then wise Telemachus answered him, saying: 'In other case I would bid thee go even to our own
house; for there is no lack of cheer for strangers, but now would it be worse for thyself,
forasmuch as I shall be away nor would my mother see thee. For she comes not often in sight
of the wooers in the house, but abides apart from them in her upper chamber, and weaves at
her web. Yet there is one whom I will tell thee of, to whom thou mayst go, Eurymachus the glorious
son of wise Polybus, whom now the men of Ithaca look upon, even as if he were a god. For he
is far the best man of them all, and is most eager to wed my mother and to have the sovereignty
of Odysseus. Howbeit, Olympian Zeus, that dwells in the clear sky, knows hereof, whether or
no he will fulfill for them the evil day before their marriage.'

Now even as he spake, a bird flew out on the right, a hawk, the swift messenger of Apollo.
In his talons he held a dove and plucked her, and shed the feathers down to the earth, midway
between the ship and Telemachus himself. Then Theoclymenus called him apart from his fellows,
and clasped his hand and spake and hailed him:

'Telemachus, surely not without the god's will hath the bird flown out on the right, for I
knew when I saw him that he was a bird of omen. There is no other house more kingly than yours
in the land of Ithaca; nay, ye have ever the mastery.'

And wise Telemachus answered him, saying: 'Ah, stranger, would that this word may be accomplished!
Soon shouldest thou be aware of kindness and many a gift at my hands, so that whoso met with
thee would call thee blessed.'

Then he spake to Piraeus, his trusty companion: 'Piraeus, son of Clytius, thou that at other
seasons hearkenest to me above all my company who went with me to Pylos, even now, I pray,
lead this stranger home with thee, and give heed to treat him lovingly and with worship in
thy house till I come.'

Then Piraeus, spearsman renowned, answered him saying: 'Telemachus, why, even if thou shouldest
tarry here long, yet will I entertain this man, and he shall have no lack of stranger's cheer.'

Therewith he went on board, and bade his men themselves to mount and loose the hawsers. And
quickly they embarked and sat upon the benches. And Telemachus bound his goodly sandals beneath
his feet, and seized a mighty spear, shod with sharp bronze, from the deck of the ship and
his men loosed the hawsers. So they thrust off and sailed to the city, as Telemachus bade them,
the dear son of divine Odysseus. But swiftly his feet bore him on his forward way, till he
came to the court, where were his swine out of number; and among them the good swineherd slept,
a man loyal to his lords.

Book XVI

  Telemachus sends Eumaeus to the city to tell his mother of
  his return. And how, in the meantime, Odysseus discovers
  himself to his son.

Now these twain, Odysseus and the goodly swineherd, within the hut had kindled a fire, and
were making ready breakfast at the dawn, and had sent forth the herdsmen with the droves of
swine. And round Telemachus the hounds, that love to bark, fawned and barked not, as he drew
nigh. And goodly Odysseus took note of the fawning of the dogs, and the noise of footsteps
fell upon his ears. Then straight he spake to Eumaeus winged words:

'Eumaeus, verily some friend or some other of thy familiars will soon be here, for the dogs
do not bark but fawn around, and I catch the sound of footsteps.'

While the word was yet on his lips, his own dear son stood at the entering in of the gate.
Then the swineherd sprang up in amazement, and out of his hands fell the vessels wherewith
he was busied in mingling the dark wine. And he came over against his master and kissed his
head and both his beautiful eyes and both his hands, and he let a great tear fall. And even
as a loving father welcomes his son that has come in the tenth year from a far country, his
only son and well-beloved, for whose sake he has had great sorrow and travail, even so did
the goodly swineherd fall upon the neck of godlike Telemachus, and kiss him all over as one
escaped from death, and he wept aloud and spake to him winged words:

'Thou art come, Telemachus, a sweet light in the dark; methought I should see thee never again,
after thou hadst gone in thy ship to Pylos. Nay now enter, dear child, that my heart may be
glad at the sight of thee in mine house, who hast newly come from afar. Then Telemachus passed
within and crossed the threshold of stone. As he came near, his father Odysseus arose from
his seat to give him place; but Telemachus, on his part, stayed him and spake saying:

'Be seated, stranger, and we will find a seat some other where in our steading, and there is
a man here to set it for us.'

So he spake, and Odysseus went back and sat him down again. And the swineherd strewed for Telemachus
green brushwood below, and a fleece thereupon, and there presently the dear son of Odysseus
sat him down. Next the swineherd set by them platters of roast flesh, the fragments that were
left from the meal of yesterday. And wheaten bread he briskly heaped up in baskets, and mixed
the honey-sweet wine in a goblet of ivy wood, and himself sat down over against divine Odysseus.
How did sailors bring him to Ithaca? and who did they avow them to be? For in no wise, I deem,
did he come hither by land.'

Then didst thou make answer, swineherd Eumaeus: 'Yea now, my son, I will tell thee all the
truth. Of wide Crete he avows him to be by lineage, and he says that round many cities of mortals
he has wandered at adventure; even so has some god spun for him the thread of fate. But now,
as a runaway from a ship of the Thesprotians, has he come to my steading, and I will give him
to thee for thy man; do with him as thou wilt; he avows him for thy suppliant.'

Then wise Telemachus answered him, saying: 'Eumaeus, verily a bitter word is this that thou
speakest. How indeed shall I receive this guest in my house? Myself I am young, and trust not
yet to my strength of hands to defend me against the man who does violence without a cause.
And my mother has divisions of heart, whether to abide here with me and keep the house, respecting
the bed of her lord and the voice of the people, or straightway to go with whomsoever of the
Achaeans that woo her in the halls is the best man, and gives most bridal gifts. But behold,
as for this guest of thine, now that he has come to thy house, I will clothe him in a mantle
and a doublet, goodly raiment, and I will give him a two-edged sword, and shoes for his feet,
and send him on his way, whithersoever his heart and his spirit bid him go. Or, if thou wilt,
hold him here in the steading and take care of him, and raiment I will send hither, and all
manner of food to eat, that he be not ruinous to thee and to thy fellows. But thither into
the company of the wooers would I not suffer him to go, for they are exceeding full of infatuate
insolence, lest they mock at him, and that would be a sore grief to me. And hard it is for
one man, how valiant soever, to achieve aught among a multitude, for verily they are far the
stronger.'

Then the steadfast goodly Odysseus answered him: 'My friend, since it is indeed my right to
answer thee withal, of a truth my heart is rent as I hear your words, such infatuate deeds
ye say the wooers devise in the halls, in despite of thee, a man so noble. Say, dost thou willingly
submit thee to oppression, or do the people through the township hate thee, obedient to the
voice of a god? Or hast thou cause to blame thy brethren, in whose battle a man puts trust,
even if a great feud arise? Ah, would that I had the youth, as now I have the spirit, and were
either the son of noble Odysseus or Odysseus' very self, {*} straightway then might a stranger
sever my head from off my neck, if I went not to the halls of Odysseus, son of Laertes, and
made myself the bane of every man among them! XXII.]

In the next three years, following the example of many a French Huguenot privateersman before
him, and forsaking trade for semi-private reprisal (in that epoch a few degrees short of piracy),
he made three voyages to the Spanish Indies.

On the third, in 1572, he raided Nombre de Dios with fire and sword.

Then, leaguing himself with the mixed-breed natives or cameroons, he waylaid a guarded mule-train
bearing treasure across the Isthmus, securing 15 tons of silver which he buried, and as much
gold as his men could stagger away under. It was on this foray that he first saw the Pacific
from a height of the Cordilleras, and resolved to steer an English squadron into this hitherto
unmolested Spanish sea.

The tale of Drake's voyage into the Pacific and circumnavigation of the globe is a piratical
epic, the episodes of which, however, find some justification in the state of virtual though
undeclared hostilities between England and Spain, in the Queen's
secret sanction, and in Spain's own policy of ruthless spoliation
in America.

Starting at the close of 1577 with five small vessels, the squadron was reduced by shipwreck
and desertion until only the flagship remained when Drake at last, on September 6 of the next
year, achieved his midwinter passage of the Straits of Magellan and bore down, "like a visitation
of God" as a Spaniard said, upon the weakly defended ports of the west coast. After ballasting
his ship with silver from the rich Potosi mines, and rifling even the churches, he hastened
onward in pursuit of a richly laden galleon nicknamed Cacafuego--a name discreetly translated
Spitfire, but which, to repeat a joke that greatly amused Drake's men at the time, it was
proposed to change to Spitsilver, for when overtaken and captured
the vessel yielded 26 tons of silver, 13 chests of pieces of eight,
and gold and jewels sufficient to swell the booty to half a million
pounds sterling.

For 20 years the voyage across the northern Pacific had been familiar to the Spanish, who had studied
winds and currents, laid down routes, and made regular crossings. Having picked up charts
and China pilots, and left the whole coast in panic fear, Drake sailed far to the northward, overhauled
his ship in a bay above San Francisco, then struck across the Pacific,
and at last rounded Good Hope and put into Plymouth in September of
the third year.

It suited Elizabeth's policy to countenance the voyage. She put the major part of the treasure into
the Tower, took some trinkets herself, knighted Drake aboard the Golden Hind, and when the Spanish
ambassador talked war she told him, in a quiet tone of voice, that she would throw him into a dungeon.

This
red-bearded, short and thickset Devon skipper, bold of speech as of action, was now the most
renowned sailor of England, with a name that inspired terror on every coast of Spain. It was inevitable,
therefore, that when Elizabeth resolved upon open reprisals in 1585, Drake should be chosen to
lead another, and this time fully authorized, raid on the Spanish Indies. Here he sacked the
cities of San Domingo and Carthagena, and, though he narrowly missed
the plate fleet, brought home sufficient spoils for the individuals
who backed the venture.

In the year 1587 with 23 ships and orders permitting him to operate freely on Spain's home
coasts, he first boldly entered Cadiz, in almost complete disregard of the puny galleys guarding
the harbor, and destroyed some 37 vessels and their cargoes.

Despite the horrified protests of his Vice Admiral Borough (an officer "of the old school" to
be found in every epoch) at these violations of traditional methods, he then took up a position
off Saigres where he could harry coastwise commerce, picked up the
East Indiaman San Felipe with a cargo worth a million pounds in modern
money, and even appeared off Lisbon to defy the Spanish Admiral Santa
Cruz.

Thus he "singed the King of Spain's beard," and set, in the words of a recent biographer, "what
to this day may serve as the finest example of how a small, well-handled fleet, acting on a
nicely timed offensive, may paralyze the mobilization of an overwhelming force."[1]

[Footnote 1: DRAKE AND THE TUDOR NAVY, Corbett, Vol. II, p. 108.]

The Grand Armada

At the time of this Cadiz expedition Spanish preparations for the invasion of England were already
well under way, Philip being now convinced that by a blow at England
all his aims might be secured--the subjugation of the Netherlands,
the safety of Spanish America, the overthrow of Protestantism, possibly
even his accession to the English throne.

As the secret instructions to Medina Sidonia more modestly stated, it was at least believed that
by a vigorous offensive and occupation of English territory England could be forced to cease
her opposition to Spain. For this purpose every province of the empire was pressed for funds.
Pope Sixtus VI contributed a million gold crowns, which he shrewdly made payable only when
troops actually landed on English soil.

Church and nobility were squeezed as never before. The Cortes on the eve of the voyage voted
8,000,000 ducats, secured by a tax on wine, meat, and oil, the common necessities of life, which
was not lifted for more than two hundred years.

To gain control of the Channel long enough to throw 40,000 troops ashore at Margate, and thereafter
to meet and conquer the army of defense--such was the highly difficult objective, to assure
the success of which Philip had been led to hope for a wholesale
defection of English Catholics to the Spanish cause.

Twenty thousand troops were to sail with the Armada; Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma, was to add
17,000 veterans from Flanders and assume supreme command. With the Spanish infantry once landed,
under the best general in Europe, it was not beyond reason that England might become a province
of Spain.

What Philip did not see clearly, what indeed could scarcely be foreseen
from past experience, was that no movement of troops should be undertaken
without first definitely accounting for the enemy fleet.

The Spanish had not even an open base to sail to. With English vessels thronging the northern
ports of the Channel, with 90 Dutch ships blockading the Scheldt
and the shallows of the Flanders coast, it would be necessary to clear
the Channel by a naval victory, and maintain control until it was
assured by victory on land.

The leader first selected, Santa Cruz--a veteran of Lepanto--at least put naval considerations
uppermost and laid plans on a grand scale, calling for 150 major ships and 100,000 men, 30,000
of them sailors. But with his death in 1587 the campaign was again thought of primarily from
the army standpoint. The ships were conceived as so many transports, whose duty at most was
to hold the English fleet at bay. Parma was to be supreme. To succeed Santa Cruz as naval
leader, and in order, it is said, that the gray-haired autocrat Philip might still control from
his cell in the Escorial, the Duke of Medina Sidonia was chosen--an amiable gentleman of high
rank, but consciously ignorant of naval warfare, uncertain of purpose, and despondent almost from
the start.

Medina had an experienced Vice Admiral in Diego Flores de Valdes, whose professional advice
he usually followed, and he had able squadron commanders in Recalde, Pedro de Valdes, Oquendo, and
others; but such a commander-in-chief, unless a very genius in self-effacement, was enough to
ruin a far more auspicious campaign.

Delayed by the uncertain political situation in France, even more than by Drake's exploits off Cadiz,
the Armada was at last, in May of 1588, ready to depart. The success of the Catholic party
under the leadership of the Duke of Guise gave assurance of support rather than hostility on
the French flank. There were altogether some 130 ships, the best of which were 10 war galleons of
Portugal and 10 of the "Indian Guard" of Spain. These were supported by the Biscayan, Andalusian,
Guipuscoan, and Levantine squadrons of about 10 armed merchantmen
each, four splendid Neapolitan galleasses that gave a good account
of themselves in action, and four galleys that were driven upon the
French coast by storms and took no part in the battle--making a total
(without the galleys) of about 64 fighting ships.

Then there were 35 or more pinnaces and small craft, and 23 urcas or storeships of little or
no fighting value. The backbone of the force was the 60 galleons, large, top-lofty vessels,
all but 20 of them from the merchant service, with towering poops
and forecastles that made them terrible to look upon but hard to handle.

On board were 8,000 sailors and 19,000 troops.

Dispersed by a storm on their departure from Lisbon, the fleet again assembled at Corunna, their
victuals already rotten, and their water foul and short. Medina Sidonia even now counseled abandonment;
but religious faith, the fatalistic pride of Spain, and Philip's dogged fixity of purpose drove
them on. Putting out of Corunna on July 22, and again buffeted by Biscay gales, they were sighted
off the Lizard at daybreak of July 30, and a pinnace scudded into Plymouth with the alarm.

For England the moment of supreme crisis had come, Elizabeth's policy of paying for nothing that
she might expect her subjects to contribute had left the royal navy short of what the situation
called for, and the government seems also, even throughout the campaign, to have tied the admirals
to the coast and kept them from distant adventures by limited supplies of munitions and food. But
in the imminent danger, the nobility, both Catholic and Protestant, and every coastwise city,
responded to the call for ships and men. Their loyalty was fatal to Philip's plan. The royal
fleet of 25 ships and a dozen pinnaces was reënforced until the total craft of all descriptions numbered
197, not more than 140 of which, however, may be said to have had
a real share in the campaign.

For a month or more a hundred sail had been mobilized at Plymouth, of which 69 were greatships
and galleons. These were smaller in average tonnage than the Spanish ships, but more heavily
armed, and manned by 10,000 capable seamen. Lord Henry Seymour, with Palmer and Sir William
Winter under him, watched Parma at the Strait of Dover, with 20 ships and an equal number
of galleys, barks and pinnaces. The Lord High Admiral, Thomas Howard of Effingham, a nobleman of 50
with some naval experience and of a family that had long held the office, commanded the western
squadron, with Drake as Vice Admiral and John Hawkins as Rear Admiral. The Ark (800 tons), Revenge
(500), and Victory (800) were their respective flagships. Martin Frobisher in the big 1100-ton
Triumph, Lord Sheffield in the White Bear (1000), and Thomas Fenner in the Nonpareil (500)
were included with the Admirals in Howard's inner council of war. "Howard," says Thomas Fuller,
"was no deep-seaman, but he had skill enough to know those who had more skill than himself
and to follow their instructions." As far as as possible for a commoner, Drake exercised command.

On
the morning of the 31st the Armada swept slowly past Plymouth in what has been described as
a broad crescent, but which, from a contemporary Italian description,
seems to have been the "eagle" formation familiar to galley warfare,
in line abreast with wide extended wings bent slightly forward, the
main strength in center and guards in van and rear.

Howard was just completing the arduous task of warping his ships
out of the harbor.

Had Medina attacked at once, as some of his subordinates advised, he might have compelled Howard to
close action and won by superior numbers. But his orders suggested the advisability of avoiding
battle till he had joined with Parma; and for the Duke this was enough. As the Armada continued
its course, Howard fell in astern and to windward, inflicting serious injuries to two ships of
the enemy rear.

A week of desultory running battle ensued as the fleets moved slowly through the Channel; the English
fighting "loose and large," and seeking to pick off stragglers, still fearful of a general
action, but taking advantage of Channel flaws to close with the enemy
and sheer as swiftly away; the Spanish on the defensive but able to
avoid disaster by better concerted action and fleet control.

Only two Spanish ships were actually lost, one of them Pedro de Valdes' flagship Neustra Señora
del Rosario, which had been injured in collision and surrendered to Drake without a struggle on
the night of August 1, the other the big San Salvador of the Guipuscoan squadron, the whole
after part of which had been torn up by an explosion after the fighting on the first day.
But the Spanish inferiority had been clearly demonstrated and they had suffered far more in
morale than in material injuries when on Sunday, August 7, they dropped anchor in Calais roads.
The English, on their part, though flushed with confidence, had seen their weakness in organized
tactics, and now divided their fleet into four squadrons, with the flag officers and Frobisher
in command.

It betrays the fatuity of the Spanish leader, if not of the whole
plan of campaign, that when thus practically driven to refuge in a
neutral port, Medina Sidonia thought his share of the task accomplished,
and wrote urgent appeals to Parma to join or send aid, though the
great general had not enough flat-boats and barges to float his army
had he been so foolhardy as to embark, or the Dutch so benevolent
as to let him go.

But the English, now reënforced by Seymour's squadron, gave the Duke little time to ponder his
next move. At midnight eight fire hulks, "spurting flames and their ordnance exploding," were
borne by wind and tide full upon the crowded Spanish fleet.

Fearful of maquinas de minas such as had wrought destruction a year before at the siege of
Antwerp, the Spanish made no effort to grapple the peril but slipped or cut cables and in complete
confusion beat off shore.

At dawn the Spanish galleons, attempting with a veering wind from the southward and westward to
form in order off Gravelines, were set upon in the closest approach to a general engagement
that occurred in the campaign.

While Howard and several of his ships were busy effecting the capture of a beached galleass,
Drake led the attack in the Revenge, seeking to force the enemy to leeward and throw the whole
body upon the shallows of the Flanders coast.

With splendid discipline, the Spanish weather ships, the flagship San Martin among them, fought
valiantly to cover the retreat. But it was an unequal struggle, the heavier and more rapid
fire of the English doing fearful execution on decks crowded with
men-at-arms.

Such artillery combat was hitherto unheard of. Though warned of the new northern methods, the
Spanish were obsessed by tradition; they were prepared for grappling and boarding, and could they
have closed, their numbers and discipline would have told. Both sides suffered from short ammunition;
but the Armada, with no fresh supplies, was undoubtedly in the worse case. "They fighting with
their great ordnance," writes Medina Sidonia, "and we with harquebus fire and musketry, the distance
being very small." Six-inch guns against bows and muskets tells the tale.

A slackening of the English pursuit at nightfall after eight hours' fighting, and an off-shore
slant of wind at daybreak, prevented complete disaster. One large galleon sank and two more stranded
and were captured by the Dutch. These losses were not indeed fatal, but the remaining ships
staggering away to leeward were little more than blood-drenched wrecks. Fifteen hundred had been
killed and wounded in the day's action, and eleven ships and some eight thousand men sacrificed
thus far in the campaign. The English, on the other hand, had suffered no serious ship injuries
and the loss of not above 100 men. In the council held next day beyond the Straits of Dover,
only a few of the Spanish leaders had stomach for further fighting; the rest preferred to brave the
perils of a return around the Orkneys rather than face again these defenders of the narrow
seas. Before a fair wind they stood northward, Drake still at their heels, though by reason
of short supplies he left them at the Firth of Forth.

In October, fifty ships, with 10,000 starved and fever-stricken men, trailed into the Biscay ports
of Spain. Torn by September gales, the rest of the Armada had been sunk or stranded on the
rough coasts of Scotland and Ireland. II, p. 448.]

"Flavit Deus, et dissipati sunt"--"The Lord sent His wind, and scattered
them."

So ran the motto on the English medal of victory. But storms completed the destruction of
a fleet already thoroughly defeated. Religious faith, courage, and discipline had availed little
against superior ships, weapons, leadership, and nautical skill. "Till the King of Spain had
war with us," an Englishman remarked, "he never knew what war by
sea meant."[2] It might be said more accurately that the battle gave
a new meaning to war by sea.

[Footnote 2: Sir Wm. Monson, NAVAL TRACTS, Purchas, Vol. III, p. 121.]

From the standpoint of naval progress, the campaign demonstrated definitely the ascendancy of
sail and artillery. For the old galley tactics a new system now had to be developed. Since
between sailing vessels head-on conflict was practically eliminated, and since guns mounted
to fire ahead and astern were of little value save in flight or pursuit, the arrangement of guns
in broadside soon became universal, and fleets fought in column, or "line ahead," usually close-hauled
on the same or opposite tacks. While these were lessons for the next generation, there is more
permanent value in the truth, again illustrated, that fortune favors the belligerent quicker to
forsake outworn methods and to develop skill in the use of new weapons. The Spanish defeat illustrates
also the necessity of expert planning and guidance of a naval campaign, with naval counsels
and requirements duly regarded; and the fatal effect of failure to concentrate attention on the enemy
fleet.

It is doubtful, however, whether it would have been better, as Drake urged, and as was actually
attempted in the month before the Armada's arrival, if the English had shifted the war to
the coast of Spain. The objections arise chiefly from the difficulties, in that age, of maintaining
a large naval force far from its base, all of which the Spanish encountered in their northward
cruise. It is noteworthy that, even after the brief Channel operations, an epidemic caused heavy
mortality in the English fleet. Finally, the Armada is a classic example of the value of naval
defense to an insular nation.

Upon Spain, already tottering from inherent weakness, the Armada defeat
had the effect of casting down her pride and confidence as leader
of the Catholic world.

Though it was not until three centuries later that she lost her last
colonies, her hold on her vast empire was at once shaken by this blow
at her sea control.

While she maintained large fleets until after the Napoleonic Wars, she was never again truly formidable
as a naval power. But the victory lifted England more than it crushed Spain, inspiring an intenser
patriotism, an eagerness for colonial and commercial adventure, an exaltation of spirit manifested
in the men of genius who crowned the Elizabethan age.

The Last Years of the War

The war was not ended; and though Philip was restrained by the rise
of Protestant power in France under Henry of Navarre, he was still
able to gather his sea forces on almost as grand a scale.

In the latter stages of the war the naval expeditions on both sides were either, like the Armada,
for the purpose of landing armies on foreign soil, or raids on enemy ports, colonies and commerce.
Thus Drake in 1589 set out with a force of 18,000 men, which attacked Corunna, moved thence upon
Lisbon, and lost a third or more of its number in a fruitless campaign on land. Both Drake and
the aged Hawkins, now his vice admiral, died in the winter of 1595-96 during a last and this
time ineffective foray upon the Spanish Main. It is owing to this latter fact that we hear of
large flotillas dispatched by each side even in the same year, yet not meeting in naval action.
Thus in June of 1596 the Essex expedition, with 17 English and 18
Dutch men-of-war and numerous auxiliaries, seized Cadiz and burned
shipping to the value of 11,000,000 ducats.

There was no naval opposition, though Philip in October of the same year had ready a hundred ships
and 16,000 men, which were dispersed with the loss of a quarter of
their strength in a gale off Finisterre.

Storms also scattered Philip's fleet in the next year; in 1598, Spanish transports landed 5,000
men at Calais; and England's fears were renewed in the year after that by news of over 100
vessels fitting out for the Channel, which, however, merely protected
the plate fleet by a cruise to the Azores.

As late as 1601, Spain landed 3500 troops in Ireland.

  
  

But if these major operations seem to have missed contact, there were many lively actions on a
minor scale, the well-armed trading vessels of the north easily beating off the galley squadrons
guarding Gibraltar and the routes past Spain.

Among these lesser encounters, the famous "Last Fight of the Revenge," which occurred during
operations of a small English squadron off the Azores in 1591, well illustrates the fighting
spirit of the Elizabethan Englishman and the ineptitude which since the Armada seems to have
marked the Spaniard at sea. In Drake's old flagship, attacked by 15 ships and surrounded by
a Spanish fleet of 50 sail, a bellicose old sea-warrior named Sir Richard Grenville held out
from nightfall until eleven the next day, and surrendered only after he had sunk three of the
enemy, when his powder was gone, half his crew dead, the rest disabled,
and his ship a sinking wreck.

 For I am not now of an age to abide at the steading,
and to obey in all things the word of the master. Nay go, and this man that thou biddest will
lead me, so soon as I shall be warmed with the fire, and the sun waxes hot. For woefully poor
are these garments of mine, and I fear lest the hoar frost of the dawn overcome me; moreover
ye say the city is far away.'

So he spake, and Telemachus passed out through the steading, stepping forth at a quick pace,
and was sowing the seeds of evil for the wooers. Now when he was come to the fair-lying house,
he set his spear against the tall pillar and leaned it there, and himself went in and crossed
the threshold of stone.

And the nurse Eurycleia saw him far before the rest, as she was strewing skin coverlets upon
the carven chairs, and straightway she drew near him, weeping, and all the other maidens of
Odysseus, of the hardy heart, were gathered about him, and kissed him lovingly on the head
and shoulders. Come now, tell me, what sight thou didst get of him?'

And wise Telemachus answered her, saying: 'Mother mine, wake not wailing in my soul, nor stir
the heart within the breast of me, that have but now fled from utter death. Nay, but wash thee
in water, and take to thee fresh raiment, and go aloft to thine upper chamber with the women
thy handmaids, and vow to all the gods an acceptable sacrifice of hecatombs, if haply Zeus
may grant that deeds of requital be made. But I will go to the assembly-place to bid a stranger
to our house, one that accompanied me as I came hither from Pylos. I sent him forward with
my godlike company, and commanded Piraeus to lead him home, and to take heed to treat him lovingly
and with worship till I should come.'

Thus he spake, and wingless her speech remained. And the lordly wooers gathered about him with
fair words on their lips, but brooding evil in the deep of their heart. Then he avoided the
great press of the wooers, but where Mentor sat, and Antiphus, and Halitherses, who were friends
of his house from of old, there he went and sat down; and they asked him of all his adventures.
Then Piraeus, the famed spearsman, drew nigh, leading the stranger to the assembly-place by
the way of the town; and Telemachus kept not aloof from him long, but went up to him.

Then Piraeus first spake to him, saying: 'Bestir the women straightway to go to my house, that
I may send thee the gifts that Menelaus gave thee.'

Then wise Telemachus answered him, saying: 'Piraeus, we know not how these matters will fall
out. If the lordly wooers shall slay me by guile in the halls, and divide among them the heritage
of my father, then I should wish thee to keep and enjoy the gifts thyself, rather than any
of these. But if I shall sow the seeds of death and fate for the wooers, then gladly bring
me to the house the gifts that I will gladly take.'

Therewith he led the travel-worn stranger to the house. And the mother of Telemachus sat over
against him by the pillar of the hall, leaning against a chair, and spinning the slender threads
from the yarn. Yet thou hadst no care to tell me clearly, before the lordly wooers came to
this house, concerning the returning of thy father, if haply thou hast heard thereof.'

And wise Telemachus answered her, saying: 'Yea now, mother, I will tell thee all the truth.
We went to Pylos and to Nestor, the shepherd of the people, and he received me in his lofty
house, and was diligent to entreat me lovingly, as a father might his son that had but newly
come from strange lands after many years; even so diligently he cared for me with his renowned
sons. Yet he said that he had heard no word from any man on earth concerning Odysseus, of the
hardy heart, whether alive or dead. But he sent me forward on my way with horses and a chariot,
well compact, to Menelaus, son of Atreus, spearman renowned. There I saw Argive Helen, for
whose sake the Argives and Trojans bore much travail by the gods' designs. Then straightway
Menelaus, of the loud war-cry, asked me on what quest I had come to goodly Lacedaemon. And
I told him all the truth. So spake Menelaus, son of Atreus, spearsman renowned. And next the
godlike Theoclymenus spake among them:

'O wife revered of Odysseus, son of Laertes, verily he hath no clear knowledge; but my word
do thou mark, for I will prophesy to thee most truly and hide nought. But when it was now the
hour for supper, and the flocks came home from the fields all around, and the men led them
whose custom it was, then Medon, who of all the henchmen was most to their mind, and was ever
with them at the feast, spake to them, saying:

'Noble youths, now that ye have had sport to your hearts' content, get you into the house,
that we may make ready a feast; for truly it is no bad thing to take meat in season.'

Even so he spake, and they rose up and departed, and were obedient to his word. Now when they
were come into the fair-lying house, they laid aside their mantles on the chairs and high seats,
and they sacrificed great sheep and stout goats, yea, and the fatlings of the boars and an
heifer of the herd, and got ready the feast.

Now all this while Odysseus and the goodly swineherd were bestirring them to go from the field
to the city; and the swineherd, a master of men, spake first saying:

'Well, my friend, forasmuch as I see thou art eager to be going to the city to-day, even as
my master gave command;-- though myself I would well that thou shouldest be left here to keep
the steading, but I hold him in reverence and fear, lest he chide me afterwards, and grievous
are the rebukes of masters--come then, let us go on our way, for lo, the day is far spent,
and soon wilt thou find it colder toward evening.'

Then Odysseus of many counsels answered him saying: 'I mark, I heed: all this thou speakest
to one with understanding. But let us be going, and be thou my guide withal to the end. And
if thou hast anywhere a staff ready cut, give it me to lean upon, for truly ye said that slippery
was the way.'

Therewith he cast about his shoulders a mean scrip, all tattered, and a cord withal to hang
it, and Eumaeus gave him a staff to his mind. So these twain went on their way, and the dogs
and the herdsmen stayed behind to guard the steading. And the swineherd led his lord to the
city in the guise of a beggar, a wretched man and an old, leaning on a staff; and sorry was
the raiment wherewith he was clothed upon. But as they fared along the rugged path they drew
near to the town, and came to the fair flowing spring, with a basin fashioned, whence the people
of the city drew water. This well Ithacus and Neritus and Polyctor had builded. And around
it was a thicket of alders that grow by the waters, all circlewise, and down the cold stream
fell from a rock on high, and above was reared an altar to the Nymphs, whereat all wayfarers
made offering. In that place Melanthius, son of Dolius, met them, leading his goats to feast
the wooers, the best goats that were in all the herds; and two herdsmen bare him company. Now
when he saw them he reviled them, and spake and hailed them, in terrible and evil fashion,
and stirred the heart of Odysseus, saying:

'Now in very truth the vile is leading the vile, for god brings ever like to like! Say, whither
art thou leading this glutton,--thou wretched swineherd,--this plaguy beggar, a kill-joy of
the feast? He is one to stand about and rub his shoulders against many doorposts, begging for
scraps of meat, not for swords or cauldrons. If thou wouldst give me the fellow to watch my
steading and sweep out the stalls, and carry fresh fodder to the kids, then he might drink
whey and get him a stout thigh. Howbeit, since he is practised only in evil, he will not care
to betake him to the labour of the farm, but rather chooses to go louting through the land
asking alms to fill his insatiate belly. But now I will speak out and my word shall surely
be accomplished. If ever he fares to the house of divine Odysseus, many a stool that men's
hands hurl shall fly about his head, and break upon his ribs, {*} as they pelt him through
the house.'

{* Reading [Greek]}

Therewith, as he went past, he kicked Odysseus on the hip, in his witlessness, yet he drave
him not from the path, but he abode steadfast. And Odysseus pondered whether he should rush
upon him and take away his life with the staff, or lift him in his grasp {*} and smite his
head to the earth. Yet he hardened his heart to endure and refrained himself. And the swineherd
looked at the other and rebuked him, and lifting up his hands prayed aloud:

{* [Greek] is perhaps best taken as an adverb in [Greek] formed from [Greek], though some letters
of the word are still left obscure. Most modern commentators, however, derive it from [Greek]
and [Greek] 'near the ground; hence, in this context, 'lift him by the feet.'}

'Nymphs of the well-water, daughters of Zeus, if ever Odysseus burned on your altars pieces
of the thighs of rams or kids, in their covering of rich fat, fulfil for me this wish:--oh
that he, even he, may come home, and that some god may bring him! Then would he scatter all
thy bravery, which now thou flauntest insolently, wandering ever about the city, while evil
shepherds destroy the flock.'

Then Melanthius, the goatherd, answered: 'Lo now, what a word has this evil-witted dog been
saying! Some day I will take him in a black decked ship far from Ithaca, that he may bring
me in much livelihood. Would God that Apollo, of the silver bow, might smite Telemachus to-day
in the halls, or that he might fall before the wooers, so surely as for Odysseus the day of
returning has in a far land gone by!'

So he spake and left them there as they walked slowly on. But Melanthius stepped forth, and
came very speedily to the house of the prince, and straightway he went in and sat down among
the wooers, over against Eurymachus, who chiefly showed him kindness. And they that ministered
set by him a portion of flesh, and the grave dame brought wheaten bread and set it by him to
eat. Now Odysseus and the goodly swineherd drew near and stood by, and the sound of the hollow
lyre rang around them, for Phemius was lifting up his voice amid the company in song, and Odysseus
caught the swineherd by the hand, and spake, saying:

'Eumaeus, verily this is the fair house of Odysseus, and right easily might it be known and
marked even among many. There is building beyond building, and the court of the house is cunningly
wrought with a wall and battlements, and well-fenced are the folding doors; no man may hold
it in disdain. And I see that many men keep revel within, for the savour of the fat rises upward,
{*} and the voice of the lyre is heard there, which the gods have made to be the mate of the
feast.'

{* Reading [Greek]}

Then didst thou make answer, swineherd Eumaeus: 'Easily thou knowest it, for indeed thou never
lackest understanding. But come, let us advise us, how things shall fall out here. Either do
thou go first within the fair-lying halls, and join the company of the wooers, so will I remain
here, or if thou wilt, abide here, and I will go before thy face, and tarry not long, lest
one see thee without, and hurl at thee or strike thee. Look well to this, I bid thee.'

Then the steadfast goodly Odysseus answered him, saying: 'I mark, I heed, all this thou speakest
to one with understanding. Do thou then go before me, and I will remain here, for well I know
what it is to be smitten and hurled at. My heart is full of hardiness, for much evil have I
suffered in perils of waves and war; let this be added to the tale of those. But a ravening
belly may none conceal, a thing accursed, that works much ill for men. For this cause too the
benched ships are furnished, that bear mischief to foemen over the unharvested seas.'

Thus they spake one to the other. And lo, a hound raised up his head and pricked his ears,
even where he lay, Argos, the hound of Odysseus, of the hardy heart, which of old himself had
bred, but had got no joy of him, for ere that, he went to sacred Ilios. Now in time past the
young men used to lead the hound against wild goats and deer and hares; but as then, despised
he lay (his master being afar) in the deep dung of mules and kine, whereof an ample bed was
spread before the doors, till the thralls of Odysseus should carry it away to dung therewith
his wide demesne. There lay the dog Argos, full of vermin. Yet even now when he was ware of
Odysseus standing by, he wagged his tail and dropped both his ears, but nearer to his master
he had not now the strength to draw. But Odysseus looked aside and wiped away a tear that he
easily hid from Eumaeus, and straightway he asked him, saying:

'Eumaeus, verily this is a great marvel, this hound lying here in the dung. Truly he is goodly
of growth, but I know not certainly if he have speed with this beauty, or if he be comely only,
like as are men's trencher dogs that their lords keep for the pleasure of the eye.'

Then didst thou make answer, swineherd Eumaeus: 'In very truth this is the dog of a man that
has died in a far land. If he were what once he was in limb and in the feats of the chase,
when Odysseus left him to go to Troy, soon wouldst thou marvel at the sight of his swiftness
and his strength. There was no beast that could flee from him in the deep places of the wood,
when he was in pursuit; for even on a track he was the keenest hound. But now he is holden
in an evil case, and his lord hath perished far from his own country, and the careless women
take no charge of him. Nay, thralls are no more inclined to honest service when their masters
have lost the dominion, for Zeus, of the far-borne voice, takes away the half of a man's virtue,
when the day of slavery comes upon him.'

Therewith he passed within the fair-lying house, and went straight to the hall, to the company
of the proud wooers. But upon Argos came the fate of black death even in the hour that he beheld
Odysseus again, in the twentieth year.

Now godlike Telemachus was far the first to behold the swineherd as he came into the hall,
and straightway then he beckoned and called him to his side. So Eumaeus looked about and took
a settle that lay by him, where the carver was wont to sit dividing much flesh among the wooers
that were feasting in the house. This seat he carried and set by the table of Telemachus over
against him, and there sat down himself. And the henchman took a mess and served it him, and
wheaten bread out of the basket.

And close behind him Odysseus entered the house in the guise of a beggar, a wretched man and
an old, leaning on his staff, and clothed on with sorry raiment. And he sat down on the ashen
threshold within the doorway, leaning against a pillar of cypress wood, which the carpenter
on a time had deftly planed, and thereon made straight the line. And Telemachus called the
swineherd to him, and took a whole loaf out of the fair basket, and of flesh so much as his
hands could hold in their grasp, saying:

'Take and give this to the stranger, and bid him go about and beg himself of all the wooers
in their turn, for shame is an ill mate of a needy man.'

So he spake, and the swineherd went when he heard that saying, and stood by and spake to him
winged words:

'Stranger, Telemachus gives thee these and bids thee go about and beg of all the wooers in
their turn, for, he says, "shame ill becomes a beggar man."'

Then Odysseus of many counsels answered him and said: 'King Zeus, grant me that Telemachus
may be happy among men, and may he have all his heart's desire!'

Therewith he took the gift in both hands, and set it there before his feet on his unsightly
scrip. Then he ate meat so long as the minstrel was singing in the halls. When he had done
supper, and the divine minstrel was ending his song, then the wooers raised a clamour through
the halls; but Athene stood by Odysseus, son of Laertes, and moved him to go gathering morsels
of bread among the wooers, and learn which were righteous and which unjust. Yet not even so
was she fated to redeem one man of them from an evil doom. So he set out, beginning on the
right, to ask of each man, stretching out his hand on every side, as though he were a beggar
from of old. And they in pity gave him somewhat, and were amazed at the man, asking one another
who he was and whence he came?

Then Melanthius, the goatherd, spake among them:

'Listen, ye wooers of the renowned queen, concerning this stranger, for verily I have seen
him before. The swineherd truly was his guide hither, but of him I have no certain knowledge,
whence he avows him to be born.'

So spake he, but Antinous rebuked the swineherd, saying: 'Oh notorious swineherd, wherefore,
I pray thee, didst thou bring this man to the city? Have we not vagrants enough besides, plaguy
beggars, kill-joys of the feast? Dost thou count it a light thing that they assemble here and
devour the living of thy master, but thou must needs {*} call in this man too?'

{* [Greek] can hardly have a local meaning here. If retained, it must be nearly equivalent
to [Greek], 'it seems,' with a touch of irony. Cf. i.348. The v. 1. [Greek] is a simpler reading,
but by no means certain.}

Then didst thou make answer, swineherd Eumaeus: 'Antinous, no fair words are these of thine,
noble though thou art. For who ever himself seeks out and bids to the feast a stranger from
afar, save only one of those that are craftsmen of the people, a prophet or a healer of ills,
or a shipwright or even a godlike minstrel, who can delight all with his song? Nay, these are
the men that are welcome over all the wide earth. But none would call a beggar to the banquet,
to waste his substance. But thou art ever hard above all the other wooers to the servants of
Odysseus, and, beyond all, to me; but behold, I care not, so long as my mistress, the constant
Penelope, lives in the halls and godlike Telemachus.'

Then wise Telemachus answered him, saying: 'Be silent, answer him not, I pray thee, with many
words, for Antinous is wont ever to chide us shamefully with bitter speech, yea, and urges
the others thereto.'

Therewithal he spake winged words to Antinous: 'Antinous, verily thou hast a good care for
me, as it were a father for his son, thou that biddest me drive our guest from the hall with
a harsh command. God forbid that such a thing should be! Take somewhat and give it him: lo,
I grudge it not; nay, I charge thee to do it. And herein regard not my mother, nor any of the
thralls that are in the house of divine Odysseus. Nay, but thou hast no such thought in thy
heart, for thou art far more fain to eat thyself than to give to another.'

Then Antinous answered him and spake, saying: 'Telemachus, proud of speech, and unrestrained
in fury, what word hast thou spoken? If all the wooers should vouchsafe him as much as I, this
house would keep him far enough aloof even for three months' space.'

So he spake, and seized the footstool whereon he rested his sleek feet as he sat at the feast,
and showed it from beneath the table where it lay. But all the others gave somewhat and filled
the wallet with bread and flesh; yea, and even now, Odysseus as he returned to the threshold,
was like to escape scot free, making trial of the Achaeans, but he halted by Antinous, and
spake to him, saying:

'Friend, give me somewhat; for methinks thou art not the basest of the Achaeans, but the best
man of them all, for thou art like a king. Wherefore thou shouldest give me a portion of bread,
and that a better than the others; so would I make thee renowned over all the wide earth. For
I too, once had a house of mine own among men, a rich man with a wealthy house, and many a
time would I give to a wanderer, what manner of man soever he might be, and in whatsoever need
he came. And I had thralls out of number, and all else in plenty, wherewith folk live well
and have a name for riches. But Zeus, the son of Cronos, made me desolate of all,--for surely
it was his will,--who sent me with wandering sea-robbers to go to Egypt, a far road, to my
ruin. And in the river Aegyptus I stayed my curved ships. Then verily I bade my loved companions
to abide there by the ships, and to guard the ship, and I sent forth scouts to range the points
of outlook. But they gave me to a friend who met them, to take to Cyprus, even to Dmetor son
of Iasus, who ruled mightily over Cyprus; and thence, behold, am I now come hither in sore
distress.'

Then Antinous answered, and spake, saying: 'What god hath brought this plague hither to trouble
the feast? Stand forth thus in the midst, away from my table, lest thou come soon to a bitter
Egypt and a sad Cyprus; for a bold beggar art thou and a shameless. Thou standest by all in
turn and recklessly they give to thee, for they hold not their hand nor feel any ruth in giving
freely of others' goods, for that each man has plenty by him.'

Then Odysseus of many counsels drew back and answered him: 'Lo now, I see thou hast not wisdom
with thy beauty! From out of thine own house thou wouldest not give even so much as a grain
of salt to thy suppliant, thou who now even at another's board dost sit, and canst not find
it in thy heart to take of the bread and give it me, where there is plenty to thy hand.'

He spake, and Antinous was mightily angered at heart, and looked fiercely on him and spake
winged words:

'Henceforth, methinks, thou shalt not get thee out with honour from the hall, seeing thou dost
even rail upon me.'

Therewith he caught up the foot-stool and smote Odysseus at the base of the right shoulder
by the back. But he stood firm as a rock, nor reeled he beneath the blow of Antinous, but shook
his head in silence, brooding evil in the deep of his heart. Then he went back to the threshold,
and sat him there, and laid down his well-filled scrip, and spake among the wooers:

'Hear me, ye wooers of the renowned queen, and I will say what my spirit within me bids me.
Verily there is neither pain nor grief of heart, when a man is smitten in battle fighting for
his own possessions, whether cattle or white sheep. But now Antinous hath stricken me for my
wretched belly's sake, a thing accursed, that works much ill for men. Ah, if indeed there be
gods and Avengers of beggars, may the issues of death come upon Antinous before his wedding!'

Then Antinous, son of Eupeithes, answered him: 'Sit and eat thy meat in quiet, stranger, or
get thee elsewhere, lest the young men drag thee by hand or foot through the house for thy
evil words, and strip all thy flesh from off thee.'

Even so he spake, and they were all exceeding wroth at his word. And on this wise would one
of the lordly young men speak:

'Antinous, thou didst ill to strike the hapless wanderer, doomed man that thou art,--if indeed
there be a god in heaven. Yea and the gods, in the likeness of strangers from far countries,
put on all manner of shapes, and wander through the cities, beholding the violence and the
righteousness of men.'

So the wooers spake, but he heeded not their words. Now Telemachus nursed in his heart a mighty
grief at the smiting of Odysseus, yet he let no tear fall from his eyelids to the ground, but
shook his head in silence, brooding evil in the deep of his heart.

Now when wise Penelope heard of the stranger being smitten in the halls, she spake among her
maidens, saying:

'Oh that Apollo, the famed archer, may so smite thee thyself, Antinous!'

And the house-dame, Eurynome, answered her, saying: 'Oh that we might win fulfilment of our
prayers! So should not one of these men come to the fair-throned Dawn.'

And wise Penelope answered her: 'Nurse, they are all enemies, for they all devise evil continually,
but of them all Antinous is the most like to black fate. Some hapless stranger is roaming about
the house, begging alms of the men, as his need bids him; and all the others filled his wallet
and gave him somewhat, but Antinous smote him at the base of the right shoulder with a stool.'

So she spake among her maidens, sitting in her chamber, while goodly Odysseus was at meat.
Then she called to her the goodly swineherd and spake, saying:

'Go thy way, goodly Eumaeus, and bid the stranger come hither, that I may speak him a word
of greeting, and ask him if haply he has heard tidings of Odysseus of the hardy heart, or seen
him with his eyes; for he seems like one that has wandered far.'

Then didst thou make answer, swineherd Eumaeus: 'Queen, oh that the Achaeans would hold their
peace! so would he charm thy very heart, such things doth he say. For I kept him three nights
and three days I held him in the steading, for to me he came first when he fled from the ship,
yet he had not made an end of the tale of his affliction. Even as when a man gazes on a singer,
whom the gods have taught to sing words of yearning joy to mortals, and they have a ceaseless
desire to hear him, so long as he will sing; even so he charmed me, sitting by me in the halls.
He says that he is a friend of Odysseus and of his house, one that dwells in Crete, where is
the race of Minos. Thence he has come hither even now, with sorrow by the way, onward and yet
onward wandering; and he stands to it that he has heard tidings of Odysseus nigh at hand and
yet alive in the fat land of the men of Thesprotia; and he is bringing many treasures to his home.'

Then wise Penelope answered him, saying: 'Go, call him hither, that he may speak to me face
to face. But let these men sit in the doorway and take their pleasure, or even here in the
house, since their heart is glad. For their own wealth lies unspoiled at home, bread and sweet
wine, and thereon do their servants feed. Oh, if Odysseus might come again to his own country;
soon would he and his son avenge the violence of these men!'

Even so she spake, and Telemachus sneezed loudly, and around the roof rang wondrously. And
Penelope laughed, and straightway spake to Eumaeus winged words:

'Go, call me the stranger, even so, into my presence. Dost thou not mark how my son has sneezed
a blessing on all my words? Wherefore no half-wrought doom shall befal the wooers every one,
nor shall any avoid death and the fates. Yet another thing will I say, and do thou ponder it
in thy heart. If I shall find that he himself speaks nought but truth, I will clothe him with
a mantle and a doublet, goodly raiment.'

So she spake, and the swineherd departed when he heard that saying, and stood by the stranger
and spake winged words:

'Father and stranger, wise Penelope, the mother of Telemachus, is calling for thee, and her
mind bids her inquire as touching her lord, albeit she has sorrowed much already. And if she
shall find that thou dost speak nought but truth, she will clothe thee in a mantle and a doublet,
whereof thou standest most in need. Moreover thou shalt beg thy bread through the land and
shalt fill thy belly, and whosoever will, shall give to thee.'

Then the steadfast goodly Odysseus answered him, saying: 'Eumaeus, soon would I tell all the
truth to the daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope, for well I know his story, and we have borne
our travail together. But I tremble before the throng of the froward wooers, whose outrage
and violence reach even to the iron heaven. For even now, as I was going through the house,
when this man struck and pained me sore, and that for no ill deed, neither Telemachus nor any
other kept off the blow. Wherefore now, bid Penelope tarry in the chambers, for all her eagerness,
till the going down of the sun, and then let her ask me concerning her lord, as touching the
day of his returning, and let her give me a seat yet nearer to the fire, for behold, I have
sorry raiment, and thou knowest it thyself, since I made my supplication first to thee.'

Even so he spake, and the swineherd departed when he heard that saying. And as he crossed the
threshold Penelope spake to him:

'Thou bringest him not, Eumaeus: what means the wanderer hereby? Can it be that he fears some
one out of measure, or is he even ashamed of tarrying in the house? A shamefaced man makes
a bad beggar.'

Then didst thou make answer, swineherd Eumaeus: 'He speaks aright, and but as another would
deem, in that he shuns the outrage of overweening men. Rather would he have thee wait till
the going down of the sun. Yea, and it is far meeter for thyself, O queen, to utter thy word
to the stranger alone, and to listen to his speech.'

Then the wise Penelope answered: 'Not witless is the stranger; even as he deems, so it well
may be. {*} For there are no mortal men, methinks, so wanton as these, and none that devise
such infatuate deeds.'

{* Placing at colon at [Greek], and reading [Greek] (cf.  xix.312).}

So she spake, and the goodly swineherd departed into the throng of the wooers, when he had
showed her all his message. And straightway he spake to Telemachus winged words, holding his
head close to him, that the others might not hear:

'Friend, I am going hence to look after thy swine and the things of the farm, thy livelihood
and mine; but do thou take charge of all that is here. Yet first look to thyself and take heed
that no evil comes nigh thee, for many of the Achaeans have ill will against us, whom may Zeus
confound before their mischief falls on us!'

And wise Telemachus answered him, and said: 'Even so shall it be, father; and do thou get thee
on thy way, when thou hast supped. And in the morning come again, and bring fair victims for
sacrifice. And all these matters will be a care to me and to the deathless gods.'

Thus he spake, and the other sat down again on the polished settle; and when he had satisfied
his heart with meat and drink, he went on his way to the swine, leaving the courts and the
hall full of feasters; and they were making merry with dance and song, for already it was close
on eventide.

Book XVIII

  The fighting at fists of Odysseus with Irus. His
  admonitions to Amphinomus. Penelope appears before the
  wooers, and draws presents from them.

Then up came a common beggar, who was wont to beg through the town of Ithaca, one that was
known among all men for ravening greed, for his endless eating and drinking, yet he had no
force or might, though he was bulky enough to look on. Arnaeus was his name, for so had his
good mother given it him at his birth, but all the young men called him Irus, because he ran
on errands, whensoever any might bid him. So now he came, and would have driven Odysseus from
his own house, and began reviling him, and spake winged words:

'Get thee hence, old man, from the doorway, lest thou be even haled out soon by the foot. Seest
thou not that all are now giving me the wink, and bidding me drag thee forth? Nevertheless,
I feel shame of the task. Nay get thee up, lest our quarrel soon pass even to blows.'

Then Odysseus of many counsels looked fiercely on him, and spake saying: 'Sir, neither in deed
nor word do I harm thee, nor do I grudge that any should give to thee, yea though it were a
good handful. But this threshold will hold us both, and thou hast no need to be jealous for
the sake of other men's goods. Thou seemest to me to be a wanderer, even as I am, and the gods
it is that are like to give us gain. Only provoke me not overmuch to buffeting, lest thou anger
me, and old though I be I defile thy breast and lips with blood. Thereby should I have the
greater quiet to-morrow, for methinks that thou shalt never again come to the hall of Odysseus,
son of Laertes'.

Then the beggar Irus spake unto him in anger: 'Lo now, how trippingly and like an old cinder-wife
this glutton speaks, on whom I will work my evil will, and smite him right and left, and drive
all the teeth from his jaws to the ground, like the tusks of a swine that spoils the corn.
Gird thyself now, that even these men all may know our mettle in fight. Nay, how shouldst thou
do battle with a younger man than thou?'

Thus did they whet each the other's rage right manfully before the lofty doors upon the polished
threshold. And the mighty prince Antinous heard the twain, and sweetly he laughed out, and
spake among the wooers:

'Friends, never before has there been such a thing; such goodly game has a god brought to this
house. The stranger yonder and Irus are bidding each other to buffets. Quick, let us match
them one against the other.'

Then all at the word leaped up laughing, and gathered round the ragged beggars, and Antinous,
son of Eupeithes, spake among them saying: 'Hear me, ye lordly wooers, and I will say somewhat.
Here are goats' bellies lying at the fire, that we laid by at supper-time and filled with fat
and blood. Now whichsoever of the twain wins, and shows himself the better man, let him stand
up and take his choice of these puddings. And further, he shall always eat at our feasts, nor
will we suffer any other beggar to come among us and ask for alms.'

So spake Antinous, and the saying pleased them well. Then Odysseus of many counsels spake among
them craftily:

'Friends, an old man and foredone with travail may in no wise fight with a younger. But my
belly's call is urgent on me, that evil-worker, to the end that I may be subdued with stripes.
But come now, swear me all of you a strong oath, so that none, for the sake of shewing a favour
to Irus, may strike me a foul blow with heavy hand and subdue me by violence to my foe.'

So he spake, and they all swore not to strike him, as he bade them. Now when they had sworn
and done that oath, the mighty prince Telemachus once more spake among them:

'Stranger, if thy heart and lordly spirit urge thee to rid thee of this fellow, then fear not
any other of the Achaeans, for whoso strikes thee shall have to fight with many. Thy host am
I, and the princes consent with me, Antinous and Eurymachus, men of wisdom both.'

So spake he and they all consented thereto. Then Odysseus girt his rags about his loins, and
let his thighs be seen, goodly and great, and his broad shoulders and breast and mighty arms
were manifest. And Athene came nigh and made greater the limbs of the shepherd of the people.
Then the wooers were exceedingly amazed, and thus would one speak looking to his neighbour:

'Right soon will Irus, un-Irused, have a bane of his own bringing, such a thigh as that old
man shows from out his rags!'

So they spake, and the mind of Irus was pitifully stirred; but even so the servants girded
him and led him out perforce in great fear, his flesh trembling on his limbs. Then Antinous
chid him, and spake and hailed him:

'Thou lubber, better for thee that thou wert not now, nor ever hadst been born, if indeed thou
tremblest before this man, and art so terribly afraid; an old man too he is, and foredone with
the travail that is come upon him. But I will tell thee plainly, and it shall surely be accomplished.
If this man prevail against thee and prove thy master, I will cast thee into a black ship,
and send thee to the mainland to Echetus the king, the maimer of all mankind, who will cut
off thy nose and ears with the pitiless steel, and draw out thy vitals and give them raw to
dogs to rend.'

So he spake, and yet greater trembling gat hold of the limbs of Irus, and they led him into
the ring, and the twain put up their hands. Then the steadfast goodly Odysseus mused in himself
whether he should smite him in such wise that his life should leave his body, even there where
he fell, or whether he should strike him lightly, and stretch him on the earth. And as he thought
thereon, this seemed to him the better way, to strike lightly, that the Achaeans might not
take note of him, who he was. Then the twain put up their hands, and Irus struck at the right
shoulder, but the other smote him on his neck beneath the ear, and crushed in the bones, and
straightway the red blood gushed up through his mouth, and with a moan he fell in the dust,
and drave together his teeth as he kicked the ground. But the proud wooers threw up their hands,
and died outright for laughter. Then Odysseus seized him by the foot, and dragged him forth
through the doorway, till he came to the courtyard and the gates of the gallery, and he set
him down and rested him against the courtyard wall, and put his staff in his hands, and uttering
his voice spake to him winged words:

'Sit thou there now, and scare off swine and dogs, and let not such an one as thou be lord
over strangers and beggars, pitiful as thou art, lest haply some worse thing befal thee.'

Thus he spake, and cast about his shoulders his mean scrip all tattered, and the cord therewith
to hang it, and he gat him back to the threshold, and sat him down there again. Now the wooers
went within laughing sweetly, and greeted him, saying:

'May Zeus, stranger, and all the other deathless gods give thee thy dearest wish, even all
thy heart's desire, seeing that thou hast made that insatiate one to cease from his begging
in the land! Soon will we take him over to the mainland, to Echetus the king, the maimer of
all mankind.'

So they spake, and goodly Odysseus rejoiced in the omen of the words. And Antinous set by him
the great pudding, stuffed with fat and blood, and Amphinomus took up two loaves from the basket,
and set them by him and pledged him in a golden cup, and spake saying:

'Father and stranger, hail! may happiness be thine in the time to come; but as now, thou art
fast holden in many sorrows.'

And Odysseus of many counsels answered him saying: 'Amphinomus, verily thou seemest to me a
prudent man enough; for such too was the father of whom thou art sprung, for I have heard the
fair fame of him, how that Nisus of Dulichium was a good man and a rich, and his son they say
thou art, and thou seemest a man of understanding. Wherefore I will tell thee, and do thou
mark and listen to me. Nought feebler doth the earth nurture than man, of all the creatures
that breathe and move upon the face of the earth. Lo, he thinks that he shall never suffer
evil in time to come, while the gods give him happiness, and his limbs move lightly. But when
again the blessed gods have wrought for him sorrow, even so he bears it, as he must, with a
steadfast heart. For the spirit of men upon the earth is even as their day, that comes upon
them from the father of gods and men. Yea, and I too once was like to have been prosperous
among men, but many an infatuate deed I did, giving place to mine own hardihood and strength,
and trusting to my father and my brethren. Wherefore let no man for ever be lawless any more,
but keep quietly the gifts of the gods, whatsoever they may give. Such infatuate deeds do I
see the wooers devising, as they waste the wealth, and hold in no regard the wife of a man,
who, methinks, will not much longer be far from his friends and his own land; nay he is very
near. But for thee, may some god withdraw thee hence to thy home, and mayst thou not meet him
in the day when he returns to his own dear country! For not without blood, as I deem, will
they be sundered, the wooers and Odysseus, when once he shall have come beneath his own roof.'

Thus he spake, and poured an offering and then drank of the honey-sweet wine, and again set
the cup in the hands of the arrayer of the people. But the other went back through the hall,
sad at heart and bowing his head; for verily his soul boded evil. Yet even so he avoided not
his fate, for Athene had bound him likewise to be slain outright at the hands and by the spear
of Telemachus. So he sat down again on the high seat whence he had arisen.

Now the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, put it into the heart of the daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope,
to show herself to the wooers, that she might make their heart all flutter with hope, and that
she might win yet more worship from her lord and her son than heretofore. To she laughed an
idle laugh, and spake to the nurse, and hailed her, saying:

'Eurynome, my heart yearns, though before I had no such desire, to show myself to the wooers,
hateful as they are. I would also say a word to my son, that will be for his weal, namely,
that he should not for ever consort with the proud wooers, who speak friendly with their lips,
but imagine evil in the latter end.'

Then the housewife, Eurynome, spake to her saying: 'Yea my child, all this thou hast spoken
as is meet. Go then, and declare thy word to thy son and hide it not, but first wash thee and
anoint thy face, and go not as thou art with thy cheeks all stained with tears. Go, for it
is little good to sorrow always, and never cease. And lo, thy son is now of an age to hear
thee, he whom thou hast above all things prayed the gods that thou mightest see with a beard
upon his chin.'

Then wise Penelope answered her, saying: 'Eurynome, speak not thus comfortably to me, for all
thy love, bidding me to wash and be anointed with ointment. For the gods that keep Olympus
destroyed my bloom, since the day that he departed in the hollow ships. But bid Autonoe and
Hippodameia come to me, to stand by my side in the halls. Alone I will not go among men, for
I am ashamed.'

So she spake, and the old woman passed through the chamber to tell the maidens, and hasten
their coming.

Thereon the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, had another thought. She shed a sweet slumber over the
daughter of Icarius, who sank back in sleep, and all her joints were loosened as she lay in
the chair, and the fair goddess the while was giving her gifts immortal, that all the Achaeans
might marvel at her. Her fair face first she steeped with beauty imperishable, such as that
wherewith the crowned Cytherea is anointed, when she goes to the lovely dances of the Graces.
And she made her taller and greater to behold, and made her whiter than new-sawn ivory. Now
when she had wrought thus, that fair goddess departed, and the white-armed handmaidens came
forth from the chamber and drew nigh with a sound of voices. Then sweet sleep left hold of
Penelope, and she rubbed her cheeks with her hands, and said:

'Surely soft slumber wrapped me round, most wretched though I be. And straightway the knees
of the wooers were loosened, and their hearts were enchanted with love, and each one uttered
a prayer that he might be her bed-fellow. But she spake to Telemachus, her dear son:

'Telemachus, thy mind and thy thoughts are no longer stable as they were. While thou wast still
a child, thou hadst a yet quicker and more crafty wit, but now that thou art great of growth,
and art come to the measure of manhood, and a stranger looking to thy stature and thy beauty
might say that thou must be some rich man's son, thy mind and thy thoughts are no longer right
as of old. For lo, what manner of deed has been done in these halls, in that thou hast suffered
thy guest to be thus shamefully dealt with. How would it be now, if the stranger sitting thus
in our house, were to come to some harm all through this evil handling? Shame and disgrace
would be thine henceforth among men.'

Then wise Telemachus answered her: 'Mother mine, as to this matter I count it no blame that
thou art angered. Yet have I knowledge and understanding of each thing, of the good and of
the evil; but heretofore I was a child. Howbeit I cannot devise all things according to wisdom,
for these men in their evil counsel drive me from my wits, on this side and on that, and there
is none to aid me. Howsoever this battle between Irus and the stranger did not fall out as
the wooers would have had it, but the stranger proved the better man. Would to Father Zeus
and Athene and Apollo, that the wooers in our halls were even now thus vanquished, and wagging
their heads, some in the court, and some within the house, and that the limbs of each man were
loosened in such fashion as Irus yonder sits now, by the courtyard gates wagging his head,
like a drunken man, and cannot stand upright on his feet, nor yet get him home to his own place,
seeing that his limbs are loosened!'

Thus they spake one to another. But Eurymachus spake to Penelope, saying:

'Daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope, if all the Achaeans in Iasian Argos could behold thee,
even a greater press of wooers would feast in your halls from to-morrow's dawn, since thou
dost surpass all women in beauty and stature, and within in wisdom of mind.'

Then wise Penelope answered him: 'Eurymachus, surely my excellence, both of face and form,
the gods destroyed in the day when the Argives embarked for Ilios, and with them went my lord
Odysseus. If but he might come and watch over this my life, greater thus would be my fame and
fairer! But now am I in sorrow; such a host of ills some god has sent against me. Ah, well
do I remember, when he set forth and left his own country, how he took me by the right hand
at the wrist and spake, saying:

'"Lady, methinks that all the goodly-greaved Achaeans will not win a safe return from Troy;
for the Trojans too, they say, are good men at arms, as spearsmen, and bowmen, and drivers
of fleet horses, such as ever most swiftly determine the great strife of equal battle. Wherefore
I know not if the gods will suffer me to return, or whether I shall be cut off there in Troy;
so do thou have a care for all these things. Be mindful of my father and my mother in the halls,
even as now thou art, or yet more than now, while I am far away. But when thou seest thy son
a bearded man, marry whom thou wilt and leave thine own house."

'Even so did he speak, and now all these things have an end. The night shall come when a hateful
marriage shall find me out, me most luckless, whose good hap Zeus has taken away. But furthermore
this sore trouble has come on my heart and soul; for this was not the manner of wooers in time
past. Whoso wish to woo a good lady and the daughter of a rich man, and vie one with another,
themselves bring with them oxen of their own and goodly flocks, a banquet for the friends of
the bride, and they give the lady splendid gifts, but do not devour another's livelihood without
atonement.'

Thus she spake, and the steadfast goodly Odysseus rejoiced because she drew from them gifts,
and beguiled their souls with soothing words, while her heart was set on other things.

Then Antinous, son of Eupeithes, answered her again: 'Daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope, the
gifts which any of the Achaeans may choose to bring hither, do thou take; for it were ill to
withhold a gift. But we for our part will neither go to our lands nor otherwhere, before thou
art wedded to the best man of the Achaeans.'

So spake Antinous, and the saying pleased them well, and each man sent a henchman to bring
his gifts. For Antinous his henchman bare a broidered robe, great and very fair, wherein were
golden brooches, twelve in all, fitted with well bent clasps. And the henchman straightway
bare Eurymachus a golden chain of curious work, strung with amber beads, shining like the sun.
And his squires bare for Eurydamas a pair of ear-rings, with three drops well wrought, and
much grace shone from them. And out of the house of Peisander the prince, the son of Polyctor,
the squire brought a necklet, a very lovely jewel. And likewise the Achaeans brought each one
some other beautiful gift.

Then the fair lady went aloft to her upper chamber, and her attendant maidens bare for her
the lovely gifts, while the wooers turned to dancing and the delight of song, and therein took
their pleasure, and awaited the coming of eventide. And dark evening came on them at their
pastime. Anon they set up three braziers in the halls, to give them light, and on these they
laid firewood all around, faggots seasoned long since and sere, and new split with the axe.
And midway by the braziers they placed torches, and the maids of Odysseus, of the hardy heart,
held up the lights in turn. Then the prince Odysseus of many counsels himself spake among them
saying:

'Ye maidens of Odysseus, the lord so long afar, get ye into the chambers where the honoured
queen abides, and twist the yarn at her side, and gladden her heart as ye sit in the chamber,
or card the wools with your hands; but I will minister light to all these that are here. For
even if they are minded to wait the throned Dawn, they shall not outstay me, so long enduring
am I.'

So he spake, but they laughed and looked one at the other. And the fair Melantho chid him shamefully,
Melantho that Dolius begat, but Penelope reared, and entreated her tenderly as she had been
her own child, and gave her playthings to her heart's desire. Yet, for all that, sorrow for
Penelope touched not her heart, but she loved Eurymachus and was his paramour. Now she chid
Odysseus with railing words:

'Wretched guest, surely thou art some brain-struck man, seeing that thou dost not choose to
go and sleep at a smithy, or at some place of common resort, but here thou pratest much and
boldly among many lords and hast no fear at heart. Verily wine has got about thy wits, or perchance
thou art always of this mind, and so thou dost babble idly. Art thou beside thyself for joy,
because thou hast beaten the beggar Irus? Take heed lest a better man than Irus rise up presently
against thee, to lay his mighty hands about thy head and bedabble thee with blood, and send
thee hence from the house.'

Then Odysseus of many counsels looked fiercely on her, and said: 'Yea, straight will I go yonder
and tell Telemachus hereof, thou shameless thing, for this thy speech, that forthwith he may
cut thee limb from limb.'

So he spake, and with his saying scared away the women, who fled through the hall, and the
knees of each were loosened for fear, for they deemed that his words were true. But Odysseus
took his stand by the burning braziers, tending the lights, and gazed on all the men: but far
other matters he pondered in his heart, things not to be unfulfilled.

Now Athene would in no wise suffer the lordly wooers to abstain from biting scorn, that the
pain might sink yet the deeper into the heart of Odysseus, son of Laertes. So Eurymachus, son
of Polybus, began to speak among them, girding at Odysseus, and so made mirth for his friends:

'Hear me ye wooers of the queen renowned, that I may say that which my spirit within me bids
me. Not without the gods' will has this man come to the house of Odysseus; methinks at least
that the torchlight flares forth from {*} that head of his, for there are no hairs on it, nay
never so thin.'

{* Accepting the conjecture [Greek] = [Greek] for the MSS. [Greek]}

He spake and withal addressed Odysseus, waster of cities: 'Stranger, wouldest thou indeed be
my hireling, if I would take thee for my man, at an upland farm, and thy wages shall be assured
thee, and there shalt thou gather stones for walls and plant tall trees? There would I provide
thee bread continual, and clothe thee with raiment, and give thee shoes for thy feet. Howbeit,
since thou art practised only in evil, thou wilt not care to go to the labours of the field,
but wilt choose rather to go louting through the land, that thou mayst have wherewithal to
feed thine insatiate belly.'

Then Odysseus of many counsels answered him and said: 'Eurymachus, would that there might be
a trial of labour between us twain, in the season of spring, when the long days begin! In the
deep grass might it be, and I should have a crooked scythe, and thou another like it, that
we might try each the other in the matter of labour, fasting till late eventide, and grass
there should be in plenty. Or would again, that there were oxen to drive, the best there may
be, large and tawny, both well filled with fodder, of equal age and force to bear the yoke
and of strength untiring! And it should be a field of four ploughgates, and the clod should
yield before the ploughshare. Then shouldest thou see me, whether or no I would cut a clean
furrow unbroken before me. Or would that this very day Cronion might waken war whence he would,
and that I had a shield and two spears, and a helmet all of bronze, close fitting on my temples!
Then shouldest thou see me mingling in the forefront of the battle, nor speak and taunt me
with this my belly. Nay, thou art exceeding wanton and thy heart is hard, and thou thinkest
thyself some great one and mighty, because thou consortest with few men and feeble. And Eurymachus
cast and smote the cup-bearer on the right hand, and the ladle cup dropped to the ground with
a clang, while the young man groaned and fell backwards in the dust. Then the wooers clamoured
through the shadowy halls, and thus one would say looking to his neighbour:

'Would that our wandering guest had perished otherwhere, or ever he came hither; so should
he never have made all this tumult in our midst! But now we are all at strife about beggars,
and there will be no more joy of the good feast, for worse things have their way.'

Then the mighty prince Telemachus spake among them:

'Sirs, ye are mad; now doth your mood betray that ye have eaten and drunken; some one of the
gods is surely moving you. Nay, now that ye have feasted well, go home and lay you to rest,
since your spirit so bids; for as for me, I drive no man hence.'

Thus he spake, and they all bit their lips and marvelled at Telemachus, in that he spake boldly.
Then Amphinomus made harangue, and spake among them, Amphinomus, the famous son of Nisus the
prince, the son of Aretias:

'Friends, when a righteous word has been spoken, none surely would rebuke another with hard
speech and be angry. And the consequences were so important to Octavius and to Rome that the accounts
were naturally adorned afterwards with the most glowing colors. Every poet who lived by the
bounty of Augustus in later years naturally felt inspired to pay tribute to it in verse. But
the actual naval battle seems to have been of an indecisive character.

For that matter, even after the wholesale surrender of Antony's Roman army and fleet, neither Anthony
nor Octavius realized the importance of what had happened. Antony had recovered from worse
disasters before, and felt secure in Alexandria. Octavius at first followed up his advantage
with timid and uncertain steps. Only after the way was made easy by the hasty submission of the
Asiatic princes and the wave of popularity and enthusiasm that was
raised in Rome by the news of the victory, did Octavius press the
issue to Egypt itself.

There the war came to an end with the suicide of both Antony and
Cleopatra.

  
  
  As in the case of the indecisive naval battle off the capes
  of the Chesapeake, which led directly to the
surrender of Cornwallis, an action indecisive in character may be
most decisive in results.

Actium may not have been a pronounced naval victory but it had tremendous consequences. As at
Salamis, East and West met for the supremacy of the western world, and the East was beaten back.
It is not likely that the Egyptian or the Syrian would have dominated the genius of the western
world for any length of time, but the defeat of Octavius would have
meant a hybrid empire which would have fallen to pieces like the empire
of Alexander, leaving western Europe split into a number of petty
states.

On the other hand, Octavius was enabled to build on the consequences of Actium the great outlines
of the Roman empire, the influence of which on the civilized world
to-day is still incalculable.

When he left Rome to fight Antony, the government was bankrupt and the people torn with faction.
When he returned he brought the vast treasure of Egypt and found a people united to support
him. Actium, therefore, is properly taken as the significant date for the beginning of the Roman
empire. Octavius took the name of his grand-uncle Cæsar, the title of Augustus, and as "Imperator"
became the first of the Roman emperors.

The relation of the battle of Actium to this portentous change in the fortunes of Octavius was formally
recognized by him on the scene where it took place.

Nicopolis, the City of Victory, was founded upon the site of his camp, with the beaks of the
captured ships as trophies adorning its forum. The little temple of Apollo on the point of Actium
he rebuilt on an imposing scale and instituted there in honor of his victory the "Actian games,"
which were held thereafter for two hundred years.

After the battle of Actium and the establishment of a powerful Roman empire without a rival
in the world, there follows a long period in which the Mediterranean,
and indeed all the waterways known to the civilized nations, belonged
without challenge to the galleys of Rome.

Naval stations were established to assist in the one activity left to ships of war, the pursuit
of pirates, but otherwise there was little or nothing to do.
 Here then, the wise Penelope sat her down, and next came white-armed handmaids
from the women's chamber, and began to take away the many fragments of food, and the tables
and the cups whence the proud lords had been drinking, and they raked out the fire from the
braziers on to the floor, and piled many fresh logs upon them, to give light and warmth.

Then Melantho began to revile Odysseus yet a second time, saying: 'Stranger, wilt thou still
be a plague to us here, circling round the house in the night, and spying the women? Nay, get
thee forth, thou wretched thing, and be thankful for thy supper, or straightway shalt thou
even be smitten with a torch and so fare out of the doors.'

Then Odysseus of many counsels looked fiercely on her, and said: 'Good woman, what possesses
thee to assail me thus out of an angry heart? Is it because I go filthy and am clothed about
in sorry raiment, and beg through the land, for necessity is laid on me? This is the manner
of beggars and of wandering men. Wherefore, woman, see lest some day thou too lose all thy
fine show wherein thou now excellest among the handmaids, as well may chance, if thy mistress
be provoked to anger with thee, or if Odysseus come home, for there is yet a place for hope.
And even if he hath perished as ye deem, and is never more to return, yet by Apollo's grace
he hath a son like him, Telemachus, and none of the women works wantonness in his halls without
his knowledge, for he is no longer of an age not to mark it,

Thus he spake, and the wise Penelope heard him, and rebuked the handmaid, and spake and hailed her:

'Thou reckless thing and unabashed, be sure thy great sin is not hidden from me, and thy blood
shall be on thine own head for the same! Wherefore do thou ask me now in thy house all else
that thou wilt, but inquire not concerning my race and mine own country, lest as I think thereupon
thou fill my heart the more with pains, for I am a man of many sorrows. But now am I in sorrow,
such a host of ills some god has sent against me. For all the noblest that are princes in the
isles, in Dulichium and Same and wooded Zacynthus, and they that dwell around even in clear-seen
Ithaca, these are wooing me against my will, and devouring the house. Wherefore I take no heed
of strangers, nor suppliants, nor at all of heralds, the craftsmen of the people. But I waste
my heart away in longing for Odysseus; so they speed on my marriage and I weave a web of wiles.
Thus did I finish the web by no will of mine, for so I must. And now I can neither escape the
marriage nor devise any further counsel, and my parents are instant with me to marry, and my
son chafes that these men devour his livelihood, as he takes note of all; for by this time
he has come to man's estate; and is full able to care for a household, for one to which Zeus
vouchsafes honour. But even so tell me of thine own stock, whence thou art, for thou art not
sprung of oak or rock, whereof old tales tell.'

And Odysseus of many counsels answered her and said:

'O wife revered of Odysseus, son of Laertes, wilt thou never have done asking me about mine
own race? Nay, but I will tell thee: yet surely thou wilt give me over to sorrows yet more
than those wherein I am holden, for so it ever is when a man has been afar from his own country,
so long as now I am, wandering in sore pain to many cities of mortals. Yet even so I will tell
thee what thou askest and inquirest. There is a land called Crete in the midst of the wine-dark
sea, a fair land and a rich, begirt with water, and therein are many men innumerable, and ninety
cities. And all have not the same speech, but there is confusion of tongues; there dwell Achaeans
and there too Cretans of Crete, high of heart, and Cydonians there and Dorians of waving plumes
and goodly Pelasgians. And among these cities is the mighty city Cnosus, wherein Minos when
he was nine years old began to rule, he who held converse with great Zeus, and was the father
of my father, even of Deucalion, high of heart. Now Deucalion begat me and Idomeneus the prince.
Howbeit, he had gone in his beaked ships up into Ilios, with the sons of Atreus; but my famed
name is Aethon, being the younger of the twain and he was the first born and the better man.
There I saw Odysseus, and gave him guest-gifts, for the might of the wind bare him too to Crete,
as he was making for Troy land, and had driven him wandering past Malea. So he stayed his ships
in Amnisus, whereby is the cave of Eilithyia, in havens hard to win, and scarce he escaped
the tempest. Anon he came up to the city and asked for Idomeneus, saying that he was his friend
and held by him in love and honour. But it was now the tenth or the eleventh dawn since Idomeneus
had gone in his beaked ships up into Ilios. Then I led him to the house, and gave him good
entertainment with all loving-kindness out of the plenty in my house, and for him and for the
rest of his company, that went with him, I gathered and gave barley meal and dark wine out
of the public store, and oxen to sacrifice to his heart's desire.  There the goodly Achaeans
abode twelve days, for the strong North Wind penned them there, and suffered them not to stay
upon the coast, for some angry god had roused it. On the thirteenth day the wind fell, and
then they lifted anchor.'

So he told many a false tale in the likeness of truth, and her tears flowed as she listened,
and her flesh melted. And even as the snow melts in the high places of the hills, the snow
that the South-East wind has thawed, when the West has scattered it abroad, and as it wastes
the river streams run full, even so her fair cheeks melted beneath her tears, as she wept her
own lord, who even then was sitting by her. Now Odysseus had compassion of heart upon his wife
in her lamenting, but his eyes kept steadfast between his eyelids as it were horn or iron,
and craftily he hid his tears. But she, when she had taken her fill of tearful lamentation,
answered him in turn and spake, saying:

'Friend as thou art, even now I think to make trial of thee, and learn whether in very truth
thou didst entertain my lord there in thy halls with his godlike company, as thou sayest. Tell
me what manner of raiment he was clothed in about his body, and what manner of man he was himself,
and tell me of his fellows that went with him.'

Then Odysseus of many counsels answered her saying: 'Lady, it is hard for one so long parted
from him to tell thee all this, for it is now the twentieth year since he went thither and
left my country. Yet even so I will tell thee as I see him in spirit. Goodly Odysseus wore
a thick purple mantle, twofold, which had a brooch fashioned in gold, with two sheathes for
the pins, and on the face of it was a curious device: a hound in his forepaws held a dappled
fawn and gazed on it as it writhed. And all men marvelled at the workmanship, how, wrought
as they were in gold, the hound was gazing on the fawn and strangling it, and the fawn was
writhing with his feet and striving to flee. Moreover, I marked the shining doublet about his
body, like the gleam over the skin of a dried onion, so smooth it was, and glistering as the
sun; truly many women looked thereon and wondered. Yet another thing will I tell thee, and
do thou ponder it in thy heart. I know not if Odysseus was thus clothed upon at home, or if
one of his fellows gave him the raiment as he went on board the swift ship, or even it may
be some stranger, seeing that to many men was Odysseus dear, for few of the Achaeans were his
peers. I, too, gave him a sword of bronze, and a fair purple mantle with double fold, and a
tasseled doublet, and I sent him away with all honour on his decked ship. Moreover, a henchman
bare him company, somewhat older than he, and I will tell thee of him too, what manner of man
he was. He was round-shouldered, black-skinned, and curly-headed, his name Eurybates; and Odysseus
honoured him above all his company, because in all things he was like-minded with himself.'

So he spake, and in her heart he stirred yet more the desire of weeping, as she knew the certain
tokens that Odysseus showed her. So when she had taken her fill of tearful lament, then she
answered him, and spake saying:

'Now verily, stranger, thou that even before wert held in pity, shalt be dear and honourable
in my halls, for it was I who gave him these garments, as judging from thy words, and folded
them myself, and brought them from the chamber, and added besides the shining brooch to be
his jewel. But him I shall never welcome back, returned home to his own dear country. But he
has lost his dear companions and his hollow ship on the wine-dark sea, on his way from the
isle Thrinacia: for Zeus and Helios had a grudge against him, because his company had slain
the kine of Helios. They for their part all perished in the wash of the sea, but the wave cast
him on the keel of the ship out upon the coast, on the land of the Phaeacians that are near
of kin to the gods, and they did him all honour heartily as unto a god, and gave him many gifts,
and themselves would fain have sent him scathless home. Yea and Odysseus would have been here
long since, but he thought it more profitable to gather wealth, as he journeyed over wide lands;
so truly is Odysseus skilled in gainful arts above all men upon earth, nor may any mortal men
contend with him. So Pheidon king of the Thesprotians told me. But me he first sent off, for
it chanced that a ship of the Thesprotians was on her way to Dulichium, a land rich in grain.

'In this wise, as I tell thee, he is safe and will come shortly, and very near he is and will
not much longer be far from his friends and his own country; yet withal I will give thee my
oath on it. But on this wise my heart has a boding, and so it shall be. Neither shall Odysseus
come home any more, nor shalt thou gain an escort hence, since there are not now such masters
in the house as Odysseus was among men,--if ever such an one there was,-- to welcome guests
revered and speed them on their way. But do ye, my handmaids, wash this man's feet and strew
a couch for him, bedding and mantles and shining blankets, that well and warmly he may come
to the time of golden-throned Dawn. And very early in the morning bathe him and anoint him,
that within the house beside Telemachus he may eat meat, sitting quietly in the hall. And it
shall be the worse for any hurtful man of the wooers, that vexes the stranger, yea he shall
not henceforth profit himself here, for all his sore anger. For how shalt thou learn concerning
me, stranger, whether indeed I excel all women in wit and thrifty device, if all unkempt and
evil clad thou sittest at supper in my halls? Man's life is brief enough! And if any be a hard
man and hard at heart, all men cry evil on him for the time to come, while yet he lives, and
all men mock him when he is dead. For full many a night I have lain on an unsightly bed, and
awaited the bright throned Dawn. And baths for the feet are no longer my delight, nor shall
any women of those who are serving maidens in thy house touch my foot, unless there chance
to be some old wife, true of heart, one that has borne as much trouble as myself; I would not
grudge such an one to touch my feet.'

Then wise Penelope answered him: 'Dear stranger, for never yet has there come to my house,
of strangers from afar, a dearer man or so discreet as thou, uttering so heedfully the words
of wisdom. I have an ancient woman of an understanding heart, that diligently nursed and tended
that hapless man my lord, she took him in her arms in the hour when his mother bare him. She
will wash thy feet, albeit her strength is frail. Up now, wise Eurycleia, and wash this man,
whose years are the same as thy master's. Yea and perchance such even now are the feet of Odysseus,
and such too his hands, for quickly men age in misery.'

So she spake, and the old woman covered her face with her hands and shed hot tears, and spake
a word of lamentation, saying:

'Ah, woe is me, child, for thy sake, all helpless that I am! Surely Zeus hated thee above all
men, though thou hadst a god-fearing spirit! For never yet did any mortal burn so many fat
pieces of the thigh and so many choice hecatombs to Zeus, whose joy is in the thunder, as thou
didst give to him, praying that so thou mightest grow to a smooth old age and rear thy renowned
son. But now from thee alone hath Zeus wholly cut off the day of thy returning.  Haply at him
too did the women mock in a strange land afar, whensoever he came to the famous palace of any
lord, even as here these shameless ones all mock at thee. To shun their insults and many taunts
it is that thou sufferest them not to wash thy feet, but the daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope,
hath bidden me that am right willing to this task. Wherefore I will wash thy feet, both for
Penelope's sake and for thine own, for that my heart within me is moved and troubled. But come,
mark the word that I shall speak. Many strangers travel-worn have ere now come hither, but
I say that I have never seen any so like another, as thou art like Odysseus, in fashion in
voice and in feet.'

Then Odysseus of many counsels answered her saying: 'Old wife, even so all men declare, that
have beheld us twain, that we favour each other exceedingly, even as thou dost mark and say.'

Thereupon the crone took the shining cauldron, wherefrom {*} she set to wash his feet, and
poured in much cold water and next mingled therewith the warm. Now Odysseus sat aloof from
the hearth, and of a sudden he turned his face to the darkness, for anon he had a misgiving
of heart lest when she handled him she might know the scar again, and all should be revealed.
Now she drew near her lord to wash him, and straightway she knew the scar of the wound, that
the boar had dealt him with his white tusk long ago, when Odysseus went to Parnassus to see
Autolycus, and the sons of Autolycus, his mother's noble father, who outdid all men in thievery
and skill in swearing. This skill was the gift of the god himself, even Hermes, for that he
burned to him the well-pleasing sacrifice of the thighs of lambs and kids; wherefore Hermes
abetted him gladly. Now Autolycus once had gone to the rich land of Ithaca, and found his daughter's
son a child new-born, and when he was making an end of supper, behold, Eurycleia set the babe
on his knees, and spake and hailed him: 'Autolycus find now a name thyself to give thy child's
own son; for lo, he is a child of many prayers.'

{* Reading [Greek]}

Then Autolycus made answer and spake: 'My daughter and my daughter's lord, give ye him whatsoever
name I tell you. Forasmuch as I am come hither in wrath against many a one, both man and woman,
over the fruitful earth, wherefore let the child's name be "a man of wrath," Odysseus. But
when the child reaches his full growth, and comes to the great house of his mother's kin at
Parnassus, whereby are my possessions, I will give him a gift out of these and send him on
his way rejoicing.'

Therefore it was that Odysseus went to receive the splendid gifts. And Autolycus and the sons
of Autolycus grasped his hands and greeted him with gentle words, and Amphithea, his mother's
mother, clasped him in her arms and kissed his face and both his fair eyes. Then Autolycus
called to his renowned sons to get ready the meal, and they hearkened to the call. So presently
they led in a five-year-old bull, which they flayed and busily prepared, and cut up all the
limbs and deftly chopped them small, and pierced them with spits and roasted them cunningly,
dividing the messes. So for that livelong day they feasted till the going down of the sun,
and their soul lacked not ought of the equal banquet. But when the sun sank and darkness came
on, they laid them to rest and took the boon of sleep. 

The Second Dutch War

Five years after Charles II became king, England was involved in another war with the Netherlands.
There was still bad feeling between the two peoples, and trading companies in the far east
or west kept up a guerilla warfare which flooded both governments with complaints. The chief cause
seems to have been the desire of the English Guinea Company to get rid of their Dutch competitors
who persistently undersold them in the slave markets of the West Indies. Before there was any
declaration of war an English squadron was sent out to attack the Dutch company's settlement on
the West African coast. After this it crossed the Atlantic and took New Amsterdam, which thereafter
became New York. The Dutch retaliated by sending out one of their squadrons to retake their African
post and threaten the Atlantic colonies. In March, 1665, war was declared.

In this conflict the relative strengths of the two navies were about the same as in the previous
war. The Dutch had made improvements in their ships, but they still suffered from the lack of
unity in organization and spirit. The first engagement was the battle of Lowestoft, on June 3,
1665. The English fleet was under the personal command of the Duke of York, later James II;
the Dutch were led by de Ruyter. The two forces numbered from 80 to 100 ships each, and strung
out as they were, must have extended over nearly ten miles of sea. The Duke of York formed
his fleet in the pattern that he set by his own "Fighting Instructions," which governed the
tactics of all navies thereafter for a hundred years, namely, the entire force drawn up in single
line. This line bore down abreast toward the enemy until it reached gunshot, then swung into
line ahead and sailed on a course parallel to that of the enemy.

De Ruyter arranged his fleet accordingly, and the two long lines passed each other on opposite
tacks three times, cannonading furiously at close range. This meant that the force was distributed
evenly along the enemy's line and as against an evenly matched force these tactics could result,
as a rule, only in mere inconclusive artillery duels which each side would claim as victories.
In the battle of Lowestoft, however, several of the captains in the
Dutch center flinched at the third passing and bore up to leeward,
leaving a wide gap in de Ruyter's line.

The English broke through at this point and hammered the weakened Dutch line in the center with
a superior force.

This was the decisive point in the battle and de Ruyter was forced to retreat. The Dutch would
have suffered even greater loss than they did had it not been for the masterly fashion in which Cornelius
Tromp--son of the famous Martin Tromp--covered the retreat.

The defeat of the Dutch was due to the bad conduct of the captains in the center, four of whom
were shot by order of de Ruyter and others dismissed from the service. It is interesting to
note that while the first half of the battle was fought on the formal lines that were soon to
be the cast iron rule of conduct for the British navy, and led to nothing conclusive; the second
half was characterized by the breaking of the enemy's line, in the older style of Blake, and led
to a pronounced victory.

At this time Louis XIV had pledged himself to give aid to the Netherlands in case of attack
by a third Power. But when the Dutch and his own ministers called on him to make good his
promise he offered more promises and no fulfillment.

The rumor of an approaching French squadron which was to make junction with de Ruyter, who
had now been placed in command of the Dutch fleet, caused the English government to make the
grave mistake of detaching Prince Rupert with 20 ships to look for the mythical French force.
This division left Monk, who was again in command of the fleet, with
only 57 ships.

Hearing that de Ruyter was anchored on the Flanders coast, Monk went out to find him. De Ruyter
left his anchorage to meet the English, and on June 1, 1666, the two forces met in mid-Channel,
between Dunkirk and the Downs. As the Dutch force heavily outnumbered him--nearly two to one--Monk
might have been expected to avoid fighting, but he acted in the spirit of Blake. Having the windward
position he decided that he could strike the advanced division under Tromp and maul it severely
before the rest of the Dutch could succor it. Accordingly he boldly headed for the enemy's
van. When Monk attacked he had only about 35 ships in hand, for the rest were straggling behind
too far to help. Thus began the famous "Four Days' Battle," characterized by Mahan as "the most
remarkable, in some of its aspects that has ever been fought upon the ocean."[1]

[Footnote 1: THE INFLUENCE OF SEA POWER UPON HISTORY, p. 125.]

The fighting was close and furious and in its unparalleled duration numbers were bound to tell.
On the third day Monk retreated to the Thames, but on being joined by Rupert's squadron immediately
sallied forth to do battle again. On this day, June 4, the Dutch succeeded in cutting through
his formation and putting him between two fires. Indeed Monk escaped destruction only by breaking
through his ring of enemies and finding refuge in the Thames. The Dutch had won a great victory,
for the English had lost some twenty ships and 5000 in killed and wounded. But Monk was right
in feeling a sense of pride in the fight that he had made against great odds. The losses that
he had inflicted were out of all proportion to the relative strength of the two forces. Unfortunately
the new spirit that was coming into the navy of the Restoration was evidenced by the fact
that a number of English captains, finding the action too hot for them, deserted their commander
in chief. On the Dutch side de Ruyter's handling of his fleet was complicated by the conduct of
Cornelius Tromp. This officer believed that he, not de Ruyter, should have been made commander
of the Dutch fleet and in this action as in the next, acted with
no regard for his chief's orders.

As a consequence of the Four Days' Battle, Dutchmen again controlled the Channel and closed the
mouth of the Thames to trade. The English strained every nerve to create a fleet that should
put an end to this humiliating and disastrous situation.

The preparations were carried out with such speed that on July 22 (1666), Monk and Rupert
anchored off the end of the Gunfleet shoal with a fleet of about 80 ships of the line and frigates.
On the 25th the English sighted de Ruyter, with a fleet slightly larger in numbers, in the broad
part of the Thames estuary.

Monk, forming his fleet in the long line ahead, sailed to the attack. The action that followed
is called the "Battle of St. James's Day" or the "Gunfleet."

Whether or not Monk was influenced by his princely colleague it is impossible to say, but the
tactics of this engagement do not suggest the Monk of earlier battles. He followed the "Fighting
Instructions" and in spite of them won a victory, but it might have been far more decisive.
The English bore down in line abreast, then formed line ahead on reaching gunshot, the van,
center, and rear, engaging respectively the Dutch van, center, and rear. In these line ahead attacks
the rear usually straggled. Tromp, commanding the Dutch rear, saw his chance to attack Smith,
commanding the English rear, before his squadron was in proper formation. Smith retreated, and
Tromp, eager to win a victory all by himself, abandoned the rest of the Dutch fleet and pursued
Smith. Thus the action broke into two widely separated parts. The English van and center succeeded
in forcing the corresponding Dutch divisions to retreat, and if Monk
had turned to the help of Smith he might have taken or destroyed all
of the 39 ships in Tromp's division.

Instead, he and Rupert went careering on in pursuit of the enemy directly ahead of them. Eventually
de Ruyter's ships found refuge in shallow water and then Monk turned
to catch Tromp.

But the latter proved too clever for his adversaries and slipped
between them to an anchorage alongside of de Ruyter.

  

Although the victory was not nearly so decisive as it should have been with the opportunity offered,
nevertheless it served the need of the hour. De Ruyter was no longer able to blockade the Thames
and the Straits of Dover. And Monk, following up his success, carried the war to the enemy's coast,
where he burned a merchant fleet of 160 vessels in the roadstead of the island of Terschelling,
and destroyed one of the towns. Early in 1666 active operations on both sides dwindled down,
and Charles, anxious to use naval appropriations for other purposes, allowed the fleet to fall into
a condition of unreadiness for service. One of the least scandals in this corrupt age was
the unwillingness or inability of the officials to pay the seamen their wages. In consequence large
numbers of English prisoners in Holland actually preferred taking service in the Dutch navy
rather than accepting exchange, on the ground that the Dutch government
paid its men while their own did not.

Early in June, 1667, de Ruyter took advantage of the condition of
the English fleet by inflicting perhaps the greatest humiliation on
England that she has ever suffered.

Entering the Thames unopposed, he was prevented from attacking London only by unfavorable wind and
tide. He then turned his attention to the dockyards of Chatham and burnt or captured seven great
ships of the line, besides numerous smaller craft, carried off the naval stores at Sheerness,
and then for the next six weeks kept a blockade on the Thames and the eastern and southern
coasts of England. This mortifying situation continued until the signing of the "Peace of
Breda" concluded the war.

The Third Dutch War

Less than five years later Charles again made war on the Netherlands.

For this there was not the shadow of excuse, but Louis XIV saw fit to attack the Dutch, and
Charles was ever his willing vassal. The English began hostilities without any declaration
of war by a piratical attack on a Dutch convoy.

At this juncture Holland was reduced to the last extremity. Attacked on her land frontiers by
France, then the dominating military power, and on her sea frontiers
by England, the strongest naval power, she seemed to have small chance
to survive.

But her people responded with a heroism worthy of her splendid history. They opened their dykes
to check the armies of invasion and strained every nerve to equip a fleet large enough to cope
with the combined navies of France and England. In this Third Dutch War four great naval battles
were fought: that of Solebay, May 28, 1672, the two engagements off Schooneveldt, May 28 and
June 4, 1673, and that of the Texel, August 11, 1673.

In all of these the honors go to the Dutch and their great admiral,
de Ruyter.

Since these actions did not restore the Netherlands to their old-time position or check the ascendancy
of England, they need not be discussed individually here.

The outstanding feature of the whole story is the surpassing skill and courage of de Ruyter
in the face of overwhelming odds. In this war he showed the full stature of his genius as never
before, and won his title as the greatest seaman of the 17th century.

After his death one must wait till the day of Suffren and Nelson to find men worthy to rank with
him.

In this campaign de Ruyter showed his powers not only as a tactician but as a strategist. His master,
Martin Tromp, is regarded as the father of the line ahead formation for battle, but he undoubtedly
taught de Ruyter its limitations as well as its advantages, and there is no trace of the stupid
formalism of the Duke of York's regulations in de Ruyter's brilliant work.

[Footnote 1: INFLUENCE OF SEA POWER UPON HISTORY, p. 144.]

At this time he had no worthy opponent. As Monk was dead, the Duke of York had again assumed
active command with Rupert as his lieutenant. Although the Duke was honestly devoted to the
navy he was dull-witted, and in spite of the advantage of numbers and the dogged courage of
officers and men which so often in English history has made up for stupid leadership, he was
wholly unable to cope with de Ruyter's genius. As for the French navy, their ships were superb,
the best in Europe, but their officers had no experience and apparently small desire for close
fighting. At all events, despite the odds against him, de Ruyter defeated the allies in all
four battles, prevented their landing an army of invasion, and broke up their attempt to blockade
the coast.

The war was unpopular in England and as it met with ill success it
became more so.

After the battle of the Texel, in 1673, active operations died down to practically nothing,
and at the beginning of the year England made peace. By this time Holland had managed to find
other allies on the Continent--Spain and certain German states--and while she had to continue
her struggle against Louis XIV by land she was relieved of the menace of her great enemy on
the sea.

Fifteen years later, by a curious freak of history, a Dutch prince became King William III of
England, and the two old enemies became united in alliance. But the Netherlands had exhausted
themselves by their protracted struggle.

They had saved their independence, but after the close of the 17th century they ceased to be a world
power of any consequence.

The persistent enmity of the French king for the Dutch gained nothing for France but everything
for England. Unwittingly he poured out his resources in money and men to the end that England
should become the great colonial and maritime rival of France. As a part of her spoils England
had gained New York and New Jersey, thus linking her northern and
southern American colonies, and she had taken St. Helena as a base
for her East Indies merchantmen.

She had tightened her hold in India, and by repeatedly chastising the Barbary pirates had won
immunity for her traders in the Mediterranean. At the beginning of the Second Dutch War Monk
had said with brutal frankness, "What matters this or that reason? What we want is more of
the trade which the Dutch have." This, the richest prize of all, fell from the hands of the
Dutch into those of the English. During the long drawn war which went on after the English
peace of 1674, while Holland with her allies fought against Louis
XIV, the great bulk of the Dutch carrying trade passed from the Dutch
to the English flag.

The close of the 17th century, therefore, found England fairly started on her career as an
ocean empire, unified by sea power.

Her navy, despite the vices it had caught from the Stuart régime, had become firmly established
as a permanent institution with a definite organization. By this time every party recognized
its essential importance to England's future.

Nevertheless, whatever satisfaction may be felt by men of English
speech in this rapid growth of England's power and prestige as a result
of the three wars with the Dutch, one cannot avoid the other side
of the picture.

A people small in numbers but great in energy and genius was hounded to the point of extinction
by the greed of its powerful neighbors. Peace-loving, asking merely to be let alone, the only
crime of the Dutch was to excite the envy of the English and the
French.

REFERENCES

See next chapter, page 221. From this time on, for over 125 years, England was involved in a series
of wars with France. They began with the threat of Louis to dominate
Europe and ended with the similar threat on the part of Napoleon.

In all this conflict the sea power of England was a factor of paramount importance. Even when
the fighting was continental rather than naval, the ability of Great Britain to cut France off from
her overseas possessions resulted in the transfer of enormous tracts of territory to the British
Empire.

During the 18th century, the territorial extent of the expire grew by leaps and bounds, with the single
important loss of the American colonies. And even this brought no positive advantage to France
for it did not weaken her adversary's grip on the sea.

The War of the League of Augsburg

The accession of William III was the signal for England's entry into
the war of the League of Augsburg (1688-1697) against France, and
the effort of the French king to put James II back again upon the
English throne.

By this time the French navy had been so greatly strengthened that at the outset it outnumbered
the combined fleets of the English and the Dutch. It boasted the only notable admiral of this
period, Tourville, but it missed every opportunity to do something decisive. It failed to keep
William from landing in England with an army; it failed also to keep
the English from landing and supplying an army in Ireland, where they
raised the siege of Londonderry and won the decisive victory of the
Boyne.

On the other hand the British navy was handled with equal irresolution and blindness in strategy.
It accomplished what it did in keeping communications open with Ireland
through the mistakes of the French, and its leaders seemed to be equally
unaware of the importance of winning definitely the control of the
sea.

If the naval strategy on both sides was feeble the tactics were equally
so.

The contrast between the fighting of Blake, Monk, Tromp and de Ruyter and that of the admirals
of this period is striking. For example, on May 1, 1689, the English admiral Herbert and the
French admiral Châteaurenault fought an indecisive action in Bantry Bay, Ireland. After considerable
powder had been shot away without the loss of a ship on either side,
the French went back to protect their transports in the bay; Herbert
also withdrew, and was made Earl of Torrington for his "victory."

This same officer commanding a Dutch and English fleet encountered the French under Tourville
off Beachy Head on the south coast of England (July 10, 1690). It is true that Tourville's
force was stronger, but Torrington acted with no enterprise and was thoroughly beaten. At the
same time the French admiral showed lack of push in following up
his victory, which might have been crushing.

By this time the line ahead order of fighting had become a fetich on both sides. The most noted
naval battle of this war is that of La Hogue (May 29, 1692), which
has been celebrated as a great British victory.

In this action an allied fleet of 99 were opposed to a French fleet of 44 under Tourville.
Tourville offered battle under such odds only because he had imperative orders from his king
to fight the enemy. During the action the French did not lose a single ship, but in the four
days' retreat the vessels became separated in trying to find shelter
and fifteen were destroyed or taken.

This was a severe blow to the the French navy but by no means decisive. The subsequent inactivity
of the fleet was due to the demands of the war on land.

As the war became more and more a continental affair, Louis was compelled to utilize all his
resources for his military campaigns. For this reason the splendid fleet with which he had begun
the war gradually disappeared from the sea. Some of these men of war were lent to great privateersmen
like Jean Bart and Du Guay Trouin, who took out powerful squadrons of from five to ten ships
of the line, strong enough to overcome the naval escorts of a British convoy, and ravaged English
commerce. In this matter of protecting shipping the naval strategy was as vacillating and blind
as in everything else. Nevertheless no mere commerce destroying will serve to win the control
of the sea, and despite the losses in trade and the low ebb to which English naval efficiency
had sunk, the British flag still dominated the ocean routes while the greater part of the French
fleet rotted in port.

In this war of the League of Augsburg, Louis XIV was fighting practically all Europe, and the
strain was too great for a nation already weakened by a long series of wars. By the terms of
peace which he found himself obliged to accept, he lost nearly everything that he had gained
by conquest during his long reign.

Wars of the Spanish and the Austrian Succession

After a brief interval of peace war blazed out again over the question whether a French Bourbon
should be king of Spain,--the War of the Spanish Succession, 1702-1713.

England's aim in this war was to acquire some of the Spanish colonies
in America and to prevent any loss of trading privileges hitherto
enjoyed by the English and the Dutch. But as it turned out nothing
of importance was accomplished in the western hemisphere except by
the terms of peace. The French and Spanish attempted no major operations
by sea. But the English navy captured Minorca, with its important
harbor of Port Mahon, and Rooke, with more initiative than he had
ever shown before in his career, took Gibraltar (August 4, 1704).
These two prizes made Great Britain for the first time a Mediterranean
power, and the fact that she held the gateway to the inland sea was
of great importance in subsequent naval history.

In addition to these
captures the terms of peace (the Treaty of Utrecht) yielded to England
from the French Newfoundland, the Hudson Bay territory, and Nova Scotia.
All that the French had left on the eastern coast of Canada was Cape
Breton Island, with Louisburg, which was the key to the St. Lawrence.
As for commercial privileges, England had gained from the Portuguese,
who had been allies in the war, a practical monopoly of their carrying
trade; and from France she had taken the entire monopoly of the slave
trade to the Spanish American colonies which had been formerly granted
by Spain to France. Holland got nothing out of the war as affecting
her interests at sea,--not even a trading post. Her alliance with
Great Britain had become as some one has called it, that of "the giant
and the dwarf." At the conclusion of the War of the Spanish Succession,
to quote the words of Mahan, "England was the sea power; there was
no second."

In this war as in the preceding, French privateersmen
made great inroads on British commerce, and some of these privateering
operations were conducted on a grand scale. For example, Du Guay Trouin
took a squadron of six ships of the line and two frigates, together
with 2000 troops, across the Atlantic and attacked Rio Janeiro.

On such wise they spake one to the other, but the wooers at that time were framing death and
doom for Telemachus. Even so there came by them a bird on their left, an eagle of lofty flight,
with a cowering dove in his clutch. Then Amphinomus made harangue and spake among them:

'Friends, this counsel of ours will not go well, namely, the slaying of Telemachus; rather
let us bethink us of the feast.'

So spake Amphinomus, and his saying pleased them well. And Philoetius, a master of men, handed
them wheaten bread in beautiful baskets, and Melanthius poured out the wine. So they put forth
their hands on the good cheer set before them.

Now Telemachus, in his crafty purpose, made Odysseus to sit down within the stablished hall
by the threshold of stone, and placed for him a mean settle and a little table. He set by him
his mess of the entrails, and poured wine into a golden cup and spake to him, saying:

'There, sit thee down, drinking thy wine among the lords, and the taunts and buffets of all
the wooers I myself will ward off from thee, for this is no house of public resort, but the
very house of Odysseus, and for me he won it. For Zeus Cronion hath hindered us of our purpose,
else would we have silenced him in our halls, shrill orator as he is.'

So spake Antinous, but Telemachus took no heed of his words. Now the henchmen were leading
through the town the holy hecatomb of the gods, and lo, the long-haired Achaeans were gathered
beneath the shady grove of Apollo, the prince of archery.

Now when they had roasted the outer flesh and drawn it off the spits, they divided the messes
and shared the glorious feast. And beside Odysseus they that waited set an equal share, the
same as that which fell to themselves, for so Telemachus commanded, the dear son of divine
Odysseus. There was among the wooers a man of a lawless heart, Ctesippus was his name, and
in Same was his home, who trusting, forsooth, to his vast possessions, was wooing the wife
of Odysseus the lord long afar. And now he spake among the proud wooers:

'Hear me, ye lordly wooers, and I will say somewhat. The stranger verily has long had his due
portion, as is meet, an equal share; for it is not fair nor just to rob the guests of Telemachus
of their right, whosoever they may be that come to this house. Go to then, I also will bestow
on him a stranger's gift, that he in turn may give a present either to the bath-woman, or to
any other of the thralls within the house of godlike Odysseus.'

Therewith he caught up an ox's foot from the dish, where it lay, and hurled it with strong
hand. But Odysseus lightly avoided it with a turn of his head, and smiled right grimly in his
heart, and the ox's foot smote the well-builded wall. Then Telemachus rebuked Ctesippus, saying:

'Verily, Ctesippus, it has turned out happier for thy heart's pleasure as it is! Thou didst
not smite the stranger, for he himself avoided that which was cast at him, else surely would
I have struck thee through the midst with the sharp spear, and in place of wedding banquet
thy father would have had to busy him about a funeral feast in this place. Wherefore let no
man make show of unseemly deeds in this my house, for now I have understanding to discern both
good and evil, but in time past I was yet a child. But as needs we must, we still endure to
see these deeds, while sheep are slaughtered and wine drunken and bread devoured, for hard
it is for one man to restrain many. But to Telemachus himself I would speak a soft word and
to his mother, if perchance it may find favour with the mind of those twain. So long as your
hearts within you had hope of the wise Odysseus returning to his own house, so long none could
be wroth that ye waited and held back the wooers in the halls, for so had it been better, if
Odysseus had returned and come back to his own home. But now the event is plain, that he will
return no more. Go then, sit by thy mother and tell her all, namely, that she must wed the
best man that wooes her, and whose gives most gifts; so shalt thou with gladness live on the
heritage of thy father, eating and drinking, while she cares for another's house.'

Then wise Telemachus answered, and said: 'Nay by Zeus, Agelaus, and by the griefs of my father,
who far away methinks from Ithaca has perished or goes wandering, in nowise do I delay my mother's
marriage; nay, I bid her be married to what man she will, and withal I offer gifts without
number. But I do indeed feel shame to drive her forth from the hall, despite her will, by a
word of compulsion; God forbid that ever this should be.'

So spake Telemachus, but among the wooers Pallas Athene roused laughter unquenchable, and drave
their wits wandering. And now they were laughing with alien lips, and blood-bedabbled was the
flesh they ate, and their eyes were filled with tears and their soul was fain of lamentation.
Then the godlike Theoclymenus spake among them:

'Ah, wretched men, what woe is this ye suffer? Shrouded in night are your heads and your faces
and your knees, and kindled is the voice of wailing, and all cheeks are wet with tears, and
the walls and the fair main-beams of the roof are sprinkled with blood. And the porch is full,
and full is the court, of ghosts that hasten hellwards beneath the gloom, and the sun has perished
out of heaven, and an evil mist has overspread the world.'

So spake he, and they all laughed sweetly at him. Then Eurymachus, son of Polybus, began to
speak to them, saying:

'The guest that is newly come from a strange land is beside himself. Quick, ye young men, and
convey him forth out of doors, that he may go to the place of the gathering, since here he
finds it dark as night.'

Then godlike Theoclymenus answered him: 'Eurymachus, in nowise do I seek guides of thee to
send me on my way. Eyes have I, and ears, and both my feet, and a stable mind in my breast
of no mean fashioning. With these I will go forth, for I see evil coming on you, which not
one man of the wooers may avoid or shun, of all you who in the house of divine Odysseus deal
insolently with men and devise infatuate deeds.'

Therewith he went forth from out the fair-lying halls, and came to Peiraeus who received him
gladly. Then all the wooers, looking one at the other, provoked Telemachus to anger, laughing
at his guests. And thus some one of the haughty youths would speak:

'Telemachus, no man is more luckless than thou in his guests, seeing thou keepest such a filthy
wanderer, whosoever he be, always longing for bread and wine, and skilled in no peaceful work
nor any deed of war, but a mere burden of the earth. And this other fellow again must stand
up to play the seer! Nay, but if thou wouldest listen to me, much better it were. Let us cast
these strangers on board a benched ship, and send them to the Sicilians, whence they would
fetch thee their price.' {*}

{* Reading [Greek], which is a correction. Or keeping the MSS. [Greek] 'and this should bring
thee in a goodly price,' the subject to [Greek] being, probably, THE SALE, which is suggested
by the context.}

So spake the wooers, but he heeded not their words, in silence he looked towards his father,
expecting evermore the hour when he should stretch forth his hands upon the shameless wooers.

Now the daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope, had set her fair chair over against them, and heard
the words of each one of the men in the halls. For in the midst of laughter they had got ready
the midday meal, a sweet meal and abundant, for they had sacrificed many cattle. But never
could there be a banquet less gracious than that supper, such an one as the goddess and the
brave man were soon to spread for them; for that they had begun the devices of shame.

Book XXI

  Penelope bringeth forth her husband's bow, which the
  suitors could not bend, but was bent by Odysseus. So she descended the tall staircase of
her chamber, and took the well-bent key in her strong hand,
a goodly key of bronze, whereon was a handle of ivory. And
she betook her, with her handmaidens, to the
treasure-chamber in the uttermost part of the house, where
lay the treasures of her lord, bronze and gold and
well-wrought iron. And there lay the back-bent bow and the
quiver for the arrows, and many shafts were therein, winged
for death, gifts of a friend of Odysseus, that met with him
in Lacedaemon, Iphitus son of Eurytus, a man like to the
gods. These twain fell in with one another in Messene, in
the house of wise Ortilochus. Now Odysseus had gone thither
to recover somewhat that was owing to him from all the
people, for the men of Messene had lifted three hundred
sheep in benched ships from out of Ithaca, with the
shepherds of the flock. In quest of these it was that
Odysseus went on a far embassy, being yet a lad; for his
father and the other elders sent him forth. Moreover,
Iphitus came thither in his search for twelve brood mares,
which he had lost, with sturdy mules at the teat. These
same it was that brought him death and destiny in the
latter end, when he came to the child of Zeus, hardy of
heart, the man Heracles, that had knowledge of great
adventures, who smote Iphitus though his guest in his
house, in his frowardness, and had no regard for the
vengeance of the gods, nor for the table which he spread
before him; for after the meal he slew him, his guest
though he was, and kept for himself in the halls the horses
strong of hoof. After these was Iphitus asking, when he met
with Odysseus, and he gave him the bow, which of old great
Eurytus bare and had left at his death to his son in his
lofty house. And Odysseus gave Iphitus a sharp sword and a
mighty spear, for the beginning of a loving friendship; but
never had they acquaintance one of another at the board;
ere that might be, the son of Zeus slew Iphitus son of
Eurytus, a man like to the immortals, the same that gave
Odysseus the bow. But goodly Odysseus would never take it
with him on the black ships, as he went to the wars, but
the bow was laid by at home in the halls as a memorial of a
dear guest, and he carried it on his own land.

Now when the fair lady had come even to the treasure-chamber, and had stept upon the threshold
of oak, which the carpenter had on a time planed cunningly, and over it had made straight the
line,--doorposts also had he fitted thereby, whereon he set shining doors,--anon she quickly
loosed the strap from the handle of the door, and thrust in the key, and with a straight aim
shot back the bolts. And even as a bull roars that is grazing in a meadow, so mightily roared
the fair doors smitten by the key; and speedily they flew open before her. Then she stept on
to the high floor, where the coffers stood, wherein the fragrant raiment was stored. Thence
she stretched forth her hand, and took the bow from off the pin, all in the bright case which
sheathed it around. And there she sat down, and set the case upon her knees, and cried aloud
and wept, and took out the bow of her lord. Now when she had her fill of tearful lament, she
set forth to go to the hall to the company of the proud wooers, with the back-bent bow in her
hands, and the quiver for the arrows, and many shafts were therein winged for death. And her
maidens along with her bare a chest, wherein lay much store of iron and bronze, the gear of
combat of their lord. Nay come now, ye wooers, seeing that this is the prize that is put before
you. The usage of [Greek] in Od. xix. 71, xxii. 75, of [Greek] in Il. xvii. 465, and of [Greek]
in Od. xxii. 15, suggests rather for [Greek] the idea of 'aiming at a mark.'}

So spake she, and commanded Eumaeus, the goodly swineherd, to set the bow for the wooers and
the axes of grey iron. And Eumaeus took them with tears, and laid them down; and otherwhere
the neatherd wept, when he beheld the bow of his lord. Then Antinous rebuked them, and spake
and hailed them:

'Foolish boors, whose thoughts look not beyond the day, ah, wretched pair, wherefore now do
ye shed tears, and stir the soul of the lady within her, when her heart already lies low in
pain, for that she has lost her dear lord? Nay sit, and feast in silence, or else get ye forth
and weep, and leave the bow here behind, to be a terrible contest for the wooers, for methinks
that this polished bow does not lightly yield itself to be strung. For there is no man among
all these present such as Odysseus was, and I myself saw him, yea I remember it well, though
I was still but a child.'

So spake he, but his heart within him hoped that he would string the bow, and shoot through
the iron. Yet verily, he was to be the first that should taste the arrow at the hands of the
noble Odysseus, whom but late he was dishonouring as he sat in the halls, and was inciting
all his fellows to do likewise.

Then the mighty prince Telemachus spake among them, saying: 'Lo now, in very truth, Cronion
has robbed me of my wits! My dear mother, wise as she is, declares that she will go with a
stranger and forsake this house; yet I laugh and in my silly heart I am glad. Nay come now,
ye wooers, seeing that this is the prize which is set before you, a lady, the like of whom
there is not now in the Achaean land, neither in sacred Pylos, nor in Argos, nor in Mycenae,
nor yet in Ithaca, nor in the dark mainland. Nay but ye know all this yourselves,--why need
I praise my mother? Come therefore, delay not the issue with excuses, nor hold much longer
aloof from the drawing of the bow, that we may see the thing that is to be. Yea and I myself
would make trial of this bow. If I shall string it, and shoot through the iron, then should
I not sorrow if my lady mother were to quit these halls and go with a stranger, seeing that
I should be left behind, well able now to lift my father's goodly gear of combat.'

Therewith he cast from off his neck his cloak of scarlet, and sprang to his full height, and
put away the sword from his shoulders. First he dug a good trench and set up the axes, one
long trench for them all, and over it he made straight the line and round about stamped in
the earth. And amazement fell on all that beheld how orderly he set the axes, though never
before had he seen it so. Then he went and stood by the threshold and began to prove the bow.
Thrice he made it to tremble in his great desire to draw it, and thrice he rested from his
effort, though still he hoped in his heart to string the bow, and shoot through the iron. And
now at last he might have strung it, mightily straining thereat for the fourth time, but Odysseus
nodded frowning and stayed him, for all his eagerness. Then the strong prince Telemachus spake
among them again:

'Lo you now, even to the end of my days I shall be a coward and a weakling, or it may be I
am too young, and have as yet no trust in my hands to defend me from such an one as does violence
without a cause. But come now, ye who are mightier men than I, essay the bow and let us make
an end of the contest.'

Therewith he put the bow from him on the ground, leaning it against the smooth and well-compacted
doors, and the swift shaft he propped hard by against the fair bow-tip, and then he sat down
once more on the high seat, whence he had risen.

Then Antinous, son of Eupeithes, spake among them, saying: 'Rise up in order, all my friends,
beginning from the left, even from the place whence the wine is poured.'

So spake Antinous, and the saying pleased them well. Then first stood up Leiodes, son of Oenops,
who was their soothsayer and ever sat by the fair mixing bowl at the extremity of the hall;
he alone hated their infatuate deeds and was indignant with all the wooers. He now first took
the bow and the swift shaft, and he went and stood by the threshold, and began to prove the
bow; but he could not bend it; or ever that might be, his hands grew weary with the straining,
his unworn, delicate hands; so he spake among the wooers, saying:

'Friends, of a truth I cannot bend it, let some other take it. Ah, many of our bravest shall
this bow rob of spirit and of life, since truly it is far better for us to die, than to live
on and to fail of that for which we assemble evermore in this place, day by day expecting the
prize. Many there be even now that hope in their hearts and desire to wed Penelope, the bedfellow
of Odysseus: but when such an one shall make trial of the bow and see the issue, thereafter
let him woo some other fair-robed Achaean woman with his bridal gifts and seek to win her.
Nay, it angers me to hear it, and to think that a bow such as this shall rob our bravest of
spirit and of life, and all because thou canst not draw it. For I tell thee that thy lady mother
bare thee not of such might as to draw a bow and shoot arrows: but there be others of the proud
wooers that shall draw it soon.'

So he spake, and commanded Melanthius, the goatherd, saying: 'Up now, light a fire in the halls,
Melanthius; and place a great settle by the fire and a fleece thereon, and bring forth a great
ball of lard that is within, that we young men may warm and anoint the bow therewith and prove
it, and make an end of the contest.'

So he spake, and Melanthius soon kindled the never-resting fire, and drew up a settle and placed
it near, and put a fleece thereon, and he brought forth a great ball of lard that was within.
Therewith the young men warmed the bow, and made essay, but could not string it, for they were
greatly lacking of such might. And Antinous still held to the task and godlike Eurymachus,
chief men among the wooers, who were far the most excellent of all.

But those other twain went forth both together from the house, the neatherd and the swineherd
of godlike Odysseus; and Odysseus passed out after them. But when they were now gotten without
the gates and the courtyard, he uttered his voice and spake to them in gentle words:

'Neatherd and thou swineherd, shall I say somewhat or keep it to myself? Nay, my spirit bids
me declare it. What manner of men would ye be to help Odysseus, if he should come thus suddenly,
I know not whence, and some god were to bring him? Would ye stand on the side of the wooers
or of Odysseus? Tell me even as your heart and spirit bid you.'

Then the neatherd answered him, saying: 'Father Zeus, if but thou wouldst fulfil this wish:
{*}--oh, that that man might come, and some god lead him hither!

Now when he knew for a surety what spirit they were of, once more he answered and spake to
them, saying:

'Behold, home am I come, even I; after much travail and sore am I come in the twentieth year
to mine own country. And I know how that my coming is desired by you alone of all my thralls,
for from none besides have I heard a prayer that I might return once more to my home. And now
I will tell you all the truth, even as it shall come to pass. If the god shall subdue the proud
wooers to my hands, I will bring you each one a wife, and will give you a heritage of your
own and a house builded near to me, and ye twain shall be thereafter in mine eyes as the brethren
and companions of Telemachus. But behold, I will likewise show you a most manifest token, that
ye may know me well and be certified in heart, even the wound that the boar dealt me with his
white tusk long ago, when I went to Parnassus with the sons of Autolycus.'

Therewith he drew aside the rags from the great scar. And when the twain had beheld it and
marked it well, they cast their arms about the wise Odysseus, and fell a weeping; and kissed
him lovingly on head and shoulders. And in like manner Odysseus too kissed their heads and
hands. And now would the sunlight have gone down upon their sorrowing, had not Odysseus himself
stayed them saying:

'Cease ye from weeping and lamentation, lest some one come forth from the hall and see us,
and tell it likewise in the house. Nay, go ye within one by one and not both together, I first
and you following, and let this be the token between us. All the rest, as many as are proud
wooers, will not suffer that I should be given the bow and quiver; do thou then, goodly Eumaeus,
as thou bearest the bow through the hall, set it in my hands and speak to the women that they
bar the well-fitting doors of their chamber. And if any of them hear the sound of groaning
or the din of men within our walls, let them not run forth but abide where they are in silence
at their work. But on thee, goodly Philoetius, I lay this charge, to bolt and bar the outer
gate of the court and swiftly to tie the knot.'

Therewith he passed within the fair-lying halls, and went and sat upon the settle whence he
had risen. And likewise the two thralls of divine Odysseus went within.

And now Eurymachus was handling the bow, warming it on this side and on that at the light of
the fire; yet even so he could not string it, and in his great heart he groaned mightily; and
in heaviness of spirit he spake and called aloud, saying:

'Lo you now, truly am I grieved for myself and for you all! Not for the marriage do I mourn
so greatly, afflicted though I be; there are many Achaean women besides, some in sea-begirt
Ithaca itself and some in other cities. Nay, but I grieve, if indeed we are so far worse than
godlike Odysseus in might, seeing that we cannot bend the bow. It will be a shame even for
men unborn to hear thereof.'

Then Antinous, son of Eupeithes, answered him: 'Eurymachus, this shall not be so, and thou
thyself too knowest it. For to-day the feast of the archer god is held in the land, a holy
feast. Who at such a time would be bending bows? Nay, set it quietly by; what and if we should
let the axes all stand as they are? None methinks will come to the hall of Odysseus, son of
Laertes, and carry them away. And in the morning bid Melanthius, the goatherd, to lead hither
the very best goats in all his herds, that we may lay pieces of the thighs on the altar of
Apollo the archer, and assay the bow and make an end of the contest.'

So spake Antinous, and the saying pleased them well. But when they had poured forth and had
drunken to their hearts' desire, Odysseus of many counsels spake among them out of a crafty
heart, saying:

'Hear me, ye wooers of the renowned queen, that I may say that which my heart within me bids.
And mainly to Eurymachus I make my prayer and to the godlike Antinous, forasmuch as he has
spoken even this word aright, namely, that for this present ye cease from your archery and
leave the issue to the gods; and in the morning the god will give the victory to whomsoever
he will. Come therefore, give me the polished bow, that in your presence I may prove my hands
and strength, whether I have yet any force such as once was in my supple limbs, or whether
my wanderings and needy fare have even now destroyed it.'

So spake he and they all were exceeding wroth, for fear lest he should string the polished
bow. And Antinous rebuked him, and spake and hailed him:

'Wretched stranger, thou hast no wit, nay never so little. Art thou not content to feast at
ease in our high company, and to lack not thy share of the banquet, but to listen to our speech
and our discourse, while no guest and beggar beside thee hears our speech? Wine it is that
wounds thee, honey sweet wine, that is the bane of others too, even of all who take great draughts
and drink out of measure. Wine it was that darkened the mind even of the Centaur, renowned
Eurytion, in the hall of high-hearted Peirithous, when he went to the Lapithae; and after that
his heart was darkened with wine, he wrought foul deeds in his frenzy, in the house of Peirithous.
Then wrath fell on all the heroes, and they leaped up and dragged him forth through the porch,
when they had shorn off his ears and nostrils with the pitiless sword, and then with darkened
mind he bare about with him the burden of his sin in foolishness of heart. Thence was the feud
begun between the Centaurs and mankind; but first for himself gat he hurt, being heavy with
wine. And even so I declare great mischief unto thee if thou shalt string the bow, for thou
shalt find no courtesy at the hand of anyone in our land, and anon we will send thee in a black
ship to Echetus, the maimer of all men, and thence thou shalt not be saved alive. Nay then,
drink at thine ease, and strive not still with men that are younger than thou.'

Then wise Penelope answered him: 'Antinous, truly it is not fair nor just to rob the guests
of Telemachus of their due, whosoever he may be that comes to this house. Dost thou think if
yonder stranger strings the great bow of Odysseus, in the pride of his might and of his strength
of arm, that he will lead me to his home and make me his wife? But a stranger and a beggar
came in his wanderings, and lightly strung the bow, and shot through the iron." Thus will they
speak, and this will turn to our reproach.'

Then wise Penelope answered him: 'Eurymachus, never can there be fair fame in the land for
those that devour and dishonour the house of a prince, but why make ye this thing into a reproach?
But, behold, our guest is great of growth and well-knit, and avows him to be born the son of
a good father. Come then, give ye him the polished bow, that we may see that which is to be.
For thus will I declare my saying, and it shall surely come to pass. If he shall string the
bow and Apollo grant him renown, I will clothe him in a mantle and a doublet, goodly raiment,
and I will give him a sharp javelin to defend him against dogs and men, and a two-edged sword
and sandals to bind beneath his feet, and I will send him whithersoever his heart and spirit
bid him go.'

Then wise Telemachus answered her, saying: 'My mother, as for the bow, no Achaean is mightier
than I to give or to deny it to whomso I will, neither as many as are lords in rocky Ithaca
nor in the isles on the side of Elis, the pastureland of horses. Not one of these shall force
me in mine own despite, if I choose to give this bow, yea once and for all, to the stranger
to bear away with him. But do thou go to thine own chamber and mind thine own housewiferies,
the loom and distaff, and bid thine handmaids ply their tasks.

Now the goodly swineherd had taken the curved bow, and was bearing it, when the wooers all
cried out upon him in the halls. And thus some one of the haughty youths would speak: 'Whither
now art thou bearing the curved bow, thou wretched swineherd, crazed in thy wits? Lo, soon
shall the swift hounds of thine own breeding eat thee hard by thy swine, alone and away from
men, if Apollo will be gracious to us and the other deathless gods.'

Even so they spake, and he took and set down the bow in that very place, being affrighted because
many cried out on him in the halls. Then Telemachus from the other side spake threateningly,
and called aloud:

'Father, bring hither the bow, soon shalt thou rue it that thou servest many masters. Take
heed, lest I that am younger than thou pursue thee to the field, and pelt thee with stones,
for in might I am the better. If only I were so much mightier in strength of arm than all the
wooers that are in the halls, soon would I send many an one forth on a woeful way from out
our house, for they imagine mischief against us.'

So he spake, and all the wooers laughed sweetly at him, and ceased now from their cruel anger
toward Telemachus. Then the swineherd bare the bow through the hall, and went up to wise Odysseus,
and set it in his hands. And he called forth the nurse Eurycleia from the chamber and spake to her:

'Wise Eurycleia, Telemachus bids thee bar the well-fitting doors of thy chamber, and if any
of the women hear the sound of groaning or the din of men within our walls, let them not go
forth, but abide where they are in silence at their work.'

So he spake, and wingless her speech remained, and she barred the doors of the fair-lying chambers.

Then Philoetius hasted forth silently from the house, and barred the outer gates of the fenced
court. Now there lay beneath the gallery the cable of a curved ship, fashioned of the byblus
plant, wherewith he made fast the gates, and then himself passed within. Then he went and sat
on the settle whence he had risen, and gazed upon Odysseus. He already was handling the bow,
turning it every way about, and proving it on this side and on that, lest the worms might have
eaten the horns when the lord of the bow was away. And thus men spake looking each one to his
neighbour:

'Verily he has a good eye, and a shrewd turn for a bow! Either, methinks, he himself has such
a bow lying by at home or else he is set on making one, in such wise does he turn it hither
and thither in his hands, this evil-witted beggar.'

And another again of the haughty youths would say: 'Would that the fellow may have profit thereof,
just so surely as he shall ever prevail to bend this bow!'

So spake the wooers, but Odysseus of many counsels had lifted the great bow and viewed it on
every side, and even as when a man that is skilled in the lyre and in minstrelsy, easily stretches
a cord about a new peg, after tying at either end the twisted sheep-gut, even so Odysseus straightway
bent the great bow, all without effort, and took it in his right hand and proved the bow-string,
which rang sweetly at the touch, in tone like a swallow. Then great grief came upon the wooers,
and the colour of their countenance was changed, and Zeus thundered loud showing forth his
tokens. And the steadfast goodly Odysseus was glad thereat, in that the son of deep-counselling
Cronos had sent him a sign. Then he caught up a swift arrow which lay by his table, bare, but
the other shafts were stored within the hollow quiver, those whereof the Achaeans were soon
to taste. He took and laid it on the bridge of the bow, and held the notch and drew the string,
even from the settle whereon he sat, and with straight aim shot the shaft and missed not one
of the axes, beginning from the first axe-handle, and the bronze-weighted shaft passed clean
through and out at the last. Then he spake to Telemachus, saying:

'Telemachus, thy guest that sits in the halls does thee no shame. In nowise did I miss my mark,
nor was I wearied with long bending of the bow. Still is my might steadfast--not as the wooers
say scornfully to slight me. But now is it time that supper too be got ready for the Achaeans,
while it is yet light, and thereafter must we make other sport with the dance and the lyre,
for these are the crown of the feast.'

Therewith he nodded with bent brows, and Telemachus, the dear son of divine Odysseus, girt
his sharp sword about him and took the spear in his grasp, and stood by his high seat at his
father's side, armed with the gleaming bronze.

Book XXII

  The killing of the wooers.

Then Odysseus of many counsels stripped him of his rags and leaped on to the great threshold
with his bow and quiver full of arrows, and poured forth all the swift shafts there before
his feet, and spake among the wooers:

'Lo, now is this terrible trial ended at last; and now will I know of another mark, which never
yet man has smitten, if perchance I may hit it and Apollo grant me renown.'

With that he pointed the bitter arrow at Antinous. Now he was about raising to his lips a fair
twy-eared chalice of gold, and behold, he was handling it to drink of the wine, and death was
far from his thoughts. For who among men at feast would deem that one man amongst so many,
how hardy soever he were, would bring on him foul death and black fate? But Odysseus aimed
and smote him with the arrow in the throat, and the point passed clean out through his delicate
neck, and he fell sidelong and the cup dropped from his hand as he was smitten, and at once
through his nostrils there came up a thick jet of slain man's blood, and quickly he spurned
the table from him with his foot, and spilt the food on the ground, and the bread and the roast
flesh were defiled. Then the wooers raised a clamour through the halls when they saw the man
fallen, and they leaped from their high seats, as men stirred by fear, all through the hall,
peering everywhere along the well-builded walls, and nowhere was there a shield or mighty spear
to lay hold on. Then they reviled Odysseus with angry words:

'Stranger, thou shootest at men to thy hurt. Never again shalt thou enter other lists, now
is utter doom assured thee. Yea, for now hast thou slain the man that was far the best of all
the noble youths in Ithaca; wherefore vultures shall devour thee here.'

So each one spake, for indeed they thought that Odysseus had not slain him wilfully; but they
knew not in their folly that on their own heads, each and all of them, the bands of death had
been made fast. Then Odysseus of many counsels looked fiercely on them, and spake:

'Ye dogs, ye said in your hearts that I should never more come home from the land of the Trojans,
in that ye wasted my house, and lay with the maidservants by force, and traitorously wooed
my wife while I was yet alive, and ye had no fear of the gods, that hold the wide heaven, nor
of the indignation of men hereafter. But now the bands of death have been made fast upon you
one and all.'

Even so he spake, and pale fear gat hold on the limbs of all, and each man looked about, where
he might shun utter doom. And Eurymachus alone answered him, and spake: 'If thou art indeed
Odysseus of Ithaca, come home again, with right thou speakest thus, of all that the Achaeans
have wrought, many infatuate deeds in thy halls and many in the field. Howbeit, he now lies
dead that is to blame for all, Antinous; for he brought all these things upon us, not as longing
very greatly for the marriage nor needing it sore, but with another purpose, that Cronion has
not fulfilled for him, namely, that he might himself be king over all the land of stablished
Ithaca, and he was to have lain in wait for thy son and killed him. But now he is slain after
his deserving, and do thou spare thy people, even thine own; and we will hereafter go about
the township and yield thee amends for all that has been eaten and drunken in thy halls, each
for himself bringing atonement of twenty oxen worth, and requiting thee in gold and bronze
till thy heart is softened, but till then none may blame thee that thou art angry.'

Then Odysseus of many counsels looked fiercely on him, and said: 'Eurymachus, not even if ye
gave me all your heritage, all that ye now have, and whatsoever else ye might in any wise add
thereto, not even so would I henceforth hold my hands from slaying, ere the wooers had paid
for all their transgressions. And now the choice lies before you, whether to fight in fair
battle or to fly, if any may avoid death and the fates. But there be some, methinks, that shall
not escape from utter doom.'

He spake, and their knees were straightway loosened and their hearts melted within them. And
Eurymachus spake among them yet again:

'Friends, it is plain that this man will not hold his unconquerable hands, but now that he
has caught up the polished bow and quiver, he will shoot from the smooth threshold, till he
has slain us all; wherefore let us take thought for the delight of battle. Draw your blades,
and hold up the tables to ward off the arrows of swift death, and let us all have at him with
one accord, and drive him, if it may be, from the threshold and the doorway and then go through
the city, and quickly would the cry be raised. Thereby should this man soon have shot his latest
bolt.'

Therewith he drew his sharp two-edged sword of bronze, and leapt on Odysseus with a terrible
cry, but in the same moment goodly Odysseus shot the arrow forth and struck him on the breast
by the pap, and drave the swift shaft into his liver. So he let the sword fall from his hand,
and grovelling over the table he bowed and fell, and spilt the food and the two-handled cup
on the floor. And in his agony he smote the ground with his brow, and spurning with both his
feet he overthrew the high seat, and the mist of death was shed upon his eyes.

Then Amphinomus made at renowned Odysseus, setting straight at him, and drew his sharp sword,
if perchance he might make him give ground from the door. But Telemachus was beforehand with
him, and cast and smote him from behind with a bronze-shod spear between the shoulders, and
drave it out through the breast, and he fell with a crash and struck the ground full with his
forehead. Then Telemachus sprang away, leaving the long spear fixed in Amphinomus, for he greatly
dreaded lest one of the Achaeans might run upon him with his blade, and stab him as he drew
forth the spear, or smite him with a down stroke {*} of the sword. So he started and ran and
came quickly to his father, and stood by him, and spake winged words:

{* Or, reading [Greek], smite him as he stooped over the corpse.}

'Father, lo, now I will bring thee a shield and two spears and a helmet all of bronze, close
fitting on the temples, and when I return I will arm myself, and likewise give arms to the
swineherd and to the neatherd yonder: for it is better to be clad in full armour.'

And Odysseus of many counsels answered him saying: 'Run and bring them while I have arrows
to defend me, lest they thrust me from the doorway, one man against them all.'

So he spake, and Telemachus obeyed his dear father, and went forth to the chamber, where his
famous weapons were lying. Thence he took out four shields and eight spears, and four helmets
of bronze, with thick plumes of horse hair, and he started to bring them and came quickly to
his father. Now he girded the gear of bronze about his own body first, and in like manner the
two thralls did on the goodly armour, and stood beside the wise and crafty Odysseus. Now he,
so long as he had arrows to defend him, kept aiming and smote the wooers one by one in his
house, and they fell thick one upon another. But when the arrows failed the prince in his archery,
he leaned his bow against the doorpost of the stablished hall, against the shining faces of
the entrance. As for him he girt his fourfold shield about his shoulders and bound on his mighty
head a well wrought helmet, with horse hair crest, and terribly the plume waved aloft. And
he grasped two mighty spears tipped with bronze.

Now there was in the well-builded wall a certain postern raised above the floor, and there
by the topmost level of the threshold of the stablished hall, was a way into an open passage,
closed by well-fitted folding doors. So Odysseus bade the goodly swineherd stand near thereto
and watch the way, for thither there was but one approach. Then Agelaus spake among them, and
declared his word to all:

'Friends, will not some man climb up to the postern, and give word to the people, and a cry
would be raised straightway; so should this man soon have shot his latest bolt?'

Then Melanthius, the goatherd, answered him, saying: 'It may in no wise be, prince Agelaus;
for the fair gate of the courtyard is terribly nigh, and perilous is the entrance to the passage,
and one man, if he were valiant, might keep back a host. Then the knees of Odysseus were loosened
and his heart melted within him, when he saw them girding on the armour and brandishing the
long spears in their hands, and great, he saw, was the adventure. Quickly he spake to Telemachus
winged words:

'Telemachus, sure I am that one of the women in the halls is stirring up an evil battle against
us, or perchance it is Melanthius.'

Then wise Telemachus answered him: 'My father, it is I that have erred herein and none other
is to blame, for I left the well-fitted door of the chamber open, and there has been one of
them but too quick to spy it. Go now, goodly Eumaeus, and close the door of the chamber, and
mark if it be indeed one of the women that does this mischief, or Melanthius, son of Dolius,
as methinks it is.'

Even so they spake one to the other. And Melanthius, the goatherd, went yet again to the chamber
to bring the fair armour. But the goodly swineherd was ware thereof, and quickly he spake to
Odysseus who stood nigh him:

'Son of Laertes, of the seed of Zeus, Odysseus, of many devices, lo, there again is that baleful
man, whom we ourselves suspect, going to the chamber; do thou tell me truly, shall I slay him
if I prove the better man, or bring him hither to thee, that he may pay for the many transgressions
that he has devised in thy house?'

Then Odysseus of many counsels answered saying: 'Verily, I and Telemachus will keep the proud
wooers within the halls, for all their fury, but do ye twain tie his feet and arms behind his
back and cast him into the chamber, and close the doors after you,{*} and make fast to his
body a twisted rope, and drag him up the lofty pillar till he be near the roof beams, that
he may hang there and live for long, and suffer grievous torment.'

{* Or, as Mr. Merry suggests in his note, 'tie boards behind him' as a method of torture. He
compares Aristoph. Thesm. 931,940.}

So he spake, and they gave good heed and hearkened. So they went forth to the chamber, but
the goatherd who was within knew not of their coming. Now he was seeking for the armour in
the secret place of the chamber, but they twain stood in waiting on either side the doorposts.
And when Melanthius, the goatherd, was crossing the threshold with a goodly helm in one hand,
and in the other a wide shield and an old, stained with rust, the shield of the hero Laertes
that he bare when he was young--but at that time it was laid by, and the seams of the straps
were loosened,--then the twain rushed on him and caught him, and dragged him in by the hair,
and cast him on the floor in sorrowful plight, and bound him hand and foot in a bitter bond,
tightly winding each limb behind his back, even as the son of Laertes bade them, the steadfast
goodly Odysseus. And they made fast to his body a twisted rope, and dragged him up the lofty
pillar till he came near the roof beams. Then didst thou speak to him and gird at him, swineherd
Eumaeus:

'Now in good truth, Melanthius, shalt thou watch all night, lying in a soft bed as beseems
thee, nor shall the early-born Dawn escape thy ken, when she comes forth from the streams of
Oceanus, on her golden throne, in the hour when thou art wont to drive the goats to make a
meal for the wooers in the halls.'

So he was left there, stretched tight in the deadly bond. But they twain got into their harness,
and closed the shining door, and went to Odysseus, wise and crafty chief. There they stood
breathing fury, four men by the threshold, while those others within the halls were many and
good warriors. Then Athene, daughter of Zeus, drew nigh them, like Mentor in fashion and in
voice, and Odysseus was glad when he saw her and spake, saying:

'Mentor, ward from us hurt, and remember me thy dear companion, that befriended thee often,
and thou art of like age with me.'

So he spake, deeming the while that it was Athene, summoner of the host. But the wooers on
the other side shouted in the halls, and first Agelaus son of Damastor rebuked Athene, saying:

'Mentor, let not the speech of Odysseus beguile thee to fight against the wooers, and to succour
him. For methinks that on this wise we shall work our will. When we shall have slain these
men, father and son, thereafter shalt thou perish with them, such deeds thou art set on doing
in these halls; nay, with thine own head shalt thou pay the price. But when with the sword
we shall have overcome your violence, we will mingle all thy possessions, all that thou hast
at home or in the field, with the wealth of Odysseus, and we will not suffer thy sons nor thy
daughters to dwell in the halls, nor thy good wife to gad about in the town of Ithaca.'

So spake he, and Athene was mightily angered at heart, and chid Odysseus in wrathful words:
'Odysseus, thou hast no more steadfast might nor any prowess, as when for nine whole years
continually thou didst battle with the Trojans for high born Helen, of the white arms, and
many men thou slewest in terrible warfare, and by thy device the wide-wayed city of Priam was
taken. How then, now that thou art come to thy house and thine own possessions, dost thou bewail
thee and art of feeble courage to stand before the wooers? Nay, come hither, friend, and stand
by me, and I will show thee a thing, that thou mayest know what manner of man is Mentor, son
of Alcimus, to repay good deeds in the ranks of foemen.'

She spake, and gave him not yet clear victory in full, but still for a while made trial of
the might and prowess of Odysseus and his renowned son. As for her she flew up to the roof
timber of the murky hall, in such fashion as a swallow flies, and there sat down.

Now Agelaus, son of Damastor, urged on the wooers, and likewise Eurynomus and Amphimedon and
Demoptolemus and Peisandrus son of Polyctor, and wise Polybus, for these were in valiancy far
the best men of the wooers, that still lived and fought for their lives; for the rest had fallen
already beneath the bow and the thick rain of arrows. Then Agelaus spake among them, and made
known his word to all:

'Friends, now at last will this man hold his unconquerable hands. Lo, now has Mentor left him
and spoken but vain boasts, and these remain alone at the entrance of the doors. Wherefore
now, throw not your long spears all together, but come, do ye six cast first, if perchance
Zeus may grant us to smite Odysseus and win renown. Of the rest will we take no heed, so soon
as that man shall have fallen.'

So he spake and they all cast their javelins, as he bade them, eagerly; but behold, Athene
so wrought that they were all in vain. One man smote the doorpost of the stablished hall, and
another the well-fastened door, and the ashen spear of yet another wooer, heavy with bronze,
stuck fast in the wall. So when they had avoided all the spears of the wooers, the steadfast
goodly Odysseus began first to speak among them:

'Friends, now my word is that we too cast and hurl into the press of the wooers, that are mad
to slay and strip us beyond the measure of their former iniquities.'

So he spake, and they all took good aim and threw their sharp spears, and Odysseus smote Demoptolemus,
and Telemachus Euryades, and the swineherd slew Elatus, and the neatherd Peisandrus. Thus they
all bit the wide floor with their teeth, and the wooers fell back into the inmost part of the
hall. But the others dashed upon them and drew forth the shafts from the bodies of the dead.

Then once more the wooers threw their sharp spears eagerly; but behold, Athene so wrought that
many of them were in vain. Yet Amphimedon hit Telemachus on the hand by the wrist lightly,
and the shaft of bronze wounded the surface of the skin. And Ctesippus grazed the shoulder
of Eumaeus with a long spear high above the shield, and the spear flew over and fell to the
ground. Then again Odysseus, the wise and crafty, he and his men cast their swift spears into
the press of the wooers, and now once more Odysseus, waster of cities, smote Eurydamas, and
Telemachus Amphimedon, and the swineherd slew Polybus, and last, the neatherd struck Ctesippus
in the breast and boasted over him, saying:

'O son of Polytherses, thou lover of jeering, never give place at all to folly to speak so
big, but leave thy case to the gods, since in truth they are far mightier than thou. This gift
is thy recompense for the ox-foot that thou gavest of late to the divine Odysseus, when he
went begging through the house.'

So spake the keeper of the shambling kine. Next Odysseus wounded the son of Damastor in close
fight with his long spear, and Telemachus wounded Leocritus son of Euenor, right in the flank
with his lance, and drave the bronze point clean through, that he fell prone and struck the
ground full with his forehead. Then Athene held up her destroying aegis on high from the roof,
and their minds were scared, and they fled through the hall, like a drove of kine that the
flitting gadfly falls upon and scatters hither and thither in spring time, when the long days
begin. But the others set on like vultures of crooked claws and curved beak, that come forth
from the mountains and dash upon smaller birds, and these scour low in the plain, stooping
in terror from the clouds, while the vultures pounce on them and slay them, and there is no
help nor way of flight, and men are glad at the sport; even so did the company of Odysseus
set upon the wooers and smite them right and left through the hall; and there rose a hideous
moaning as their heads were smitten, and the floor all ran with blood.

Now Leiodes took hold of the knees of Odysseus eagerly, and besought him and spake winged words:
'I entreat thee by thy knees, Odysseus, and do thou show mercy on me and have pity. For never
yet, I say, have I wronged a maiden in thy halls by froward word or deed, nay I bade the other
wooers refrain, whoso of them wrought thus. But they hearkened not unto me to keep their hands
from evil. Wherefore they have met a shameful death through their own infatuate deeds. Yet
I, the soothsayer among them, that have wrought no evil, shall fall even as they, for no grace
abides for good deeds done.'

Then Odysseus of many counsels looked askance at him, and said: 'If indeed thou dost avow thee
to be the soothsayer of these men, thou art like to have often prayed in the halls that the
issue of a glad return might be far from me, and that my dear wife should follow thee and bear
thee children; wherefore thou shalt not escape the bitterness of death.'

Therewith he caught up a sword in his strong hand, that lay where Agelaus had let it fall to
the ground when he was slain, and drave it clean through his neck, and as he yet spake his
head fell even to the dust.

But the son of Terpes, the minstrel, still sought how he might shun black fate, Phemius, who
sang among the wooers of necessity. He stood with the loud lyre in his hand hard by the postern
gate, and his heart was divided within him, whether he should slip forth from the hall and
sit down by the well-wrought altar of great Zeus of the household court, whereon Laertes and
Odysseus had burnt many pieces of the thighs of oxen, or should spring forward and beseech
Odysseus by his knees. And as he thought thereupon this seemed to him the better way, to embrace
the knees of Odysseus, son of Laertes. It will be a sorrow to thyself in the aftertime if thou
slayest me who am a minstrel, and sing before gods and men. Yea none has taught me but myself,
and the god has put into my heart all manner of lays, and methinks I sing to thee as to a god,
wherefore be not eager to cut off my head. And Telemachus will testify of this, thine own dear
son, that not by mine own will or desire did I resort to thy house to sing to the wooers at
their feasts; but being so many and stronger than I they led me by constraint.'

So he spake, and the mighty prince Telemachus heard him and quickly spake to his father at
his side: 'Hold thy hand, and wound not this blameless man with the sword; and let us save
also the henchman Medon, that ever had charge of me in our house when I was a child, unless
perchance Philoetius or the swineherd have already slain him, or he hath met thee in thy raging
through the house.'

So he spake, and Medon, wise of heart, heard him. For he lay crouching beneath a high seat,
clad about in the new-flayed hide of an ox and shunned black fate. So he rose up quickly from
under the seat, and cast off the ox-hide, and sprang forth and caught Telemachus by the knees,
and besought him and spake winged words:

'Friend, here am I; prithee stay thy hand and speak to thy father, lest he harm me with the
sharp sword in the greatness of his strength, out of his anger for the wooers that wasted his
possessions in the halls, and in their folly held thee in no honour.'

And Odysseus of many counsels smiled on him and said: 'Take courage, for lo, he has saved thee
and delivered thee, that thou mayst know in thy heart, and tell it even to another, how far
more excellent are good deeds than evil. But go forth from the halls and sit down in the court
apart from the slaughter, thou and the full-voiced minstrel, till I have accomplished all that
I must needs do in the house.'

Therewith the two went forth and gat them from the hall. So they sat down by the altar of great
Zeus, peering about on every side, still expecting death. And Odysseus peered all through the
house, to see if any man was yet alive and hiding away to shun black fate. But he found all
the sort of them fallen in their blood in the dust, like fishes that the fishermen have drawn
forth in the meshes of the net into a hollow of the beach from out the grey sea, and all the
fish, sore longing for the salt sea waves, are heaped upon the sand, and the sun shines forth
and takes their life away; so now the wooers lay heaped upon each other. Then Odysseus of many
counsels spake to Telemachus:

'Telemachus, go, call me the nurse Eurycleia, that I may tell her a word that is on my mind.'

So he spake, and Telemachus obeyed his dear father, and smote at the door, and spake to the
nurse Eurycleia: 'Up now, aged wife, that overlookest all the women servants in our halls,
come hither, my father calls thee and has somewhat to say to thee.'

Even so he spake, and wingless her speech remained, and she opened the doors of the fair-lying
halls, and came forth, and Telemachus led the way before her. So she found Odysseus among the
bodies of the dead, stained with blood and soil of battle, like a lion that has eaten of an
ox of the homestead and goes on his way, and all his breast and his cheeks on either side are
flecked with blood, and he is terrible to behold; even so was Odysseus stained, both hands
and feet. Now the nurse, when she saw the bodies of the dead and the great gore of blood, made
ready to cry aloud for joy, beholding so great an adventure. But Odysseus checked and held
her in her eagerness, and uttering his voice spake to her winged words:

'Within thine own heart rejoice, old nurse, and be still, and cry not aloud; for it is an unholy
thing to boast over slain men. Now these hath the destiny of the gods overcome, and their own
cruel deeds, for they honoured none of earthly men, neither the bad nor yet the good, that
came among them. Wherefore they have met a shameful death through their own infatuate deeds.
But come, tell me the tale of the women in my halls, which of them dishonour me, and which
be guiltless.'

Then the good nurse Eurycleia answered him: 'Yea now, my child, I will tell thee all the truth.
Thou hast fifty women-servants in thy halls, that we have taught the ways of housewifery, how
to card wool and to bear bondage. Of these twelve in all have gone the way of shame, and honour
not me, nor their lady Penelope. And Telemachus hath but newly come to his strength, and his
mother suffered him not to take command over the women in this house. But now, let me go aloft
to the shining upper chamber, and tell all to thy wife, on whom some god hath sent a sleep.'

And Odysseus of many counsels answered her saying: 'Wake her not yet, but bid the women come
hither, who in time past behaved themselves unseemly.'

So he spake, and the old wife passed through the hall, to tell the women and to hasten their
coming. Then Odysseus called to him Telemachus, and the neatherd, and the swineherd, and spake
to them winged words:

'Begin ye now to carry out the dead, and bid the women help you, and thereafter cleanse the
fair high seats and the tables with water and porous sponges. And when ye have set all the
house in order, lead the maidens without the stablished hall, between the vaulted room and
the goodly fence of the court, and there slay them with your long blades, till they shall have
all given up the ghost and forgotten the love that of old they had at the bidding of the wooers,
in secret dalliance.'

Even so he spake, and the women came all in a crowd together, making a terrible lament and
shedding big tears. So first they carried forth the bodies of the slain, and set them beneath
the gallery of the fenced court, and propped them one on another; and Odysseus himself hasted
the women and directed them, and they carried forth the dead perforce. Thereafter they cleansed
the fair high seats and the tables with water and porous sponges. And Telemachus, and the neatherd,
and the swineherd, scraped with spades the floor of the well-builded house, and, behold, the
maidens carried all forth and laid it without the doors.

Now when they had made an end of setting the hall in order, they led the maidens forth from
the stablished hall, and drove them up in a narrow space between the vaulted room and the goodly
fence of the court, whence none might avoid; and wise Telemachus began to speak to his fellows,
saying: 'God forbid that I should take these women's lives by a clean death, these that have
poured dishonour on my head and on my mother, and have lain with the wooers.'

With that word he tied the cable of a dark-prowed ship to a great pillar and flung it round
the vaulted room, and fastened it aloft, that none might touch the ground with her feet. And
even as when thrushes, long of wing, or doves fall into a net that is set in a thicket, as
they seek to their roosting-place, and a loathly bed harbours them, even so the women held
their heads all in a row, and about all their necks nooses were cast, that they might die by
the most pitiful death. And they writhed with their feet for a little space, but for no long while.

Then they led out Melanthius through the doorway and the court, and cut off his nostrils and
his ears with the pitiless sword, and drew forth his vitals for the dogs to devour raw, and
cut off his hands and feet in their cruel anger.

Thereafter they washed their hands and feet, and went into the house to Odysseus, and all the
adventure was over. So Odysseus called to the good nurse Eurycleia: 'Bring sulphur, old nurse,
that cleanses all pollution and bring me fire, that I may purify the house with sulphur, and
do thou bid Penelope come here with her handmaidens, and tell all the women to hasten into
the hall.'

Then the good nurse Eurycleia made answer: 'Yea, my child, herein thou hast spoken aright.
But go to, let me bring thee a mantle and a doublet for raiment, and stand not thus in the
halls with thy broad shoulders wrapped in rags; it were blame in thee so to do.'

And Odysseus of many counsels answered her saying: 'First let a fire now be made me in the hall.'

So he spake, and the good nurse Eurycleia was not slow to obey, but brought fire and brimstone;
and Odysseus thoroughly purged the women's chamber and the great hall and the court.

Then the old wife went through the fair halls of Odysseus to tell the women, and to hasten
their coming. So they came forth from their chamber with torches in their hands, and fell about
Odysseus, and embraced him and kissed and clasped his head and shoulders and his hands lovingly,
and a sweet longing came on him to weep and moan, for he remembered them every one.

Book XXIII

  Odysseus maketh himself known to Penelope, tells his
  adventures briefly, and in the morning goes to Laertes
  and makes himself known to him.

Then the ancient woman went up into the upper chamber laughing aloud, to tell her mistress
how her dear lord was within, and her knees moved fast for joy, and her feet stumbled one over
the other; and she stood above the lady's head and spake to her, saying:

'Awake, Penelope, dear child, that thou mayest see with thine own eyes that which thou desirest
day by day. Odysseus hath come, and hath got him to his own house, though late hath he come,
and hath slain the proud wooers that troubled his house, and devoured his substance, and oppressed
his child.'

Then wise Penelope answered her: 'Dear nurse, the gods have made thee distraught, the gods
that can make foolish even the wisdom of the wise, and that stablish the simple in understanding.
They it is that have marred thy reason, though heretofore thou hadst a prudent heart. Why dost
thou mock me, who have a spirit full of sorrow, to speak these wild words, and rousest me out
of sweet slumber, that had bound me and overshadowed mine eyelids? Never yet have I slept so
sound since the day that Odysseus went forth to see that evil Ilios, never to be named. Go
to now, get thee down and back to the women's chamber, for if any other of the maids of my
house had come and brought me such tidings, and wakened me from sleep, straightway would I
have sent her back woefully to return within the women's chamber; but this time thine old age
shall stand thee in good stead.'

Then the good nurse Eurycleia answered her: 'I mock thee not, dear child, but in very deed
Odysseus is here, and hath come home, even as I tell thee. He is that guest on whom all men
wrought such dishonour in the halls. From this time forward the power of the Saracen began to ebb
by land and sea.

As it ebbed, the new cities of Genoa, Pisa, and Venice began to capture the trade and hold the control
of the sea that once had been Saracen, until the Christian control was so well established as to
make possible the Crusades. Later, as we shall see, a second invasion of Mohammedans, the Turks, ably
assisted by the descendants of the Arabs who conquered Spain, once more threatened to control
the Mediterranean for the cause of Islam.

But the Persian Gulf and the Indian Ocean, which fell into the hands of the Arabs as soon as
they took to the water, remained in Arab hands down to the times of the Portuguese. In those
waters, because they were cut off from the Mediterranean, the Saracen had no competitor. As
early as the eighth century Ceylon was an Arab trading base, and when the Portuguese explorers arrived
at the end of the 15th century they found the Arabs still dominating the water routes of India
and Asia, holding as they had held for seven centuries a monopoly of the commerce of the east.

Of
the Mediterranean during the struggle between Christian and Saracen a recent English writer makes
the following suggestive comment:

"The function of the Mediterranean has thus undergone a change. In early times it had been a barrier;
later, under the Phnicians, it became a highway, and to the Greeks a defense. We find that the
Romans made it a basis for sea power and subdued all the lands on
its margin.

With the weakening of Rome came a weakening of sea power.

The Barbary states and Spain became Saracen only because the naval power of the eastern empire was
not strong enough to hold the whole sea, but neither was the Saracen able to gain supreme control.
Thus the conditions were the same as in the earlier days of the conflict between Rome and Carthage:
the Mediterranean became a moat separating the rivals, though first one and then the other
had somewhat more control. The islands became alternately Saracen and Christian. Crete and Sicily
were held for centuries before they were regained by a Christian power."[1]

[Footnote 1: GEOGRAPHY AND WORLD POWER, Fairgrieve, p. 125.]

The victory of 718 saved Constantinople from any further peril from the Arabs, but it was again
in grave peril, two centuries later, when a sudden invasion of Russians
in great force threatened to accomplish at a stroke what the Saracens
had failed to do in three great expeditions.

The King of Kiev, one of the race of Vikings that had fought their way into southern Russia,
collected a huge number of ships, variously estimated from one to ten thousand, and suddenly
appeared in the Bosphorus.

Probably there were not more than 1500 of these vessels all told and they must have been small
compared with the Christian dromons; nevertheless they presented an appalling danger at that
moment. The Christian fleet was watching Crete, the army was in the east winning back territory
from the Arabs, and Constantinople lay almost defenseless. The great walls could be depended
an to hold off a barbarian army, but a fleet was needed to hold the waterways; otherwise the
city was doomed.

In the Horn lay a few antiquated dromons and a few others still on
the stocks.

To Theophanes the Patrician was given this nucleus of a squadron with which to beat back the
Russians. Desperate and even hopeless as the situation appeared, he went to work with the greatest
energy, patching up the old ships, and hurrying the completion of the new. Meanwhile the invaders
sent raiding parties ashore that harried the unprotected country
districts with every refinement of cruelty.

In order to make each ship count as much as possible as an offensive unit, Theaphanes made
an innovation by fitting out Greek fire tubes on the broadsides as well as in the bows. This
may be noted as the first appearance of the broadside armament idea, which had to wait six hundred
years more before it became finally established.

When the new ships had been completed and the old ones made serviceable, Theophanes had exactly
fifteen men of war. With this handful of vessels, some hardly fit to take the sea, he set out
from the Horn and boldly attacked the Russian fleet that blocked the entrance to the strait.
Never was there a more forlorn hope. Certainly neither the citizens on the walls nor the men
on the ships had any expectation of a return.

What followed would be incredible were it not a matter of history.

These fifteen ships were immediately swallowed up by the huge fleet of the enemy, but under
the superb leadership of Theophanes each one fought with the fury of desperation. They had
one hope, the weapon that had twice before saved the city, Greek fire. The Russians swarmed alongside
only to find their ships taking fire with a flame that water would
not quench.

Contempt of their feeble enemy changed soon to a wild terror. There was but one impulse, to get
out of reach of the Christians, and the ships struggled to escape. Soon the whole Russian fleet
was in wild flight with the gallant fifteen in hot pursuit. Some of these could make but slow
headway because of their unseaworthiness, but when all was over the Russians are said to have
lost two-thirds of their entire force. The invaders who had been left on shore were then swept
into the sea by reënforcements that had arrived at Constantinople, and not a vestige was left
of the Russian invasion. Once more Greek fire and the Christian navy had saved the empire; and
for sheer audacity, crowned with a victory of such magnitude, the
feat of Theophanes stands unrivaled in history.

From the tenth century on, Constantinople began to find her rivalries in the west. The coronation
of Charlemagne in 800 had marked the final separation of the eastern and the western empire. As
noted above, the passing of the Saracens gave opportunity for the
growth of commercial city-states like Genoa, Pisa and Venice, and
their interests clashed not only with one another but also with those
of Constantinople.

The climax came in 1204 when Venice succeeded in diverting the Fourth Crusade to an expedition of vengeance
for herself, first against the city of Zara and then against Constantinople. This time the Eastern
Empire had no fleet ready for defense and the Venetian galleys filled the waters under the city
walls.

Many of these galleys were fitted with a kind of flying bridge, a long yard that extended from
the mast to the top of the wall and stout enough to bear a file of men that scrambled by this
means to the parapets. After many bloody repulses the city was finally captured, and there
followed a sack that for utter barbarity outdid anything ever perpetrated by Arab or Turk. Thus
the city that for nearly a thousand years had saved Christian civilization
was, by a hideous irony of fate, taken and sacked by a Crusading army.

When the second Mohammedan invasion threatened Europe, Constantinople, weak on land and impotent
by sea, and deserted by the Christian nations of the west, was unable to put up a strong resistance.
At last, in 1453, it was captured by the Turks, and became thereafter the capital of the Moslem
power.

Great as this catastrophe was, it cannot compare with what would have happened if the city
had fallen to the Saracen, the Hun, or the Russian during the dark centuries when the nations
of the west were scarcely in embryo. In the 15th century they were strong enough to take up the
sword that Constantinople had dropped and draw the line beyond which the Turk was not permitted
to go.

Although it has been the fashion since Gibbon to sneer at the Eastern Empire, it must be remembered
with respect as the last treasure house of the inheritance bequeathed by Rome and Greece during
the dark centuries of barbarian and Saracen. Even in its ruin it sent its fugitives westward
with the manuscripts of a language and literature then little known, the Greek, and thereby added
greatly to the growing impetus of the Renaissance. It is significant also that during its thousand
years of life, as long as it kept its hold on the sea it stood firm. When it yielded that, its empire
dwindled to a mere city fortress whose doom was assured long before it fell.

REFERENCES

CAMBRIDGE MEDIEVAL HISTORY, Vol. II., 1913. THE HISTORY OF THE SARACENS, E. Gibbon & S. Ockley.
HISTORY OF THE DECLINE AND FALL OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, Edward Gibbon, ed. by J. B. Bury. THE
BYZANTINE EMPIRE, E. A. Foord, 1911. MILITARY AND RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE MIDDLE AGES, Paul Lacroix,
1874. HISTORY OF THE LATER ROMAN EMPIRE, J. B. Bury, 1889. HISTORY OF THE EASTERN ROMAN EMPIRE,
J. B. Bury, 1912.

CHAPTER V

THE NAVIES OF THE MIDDLE AGES [Continued]: VENICE AND THE TURK

The city-state of Venice owed its origin to the very same barbarian invasions that wrecked
the old established cities of the Italian peninsula. Fugitives from these towns in northern
Italy and the outlying country districts fled to the islets and lagoons for shelter from the
Hun, the Goth, and the Lombard. As the sea was the Venetians' barrier from the invader, so
also it had to be their source of livelihood, and step by step through
the centuries they built up their commerce until they practically
controlled the Mediterranean, for trade or for war.

As early as 991 a Doge of Venice made a treaty with the Saracens inaugurating a policy held thereafter
by Venice till the time of Lepanto; namely, to trade with Mohammedans rather than fight them. The
supreme passion of Venice was to make money, as it had been of ancient Phnicia, and to this was
subordinated every consideration of race, nationality, and religion. The first important step
was the conquest of the Dalmatian pirates at the beginning of the 11th century. This meant
the Venetian control of the Adriatic. When the Crusades began, the sea routes to the Holy
Land were in the hands of the Venetians; indeed it was this fact that made the Crusades possible.
As the carrying and convoying agent of the Crusaders, Venice developed greatly in wealth and
power.

With direct access to the Brenner Pass, she became a rich distributing center for Eastern goods
to northern Europe. In all important Levantine cities there was a Venetian quarter, Venetians had
special trading privileges, and many seaports and islands came directly under Venetian rule.

This rapid expansion naturally roused the jealousy of others. In 1171 Venice fought an unsuccessful
war with Constantinople, and yet continued to grow in wealth and
power.

In 1204, as we have seen, Venice avenged herself by diverting the Fourth Crusade to the siege
and sack of her eastern rival. As the reward of that nefarious exploit Venice received the greater
part of the eastern empire, and became the dominating power in the Mediterranean. During the 13th
and 14th centuries, however, she was compelled to fight with her rebellious colonies and her
new rivals, Genoa and Padua.

The wars with Genoa very nearly proved fatal to Venice, but just when matters seemed most desperate
she was saved by a naval victory against a Genoese fleet in her own waters. In consequence of
these wars between Venice and Genoa both were heavy losers in wealth and lives; Genoa never
recovered from her defeat, but her rival showed amazing powers of
recuperation.

She extended her territory in Italy to include the important cities of Treviso, Padua, Vicenza,
and Verona, and in 1488 acquired the island of Cyprus in the Levant.

At this time the Venetian state owned 3300 ships, manned by 36,000 men, and stood at the height
of her power.

Already, however, a new enemy had appeared who threatened not only Venice but all Europe. This
was the Ottoman Turk. The Turks were not like the Arabs, members of the Indo-European family,
but a race from the eastern borders of the Caspian Sea, a branch of the Mongolian stock. As
these peoples moved south and west they came in contact with Mohammedanism
and became ardent converts.

Eventually they swept over Asia Minor, crossed the Dardanelles, took Adrianople, and pushed
into Serbia. Thus, when Constantinople fell in 1453 it had been for some time a mere island
of Christianity surrounded by Moslems. Indeed it was only the civil wars among the Turks themselves
that held them back so long from the brilliant career of conquest that characterized the 15th and
early 16th centuries, for these later followers of Mohammed had all the fanaticism of the Saracens.
Before the fall of Constantinople and the transfer of the Turkish
seat of government to that city, a corps of infantry was organized
that became the terror of the Christian world--the Janissaries.

By a grim irony of the Sultan, who created this body of troops, these men were exclusively
of Christian parentage, taken as children either in the form of a human tribute levied on the
Christian population of Constantinople, or as captives in the various expeditions in Christian
territory. The Janissaries were brought up wholly to a military life, they were not permitted
to marry, and their lives were devoted to fighting for the Crescent. For a long time they were invincible
in the open field.

The first half of the 16th century saw the Turks in Persia, in the east, and at the gates of
Vienna in the west. For a time they got a foothold in Italy by seizing Otranto. They had conquered
Egypt and Syria, penetrated Persia, and in Arabia gained the support of the Arabs for the Turkish
sultan as the successor to the Caliphs. Constantinople, therefore, became not only the political
capital for the Turkish empire but the religious center of the whole Moslem world. Moreover,
the Arab states on the southern borders of the Mediterranean acknowledged the suzerainty of
the Turkish ruler.

This fact was of great importance, for it enabled the Turks to become masters of the inland
sea. In 1492 the greater part of the Moors--the descendants of the Arab conquerors of Spain--were
expelled from the Peninsula by the conquest of Granada. This event was hailed with joy throughout
Christendom, but it had an unexpected and terrible consequence.

Flung back into northern Africa, and filled with hatred because of the persecution they had endured,
these Moors embarked on a career of piracy directed against Christians. In making common cause
with the Turks they supplied the fleets that the Turkish power needed to carry out its schemes
of conquest.

Apparently the Turks had never taken to salt water as the Arabs had done, but in these Moorish
pirates they found fighters on the sea well worthy to stand comparison with their peerless
fighters on land, the Janissaries. Between 1492 and 1580, the date of Ali's death, there was
a period in which the Moorish corsairs were supreme. It produced three great leaders, each
of whom in turn became the terror of the sea: Kheyr ed Din, known as Barbarossa, Dragut, and
Ali. It is a curious fact that the first and third were of Christian parentage.

So long as the Turk invaded Christian territory by land alone, the Venetians were unconcerned.
They made what treaties they could for continuing their trade with communities that had fallen
into the conquerors' hands. But when the Turk began to spread out by sea it was inevitable
that he must clash with the Venetian, and so there was much fighting.

Yet even after a successful naval campaign the emissary of Venice was obliged to come before
the Sultan, cap in hand, to beg trading privileges in Turkish territory. Everything in Venetian policy
was subordinated to the maintenance of sufficient friendly relations with the Turk to assure
a commercial monopoly in the Levant. Although the Moslem peril grew more and more menacing,
Venice remained unwilling to join in any united action for the common
good of Europe.

  
  Of course Venice was not alone in this policy. In 1534 Francis the
First, for example, in order to humiliate his rival, Charles V, secretly
sent word to Barbarossa of the plans being made against him. Indeed
France showed no interest in combating the Turk even at the time when
he was at the summit of his power. But Venice, as the dominating naval
power, had the means of checking the Turkish invasion if she had chosen
to do so. Instead she permitted the control of the Mediterranean to
slip from her into the hands of the Moslems with scarcely a blow.

The
leading part in the resistance to the Moslem sea power was taken by
Spain under Charles V. He had, as admiral of the navy, Andrea Doria,
the Genoese, the ablest seaman on the Christian side. Early in his
career he had captured a notorious corsair; later in the service of
Spain, he defeated the Turks at Patras (at the entrance to the Gulf
of Corinth), and again at the Dardanelles. These successes threatened
Turkish supremacy on the Mediterranean, and Sultan Soliman "the Magnificent,"
the ruler under whom the Turkish empire reached its zenith, summoned
the Algerian corsair Barbarossa and gave him supreme command over
all the fleets under the Moslem banner. At this time, 1533, Barbarossa
was seventy-seven years old, but he had lost none of his fire or ability.
On the occasion of being presented to the Sultan, he uttered a saying
that might stand as the text for all the writings of Mahan: "Sire,
he who rules on the sea will shortly rule on the land also."

The
following year Barbarossa set out from Constantinople with a powerful
fleet and proceeded to ravage the coast of Italy. He sacked Reggio,
burnt and massacred elsewhere on the coast without opposition, cast
anchor at the mouth of the Tiber and if he had chosen could have sacked
Rome and taken the Pope captive. He then returned to Constantinople
with 11,000 Christian captives.

Charles V was roused by this display
of corsair power and barbarity to collect a force that should put
an end to such raids. Barbarossa had recently added Tunis to his personal
domains, and the great expedition of ships and soldiers which the
emperor assembled was directed against that city. And coming near the house of Laertes,
  are met by Odysseus, and Laertes with Telemachus and
  servants, the whole number twelve, and are overcome,
  and submit.

Now Cyllenian Hermes called forth from the halls the souls of the wooers, and he held in his
hand his wand that is fair and golden, wherewith he lulls the eyes of men, of whomso he will,
while others again he even wakens out of sleep. Herewith he roused and led the souls who followed
gibbering. And even as bats flit gibbering in the secret place of a wondrous cave, when one
has fallen down from the cluster on the rock, where they cling each to each up aloft, even
so the souls gibbered as they fared together, and Hermes, the helper, led them down the dank
ways. Past the streams of Oceanus and the White Rock, past the gates of the Sun they sped and
the land of dreams, and soon they came to the mead of asphodel, where dwell the souls, the
phantoms of men outworn.

So these were flocking round Achilles, and the spirit of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, drew nigh
sorrowful; and about him were gathered all the other shades, as many as perished with him in
the house of Aegisthus, and met their doom. Now the soul of the son of Peleus spake to him
first, saying:

'Son of Atreus, verily we deemed that thou above all other heroes wast evermore dear to Zeus,
whose joy is in the thunder, seeing that thou wast lord over warriors, many and mighty men,
in the land of the Trojans where we Achaeans suffered affliction. But lo, thee too was deadly
doom to visit early, {*} the doom that none avoids of all men born. Ah, would that in the fulness
of thy princely honour, thou hadst met death and fate in the land of the Trojans! So would
all the Achaean host have builded thee a barrow, yea and for thy son thou wouldst have won
great glory in the aftertime. But now it has been decreed for thee to perish by a most pitiful
death.'

{* Reading [Greek]}

Then the soul of the son of Atreus answered, and spake: 'Happy art thou son of Peleus, godlike
Achilles, that didst die in Troy-land far from Argos, and about thee fell others, the best
of the sons of Trojans and Achaeans, fighting for thy body; but thou in the whirl of dust layest
mighty and mightily fallen, forgetful of thy chivalry. And we strove the livelong day, nor
would we ever have ceased from the fight, if Zeus had not stayed us with a tempest. Anon when
we had borne thee to the ships from out of the battle, we laid thee on a bier and washed thy
fair flesh clean with warm water and unguents, and around thee the Danaans shed many a hot
tear and shore their hair. And forth from the sea came thy mother with the deathless maidens
of the waters, when they heard the tidings; and a wonderful wailing rose over the deep, and
trembling fell on the limbs of all the Achaeans. Yea, and they would have sprung up and departed
to the hollow ships, had not one held them back that knew much lore from of old, Nestor, whose
counsel proved heretofore the best. Out of his good will he made harangue, and spake among them:

'"Hold, ye Argives, flee not, young lords of the Achaeans. Lo, his mother from the sea is she
that comes, with the deathless maidens of the waters, to behold the face of her dead son."

'So he spake, and the high-hearted Achaeans ceased from their flight. Then round thee stood
the daughters of the ancient one of the sea, holding a pitiful lament, and they clad thee about
in raiment incorruptible. And all the nine Muses one to the other replying with sweet voices
began the dirge; there thou wouldest not have seen an Argive but wept, so mightily rose up
the clear chant. Thus for seventeen days and nights continually did we all bewail thee, immortal
gods and mortal men. On the eighteenth day we gave thy body to the flames, and many well-fatted
sheep we slew around thee, and kine of shambling gait. So thou wert burned in the garments
of the gods, and in much unguents and in sweet honey, and many heroes of the Achaeans moved
mail-clad around the pyre when thou wast burning, both footmen and horse, and great was the
noise that arose. But when the flame of Hephaestus had utterly abolished thee, lo, in the morning
we gathered together thy white bones, Achilles, and bestowed them in unmixed wine and in unguents.
Thy mother gave a twy-handled golden urn, and said that it was the gift of Dionysus, and the
workmanship of renowned Hephaestus. Therein lie thy white bones, great Achilles, and mingled
therewith the bones of Patroclus son of Menoetias, that is dead, but apart is the dust of Antilochus,
whom thou didst honour above all thy other companions, after Patroclus that was dead. Then
over them did we pile a great and goodly tomb, we the holy host of Argive warriors, high on
a jutting headland over wide Hellespont, that it might be far seen from off the sea by men
that now are, and by those that shall be hereafter. Then thy mother asked the gods for glorious
prizes in the games, and set them in the midst of the lists for the champions of the Achaeans.
In days past thou hast been at the funeral games of many a hero, whenso, after some king's
death, the young men gird themselves and make them ready for the meed of victory; but couldst
thou have seen these gifts thou wouldst most have marvelled in spirit, such glorious prizes
did the goddess set there to honour thee, even Thetis, the silver-footed; for very dear wert
thou to the gods. Thus not even in death hast thou lost thy name, but to thee shall be a fair
renown for ever among all men, Achilles. But what joy have I now herein, that I have wound
up the clew of war, for on my return Zeus devised for me an evil end at the hands of Aegisthus
and my wife accursed?'

So they spake one to the other. And nigh them came the Messenger, the slayer of Argos, leading
down the ghosts of the wooers by Odysseus slain, and the two heroes were amazed at the sight
and went straight toward them. And the soul of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, knew the dear son
of Melaneus, renowned Amphimedon, who had been his host, having his dwelling in Ithaca. The
soul of the son of Atreus spake to him first, saying:

'Amphimedon, what hath befallen you, that ye have come beneath the darkness of earth, all of
you picked men and of like age? it is even as though one should choose out and gather together
the best warriors in a city. Did Poseidon smite you in your ships and rouse up contrary winds
and the long waves? Or did unfriendly men, perchance, do you hurt upon the land as ye were
cutting off their oxen and fair flocks of sheep, or while they fought to defend their city
and the women thereof? Answer and tell me, for I avow me a friend of thy house. Rememberest
thou not the day when I came to your house in Ithaca with godlike Menelaus, to urge Odysseus
to follow with me to Ilios on the decked ships? And it was a full month ere we had sailed all
across the wide sea, for scarce could we win to our cause Odysseus, waster of cities.'

Then the ghost of Amphimedon answered him, and spake: 'Most famous son of Atreus, king of men,
Agamemnon, I remember all these things, O fosterling of Zeus, as thou declarest them, and I
in turn will tell thee all the tale well and truly, even our death and evil end, on what wise
it befell. We wooed the wife of Odysseus that was long afar, and she neither refused the hated
bridal nor was minded to make an end, devising for us death and black fate. Also this other
wile she contrived in her heart. Now when she brought the robe to light, after she had woven
the great web and washed it, and it shone even as sun or moon, at that very hour some evil
god led Odysseus, I know not whence, to the upland farm, where the swineherd abode in his dwelling.
Thither too came the dear son of divine Odysseus out of sandy Pylos, voyaging with his black
ship. These twain framed an evil death for the wooers, and came to the renowned town. Odysseus
verily came the later, and Telemachus went before and led the way. Now the swineherd brought
Odysseus clad in vile raiment, in the likeness of a beggar, a wretched man and an old, leaning
on a staff, and behold, he was clad about in sorry raiment. And none of us, not even the elders,
could know him for that he was, on this his sudden appearing, but with evil words we assailed
him and hurled things at him. Yet for a while he hardened his heart to endure both the hurlings
and the evil words in his own halls; but at the last, when the spirit of Zeus, lord of the
aegis, aroused him, by the help of Telemachus he took up all the goodly weapons, and laid them
by in the inner chamber and drew the bolts. Next in his great craft he bade his wife to offer
his bow and store of grey iron to the wooers to be the weapons of our contest, luckless that
we were, and the beginning of death. Now not one of us could stretch the string of the strong
bow; far short we fell of that might. But when the great bow came to the hands of Odysseus,
then we all clamoured and forbade to give him the bow, how much soever he might speak, but
Telemachus alone was instant with him and commanded him to take it. Then he took the bow into
his hands, the steadfast goodly Odysseus, and lightly he strung it, and sent the arrow through
the iron. Then straight he went to the threshold and there took his stand, and poured forth
the swift arrows, glancing terribly around, and smote the king Antinous. Thereafter on the
others he let fly his bolts, winged for death, with straight aim, and the wooers fell thick
one upon another. Then was it known how that some god was their helper, for pressing on as
their passion drave them, they slew the men right and left through the halls, and thence there
arose a hideous moaning, as heads were smitten and the floor all ran with blood. So we perished,
Agamemnon, and even now our bodies lie uncared for in the halls of Odysseus, for the friends
of each one at home as yet know nought, even they who might wash the black-clotted blood out
of our wounds, and lay out the bodies and wail the dirge, for that is the due of the dead.'

Then the ghost of the son of Atreus answered him: 'Ah, happy son of Laertes, Odysseus of many
devices, yea, for a wife most excellent hast thou gotten, so good was the wisdom of constant
Penelope, daughter of Icarius, that was duly mindful of Odysseus, her wedded lord. Wherefore
the fame of her virtue shall never perish, but the immortals will make a gracious song in the
ears of men on earth to the fame of constant Penelope. In far other wise did the daughter of
Tyndareus devise ill deeds, and slay her wedded lord, and hateful shall the song of her be
among men, and an evil repute hath she brought upon all womankind, even on the upright.'

Even so these twain spake one to the other, standing in the house of Hades, beneath the secret
places of the earth.

Now when those others had gone down from the city, quickly they came to the rich and well-ordered
farm land of Laertes, that he had won for himself of old, as the prize of great toil in war.
There was his house, and all about it ran the huts wherein the thralls were wont to eat and
dwell and sleep, bondsmen that worked his will. And in the house there was an old Sicilian
woman, who diligently cared for the old man, in the upland far from the city. There Odysseus
spake to his thralls and to his son, saying:

'Do ye now get you within the well-builded house, and quickly sacrifice the best of the swine
for the midday meal, but I will make trial of my father, whether he will know me again and
be aware of me when he sees me, or know me not, so long have I been away,'

Therewith he gave the thralls his weapons of war. Then they went speedily to the house, while
Odysseus drew near to the fruitful vineyard to make trial of his father. Now he found not Dolius
there, as he went down into the great garden, nor any of the thralls nor of their sons. It
chanced that they had all gone to gather stones for a garden fence, and the old man at their
head. So he found his father alone in the terraced vineyard, digging about a plant. He was
clothed in a filthy doublet, patched and unseemly, with clouted leggings of oxhide bound about
his legs, against the scratches of the thorns, and long sleeves over his hands by reason of
the brambles, and on his head he wore a goatskin cap, and so he nursed his sorrow. Now when
the steadfast goodly Odysseus saw his father thus wasted with age and in great grief of heart,
he stood still beneath a tall pear tree and let fall a tear. Then he communed with his heart
and soul, whether he should fall on his father's neck and kiss him, and tell him all, how he
had returned and come to his own country, or whether he should first question him and prove
him in every word. And as he thought within himself, this seemed to him the better way, namely,
first to prove his father and speak to him sharply. So with this intent the goodly Odysseus
went up to him. Now he was holding his head down and kept digging about the plant, while his
renowned son stood by him and spake, saying:

'Old man, thou hast no lack of skill in tending a garden; lo, thou carest well for all, {*}
nor is there aught whatsoever, either plant or fig-tree, or vine, yea, or olive, or pear, or
garden-bed in all the close, that is not well seen to. Yet another thing will I tell thee and
lay not up wrath thereat in thy heart. Thyself art scarce so well cared for, but a pitiful
old age is on thee, and withal thou art withered and unkempt, and clad unseemly. It cannot
be to punish thy sloth that thy master cares not for thee; there shows nothing of the slave
about thy face and stature, for thou art like a kingly man, even like one who should lie soft,
when he has washed and eaten well, as is the manner of the aged. But come declare me this and
plainly tell it all. Whose thrall art thou, and whose garden dost thou tend? Tell me moreover
truly, that I may surely know, if it be indeed to Ithaca that I am now come, as one yonder
told me who met with me but now on the way hither. He was but of little understanding, for
he deigned not to tell me all nor to heed my saying, when I questioned him concerning my friend,
whether indeed he is yet alive or is even now dead and within the house of Hades. For I will
declare it and do thou mark and listen: once did I kindly entreat a man in mine own dear country,
who came to our home, and never yet has any mortal been dearer of all the strangers that have
drawn to my house from afar. He declared him to be by lineage from out of Ithaca, and said
that his own father was Laertes son of Arceisius. So I led him to our halls and gave him good
entertainment, with all loving-kindness, out of the plenty that was within. Such gifts too
I gave him as are the due of guests; of well wrought gold I gave him seven talents, and a mixing
bowl of flowered work, all of silver, and twelve cloaks of single fold, and as many coverlets,
and as many goodly mantles and doublets to boot, and besides all these, four women skilled
in all fair works and most comely, the women of his choice.'

{* Supplying [Greek] from the preceding clause as object to [Greek]. Other constructions are
possible.}

Then his father answered him, weeping: 'Stranger, thou art verily come to that country whereof
thou askest, but outrageous men and froward hold it. And these thy gifts, thy countless gifts,
thou didst bestow in vain. For if thou hadst found that man yet living in the land of Ithaca
he would have sent thee on thy way with good return of thy presents, and with all hospitality,
as is due to the man that begins the kindness. But come, declare me this and plainly tell me
all; how many years are passed since thou didst entertain him, thy guest ill-fated and my child,--if
ever such an one there was,--hapless man, whom far from his friends and his country's soil,
the fishes, it may be, have devoured in the deep sea, or on the shore he has fallen the prey
of birds and beasts. His mother wept not over him nor clad him for burial, nor his father,
we that begat him. Nor did his bride, whom men sought with rich gifts, the constant Penelope,
bewail her lord upon the bier, as was meet, nor closed his eyes, as is the due of the departed.
Where now is thy swift ship moored, that brought thee thither with thy godlike company? Hast
thou come as a passenger on another's ship, while they set thee ashore and went away?

Then Odysseus of many counsels answered him, saying: 'Yea now, I will tell thee all most plainly.
From out of Alybas I come, where I dwell in a house renowned, and am the son of Apheidas the
son of Polypemon, the prince, and my own name is Eperitus. But some god drave me wandering
hither from Sicania against my will, and yonder my ship is moored toward the upland away from
the city. But for Odysseus, this is now the fifth year since he went thence and departed out
of my country. Ill-fated was he, and yet he had birds of good omen when he fared away, birds
on the right; wherefore I sped him gladly on his road, and gladly he departed, and the heart
of us twain hoped yet to meet in friendship on a day and to give splendid gifts.'

So he spake, and on the old man fell a black cloud of sorrow. With both his hands he clutched
the dust and ashes and showered them on his gray head, with ceaseless groaning. Then the heart
of Odysseus was moved, and up through his nostrils throbbed anon the keen sting of sorrow at
the sight of his dear father. And he sprang towards him and fell on his neck and kissed him,
saying:

'Behold, I here, even I, my father, am the man of whom thou askest; in the twentieth year am
I come to mine own country. But stay thy weeping and tearful lamentation, for I will tell thee
all clearly, though great need there is of haste. I have slain the wooers in our halls and
avenged their bitter scorn and evil deeds.'

Then Laertes answered him and spake, saying: 'If thou art indeed Odysseus, mine own child,
that art come hither, show me now a manifest token, that I may be assured.'

Then Odysseus of many counsels answered him saying: 'Look first on this scar and consider it,
that the boar dealt me with his white tusk on Parnassus, whither I had gone, and thou didst
send me forth, thou and my lady mother, to Autolycus my mother's father, to get the gifts which
when he came hither he promised and covenanted to give me. But come, and I will even tell thee
the trees through all the terraced garden, which thou gavest me once for mine own, and I was
begging of thee this and that, being but a little child, and following thee through the garden.
Through these very trees we were going, and thou didst tell me the names of each of them. About
his dear son he cast his arms, and the steadfast goodly Odysseus caught him fainting to his
breast. Now when he had got breath and his spirit came to him again, once more he answered
and spake, saying:

'Father Zeus, verily ye gods yet bear sway on high Olympus, if indeed the wooers have paid
for their infatuate pride! But now my heart is terribly afraid, lest straightway all the men
of Ithaca come up against us here, and haste to send messengers everywhere to the cities of
the Cephallenians.'

Then Odysseus of many counsels answered him saying: 'Take courage, and let not thy heart be
careful about these matters. But come, let us go to the house that lies near the garden, for
thither I sent forward Telemachus and the neatherd and the swineherd to get ready the meal
as speedily as may be.'

After these words the twain set out to the goodly halls. Now when they had come to the fair-lying
house, they found Telemachus and the neatherd and the swineherd carving much flesh, and mixing
the dark wine. Meanwhile the Sicilian handmaid bathed high-hearted Laertes in his house, and
anointed him with olive-oil, and cast a fair mantle about him. Then Athene drew nigh, and made
greater the limbs of the shepherd of the people, taller she made him than before and mightier
to behold. Then he went forth from the bath, and his dear son marvelled at him, beholding him
like to the deathless gods in presence. And uttering his voice he spake to him winged words:

'Father, surely one of the gods that are from everlasting hath made thee goodlier and greater
to behold.'

Then wise Laertes answered him, saying: 'Ah, would to father Zeus and Athene and Apollo, that
such as I was when I took Nericus, the stablished castle on the foreland of the continent,
being then the prince of the Cephallenians, would that in such might, and with mail about my
shoulders, I had stood to aid thee yesterday in our house, and to beat back the wooers; so
should I have loosened the knees of many an one of them in the halls, and thou shouldest have
been gladdened in thine inmost heart!'

So they spake each with the other. But when the others had ceased from their task and made
ready the feast, they sat down all orderly on chairs and on high seats. Then they began to
put forth their hands on the meat, and the old man Dolius drew nigh, and the old man's sons
withal came tired from their labour in the fields, for their mother, the aged Sicilian woman,
had gone forth and called them, she that saw to their living and diligently cared for the old
man, now that old age had laid hold on him. So soon as they looked on Odysseus and took knowledge
of him, they stood still in the halls in great amazement. But Odysseus addressed them in gentle
words, saying:

'Old man, sit down to meat and do ye forget your marvelling, for long have we been eager to
put forth our hands on the food, as we abode in the hall alway expecting your coming.'

So he spake, and Dolius ran straight toward him stretching forth both his hands, and he grasped
the hand of Odysseus and kissed it on the wrist, and uttering his voice spake to him winged words:

'Beloved, forasmuch as thou hast come back to us who sore desired thee, and no longer thought
to see thee, and the gods have led thee home again;--hail to thee and welcome manifold, and
may the gods give thee all good fortune! Moreover tell me this truly, that I may be assured,
whether wise Penelope yet knows well that thou hast come back hither, or whether we shall dispatch
a messenger.'

Then Odysseus of many counsels answered saying: 'Old man, already she knows all; what need
to busy thyself herewith?'

Thereon the other sat him down again on his polished settle. And in like wise the sons of Dolius
gathered about the renowned Odysseus, and greeted him well and clasped his hands, and then
sat down all orderly by Dolius their father.

So they were busy with the meal in the halls. Now Rumour the messenger went swiftly all about
the city, telling the tale of the dire death and fate of the wooers. And the people heard it,
and all at once gathered together from every side with sighing and groaning before the house
of Odysseus. And each brought forth his dead from the halls, and buried them; but those that
came out of other cities they placed on swift ships and sent with fisherfolk, each to be carried
to his own home. As for them they all fared together to the assembly-place, in sorrow of heart.
When they were all gathered and come together, Eupeithes arose and spake among them, for a
comfortless grief lay heavy on his heart for his son Antinous, the first man that goodly Odysseus
had slain. Weeping for him he made harangue and spake among them:

'Friends, a great deed truly hath this man devised against the Achaeans. Some with his ships
he led away, many men, and noble, and his hollow ships hath he lost, and utterly lost of his
company, and others again, and those far the best of the Cephallenians he hath slain on his
coming home. Up now, before ever he gets him swiftly either to Pylos or to fair Elis, where
the Epeians bear sway, let us go forth; else even hereafter shall we have shame of face for
ever. For a scorn this is even for the ears of men unborn to hear, if we avenge not ourselves
on the slayers of our sons and of our brethren. Life would no more be sweet to me, but rather
would I die straightway and be with the departed. Up, let us be going, lest these fellows be
beforehand with us and get them over the sea.'

Thus he spake weeping, and pity fell on all the Achaeans. Then came near to them Medon and
the divine minstrel, forth from the halls of Odysseus, for that sleep had let them go. They
stood in the midst of the gathering, and amazement seized every man. Then Medon, wise of heart,
spake among them, saying:

'Hearken to me now, ye men of Ithaca, for surely Odysseus planned not these deeds without the
will of the gods. Nay I myself beheld a god immortal, who stood hard by Odysseus, in the perfect
semblance of Mentor; now as a deathless god was he manifest in front of Odysseus, cheering
him, and yet again scaring the wooers he stormed through the hall, and they fell thick one
on another.'

Thus he spake, and pale fear gat hold of the limbs of all. Then the old man, the lord Halitherses,
spake among them, the son of Mastor, for he alone saw before and after. Through your own cowardice,
my friends, have these deeds come to pass. For ye obeyed not me, nor Mentor, the shepherd of
the people, to make your sons cease from their foolish ways. A great villainy they wrought
in their evil infatuation, wasting the wealth and holding in no regard the wife of a prince,
while they deemed that he would never more come home. And now let things be on this wise, and
obey my counsel. Let us not go forth against him, lest haply some may find a bane of their
own bringing.'

So he spake, but they leapt up with a great cry, the more part of them, while the rest abode
there together; for his counsel was not to the mind of the more part, but they gave ear to
Eupeithes, and swiftly thereafter they rushed for their armour. So when they had arrayed them
in shining mail, they assembled together in front of the spacious town. And Eupeithes led them
in his witlessness, for he thought to avenge the slaying of his son, yet himself was never
to return, but then and there to meet his doom.

Now Athene spake to Zeus, the son of Cronos, saying: 'O Father, our father Cronides, throned
in the highest, answer and tell me what is now the hidden counsel of thy heart? Wilt thou yet
further rouse up evil war and the terrible din of battle, or art thou minded to set them at
one again in friendship?'

Then Zeus, the gatherer of the clouds, answered her saying: 'My child, why dost thou thus straitly
question me, and ask me this? Nay didst not thou thyself devise this very thought, namely,
that Odysseus should indeed take vengeance on these men at his coming? Do as thou wilt, but
I will tell thee of the better way. Now that goodly Odysseus hath wreaked vengeance on the
wooers, let them make a firm covenant together with sacrifice, and let him be king all his
days, and let us bring about oblivion of the slaying of their children and their brethren;
so may both sides love one another as of old, and let peace and wealth abundant be their portion.'

Therewith he roused Athene to yet greater eagerness, and from the peaks of Olympus she came
glancing down.

Now when they had put from them the desire of honey-sweet food, the steadfast goodly Odysseus
began to speak among them, saying:

'Let one go forth and see, lest the people be already drawing near against us.'

So he spake, and the son of Dolius went forth at his bidding, and stood on the outer threshold
and saw them all close at hand. Then straightway he spake to Odysseus winged words:

'Here they be, close upon us! Quick, let us to arms!'

Thereon they rose up and arrayed them in their harness, Odysseus and his men being four, and
the six sons of Dolius, and likewise Laertes and Dolius did on their armour, grey-headed as
they were, warriors through stress of need. Now when they had clad them in shining mail, they
opened the gates and went forth and Odysseus led them.

Then Athene, daughter of Zeus, drew near them in the likeness of Mentor, in fashion and in
voice. And the steadfast goodly Odysseus beheld her and was glad, and straightway he spake
to Telemachus his dear son:

'Telemachus, soon shalt thou learn this, when thou thyself art got to the place of the battle
where the best men try the issue,--namely, not to bring shame on thy father's house, on us
who in time past have been eminent for might and hardihood over all the world.'

Then wise Telemachus answered him, saying: 'Thou shalt see me, if thou wilt, dear father, in
this my mood no whit disgracing thy line, according to thy word.'

So spake he, and Laertes was glad and spake, saying: 'What a day has dawned for me, kind gods;
yea, a glad man am I! My son and my son's son are vying with one another in valour.'

Then grey-eyed Athene stood beside Laertes, and spake to him: 'O son of Arceisius that art
far the dearest of all my friends, pray first to the grey-eyed maid and to father Zeus, then
swing thy long spear aloft and hurl its straightway.'

Therewith Pallas Athene breathed into him great strength. Then he prayed to the daughter of
mighty Zeus, and straightway swung his long spear aloft and hurled it, and smote Eupeithes
through his casque with the cheek-piece of bronze. The armour kept not out the spear that went
clean through, and he fell with a crash, and his arms rattled about his body. Then Odysseus
and his renowned son fell on the fore-fighters, and smote them with swords and two-headed spears.
And now would they have slain them all and cut off their return, had not Athene called aloud,
the daughter of Zeus lord of the aegis, and stayed all the host of the enemy, saying:

'Hold your hands from fierce fighting, ye men of Ithaca, that so ye may be parted quickly,
without bloodshed.'

So spake Athene, and pale fear gat hold of them all. The arms flew from their hands in their
terror and fell all upon the ground, as the goddess uttered her voice. To the city they turned
their steps, as men fain of life, and the steadfast goodly Odysseus with a terrible cry gathered
himself together and hurled in on them, like an eagle of lofty flight. Then in that hour the
son of Cronos cast forth a flaming bolt, and it fell at the feet of the grey-eyed goddess,
the daughter of the mighty Sire. Then grey-eyed Athene spake to Odysseus, saying:

'Son of Laertes, of the seed of Zeus, Odysseus of many devices, refrain thee now and stay the
strife of even-handed war, lest perchance the son of Cronos be angry with thee, even Zeus of
the far-borne voice.'

So spake Athene, and he obeyed and was glad at heart. Her hands lightly caught the molding on either
side of the door. She was looking intently into the mirror at the other end of the hall. All
the lights in the dining-room were lit, and she saw herself rather
keenly set against their brilliance.

 The straight-held head, the lifted arms,
     the short, slender waist, the long, long
     sweep of her skirts made her seem taller
 than she actually was; and the strong, bright
 growth of her hair and the vivacity of
     her face made her seem more deeply colored.
      
 No wiser we than men of heretofore 
     To find thy mystic fountains guarded fast;
 Enough--thy flood makes green our human shore 
     As Nilus, Egypt, rolling down his vast, 
 His fertile waters, murmuring evermore 
     Of gods dethroned, and empires of the Past.

A. L.

