He had finally hit upon the right thing. It came to him just as Ram Lal entered, with his finger
on his lip. "She is in there, waiting for you, and she came alone!" said the crafty merchant. The
Castle of Carlaverock, one of the most ancient possessions of the brave Maxwells, stands a memento,
in its noble ruins, of the disinterested loyalty of its owners.

The
remains of Carlaverock afford but a slight notion of its former strength.
 A woman's
natural jealousy will do the trick!" so sagely mused the young man as he walked out into the
hall, where Ram Lal's treasures were heaped up on every side. There was no one visible in the
shop, but Ram Lal silently pointed with a brown finger, gleaming with whitest gems, to a closed
door. It was the entrance to the room specially devoted to the superb collection of arms, the
regained loot of Delhi, slyly collected in the days of the mad sacking by the revengeful English
soldiery. A bottle of rum then bought a princely token.

It had been with a guilty, beating heart that Justine Delande abandoned her fair, young charge
to the morning ministrations of a bevy of dark-skinned servants. However, the sturdy Genevese
waiting-maid who had accompanied them to India was at hand, when the spinster incoherently
murmured her all too voluble excuses for an early morning visit to the European shops on the
Chandnee Chouk, and then fled away as if fearful of her own shadow. She was duly thankful that
no one had observed her entrance to the jewel shop, and the refuge of the room, pointed out
by the amiable Ram Lal, at once reassured her. Justine was accorded a brief breathing spell
by the fates as the Major settled his plans.

It did not seem so very hard, this first fall from maidenly grace, when Major Alan Hawke, entering
the little armory chamber, politely led the startled woman to a seat, with a graceful self-introduction.

"I should have recognized you any where, Mademoiselle Justine," deftly remarked the Major,
"by your resemblance to your most charming sister. You have, I hope, received some private
letters from her, with regard to my visit?" The Swiss gouverriante faltered forth her affirmative
answer, while secretly approving the enthusiastic judgment of her distant sister upon this
most admirable Crichton of English Majors. "Then," said Hawke, alluringly, "we must be very
good friends, you and I, for we are alone together, among strangers, in this far-away land!"
Then he calmly dropped into an easy discourse, in which Geneva and Sister Euphrosyne punctuated
the graceful flow of his friendly chat. There was nothing very sinful in the debut of this
little intrigue.

"Let us always speak French!" said Alan Hawke, with a quiet, warning glance at the closed door. In
addition to these family honours, Lord Nithisdale possessed rich patrimonial estates in one
of the most fertile and luxuriant counties in Scotland. The Valley of the Nith, from which he derived
his title, owned his lordship over some of its fairest scenes.
 Justine Delande still lingered in that temperate
zone of life where a fair fighting chance of matrimony was still hers. "If a ray of sunshine
ever steals into the flinty bosom of a Swiss woman, there maybe a gleam or two still left here,"
mused the Major, most adroitly avoiding all reference to Justine's rosebud charge, and only
essaying to place her entirely at her ease.

But, in proportion as he gracefully labored, the frightened governess began to realize the
danger of her situation.

"I hope that no one will observe us," she said, speaking rapidly and under her breath. "Mr.
Johnstone is so eccentric, so haughty, and so very peculiar!" Her distress was evident, and
the gallant Major at once hastened to allay her fears.

