[Footnote A: There are many more of similar lessons, and, if any thing, more simple, which
accompany the pictures and apparatus which I supply for Infant Schools; the profits from which
will assist to enable me, if I am blessed with health and strength, still further to extend
the system.]

Allow such things as these to be brought before the infant mind: let the feelings of the heart,
as well as the powers of the understanding, be called into exercise; let babes have "the pure
milk of the Word" before "the strong meat;" let as little stress as possible be laid on "the
mere letter," and as much as possible on "the spirit" of "the truth;" let it be shewn that
piety is not merely rational, but in the highest degree practicable; let this be done with
diligence, faith, and prayer, and I hesitate not to say, that we shall have an increase of
the religion of the heart.

Religious instruction may be given in other ways. Let the teacher take a flower or an insect,
and ask the, children if they could make such a one; and I never found one who would answer,
"Yes." A microscope will increase the knowledge of its wonders. The teacher may then make a
needle the subject of remark; the children will admit that it is smooth, very smooth; let him
tell them it is the work of man, and as such will appear imperfect in proportion as it is examined;
and shewing them it through the microscope, they will perceive it is rough and full of holes.
As a contrast, let him take a bee, obtain their observations on it as it is, give them a short
history of it, and they will acknowledge its superiority over the needle. But on viewing it
through the microscope, astonishment will be increased, and I have heard many say at such a
time, "O sir, how good (meaning great) God must be!" The sting may then be pointed out, as
unlike the needle, and perfectly smooth; and thus truth may be imparted in a manner the most
interesting and delightful.

The influence of such considerations on character is obvious. When the greatness of God is
spoken of, allusion may be made to our pride, and to the importance of humility; his goodness
may suggest the evil of unkindness, and the importance of benevolence; and his truth may lead
to remarks on its necessity, and the sin of falsehood.

A small plot of ground may moreover be appropriated to the children; some grains of wheat,
barley, or rye may be sown, and they may be told that, at a certain time, they will spring
forth. Often will they go, and anxiously watch for this; and at length they will say perhaps,
"Please, sir, such a thing has come up; we know it is so, for it is just what you said it would
be." Week after week the progress of vegetation will be observed, and the fulfilment of the
master's promise will greatly tend to increase his influence. So great will he appear, that
his words and commands will be more regarded; while it will be his object to trace the wonders
which he predicted to their divine Source. I have frequently observed, on such occasions, what
I should term an act of infant worship. Often has the question been put to me, "Please, sir,
is it wicked to play?" as if the spirit were awed, and transgression against God were regarded
with dread. Caution has been also discovered in the use of the divine name; and I have listened
with delight to such remarks as these: "Please, sir, when we sing a hymn, we may say Gad, or
if we talk about the sun, we may say God made it; and it isn't taking his name in vain, is
it? But when we talk of God as boys do in the street, that is very wicked!"

The following facts will illustrate the benefit of scriptural instruction.

A little boy, about four years and a half old, belonging to an Infant School, went to see his
cousin, a little girl about his own age. At bed-time, the little boy, to his great surprise,
saw her get into bed without having said her prayers. The little fellow immediately went up
to the side of the bed, and put this question to her: "Which would you rather go to, heaven
or hell?" The little girl said, "I don't know!" "Not know!" said the boy; "Why, wicked people
go to hell, and the good go to heaven, a happy place." The little girl then said, "Why, I should
like to go to heaven." "Ah!" but replied the little fellow again, "You did not say your prayers;
and all that go heaven pray to God." She then said, "Will you teach me to pray your prayer?"
"If I lived with you," said he, "I would; but if you go to the Infant School, they will teach
you to say your prayers, and sing hymns too."

One day, while the teacher of an Infant School was speaking to his little children, from the
conversation of our Lord with the woman of Samaria at the well, a gentleman present asked the
following questions: "Where should we go to worship God?" When a little boy answered, "To a
throne of grace." "And where is a throne of grace?" "Any where," answered the boy; "for where
we kneel down, and pray to God with our hearts, we are then at a throne of grace."

There are times when the children are in a better state to receive religious instruction than
others. A teacher of observation will soon perceive this, and act accordingly; if, however,
the thing is overdone, which it may be, and which I have seen, then the effect is fatal. Hypocrisy
will take the place of sincerity, and the heart will remain unaffected and unimproved.

A little boy, the subject of the following anecdote, being six years of age, and forward in
his learning, I considered him fit to be sent to another school; and informed the parents accordingly.
The father came immediately, and said, he hoped I would keep him till he was seven years of
age; adding, that he had many reasons for making the request. I told him, that it was the design
of the Institution to take such children as no other school would admit; and as his child had
arrived at the age of six, he would be received into the national school; moreover, as we had
a number of applications for the admission of children much younger, I could not grant his
request. He then said, "I understand that you make use of pictures in the school, and I have
good reason to approve of them; for," said he, "you must know that I have a large Bible in
the house, Matthew Henry's, which was left me by my deceased mother; like many more, I never
looked into it, but kept it merely for show. The child, of course, was forbidden to open it,
for fear of its being spoiled: but still he was continually asking me to read in it, and I
as continually denied him; indeed, I had imbibed many unfavourable impressions concerning this
book, and had no inclination to read it, and was not very anxious that the child should. However,
the child was not to be put off, although several times I gave him a box on the ear for worrying
me; for, notwithstanding this usage, the child would frequently ask me to read it, when he
thought I was in a good humour; and at last I complied with his wishes; 'Please, father,' said
the child, 'will you read about Solomon's wise judgment' 'I don't know where to find it,' was
the reply. 'Then,' says the child, 'I will tell you; it is in the third chapter of the first
book of Kings.' I looked as the child directed, and, finding it, I read it to him. Having done
so, I was about to shut up the book; which the child perceiving, said, 'Now, please, father,
will you read about Lazarus raised from the dead?' which was done; and, in short," said the
father, "he kept me at it for at least two hours that night, and completely tired me out, for
there was no getting rid of him. The next night be renewed the application, with 'Please, father,
will you read about Joseph and his brethren?' and he could always tell me where these stories
were to be found. Indeed, he was not contented with my reading it, but would get me into many
difficulties, by asking me to explain that which I knew nothing about; and if I said I could
not tell him, he would tell me that I ought to go to church, for his master had told him, that
that was the place to learn more about it; adding, 'and I will go with you, father.' In short,
he told me every picture you had in your school, and kept me so well at it, that I at last
got into the habit of reading for myself, with some degree of delight; this, therefore, is
one reason why I wish the child to remain in the school." A short time afterwards, the mother
called on me, and told me, that no one could be happier than she was, for there was so much
alteration in her husband for the better, that she could scarcely believe him to be the same
man. Instead of being in the skittle-ground, in the evening, spending his money and getting
tipsy, he was reading at home to her and his children; and the money that used to go for gambling,
was now going to buy books, with which, in conjunction with the Bible, they were greatly delighted,
and afforded both him and them a great deal of pleasure and profit.

Here we see a whole family were made comfortable, and called to a sense of religion and duty,
by the instrumentality of a child of six years of age. I subsequently made inquiries, and found
that the whole family attended a place of worship, and that their character would bear the
strictest investigation.

