  Government is a delegated trust from God,
who alone has the right to govern.  He gives to every nation the right to say in what form
this trust shall be clothed.  No man has the right to be his brother's master.  Take away the
truth that government is a trust which comes from God, and you have left nothing between man
and man but cunning and brute force.  Burke said, "this sacred trust of government does not
arise from our conventions and compacts," but it gives our conventions and compacts all the
force and sanction which they have.  I shall be told that the name of God is not found in the
Constitution of the United States; it did not need to be when it was written on the people's
hearts.

While we commemorate the noble deeds of our fathers, which under God were this day crowned
with success, we gratefully remember that our fathers' God has guided us through all dangers.
What other nation has come out of the horrors of civil war with victors and vanquished vieing
with each other in love for one common country?  Where has the hand of the assassin bowed the
whole people by the leader's grave?  This is no day for boasting or to call over the roll of
our great dead.

We have sinned deeply, and deeply have we paid the penalty.  No hand but God's could have over-ruled
our mistakes and given us our favored position to-day.  We must not forget that no nation has
ever survived the loss of its religion.  The year which saw Washington inaugurated president,
saw in the fair land of Lafayette the beginnings of that holocaust of murder which turned France
into a hell. The people have always been used to the present system; they would hardly know how
to act on any other. Moreover, a large majority of the church members are destitute of active piety;
to put the interests of religion into the hands of such men would seem to be a dangerous experiment.
Especially is it true of the mercantile classes, of those who are
pecuniarily best able to maintain religious institutions, that they
are in general indifferent to religious things.

This being the case, one cannot be surprised at the reluctance of those in ecclesiastical authority
to desire the support of the state to be withdrawn. Neverheless it cannot but widen the chasm
between the established church and the freethinkers, that the former urges upon the Government
to continue a policy which is plainly inconsistent with the constitution, and that the Government
yields to the urging.

A more vital point in the controversy between the king and the Liberals was the disposition
of the finances. The House of Delegates, in the session lasting from January 14 to March 11, 1862,
insisted on a more minute specification than the ministry had given of the use to be made of
the moneys to be appropriated. The king at length, wearied with their importunity, dissolved the
House, upon which a new election followed in the next month. The excitement was great. The
Government seems to have hoped for a favorable result, at least for a diminution of the Liberal
majority. The Minister of the Interior issued a communication to all officials, announcing that
they would be expected to vote in favor of the Government. A similar notification was made
to the universities, but was protested against. Most of the consistories summoned the clergymen
to labor to secure a vote in favor of the king. But in spite of all these exertions, the new
House, like the other, contained an overwhelming majority of Progress men. At the beginning
of the new session in May, however, both parties seemed more yielding than before. Attention
was given less to questions of general character, more to matters of practical concern. But at last
the schism developed itself again. The king had determined to reorganize and enlarge the army,
to which end larger appropriations were needed than usual. The military budget put the requisite
sum at 37,779,043 thalers (about twenty-five million dollars); the House voted 31,932,940,
rejecting the proposition of the minister by a vote of three hundred and eight to eleven. A
change in the ministry followed, but not a change such as would be expected in England--just
the opposite.

At the dissolution of the previous House the Liberal ministry had given place to a more conservative
one; now this conservative one gave place to one still more conservative,
Herr von Bismarck became Minister of State.

The House then voted that the appropriations must be determined by the House, else every use
made by the Government of the national funds would be unconstitutional.

The king's answer to this was an order closing the session. A new session began early in 1863.
The same controversy was renewed.

The king had introduced his new military scheme; he had used, under the plea of stern necessity,
money not voted by Parliament.
  Man has created nothing.  The lightening would run its circuit in the Garden
of Eden as well as when Morse made it man's messenger.  In the fullness of time God has lifted
the veil from human eyes to see the mysteries of His bounty, and so prepare a highway for the
coming of our King.

I have no argument about the obligation of missions.  It is eighteen hundred years too late
for this.

I speak to you to-day of the progress of the Kingdom of Christ.  Pray for me that the story
may lead us to the foot of the Cross to consecrate all that we have to His blessed service.

At the close of the last century a thoughtful young Englishman asked the governor of the East
India Company to go to India to preach the Gospel. The answer was: "The man that would go to
India upon that errand is as mad as a man who would put a torch to a powder magazine."

A few years ago Chunder Sen, the great scholar of India, died.  On his death-bed a friend asked
him what he thought were the prospects of Christianity in India.  He answered: "Jesus Christ
has conquered the heart of India."  Not that great battles are not yet to be fought, much weary
work to be done, but with more than half a million of Christians in India, which have been
won in this century, we are certain that the nation will be won to Christ.

I turn to that dark continent which has had more of human sorrow bound up in its history than
any place on earth.  Forty years ago in a cottage in the highlands of Scotland an aged man
said to his son: "David, you will have family prayer to-day, for when we part we shall never
meet again until we meet before the great white throne."  David Livingstone read the thirty-fourth
Psalm, the key-note of that wonderful life, and then poured out his heart to God in prayer,
threw his arms around his father's neck and kissed him; they parted never to meet again in
this world, and so he went to Africa.  He did a wonderful work in the Bechuana country.  He
was a carpenter, blacksmith, teacher, laborer, physician and minister to these poor souls,
but the man's heart was in the interior of Africa.  One day, with about as much preparation
as I take when I go to the north woods of Minnesota, he left for the interior of Africa.  His
route was along the path of slave traders, and every few days he came to some place where a
poor woman had fainted in the chain- gang and had been strapped to a tree with her babe at
her breast and left to be stung to death by insects.  No wonder that he wrote in his Journal,
and blotted it with tears: "Oh, God, when will the great sore of the world be healed?"

When you remember that the followers of the false prophet are the only people engaged in this
traffic in human flesh, and that to the poor African it means slavery or death, you have the
answer to the stories of the progress of Mohammedanism in Africa.

I cannot tell the story of his life.   One day he was found dead on his knees in prayer in
an African hut.  That life had so impressed itself upon the heathen folk that they did what
will always be a marvel of history.  They wrapped the body in leaves.  They covered it with
pitch. They carried it nine months on their shoulders.  They fought hostile tribes.  They swam
swollen rivers.  They cut their way through impenetrable thickets, and at last stood at the
door of a mission house in Zanzibar, and said, "We have brought the man of God to be buried
with his people."  And so David Livingstone sleeps in Westminster Abbey.

Our Stanley took up Livingstone's work, and he laid Africa open to the gaze of the world. 
He travelled nine hundred and ninety-nine days, and the thousandth day reached the sea-coast.
In all that journey he did not meet a single, solitary soul who had heard that Jesus Christ
had come into the world.  Stanley tells the reason why he went back to Africa.  He said:

"When I found Livingstone I cared no more for missions than the veriest atheist in England.
I had been a press reporter, and my business was to follow armies and to describe battles;
to attend conventions and report speeches, but my heart had not been touched with sympathy
for missions. When I found this grand old man I asked: 'What is he here for?  Is he crazy?
Is he cracked?  I sat at his feet four months and I saw that a power above his will had taken
possession of his life, and given him a hunger to lead poor heathen folk out of their darkness.

"I have heard the same voice speaking to my heart, 'Follow me,' and I go back to Africa to
finish Livingstone's work."

This was a few years ago.  To-day there are fifteen Christian Bishops of our communion in Africa.
Eight were present at the Lambeth Conference. One of them, Bishop Crowther, was captured when
a boy ten years of age on a slave ship, placed in a mission school, transferred to a high school,
then to the university, graduated with honors, and went back to Africa as a Bishop.  As I looked
in the face of that black man and thought of his wonderful history, I remembered another man
from Africa that carried the cross of my blessed Master up the hill to Calvary, and that this
aged servant of Christ was following in his blessed footsteps.

Another of these Bishops was one of the manliest men that I ever looked upon; Bishop Smythies,
the picture of manly beauty, honored by his university, beloved by friends, a face gentle and
loving as that of St. John.  When I thought of this man going on foot in the interior of Africa,
perhaps to die for Christ, I could not keep back the tears, and I went to him and said, "My
good brother, I cannot tell you how my heart goes out to you in loving sympathy."  He smiled
and said, "Bishop, when the Church in Jerusalem had more work than it knew how to do, the Holy
Ghost sent one of its ministers upon a long journey to convert one African.  Surely it is not
much for the Christians of Christian England to send a Christian Bishop to millions who never
heard there is a Savior."

And now I turn to the opposite quarter of the globe--Australasia, New Zealand, and Polynesia.
When I was a boy there was but one English settlement, and that was known throughout the world
as Botany Bay, the abode of the most abandoned criminals of English civilization.  There are
to-day twenty-one Bishops in those islands.  I wish I could tell the story inwrought in the
lives of Selwyn, Patteson, Williams, and a host of others, some of whom have laid down their
lives for Christ.

To-day cannibalism is a thing of the past.  Human sacrifices, thank God, are to be found nowhere
on the earth.  There is not one of those islands without its Christian church, and in some
of them the last vestige of heathenism has passed away.  They have thousands of Christian men
and women under their native pastors.  Surely this is no time to talk about the failure of
Christian missions.

Now I turn to Japan.  Less than forty year ago one of our brave American sailors, Commodore
Perry, cast anchor on Sunday morning in the harbor of Yeddo.  He called his officers and crew
together for public worship, and they sang that old hymn of our fathers, "Old Hundred"; and
the first sound that this hermit nation heard from her younger sister of the West was that
grand old hymn.

Next year Japan will have a constitutional government.  It has already adopted the Christian
calendar.  There are more that a million of children in their public schools.  Many of these
schools are under the charge of Christian men and women, and it is only a question of a few
years when Japan will take her place beside other Christian nations. This is more wonderful
when we remember that until recently there was a statute in Japan that, "if any Christian shall
set his foot on the Island of Japan, or if the Christian's God, Jesus, shall come, he shall
be beheaded."

I turn to China.  I wonder that its doors are open to Christian missions when I remember that
Christian nations at the mouth of the cannon have forced upon that people that deadly drug
which drags body and soul to death, that their names have been by-words and hissing in Christian
lands.  The secret is that God sent to China a young Englishman whose life was hid with Christ
in God.  Chinese Gordon saved the nation of China, and his name will be a household word forever.
Surely a people where the poorest laborer can become the first prince of the realm if he becomes
the first scholar, and if his son is a vagabond sinks to the place from which his father came,
surely such a people have the elements to receive the Gospel of Christ.

Time would fail me to tell the story of missions in North America; I should begin at Hudson's
Bay, where Bishop John Horden has lived thirty- five years amid its solitudes and won every
one of its Indian tribes to Christianity.  I should tell you of the Bishop of Athabasca, whose
home is within the Arctic circle, who could not attend the Lambeth Conference because he could
not go and return the same year.  I should tell of my young friend, the Bishop of Mackenzie
River, when I knew that he spent nine months each year travelling upon snowshoes and three
months in a birch-bark canoe; that the only way that he could carry to them the Gospel was
to follow them in the chase, hunt with them, fish with them, lie down in their wigwams in his
blanket and always have waiting upon his lips the sweet story of the love of God, our Father.
I told him I wished he would give me his post-office address and I would send him books and
papers; he said: "Bishop, I am a thousand miles from a post- office and only get one mail a year."

I should tell you of another, the Bishop of Rupertsland, Dr. Macrae, the only Bishop in Christendom
who has a university made up of a Roman Catholic college, a Presbyterian college, and a college
of the Church of England; so large-hearted that almost by one consent the people of Manitoba
have made him the president of their entire educational system.

If I turn to our own land, it would be to tell you that one hundred years ago the Church was
a feeble folk, scattered along the Atlantic coast and known as a people that were everywhere
spoken against.  Thank God, to-day her voice is heard in the miner's camp, in the schoolhouse
of the border, in the wigwam of the Indians, and sturdy heralds are in the fore-front of that
mighty movement which is peopling this land with its millions of souls.  Marvellous as is the
progress of Christian missions and the work which has been done in this century, it has largely
been committed to the English-speaking race.  In the providence of God races of men have been
selected by Him to do His work.  Two hundred years ago the English-speaking people of Europe
were less than many of the nations of the Latin races.  Spain outnumbered England two to one.
To-day there are one hundred and fifty millions of English- speaking people in the world, one-tenth
of the entire human family. When we think of the future, that by the close of another century
more than five hundred millions will be speaking one language, it leads us to ask, on bended
knees, why has this commission been committed to this English-speaking race, and what are the
responsibilities that rest upon our branch of the Church of God?  I reverently believe that
it is because on its civil side it recognizes as no other race that government is a delegated
trust from God, who alone has the right to govern.  It represents constitutional government,
and it has done so since Bishop Stephen Langton, at the head of the nobles of England, wrung
the /Magna Charta/ from King John, and henceforth recognized the sacredness of the citizen,
who has been clothed with an individuality unlike any being who lives or will live in all the
ages of eternity.  On its religious side it recognizes the two truths which underlie the possibility
of the reunion of Christendom--the validity of all Christian Baptism in the name of the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and that the condition of fellowship in the Church of God is faith
in the incarnate Son of God as contained in the Old Catholic creeds.  Surely we may hold up
the olive branch of God's peace over all strife and divisions among the disciples of Christ,
and say "Ye are brethren."

When we remember that in the providence of God the Greek tongue was spoken throughout the civilized
world to prepare a way for the coming of His Son and the preaching of the blessed Gospel, we
see in these facts forerunning tokens of his preparation for the second coming of Jesus Christ.

If I had time to-day, I would love to tell you the story that is inwrought in the history of
our noble Missionary Bishops; men who have hazarded their lives for the Lord Jesus.  I wish
I could tell you of their ventures of faith, foundations for Christian schools which they have
laid with prayers and watered with tears, and with a prophet's eye looked forward to a future
when the land will swarm with millions of souls, that so by Christian nurture and Christian
training the Church may fulfil the Master's words, "Feed my lambs."  I wish I could tell you
of the work, dear to every Bishop's heart, of the daughters of the Cross; yes, and I would
like to bring to this Council some of the tempest-tossed and weary souls who have been led
out of their darkness to the rest and peace and gladness of Christian faith.  I wish I could
bring here some from the northern forests and the prairies of the West, the men of the trembling
eye and the wandering foot, that they might thank you for having led them out of their heritage
of anguish and sorrow into the light of the children of God.

I may not close without a word of tribute to those who have fallen asleep.  Since our last
General Convention nine Bishops have crossed the river and are waiting for us on the other
shore.  Unbidden tears come as I remember the loving Elliot, our St. John; Welles, another
holy Herbert; Brown, with his Catholic heart that had room enough to take in all the poor and
the sorrowful of his diocese; Harris, every whit a great leader in our Israel; Dunlop, the
soldier on the outpost, often debarred brotherly sympathy, who in loneliness and weariness
bravely did his work. "The little boy had fastened his small clammy hands round a finger of
each of us. He looked at us alternately; and seemed to ask, alike from his father and his murderer,
that help which it was beyond the power of one of earth to give.

Since I entered the House of Bishops, fifty-three Bishops have laid down their shepherd's staves
and entered into rest.

