For one heart-beat there was no sound but the heavy panting of men's breath. Then a man snatched
a golden cup rimmed with rubies, which stood on a stand near the window, and thrust it into
his breast. With his first motion the two others started upon Varia where she stood, rose and
white, in the middle of the chamber. Midway, the larger man pushed the smaller red-bearded
one aside; he recovered, with a vicious pass of his knife, which the other gave aside to parry.

"I entered first!" the red one shouted. "Hands off, thou son of swine! Said we not that I,
Wulf, who brought thee hither, should have first choice? Call you the others; thus we shall
catch them front and rear."

"Call yourself!" said the other. He sprang forward, clutching at Varia, slipped on the polished
floor, and plunged headlong at her feet. Varia screamed in terror; and as Wulf overleaped his
prostrate comrade and caught her in his arms, screamed again. Her head was crushed against
Wulf's leather-clad breast, but she struggled and cried aloud as a hare cries when the hounds
have brought it down.

There was a rush from the corridor outside, a long-drawn shout of warning and triumph, answered
by yells from the garden, where more black figures came leaping. Wardo, grimed from head to
foot, dashed into the room at the head of his men as a crowd of invaders surged through the
long window. He lunged at Wulf with the short broad sword he carried, and the point came away
red. Wulf gurgled and fell, dragging Varia with him; and the fight closed over them both as
water closes over a cast stone.

And as Life had entered the garden by that little narrow door, so Death also entered, bringing
with it what Death must bring.

III

When dawn washed the first faint streak of gray across the night sky, the barbarians, beaten
back and baffled, retreated to the great Wood from which they had come, and lurked darkly there.

"I think we are not yet through with them," said Marius. He had seen Saxons fight before.

With dawn, also, Eudemius sent forth a trusty slave westward to seek aid from the civil authorities
and from his own people at the mine, the nearest point at which it might be obtained, and with
the dawn was found the body of Hito, stabbed in the back, lying near the little garden door
which led to the outer world.

Many of the guests chose to take their chances of attack, and left the villa hurriedly while
yet the day was young. Eudemius could not hold them prisoners, and would not if he could. His
own was enough to guard. But Felix did not go, and Eudemius could not order him forth. He dared
not leave the villa, where he felt a measure of security; were he to do so, he knew that it
would be his fate to be captured and killed before he could win to safety. So they shrugged
their shoulders and left him.

That day the villa, unmolested and with half its inmates gone, seemed to sink into a calm of
exhaustion, which, after the night that had passed, was like the calm of death. Marius and
Eudemius themselves superintended the cleaning up of the house, the strengthening of barricades,
the muster of the slaves for what further service might be needed.

"I trust the messengers whom I sent forth have not been waylaid," Eudemius said.

"Help could not come before to-morrow night," Marius answered. "It will go hard with us if
we cannot hold out that long. This time it may be that we shall fare better; there will be
no Hito to betray us."

"I shall have him buried at the crossroads with a stake through his evil heart!" said Eudemius.
"There be eleven dead awaiting burial. This we shall do to-night. And Varia, my son, how fares
she?"

"She is unhurt, but exhausted, and the old woman watches her," said Marius. "Sleep thou also,
and I shall see to setting a watch about the house, and that those may take rest who can be
spared."

Mycon entered, his arms before his face.

"Lords, there be a slave, Wardo the Saxon, who insists that he hath grave matters for thine
ears. He is in very evil plight--"

"Let him stand forth," said Eudemius.

Wardo came, tall, grim, very dirty. A bloody rag bound his head; he limped, and one of his
sandals was stained with blood. He crossed his arms before his face, and waited.

"Speak!" Eudemius commanded.

And Wardo spoke, standing erect, his blue eyes on his lord's face.

"Lord, it was not Hito who betrayed the household, as I hear men say. It was I. There is a
little man, red like a fox, who came to a house on Thorney where was I. He also is Saxon. And
I, being drunken with much wine, did boast to this one of my lord's greatness, and of the feasts
which were made within this house, and the wealth which was herein. And when I was sober, after
many hours, one told me of what I had done, and of how this red Saxon was gone to set his fellows
upon my lord. So I rode until my horse fell with me and died, but I was too late to bring warning
to my lord. When I reached this house last night, it was surrounded, with the door beaten down
and men swarming within. So I, being Saxon, and not suspected in the dark, entered, shouting,
with others. And in my lady's chamber found I that red Wulf, who is no wolf, but a sly thieving
fox, and tried to slay him. But he got away. I am my lord's man."

"It is well that you have told me this," said Eudemius. "At sunset you shall be crucified. Go."

Wardo crossed his arms before his face and went.

When his work about the house was done, Marius entered softly the room where Varia lay, tended
by Nerissa. The old woman slipped away, and Varia held out a slim hand to him in one of her
sudden and unaccountable moods of coquetry. He kissed it gallantly.

"How fares my lady?"

Varia shivered.

"I do not wish to think of it! Were it not for Wardo--"

"Ay, that is true," said Marius, misunderstanding. "Well, by this night his fault will be punished.
But how know you of what Wardo hath done?"

"How?" she echoed in surprise. "Was it not my life he saved? And what is he to be punished
for? What hath he done?"

"Naught that in the least would interest thee," he told her.

"He shall not be harmed," she said firmly. "He saved me from two great men and one little one
who would have slain me, and he is not to suffer for it."

"Now this is something new. Dost know, sweeting, that had it not been for this knave Wardo,
no great men nor little would have come upon thee? It was he who betrayed us, and it is right
that he should suffer for it."

Her eyes filled with tears.

"He saved my life, and I will not have him suffer! What is to be done to him this night?"

He tried to put her off.

"Never mind him, sweet one. Think of him no more."

But she repeated stubbornly:

"What is to be done to him this night?" She glanced at him, one of her strange and sidelong
glances. "Is he to be--crucified?"

Marius started in spite of himself.

"Who told thee?" he demanded.

"None told me," she answered. She raised her hands to her temples. "I felt it--here. So, I
say that he shall not be crucified, nor harmed in any way at all. And thou must see to it!"
She was like an imperious young empress, commanding her meanest slave.

"And if I will not?" said the slave, perversely.

Her child's mouth quivered.

"But thou wilt!" she pleaded. She laid a hand upon his bare sinewy arm, fingering the heavy
golden armlet on it, and for a fleeting instant raised her eyes to his. "Thou wilt?" she repeated
sweetly.

His dark face hardened against her wiles.

"The man hath played the traitor. He also is Saxon. Who knows but that he may set his fellows
on again? Nay, lady wife; I fear thy man must die."

"Ah, no!" she begged. "It is the first request I make of thee--thou'lt not refuse it if I ask
thee?"

"Ask it then," said Marius, his eyes on her, "in the right and proper way that a wife should
ask her husband."

Rose-leaf color flushed her cheeks; she raised herself to her knees amid the draperies of the
couch, and clasped her folded hands upon her breast, and closed her eyes, devout and meek and holy.

"Pray thee, let Wardo go, my lord!" she said softly, and opened her eyes quickly to see how
he might take it. "Is it thus thou wouldst have me ask?"

He bent his head, sudden laughter in his eyes, and kissed her pleading lips.

"Who could resist thee, lady mine?" he cried gayly. "Sure never did unworthy man have so fair
a lawyer. Ay, child, if he saved thy life--and thy account and his do tally--he shall go free."

Varia slipped out of his arms and clapped her hands.

"Go then--go quickly and tell my lord father so! He will do it for thee, as thou hast done
it for me. Is it not so?"

So it came to pass that evening that the cross in the chamber of fate knew not its victim;
and for this there were more reasons than a girl's tender wiles.

For while the flame of sunset again stabbed the dusk of night, came men out from the Wood of
Anderida, fifteen miles away, some on foot and some on horseback, with at their head the red
Wulf, astride a great bay horse. Wardo, from his station on the roofs, saw them from far off;
saw also that many as they had been the night before, they were now fivefold more, an army
bent on plunder, captained by lawlessness. And still no aid had come. Wardo told Marius, and
Marius went up on the roofs to see, and came back square of jaw and with moody eyes. He sought
out Eudemius, where the latter was going the rounds of their makeshift defences, and said:

"This red hound of hell hath come back upon us and brought his pack, five times as many as
before. Thou knowest I am not one to turn tail when there is fighting to be done, but I can
see what is to be seen. And we have women and children with us."

"You think, then, that we should fly from here?" Eudemius asked with sombre eyes.

"I think we are lucky to have the chance to attempt it," said Marius, curtly. "Were it not
better to lose half rather than all? For an hour we might stand against them, scarcely more.
Thy familia numbers five hundred souls; of these some are wounded and more are but incumbrances.
If it pleaseth thee to stay, thou knowest that nothing will suit me better. A good fight against
odds is worth risking much for. I but state the case as I have seen it."

"My fighting days are over," said Eudemius. "But I am not too old to run. And there are the
women and the children. Be it as thou sayest, lad. This work is thy work--" he broke off to
chuckle grimly--"and thou'rt a clever workman! We have chariots and horses, and I will give
command to pack what papers and things of value I may."

Again the villa was in uproar. Chests were strapped on sumpter mules; chariots with pawing
horses stood in the main courtyard, ready to be gone. Slaves ran here and there with scrolls
and bundles in their arms; cooks left the meat turning on the spits; dancing girls, wrapped
in cloaks and clinging to their treasures, huddled together, waiting for the start. The gates
were opened, and all but certain of the stewards and body-slaves were permitted to depart.
They swarmed from the villa like ants when their hill is crushed, and spread off to the west,
away from the direction of the enemy. And always the slave stationed on watch cried down to
those below the approach, near and ever nearer, of that enemy; and at every cry a spasm of
increased activity shuddered through the house. It was each one for himself, and the hindmost
would surely rue it.

"Should we be separated in the night, let us plan to meet at one spot," said Marius. He was
strapping a bundle of food and a flask of wine to his saddle-bow, in the hurrying confusion
of the courtyard, too old a campaigner to face a march without supplies. Eudemius nodded, his
arms full of papers, which a slave was placing in a box.

"At Londinium, then, whence I shall sail for Gaul as soon as may be. We will wait there, each
for the other. If the barbarians sweep the country widely, we may not at first be able to reach
there."

"That is true," said Marius. "I have thought of that. Our best plan will be to hold west from
here, make a half circle and gain the Bibracte road, and when the brutes are worrying the carcass
here, return eastward, passing them by the road, and so reach Londinium. The gods grant that
Ætius can spare me a legion!"

In the end they barely escaped. The slave on watch shouted warning; the stewards flung themselves
on their horses and made off. Varia ran into the court, crying for Nerissa; without ado Marius
lifted her into the chariot, of which Wardo held the reins. The chariot of Eudemius, driven
by himself, was already rumbling through the gateway. There was a terrified scurry of slaves
from under his horses' feet. He swung into the road and lashed the stallions to a gallop. Close
at his heels Wardo followed, his grays leaping in the traces, with Varia, white-faced, crouched
low in front of him. The hollow thunder of the wheels mingled with the pounding of hoofs as
they dashed into the oak-bordered road. Marius swung himself to his horse's back as the beast
reared with excitement, found his stirrups, and galloped hard after, his sword clapping against
his greave. He did not see who followed through the gate, for as he caught up with the flying
chariots, the first of the pursuers mounted the brow of the hill to the east of the house,
not a quarter of a mile away.

Some of them rode their horses into the courtyard; others took up the trail of the fleeing
Romans. But they were there for plunder; soon they gave up the chase and galloped back to strive
for their share with the others. Those slaves who had been left behind or who were overtaken
on the road were slain; as the sun went down there began in the stately halls an orgy which
sounded to high heaven.

So when they had eaten and drunk until they could eat and drink no more, they fought among
themselves over the division of the spoils; and between them all they killed their leader,
Wulf the red son of Wulf. Also, in their drunken frenzy, they tried to set the villa on fire.
In the midst of this, while they swept ravening through the rooms like devouring flame, while
every court held its knot of drunken brawlers, who cursed and fought in darkness or under the
flaring light of cressets, a detachment of milites stationarii, or military police, in whose
hands was the maintenance of law and public order, rode over the western hills, coming hotfoot
from Calleva, thirty miles away. They fell upon the barbarians, taking them by surprise; these
forgot their quarrels and made common cause against this sudden foe. At once bloody battle
was waged beneath the stars; the pillared halls rang to the clang of weapons and the thud of
armed feet. Men in armor of bronze came crashing to the ground with their blood spreading from
them darkly over the marble floors; in the courtyards men at every moment stumbled over bodies
of the dead and dying.

And an hour before dawn there arrived from the west a body of footsore miners, armed for the
most part with picks, which it appeared they were skilled in using in a variety of ways. These
combined with the stationarii; for an hour red death swept through hall and court and chamber,
to the tune of the yelling of the human wolf-pack loosed for blood. At the end of it the barbarians,
harried before and behind, unable to rally, fell into panic and started to flee, laden with
what spoil they could bear away. By dawn what was left of the villa was again in Roman hands,
a wreck mighty in its desolation, epitome of the splendor that had been and the tragedy that
was to come. The pendulum of Time had started on its inevitable downward course, and where
had been power and grandeur were but the ashes of pomp and pride.

IV

Now, four days after that night when Wardo had betrayed his lord in the house of Chloris, men
coming up from the mine, at sunset when the day's work was done, were herded by their overseers
and guards into the bare open space at the mouth of the mine. The superintendent came among
them, a grizzled man, hard-faced, as became his lot, and spoke. Beside him was a slave whom
some there recognized as from the villa, travel-stained and dropping with fatigue, just arrived
with letters from his lord.

"An attack hath been made upon the house of our lord by barbarians and insurgents," said the
superintendent, glancing over the tablets he held. "It was repulsed, but with loss upon both
sides. The barbarians came from the Silva Anderida, and it is thought that they are being reinforced
by others, and will try again. My lord is hard pressed, for the house is crowded with guests
gathered for the marriage feast of our lady. The attack hath been stubborn beyond belief; the
barbarians demand that one lord Felix, who slew their chief at Anderida, be given up to them,
and this my lord will not do. Also my lord saith that knowledge of the rich treasure in the
house was betrayed to the barbarians by a drunken slave, and they are hot for plunder. Therefore
he hath sent to me, as the nearest one to afford him help, commanding that I say to you in
his name: Those of you whose crimes are not murder or against religion shall be returned to
the house to take part in its defence, as many as can be singled out by to-morrow's dawn. For
loyal service and obedience to orders, ye shall receive the freedom of casarii and your sentence
here shall be cancelled. To-night your records shall be looked up, and to-morrow those of you
whose names and numbers are called will be sent forward as quickly as may be."

Half a hundred voices raised a tired cheer, not so much because their lord was in danger, as
because there was prospect of release. The nightly rations of black bread and beans were served
out. Some men took their portion to the huts where they slept, as beasts carry food to their
lair; but these were for the most part condemned for murders and religious crimes and knew
that they had no hope of freedom. The majority gathered in discussion about the fires, always
with alert sentries hovering near at hand. All that night the air throbbed with expectation.

In the first dark hours of morning the blast of a brazen trumpet brought five hundred men into
the open, eager to know their fate. The superintendent and his assistants appeared with lists
of names which they had worked all night to complete. Men pressed close around him, eager not
to lose a word; the overseers, whips in hand, mingled with the crowd to check incipient disturbances.
A score of mounted guards were drawn up near by, waiting to escort the detail. Lanterns shone
here and there through the thin gray mist which hung over the broken land.

Nicanor woke at the first brassy blare of the trumpet. His face was keen with his first conscious
thought; there was no doubt that he would be of those chosen. He made his toilet with a shake
of his tunic, and went outside. Around him, in the semi-darkness, figures were hurrying to
where the superintendent, mounted on a keg, was calling the roll by the light of a lantern,
with his hood pulled well over his face against the keen air of morning. His harsh voice, shouting
names and numbers, rose above the stir and rustle of excited men.

Three rods from his hut, Nicanor was jostled violently by one who wheeled with an oath to see
who had run against him.

