Audrey herself felt an unspeakable relief after that question and her own inspired answer.
Last night she had possibly been ambiguous; to-day, at any rate, her words had a trenchant
force which severed one of the thousand little threads that bound her to Hardy. After all,
when it came to the point, there was an immense amount of decision in her character. And as
the days went on, and Hardy with them, leaving league after league of the Atlantic behind him,
the load at her heart grew lighter; and when at last the letter came which told her that he
had crossed the Rocky Mountains, she felt with a little tremor of delight that she was a free
woman once more. Her world was all before her, vaguely alluring, as it had been a month ago.

The letters which Hardy sent from time to time had no power to destroy this agreeable illusion;
for of course letters were bound to come, and she answered them all with cousinly affection,
as she would have answered them in any case. At last one came which roused her from her indifference,
for it had a postscript:--

    "By the way, there's a Miss Katherine Haviland living near you, at
    12 Devon Street, Pimlico. She's a sort of little half-sister of
    mine, so I'd be glad if you'd go and look her up some day and be
    kind to her. There's a brother knocking about somewhere, but he
    doesn't count, he's only a baby. Ripping sport--shot a moose and two
    wapiti this morning."

Audrey read the letter with languid attention. She was not in the least interested to hear
that he had taken up land and put it into the hands of an agent to farm. She was tired of the
long highly-coloured descriptions of Canadian scenery and the tales of Vincent's adventures,
and she had got into the way of skipping his vain repetitions of all the absurd things he had
said to her on the night of his departure; but the postscript stirred strange feelings in her
breast. His mother was married a second time, but to Audrey's certain knowledge Vincent had
no little half-sisters; it followed that for some reason he had used a figure of speech. She
was not in the least in love with him, but at the same time she felt all the dignity of her
position as empress of his heart, and could bear no little half-sisters near the throne. She
would certainly look Miss Haviland up. She would go and be kind to her that afternoon; and
she put on her best clothes for the occasion.

A few minutes' walk brought her to No. 12 Devon Street, one of a row of gloomy little houses--"full
of dreadful city clerks and dressmakers," she said to herself in a flight of imagination.

She lifted the knocker gingerly in her white gloved hand, and felt by no means reassured when
she was shown in, and followed the servant up the narrow staircases to the attics. As she neared
the top she heard a voice above her sounding in passionate remonstrance.

"Three baths in the one blessed dy, a-splashin' and a-sloogin' somethin' orful--'e didn't ought
for to do it, m'm, not if it was ever so!"

Here the voice was cut short by a mingled roar and ripple of laughter, and Miss Audrey Craven
paused before announcing herself. Through the half-open doorway she saw a girl standing before
an easel. She had laid down her palette and brushes, and with bold sure strokes of the pencil
was sketching against time, leaning a little backwards, with her head in a critically observant
pose. The voice reasserted itself in crushing peroration--

"I tell you wot it is, Mr. 'Aviland--you're no gentleman."

And Audrey's entrance coincided with the retreat of a stout woman, moving slowly with an unnatural
calm.

The girl doubled back her sketch-book and came forward, apologising for the confusion. Face
to face with the object of her curiosity, Audrey's first feeling was one of surprised and reluctant
admiration. Miss Haviland was dark, and pale, and thin; she was also a little too tall, and
Audrey did not know whether she quite liked the airy masses of black hair that curled high
up from her forehead and low down on it, in crisp tendrils like fine wire. Yet, but for her
nose, which was a shade too long, a thought too retroussé, Miss Haviland would have been beautiful
after the Greek type. (Audrey's own type, as she had once described it in a moment of introspection,
was the "Roman piquante," therefore she made that admission the more readily.) There was a
touch of classic grace, too, in the girl's figure and her dress. She had rolled up the sleeves
of her long blue overall, and bound it below her breasts and waist with a girdle of tape--not
for the sake of effect, as Audrey supposed, but to give her greater freedom as she worked and
moved about the studio. At this point Audrey found out that all Miss Haviland's beauty lay
in the shape of her head and neck. With "that nose" she might be "interesting," but could never
be beautiful; in fact, her mouth was too firm and her chin stuck out too much even for moderate
prettiness.

Audrey did not arrive at these conclusions in the gradual manner here set forth. The total
impression was photographed on her sensitive feminine brain by the instantaneous process; and
with the same comprehensive rapidity she began to take in the details of her surroundings.
The attic was long, and had one window to the west, and another to the north under the roof,
looking over the leads. At the far end were a plain square table and a corner cupboard. That
was the dining-room and the pantry. Before the fireplace were a small Persian rug bounded by
a revolving book-case, a bamboo couch, a palm fern, a tea-table. That was the library and drawing-room.
All the remaining space was the studio; and amongst easels, stacks of canvases, draperies,
and general litter, a few life-size casts from the antique gleamed from their corners.

From these rapid observations Audrey concluded that Miss Haviland was poor.

"You were busy when I came in?" she asked sweetly.

"No; I was only taking a hurried sketch from the life. It's not often that our landlady exhibits
herself in that sublime mood; so I seized the opportunity."

"And I interrupted you."

"No; you interrupted Mrs. Rogers, for which we were much obliged--she might have sat for us
longer than we liked. I am very pleased to see you."

Certainly Audrey was a pleasant sight. There was no critical afterthought in the admiring look
which Miss Haviland turned on her visitor, and Audrey felt to her finger-tips this large-hearted
feminine homage. To compel another woman to admire you is always a triumph; besides, Miss Haviland
was an artist, and her admiration was worth something--it was like having the opinion of an
expert. Audrey pondered for a moment, with her head at a becoming angle, for she had not yet
accounted for herself.

"My cousin Vincent Hardy asked me to call on you. I believe he is a very old friend of yours?"

"Yes; we have known each other since we were children."

"What do you think of his going out to Canada to farm?"

"I didn't know he had gone."

(Then Vincent had not thought it worth while to say good-bye to his "little half-sister." So
far, so good.)

"Oh, didn't you? He went six weeks ago."

"I never heard. It's an unlikely thing for him to do, but that's the sort of thing he always
did do."

"He hated going, poor fellow. He came to say good-bye to me the night before he went, and he
was in a dreadful state. I've heard from him every week since he sailed, and he's promised
to send me some bearskins. Isn't it nice of him?" ("She won't like that!")

Miss Haviland assented gravely, but her eyes smiled.

"I suppose you've seen a good deal of Vincent? He wrote to me about you from the Rocky Mountains."

"Did he? We used to be a good deal together when we were little. Since then we have been the
best of friends, which means that we ignore each other's existence with the most perfect understanding
in the world. I always liked Vincent."

This was reassuring. Miss Haviland's manner was candour itself; and depend upon it, if there
had been any self-consciousness about her, Audrey would have found it out at once. She dropped
the subject, and looked about her for another. The suggestions of the place were obvious.

"I see you are a great artist. My cousin didn't prepare me for that."

Miss Haviland laughed.

"Vincent is probably unaware of the interesting fact, like the rest of the world."

"That picture is very beautiful; may I look at it?" said Audrey, going up to the easel.

"Certainly. It's hardly finished yet, and I don't think it will be particularly beautiful when
it is. I can't choose my subjects."

"It looks--interesting," murmured Audrey, fatuously. (What was the subject, after all?) "Have
you done many others?"

"Yes, a good many."

"May I----?" she hesitated, wondering whether her request might not be a social solecism, like
asking a professional to play.

"If you care about pictures, I will show you some of my brother's some day. His are better
than mine--more original, at least."

"Your brother? Oh, of course. Vincent told me you had a brother, a baby brother. Surely----"

Miss Haviland laughed again.

"How like Vincent! He is unconscious of the flight of time. I suppose he told you I was about
ten years old. But you must really see the baby; he will be delighted with your description
of him." She called through the skylight, and Audrey remembered the gentleman who was "no gentleman,"
and who must have been responsible for half the laughter she had overheard.

"You see," Miss Haviland explained, "we've only one room for everything; so Ted always climbs
on to the leads when we hear people coming--he's bound to meet them on the stairs, if he makes
a rush for the bedrooms. If any bores come, I let him stay up there; and if it's any one likely
to be interesting, I call him down."

"He must have great confidence in your judgment."

"He has. Here he comes."

Audrey looked up in time to see the baby lowering himself through the skylight. With his spine
curved well back, his legs hanging within the room, and his head and the upper part of his
body laid flat on the leads outside it, he balanced himself for a second of time. It was a
most undignified position; but he triumphed over it, as, with one supple undulation, he shot
himself on to the floor, saving his forehead from the window by a hair's-breath.

After this fashion Ted Haviland was revealed to Audrey. She was, if anything, more surprised
by his personal appearance than by the unusual manner of his entrance. The baby could not have
been more than nineteen or twenty, and there could be no dispute as to his beauty. Nature had
cast his features in the same mould as his sister's, and produced a very striking effect by
giving him the same dark eyebrows and lashes, with blue eyes and a mass of light brown hair.
Detractors complained that the type was too feminine for their taste; but when challenged to
show a single weak line in his face, they evaded the point and laid stress on the delicate
pallor of his complexion. Not that it mattered, for Ted soon made you think as little of his
good looks as he did himself. But Audrey never forgot him as she first saw him, glowing with
exercise and the midday bath which had roused his landlady's indignation.

"I'm extremely sorry," he began airily, "for disappearing in that rude way."

"Perhaps I ought to apologise," said Audrey, "for I frightened you away."

"Not at all, though I was desperately frightened too. I was flying before Mrs. Rogers when
you came in. You'll probably think I ought to have braved it out, just for the look of the
thing--especially after her reflections on my social position--but unfortunately my sister
has imbued that terrible woman with the belief that art can't possibly flourish anywhere outside
this attic of hers. Ever since then she's kept us in the most humiliating subjection. I don't
want you to think badly of Mrs. Rogers: there's no malice about her; she wouldn't raise your
rent suddenly, or leave pails of water on the stairs, or anything of that kind, and she's capable
of really deep feeling when it's a question of dinner."

"Ted--if you can forget Mrs. Rogers for a minute--I told Miss Craven that you would show her
some of your sketches and things some day."

"All right; we'll have the exhibition to-day, if Miss Craven cares to stop. Plenty of time
before the light goes."

Audrey hesitated: but Miss Haviland had moved aside her own easel to make room for her brother's;
she seconded his invitation, and Miss Craven stopped.

Three months ago, in an Oxford drawing-room, she had found herself absorbing metaphysics, as
it were through the pores of her skin, without any previous discipline in that exacting science;
now, in a London studio, she became aware of a similarly miraculous influx of power. Yesterday
she would have told you that she knew nothing about art, and cared less. To-day it seemed that
she had lived in its atmosphere from her cradle, and learned its language at her nurse's knee.
But, though familiar with art, she was not prepared for the behaviour of the artist. Ted treated
his works as if he were the last person concerned with them. He would pass scathing judgment
on those which pleased Audrey best; or he would stand, like a self-complacent deity, aloof
from his own creations, beholding them to be very good, and not hesitating to say so.

"Well," said Audrey at last, "you've shown me a great many lovely things, but which is your
masterpiece?"

"They were all masterpieces when I first finished them."

"Yes; but seriously, which do you consider your best? I want to know."

Ted hesitated, and then turned to a stack of larger canvases.

"I wonder," she murmured, "if I shall think it your best."

"Probably not."

"Why not?"

Ted did not answer: he hardly liked to say, "Because hitherto you have persistently admired
my worst."

"This," he said, laughing, as he lifted a large canvas on to the easel, "is the only masterpiece
that has withstood the test of time."

"He means," struck in his sister, "that he finished it a week ago, and that in another week
he'll want to stick a knife into it."

With all its faults the picture had a poetic audacity that defied the criticism it provoked.
If you looked long enough, you saw that a youth and a maiden were lying in a trance that was
half sleep, half death; while their souls, diaphanous forms with indefinite legs, hovered above
them in mid-air, each leaning towards the other's body. The souls described two curves that
crossed like the intersecting of rainbows; and where they met, their wings mingled in a confused
iridescence. Eros, in a flame-coloured tunic, looked on with an air of studied indifference
that might or might not have been intended by the painter.

Audrey looked helplessly at the picture. She could not understand it, and with things that
she could not understand she always felt a vague impotent displeasure.

"What--what is the subject?" she gasped at length.

"A metempsychosis."

She knitted her brows and said nothing.

"Transmigration of souls--why didn't I say so at first?" returned Ted, in cheerful response
to the frown.

"So I see; but what's Apollo doing there with his bow and arrows, and why is he all in red?"

"It's not meant for Apollo--it's an Eros."

"I beg your pardon?"

"An Eros--Love, a very inferior order of deity."

"Why is he in red?"

"I don't know, I'm sure. His taste in dress always was a little loud."

"But why is he there at all?"

"Love! Can't you see? I can't explain if it's not obvious. He--er--he must be there."

Audrey looked up, but the baby was not looking at her; he was absorbed in his masterpiece.
She flushed, and pressed one little pointed boot firmly to the ground.

"Yes, yes, I see that; but I can't make out the rest of it."

Ted shook his head helplessly, while his sister laughed at his discomfiture.

"Please don't mind my sister," said he, nervously flourishing his maul-stick. "The picture
represents two people exchanging souls"--Audrey raised her eyebrows: "those are the souls,
and these are the people--do be quiet, Katherine! It's a perfectly conceivable transaction,
though I own it might be a very bad bargain for some. I wouldn't like to swop souls with my
sister, for instance--she hasn't any imagination."

Audrey gave a little shudder.

"What a curious idea! It makes me feel quite creepy. But I'm sure I never could lose my sense,
of personal identity. My individuality is too strong--or something. And then, what has Love
got to do with it? What does it all mean?"

"Obviously, that Love is Master of the Ceremonies at every well-regulated metempsychosis,"
said Katherine.

"I see." Audrey lay back in her chair and gazed dreamily at the painting, while the painter
gazed at her. Was he trying to find out the secret of that individuality?

Audrey turned to Katherine with her radiant smile.

"Do you paint like this, too?"

"No, I'm a portrait-painter."

"Ah! that means that you'd rather paint what you see?"

"It means that I have to paint a great deal that I'd rather not see."

"But your brother is an idealist--aren't you, Mr. Haviland?"

"Probably. I've always noticed that when people call you an idealist, it's a polite way of
saying you're a failure. I may be an idealist; I don't know, and I'm afraid I don't much care."

"I'm sure you do care; and you must have your ideals."

"Oh, as for that, I've kept as many as seven of them at a time. But I never could tame them,
and when it comes to taking their portraits the things don't know how to sit properly. Look
at that woman's soul, for instance"--and Ted pointed to his masterpiece with disgust.

"Why, what's wrong with it? It's beautiful."

"Yes; I got on all right with the upper half, but, as you see, I've been a little unfortunate
with the feet and legs."

"Of course!" interrupted Katherine, "because you got tired of the whole thing. That's what
a man's idealism comes to!"

Audrey looked up with a quick sidelong glance.

"And what does a woman's idealism come to?"

"Generally to this--that she's tried to paint her own portrait large, with a big brush, and
made a mess of the canvas."

There was a sad inflection in the girl's voice, and she looked away as she spoke. The look
and the tone were details that lay beyond the range of Audrey's observation, and she felt hurt,
though she hardly knew why. She rose, carefully adjusting her veil and the lace about her throat.

"I adore idealists--I can't help it; I'm made that way, you see."

She shrugged her shoulders, in delicate deprecation of the decrees of Fate.

Katherine did not see, but she went down with Miss Craven to the door. Ted had proposed tea
on the leads, and Audrey had agreed that it would have been charming--idyllic--if she could
have stayed. But she had looked at the skylight, and then at her own closely fitting gown,
and Propriety, her guardian angel, had suggested that she had better not.

"Ted," said Katherine an hour later, "I've got an idea. What a magnificent model Miss Craven
would make!"

Ted made no answer; but he flung his sketch-book to the other end of the room, where it took
Apollo neatly in the eye.

"I've failed miserably in my Mrs. Rogers," said he, and went off for solitary contemplation
on the leads.

Katherine picked up the book and looked at it.

He had failed in his Mrs. Rogers; but in a corner of a fresh page he had made a little sketch
of a face and figure which were not those of Mrs. Rogers. And that was a failure too.

CHAPTER IV

There was a certain truth in Hardy's description of Ted Haviland. Ted had all a baby's fascination,
a baby's irresponsibility, and a baby's rigid tenacity of purpose. There perhaps the likeness
ended. At any rate, Ted had contrived to plan a career for himself at the age of seven, had
said nothing about it for ten years, and then quietly carried it through in spite of circumstances
and the influential members of his family. These powers had been against him from the first.
His mother had died in giving him birth; and as his father chose to hold him directly responsible
for the tragedy, his early years were passed somewhat under a cloud. Katherine was his only
comfort and stay. The girl had five years the start of him, which gave her an enormous advantage
in dealing with the uncertain details of life. Her method was simplicity itself. It was summed
up in the golden rule: Take your own way first, and then let other people take theirs. It was
in this spirit that, mounted on a table, she painted the great battle-piece that covered the
north wall of the nursery; and with equal heroism she met the unrighteous Nemesis that waits
upon mortal success, and skipped off to bed at three o'clock in the afternoon as if to a tea-party.
Ted worshipped his sister, because of her courage and resource, because of her fuzzy black
hair cut short like a boy's, for the strength of her long limbs, and for a hundred other reasons.
And Katherine loved Ted with a passion all the more intense because he was the only creature
she knew that would let itself be loved comfortably; for "Papa" was an abstraction, and "Nurse"
erred on the opposite extreme, being a terribly concrete reality, with a great many acute angles
about her, which was a drawback to demonstrations of affection.

One day Katherine mixed some colours for Ted and taught him how to manage a pencil and paint-brush.
That was just before she went to school, and then Ted said to himself, "I too will paint battle-pieces";
and he painted them in season and out of season, and was obliged to hide them away in drawers
and cupboards and places, for there was no one to care for them now that Kathy was gone. As
for that headstrong young person, her method was so far successful that when she was eighteen
it began to be rumoured in the family that Katherine would do great things, but that Ted was
an idle young beggar. The boy had shown no talent for anything in particular, and nobody had
thought of his future: not Katherine--she was too busy with her own--and certainly not his
father, who at the best of times lived piously in the past with the memory of his dead wife,
and was day by day loosening his hold upon the present. For Ted "Papa" became more and more
an abstraction, until a higher Power withdrew him altogether from earthly affairs.

Mr. Haviland had lived in a melancholy gentility on a pension which died with him, and at his
death the children were left with nothing but the pittance they inherited from their mother.
When the family met in solemn conclave to decide the fate of Katherine and Ted, it learned
that Katherine, true to her old principles, had taken the decision into her own hands. She
meant to live for art and by art, and Uncle James was much mistaken if he thought that an expensive
training was to be flung away upon a "niggling amateur." At any rate, she had taken a studio
in Pimlico and furnished it, and as she had come of age yesterday, there was really no more
to be said. Ted, of course, would live with her, and choose his own profession. But Ted's profession
was not so easily chosen. The boy had brought a perfectly open mind to the subject, and discussed
the reasons for and against the Church, the Bar, the Bank, and a trade, with admirable clearness
and impartiality; but when invited to make a selection from among the four, he betrayed no
enthusiasm. Finally he was asked if he had any objection to the medical profession, and replied
that he had none, having, indeed, never thought about it. On the whole, he considered that
the idea was not a bad one, and he would try it. He tried it for a year and a half, but not
altogether with success. He had been advised to take up surgery, for a great man had noticed
his long sensitive fingers, and told him that he had the hands of a born surgeon. He managed
to get through the hours in the dissecting-room, standing on his head from time to time as
a precaution against faintness; but his heroism gave way before the horrors of the theatre.
Soon, with indignation naturally mingled with pleasure at this fulfilment of its own predictions,
the family heard that Ted had flung up the medical profession. That the boy had the hands of
a born surgeon was considered to be an aggravation of his offence; it constituted it flying
in the face of Providence. When Ted drew attention to the fact that he had passed first in
Comparative Anatomy, his uncle James told him that stupidity was excusable, and that his abilities
only proved him a lazy good-for-nothing fellow. He then offered him a berth in his office,
with board and lodging in his own house; and as Ted was in low water, there was nothing for
it but to accept. Mr. James Pigott remained master of the situation, without a suspicion of
its pathetic irony. Ted, whose intellect was incapable of adding two and two together, had
to sit on a high stool and work endless sums in arithmetic. Ted, whose soul was married sub
rosa to ideal beauty, had to live in a house where every object had the same unwinking self-complacent
ugliness, and where the cook was the only artist whose genius was appreciated. Ted was a little
bit of a Stoic, and he could have borne the long impressive dinners and the unstudied malice
of the furniture, if only his uncle would have let him alone. But Mr. Pigott was nothing if
not conscientious; and now that he had him under his thumb, he made superhuman efforts to understand
his nephew's character and to win his confidence. The poor gentleman might just as well have
tried to understand the character of an asymptote, or to win the confidence of a Will-o'-the-wisp;
and nothing but misery can come of it when a middle-aged city merchant, born without even a
rudimentary sense of humour, suddenly determines to cultivate that gift for the benefit of
a boy who can detect humour in the wording of an invoice.

Well, he never knew how it happened--his mind might have been running on an illustrated edition
of the cash accounts of Messrs. Pigott & Co.--but at last Ted made an arithmetical blunder
so unprecedented, so astounding, that a commercial career was closed to him for ever. "Stupidity
is excusable," said Uncle James. "If you had been stupid, I would have forgiven you; but you
have ability enough, sir, and it follows that you are careless--criminally careless--and I
wash my hands of you." And, like Pilate, he suited the action to the word.

So it happened that as Katherine was putting the last touches to her great picture "The Witch
of Atlas," and to her sketch of an elaborate future, Fate stepped in and altered all her arrangements.
She called it Fate, for she never could bring herself to say it was Ted. For months she had
been living in a dream, in which she was no longer a poor artist toiling in a London garret:
she was on the highest peak of Atlas, in the land where, as you know, dreams last forever,
where the light comes down unfiltered through the transcendental air, and where, owing to the
unmelting ice and snow, the shadows are always colours. To live for art and by art--she had
not yet realised the incompatibility of these two aims; for Katherine was as uncompromising
in this as in everything else, and refused to work in a liberal and enlightened spirit. She
believed that beauty is the only right or possible or conceivable aim of the artist, and she
was ready to sacrifice a great deal for this belief. For this she slept and worked in one room,
which she left bare of all but necessary furniture--under which head, in defiance of all laws
of political economy, she included a small Pantheon of plaster deities: for this she stinted
herself in everything except air and exercise, which were cheap; and for this she refused to
join housekeeping with her cousin Nettie, thereby giving lasting offence to an influential
branch of the family. At the end of three years she had begun to hope, and to feel the quickening
of new powers; and as her nature expanded, her art took on a subtler quality, a subdued and
delicate sensuousness, which, it must be owned, had very little in common with the flesh and
blood of ordinary humanity.

She was painting steadily, in a pallid fervour of concentrated excitement, the ease of her
pliant hands contrasting with her firm lips and knitted brows, when Ted burst into the studio,
with a thin Gladstone bag in one hand and a fat portfolio in the other. His face told her of
a crisis in his history; it was humorous, pathetic, deprecating, and determined, all at once,--not
the face of a boy dropping in casually at tea-time. When asked if anything had gone wrong at
the office, he replied, "Probably--by this time. They lost their brightest ornament this morning.
You see they said--among other things--that it wasn't the least use my stopping, as I hadn't
any head for figures,--which was odd, considering that it's just with figures I've been most
successful." But Katherine was to judge for herself. He sat down leisurely and began untying
his portfolio. Then he caught sight of "The Witch of Atlas." "That's going to be a stunning
picture, Kathy," said he. He stood before the canvas for a moment, and then turned abruptly
away. When he looked at Katherine again, his face was set and a little flushed. He seemed to
be making a calculation--a thing he had always some difficulty in doing. "You've been at it
practically all your life; but it took you--one--two--three--five years' real hard work, didn't
it, before you could paint like that?"

"Yes, Ted, five years' hard labour, with costs."

"It'll take me four. Thank heaven, I've learnt anatomy!"

Katherine said nothing: she had opened the portfolio and spread out the drawings, and was hanging
over them in amazement. How, when, and where the boy had done the things, she could not imagine.
There were finished studies in anatomy, of heads and limbs in every conceivable attitude. There
were shilling drawing-books crammed with illustrations of most possible subjects and some impossible
ones; loose sketches done on the backs of envelopes, the fly-leaves of books, and (fearful
revelation of artistic depravity!) the ruled pages of ledgers. And in every one of them there
was power and wild exuberant vitality. It was genius, rampant and undisciplined, but unmistakable;
and she told him so. Her first feeling sent the blood to her cheeks for pure joy; her second
drove it back to her heart again. Katherine was one of those people who can see a thing instantly,
in all its possible bearings; and at the present moment she saw clearly, not only that Ted
was a genius, but that his genius had everything to learn, and that it would take the whole
of his tiny income to teach it, while the necessities of his board and lodging in the meanwhile
would more than double her own expenses. She saw herself doomed to the production of an unbroken
succession of pot-boilers, and for the next few years at least Ted's career was only possible
at the sacrifice of her own. "Yes," she said at last, sitting down and tying the strings of
the portfolio tenderly, "you'll have to work hard for four or five years or so; and then you'll
have to wait. Art is long, you know, and high art's the longest of all." And when she told
him that it would be a great help to her if they clubbed together, Ted actually believed her,
so unaware was he of the complexities of life.

Katherine understood why Ted had gone to Guy's Hospital; but when she asked him--idiot!--why
he had wasted a year at his uncle Pigott's office, he said that he wanted to prove to his uncle
Pigott's limited capacity that he was utterly incapable of managing anybody's business but
his own. Katherine asked no more questions, for she was trying to think. Then when she had
done thinking, she took the Witch and turned her with her face to the wall. And when she looked
at Ted again it was with a choking sensation, and for the first time for three years she was
aware that she had a heart beating under the blue overall. She had come down from Atlas faster
than she had gone up. After all, the climate there is frightfully cold, and there are passes
on that lonely mountain which overhang the bottomless pit, where some have perished very miserably.
Katherine had escaped the abyss, and left behind her the dreams and the golden mists and the
starry peaks of ice. It was dark in the studio, and a voice was heard inquiring whether the
young gentleman was going to stay for supper, "Because, if a bysin of hoatmeal porridge yn't
enuff for one----"

Mrs. Rogers was great in the argument a fortiori.

CHAPTER V

Audrey had never been able to enjoy the friendship of her own sex for more than ten minutes
at a time. Her own society bored her inexpressibly, and that of the women she had known hitherto
was uninteresting because it was like her own. But Katherine was unlike all other women, and
she had taken Audrey's fancy. Audrey was always devising pretty little excuses for calling,
always bringing in hothouse flowers, or the last hothouse novel, which Katherine positively
must read; until, by dint of a naïve persistency, she won the right to come and go as she pleased.
As for Katherine, she considered that a beautiful woman is exempt from criticism; and so long
as she could watch Audrey moving about, arranging flowers with dainty fastidious touches, or
lying back on the couch in some reckless but perfect pose, she reserved her judgment. She rejoiced
in her presence for its beauty's sake. She loved the curves of her limbs, the play of her dimples,
the shifting lights in her hair. But she had to pay for the pleasure these things afforded
her, and "man's time" became a frequent item in the account. Katherine had set her heart on
Ted's studying in Paris for six months, and was trying hard to make enough money to send him
there. With this absorbing object in view, she herself worked equally well whether Audrey were
in the studio or out of it; but it seemed that Ted's powers were either paralysed or diverted
into another channel from the moment she came in. The baby was trying to solve a problem which
had puzzled wiser heads than his. But he had no clue to the labyrinth of Audrey's soul; he
was not even certain whether she was an intelligent being, though to doubt it was blasphemy
against the divine spirit of beauty.

His researches took him very often to Chelsea Gardens, and most of his spare time not spent
there was employed in running errands to and fro. Owing to these distractions his nerves became
quite unhinged, and for the first time in his life he began to show signs of a temper. He had
been full of the Paris scheme at first, but he had not spoken of it now for at least a month.

He had just sat down for the twentieth time to a study of Katherine's head as "Sappho," and
had thrown down his palette in disgust, exclaiming--

"What's the use of keeping your mouth still, if your confounded eyes giggle?" when a note arrived
from Miss Craven.

You can't step out of a violent passion all in a minute, and perhaps that was the reason why
Ted's hands trembled a little as he tore open the envelope and read--

    "DEAR MR. HAVILAND,--Do come over at once. I'm in a dreadful fix,
    and want your advice and help badly. I would ask your sister, only
    I know she is always busy.--Sincerely yours,

                                                     "AUDREY CRAVEN."

Audrey wrote on rough-edged paper, in the bold round hand they teach in schools. She had modelled
hers on another girl's, and she signed her name with an enormous A and a flourish. People said
there was a great deal of character in her hand-writing.

Ted crammed the note hastily into his pocket, and did his best to hide the radiance of his smile.

"It's only Miss Craven. I'm just going over for half an hour,--I'll be back for tea."

And before Katherine had time to answer he was gone.

Ted's first thought as he entered Miss Craven's drawing-room was that she was in the midst
of a removal. The place was turned topsy-turvy. Curtains had been taken down, ornaments removed
from their shelves, pictures from their hangings; and the grand piano stood where it had never
yet been allowed to stand, in a draught between the window and the door. Tripping over a Persian
rug, he saw that the floor was littered with tapestries and rich stuffs of magnificent design.
On his left was a miscellaneous collection of brass and copper ware, on his right a heap of
shields and weapons of barbarous warfare. On all the tables and cabinets there stood an array
of Venetian glass, and statuettes in bronze, marble, and terra-cotta. He was looking about
for Miss Craven, when that lady arose from a confused ocean of cushions and Oriental drapery--Aphrodite
in an "Art" tea-gown. She greeted him with childlike effusion.

"At last! I'm so glad you've come--I was afraid you mightn't. Help me out of this somehow--I'm
simply distracted."

And she pointed to the floor with a gesture of despair.

"Yes; but what do you want me to do?"

"Why, to offer suggestions, advice, anything--only speak."

Ted looked about him, and his eyes rested on the grand piano. "Is it a ball, a bazaar, or an
auction? And are we awake or dreaming, alive or dead?"

"Can't you see, Mr. Haviland?"

"Yes, I see a great many things. But what does it all mean?"

Audrey sank on to an ottoman, and answered slowly and incisively, looking straight before her--

"It means that I'm sick of the hideousness of life, of the excruciating lower middle-class
arrangement of this room. I don't know how I've stood it all these years. My soul must have
been starved--stifled. I want to live in another atmosphere, to be surrounded by beautiful
things. Don't laugh like that,--I know I'm not an artist; I couldn't paint a picture--how could
I? I haven't been taught. But I know that Art is the only thing worth caring about. I want
to cultivate my sense of beauty, and I don't want my room to look like anybody else's."

"It certainly doesn't at present."

"Please be serious. You're not helping me one bit. Look at that pile of things Liberty's have
sent me! First of all, I want you to choose between them. Then I want you to suggest a colour-scheme,
and to tell me the difference between Louis Quinze and Louis Quatorze (I can't remember), whether
it'll do to mix Queen Anne with either. And whether would you have old oak, real old oak, or
Chippendale, for the furniture? and must I do away with the cosy corner?"

Ted felt his head going round and round. Artistic delight in Audrey's beauty, pagan adoration
of it, saintly belief in it, the first tremor of crude unconscious passion, mingled with intense
amusement, reduced him to a state of utter bewilderment. But he had sufficient presence of
mind to take her last question first and to answer authoritatively--

"Certainly. A cosy corner is weak-minded and conventional."

"Yes, it is. I'm not in the least conventional, and I don't think I'm weak-minded. And I want
my room to express my character, to be a bit of myself. So give me some ideas. You don't mind
my asking you, do you? You're the only artist I know."

"Am I really? And if you knew six or seven artists, what then?"

"Why, then--I should ask you all the same, of course."

Boy-like he laughed for pure pleasure, and boy-like he tried to dissemble his emotion, and
did her bidding under a faint show of protest. He gave his vote in favour of Venetian glass
and a small marble Diana, against majolica and a French dancing-girl in terra-cotta; he made
an intelligent choice from amongst the various state-properties around him, and avoided committing
himself on the subject of Louis Quatorze. On one point Audrey was firm. For what reasons nobody
can say, but some Malay creeses had caught her fancy, and no argument could dissuade her from
arranging them over the Neapolitan Psyche which she had kept at Ted's suggestion. The gruesome
weapons, on a background of barbaric gold, hung above that pathetic torso, like a Fate responsible
for its mutilation. Audrey was pleased with the effect; she revelled in strong contrasts and
grotesque combinations, and if Liberty's had sent her a stuffed monkey, she would have perched
him on Psyche's pedestal.

"I know a man," said Ted, when he had disposed the last bit of drapery according to an ingenious
colour-scheme, in which Audrey's hair sounded a brilliant staccato note--"a first-rate artist--who
was asked to decorate a lady's room. What do you think he did? He made her take all the pictures
off the walls, and he covered them over with little halfpenny Japanese fans, and stuck little
halves and quarters of fans in the corners and under the ceiling. Then he put a large Japanese
umbrella in the fireplace, and went away smiling."

"Was the lady pleased?"

"Immensely. She asked all her friends to a Japanese tea-party in Mr. Robinson's room. The rest
of the furniture was early Victorian."

This anecdote was not altogether to Audrey's taste. She walked to a shelf where Ted had put
some bronzes, looked at them with a decided air of criticism, and arranged them differently.
Having asserted her independence, she replied severely--

"Your friend's friend must have been an extremely silly woman."

"Not at all; she was a most intelligent, well-informed person, with--er--a deep sense of religion."

"And now, Mr. Haviland, you're making matters worse. You care nothing about her religion; you
simply think her a fool, and you meant that I'm like her. Else why did you tell such a pointless
story?"

"Forgive me; the association of ideas was irresistible. You are like her--in your utter simplicity
and guileless devotion to an ideal."

He looked all round the room again, and sank back on the sofa cushions all limp with laughter.

"I--I never saw anything so inexpressibly sad as this afternoon's work; it's heartrending."

His eye fell on the terra-cotta Parisienne dancing inanely on her pedestal, and he moaned like
one in pain. Audrey's mouth twitched and her cheeks flamed for a second. She turned her back
on Ted, until his fit had spent itself, dying away among the cushions in low gurgles. Then
there was silence.

Ted raised his head and looked up. She was still standing in the same place, but one hand was
moving slowly towards her pocket.

He sprang to his feet and faced her. She walked to the window, convulsively grasping her pocket-handkerchief.

He followed her.

"Miss Craven--dear Miss Craven--on my soul--I swear--I never----Can't you--won't you believe me?"

Still there was silence and an averted head.

"Speak, can't you!"

He leant against the window and began to giggle again. Audrey turned at the sound, and looked
at him through eyes veiled with tears; her lips were trembling a little, and her fingers relaxed
their convulsive grasp. He darted forward, seized her hand, and kissed it an indefinite number
of times, exclaiming incoherently--

"Brute, hound, cur that I am! Forgive me--only say you'll forgive me! I know I'm not fit to
live! And yet, how could I tell? Good heavens! what funny things women are?" Here he took possession
of the little lace pocket-handkerchief, and wiped her eyes very gently. Then he kissed her
once on the mouth, reverently but deliberately.

To do Audrey justice, she had meant to sustain her part with maidenly reserve, but she was
totally unprepared for this acceleration of the march of events. She said nothing, but went
back submissively to her sofa, hand in hand with Ted. There they sat for a minute looking rather
stupidly into each other's faces.

The lady was the first to recover her self-possession. She raised her hand with a benedictory
air and let it rest lightly, ever so lightly, on Ted's hair.

"My dear boy," she murmured, "I forgave you all the time."

Now there is nothing that will dwarf the proportions of the grand passion and bring you to
your sober senses sooner than being patted on the head and called "My dear boy" by the lady
of your love. Ted ducked from under the delicate caress, and rose to his feet with dignity.
His emotion was spent, and he was chiefly conscious of the absurdity of the situation. Every
object in that ridiculous room accentuated the distasteful humour of the thing. Psyche looked
downcast virgin disapproval from her pedestal under the Malay creeses, and the frivolous little
Parisienne flung her skirts abroad in the very abandonment of derision.

If only he hadn't made a fool of himself, if only he hadn't told that drivelling story about
the Japanese umbrella, if only he hadn't laughed in that frantic manner, and if only----But
no, he could not look back on the last five minutes. The past was a grey blank, but the flaming
episode of the kiss had burnt a big black hole in his present consciousness. He felt that by
that rash, unpardonable act he had desecrated the holy thing; and with it all, had forestalled,
delayed, perhaps for ever prevented, the sanction of some diviner opportunity. If he had only
waited another year, she could not have called him her dear boy.

"I'm fully aware," he said, ruefully, "that I've behaved like a heaven-afflicted idiot, and
I'd better go."

"No, you shall not go. You shall stay. I wish it. Sit down--here."

She patted the sofa beside her, and he obeyed mechanically.

"Poor, poor Ted! I do forgive you. We will never misunderstand each other again--never. And
now I want to talk to you. What distressed me so much just now was not anything that you said
or thought about me, but the shocking way you treat yourself and what is best in you. Can't
you understand it? You know how I believe in you and hope for you, and it was your affectation
of indifference to things which are a religion to me--as they are to you--that cut me to the
heart."

She had worked herself up till she believed firmly in this little fiction. Yes, those tears
were tears of pure altruism--tears not of wounded vanity and self-love, but of compassion for
an erring genius.

She drew back her head proudly and looked him full in the face. Then she continued, in a subdued
voice, with a certain incisive tremor in it, the voice that is usually expressive of the deeper
emotions--

"You know, and I know, that there is nothing worth caring about except art. Then why pretend
to despise it as you do? And Katherine's every bit as bad as you are,--she encourages you.
I know--what perhaps she doesn't--that you have great enthusiasms, great ideals; but you are
unfaithful to them. You laughed at me; you know you did----"

("I didn't," from Ted.)

"----because I'm trying to make my life beautiful. You're led away by your strong sense of
humour, till you see something ridiculous in the loveliest and noblest things" (Ted's eyes
wandered in spite of himself to the little lady in terra-cotta). "I know why: you're afraid
of being sentimental. But if people have feelings, why should they be ashamed of them? Why
should they mind showing them? Now I want you to promise me that, from this day forth, you'll
take yourself and your art seriously; that you'll work hard--you've been idling shamefully
lately" (oh, Audrey! whose fault was that?)--"and finish some great picture before the year's
out" (he had only five weeks to do it in, but that was a detail). "Now promise."

"I--I'll promise anything," stammered the miserable Ted, "if only you'll look at me like that--sometimes,
say between the hours of seven and eight in the evening."

"Ridiculous baby! Now we must see about the pictures; we've just time before tea."

The mention of tea was a master-stroke; it brought them both back to the world of fact, and
restored the familiar landmarks.

Ted, solemnly penitent, gave his best attention to the pictures: there was not a trace of his
former abominable levity in the air with which he passed sentence on each as Audrey brought
them up for judgment. But when he came to the family portraits he suspended his verdict, and
Audrey was obliged to take the matter into her own hands.

She took up a small picture in a square frame and held it close to Ted's face.

"Portrait of my uncle, the Dean of St. Benedict's. What shall I do with it?"

"That depends entirely on the amount of affection you feel for the original."

"H'm--does it? He's a dear old thing, and I'm very fond of him, but--what do you think of him?--from
an artistic point of view?"

She stood with her body curved a little backwards, holding the Dean up high in a good light.
Her attitude was so lovely that it was impossible to disapprove of her. Ted's reason tottered
on its throne, and he laughed, which was perhaps the best thing he could have done.

"He is not, strictly speaking, handsome."

"No," said Audrey; "I'm afraid he'll have to go."

She knelt down beside the portrait of a lady. It was evidently the work of an inferior artist,
but his most malignant efforts had failed to disguise the beauty of the face. It bore a strong
resemblance to Audrey, but it was the face of an older woman, grave, intelligent, and refined
by suffering.

"I've been obliged to take this down," she said, as if apologising more to herself than Ted,
"because I want to hang my large photo of the Sistine Madonna in its place."

"What is it?"

"It's--my mother's portrait. She died when I was a very little girl, and I hardly ever saw
her, you know. I'm not a bit like her."

He stood silent, watching her intently as she spoke.

"Family portraits," she continued, "may be interesting, but they are not decorative. Unless,
of course," she added, hastily, being at a loss to account for the peculiar expression of Ted's
face, "they're very old ones--Lelys and Sir Joshua Reynoldses."

"That face does not look old, certainly."

"No. She died young."

She had not meant to say that; a little shiver went through her as the words passed her lips,
and she felt a desire to change the subject. But the portrait of the late Mrs. Craven was turned
to the wall along with the Dean.

"Hullo!" exclaimed Ted, taking up a photo in a glass frame, hand-painted, "here's old Hardy!
What on earth is he doing here?"

Audrey blushed, but answered with unruffled calm.

"Vincent? Oh, he's a family portrait too. He's my cousin--first cousin, you know."

"What are you going to do with him?"

"I--I hardly know."

She took the photo out of his hands and examined it carefully back and front. Then she looked
at Ted.

"What shall I do with him? Is he to go too?"

"Well, I suppose he ought to. He's all very well in his own line, but--from an artistic point
of view--he's not exactly--decorative."

"Poor old Vincent! No, he's not."

And Vincent was turned face downward among the ruins of the cosy corner, and Audrey and Ted
rested from their labours.

When Ted had gone, the very first thing Audrey did was to get a map and to look out the Rocky
Mountains. There they were, to be sure, just as Vincent had described them, a great high wall
dividing the continent. At that moment Hardy was kneeling on the floor of his little shanty,
busy sorting bearskins and thinking of Audrey and bears. He had had splendid sport--that is,
he had succeeded in killing a grizzly just before the grizzly killed him. How nervous Audrey
would feel when she got the letter describing that encounter! Then he chose the best and fluffiest
bearskin to make a nice warm cape for her, and amused himself by picturing her small oval chin
nestling in the brown fur. And then he fell to wondering what she was doing now.

He would have been delighted if he could have seen her poring over that map with her pencilled
eyebrows knit, while she traced the jagged outlines of the Rockies with her finger-nail, congratulating
herself on the height of that magnificent range.

Yes, there was a great deal between her and her cousin Mr. Hardy.

CHAPTER VI

One fine morning in latter spring, about four months after the day of the transformation scene
in Audrey's drawing-room, Ted Haviland was lying on his back sunning himself on the leads.
There are many lovelier places even in London than the leads of No. 12 Devon Street, Pimlico,
but none more favourable to high and solitary thinking. Here the roar of traffic is subdued
to a murmur hardly greater than the stir of country woods on a warm spring morning--a murmur
less obtrusive, because more monotonous. It is the place of all others for one absorbed in
metaphysical speculation, or cultivating the gift of detachment. The very chimney-pots have
a remote abstracted air; the slopes of the slates rise up around you, shutting you in on three
sides, and throwing you so far back on yourself; while before you lies the vast, misty network
of roofs, stretching eastward towards the heart of the city, and above you is the open sky.
It is even pleasant here on a day like this, a day with all the ardour of summer in it, and
all the languor of spring, with the sun warming the slates at your back, and a soft breeze
from the river fanning your face. You must go up on to the leads on such a day to feel the
beauty and infinity of blue sky, the only beautiful and boundless thing here, where there is
no green earth to rival heaven.

Ted had certainly no taste for detachment, but he was so far advanced towards metaphysical
speculation that he was engaged in an analysis of sensation. Off and on, ever since that day
of unreasonable mirth and subsequent madness, he had been a prey to remorse. He had kept away
from Audrey for a fortnight, during which time his imagination had run riot through past, present,
and future. Audrey had been sweet and confiding from the first; she had believed in him with
childlike simplicity, and when she had trusted to his guidance in her innocent æstheticism,
he, like the coarse-minded villain that he was, had made fun of all her dear little arrangements,
those pathetic efforts to make her life beautiful. He had made her cry, and then taken a brutal
advantage of her tears. To Ted's conscience, in the white-heat of his virgin passion, that
premature kiss, the kiss that transformed a boyish fancy into full-grown love, was a crime.
And yet she had forgiven him. All the time she had been thinking, not of herself, but of him.
Her words, hardly heeded at the moment, came back to him like a dull sermon heard in some exalted
mood, and henceforth transfigured in memory. She had done well to reproach him for his frivolity
and want of purpose. She was so ready to say pleasant things, that blame from her mouth was
sweeter than its praise. It showed that she cared more. By this time he had forgotten the traits
that had impressed him less pleasantly.

Happily for him, his passion for Audrey was at first altogether bound up with his art. We are
not all geniuses, but to some of us, once perhaps in a lifetime, genius comes in the form of
love. To Ted love came in the form of genius, quickening his whole nature, and bringing his
highest powers to a sudden birth. He had begun and almost finished the work which Audrey had
urged him to undertake, and nobody could say that he had approached his subject in a frivolous
spirit. It was a portrait of herself. Ted had been rather inclined to affect the romantic antique:
Audrey had been a revelation of the artistic possibilities of modern womanhood, and he turned
in disgust from his languid studies of decadent renaissance, or renaissant decadence, to this
brilliant type. One corner of the studio was stacked with sketches and little full-length portraits
of Audrey. Audrey from every point of view. Audrey in a black Gainsborough hat, Audrey with
brown fur about her throat, Audrey half-smothered in billowy silk and chiffon, Audrey as she
appeared at a dance in a simple frock and sash, and Audrey in a tailor-made gown, in the straight
lines of which Ted professed to have discovered new principles of beauty. In fact, he dreamed
of founding a New Art on portraits of Audrey alone. From which it would appear that he was
taking himself and his art very seriously indeed.

Audrey had just left him after a protracted sitting, and up among the dreamy chimney-pots he
was reviving in fancy the sensations of the morning. He was brought back from his ecstasy by
Katherine's voice calling, "Ted, come down this minute--I've got something to show you"; and,
rousing himself very much against the grain, he dropped languidly into the room below.

Katherine had come in all glowing with excitement. She pushed back her broad-brimmed hat from
her forehead, and thrust both hands into her coat-pockets, bringing out two loose heaps of gold.

"There!" she said, letting sovereigns and half-sovereigns drip on to the table with an impressive
chink, "aren't you thankful that I wasn't murdered, walking through the great sinful city with
all that capital about me?"

"What's up? Has our uncle climbed down, or have you been robbing a till?"

"Neither. I've been to the bank, cashing real live cheques. Five pounds for my black-and-white
for the Saint Abroad, I mean the "Woman at Home." Fifteen pounds for Miss Maskelyne's prize
bull-dog (I idealised him). Twenty pounds for Lady Stodart's prize baby. Total, forty pounds."
She arranged the sovereigns in neat little piles on the table. "That's enough to take you to
Paris and set you going." Ted started, and his face fell a little. "It's positively my only
dream that ever came true. Picture it, think of it, just on the brink of it. You can start
next week, to-morrow if you like!"

Ted's face turned a deep crimson, and he was silent.

"Then Audrey's promised me twenty for a copy of the Botticelli Madonna; I began it yesterday.
That'll be enough to keep you on another month, if you want it, and bring you home again."

Still Ted said nothing. He sat down and buried his face in his hands. Katherine knelt down
and put her arm tight round his neck.

"Ted, you duffer, do you really care so much? I am so glad. I didn't know you'd take it that way."

He drew back and looked her mournfully in the face.

"Kathy, you're an angel; it's awfully good of you; but I--I can't take it, you know."

"Why not? Too proud?"

"No--rubbish! It does seem an infernal shame not to, when you've scraped it together with your
dear little paws; but--well--don't think me a brute--I don't know that I want to go to Paris now."

"Not to go to Paris?"

"No."

"Idiot!"

"Kathy, which Botticelli did she ask you to do for her?"

"The one you got so excited about, with St. John and the angel--right-hand side opposite you
as you go in. Come, I can see through that trick, and I'm not going to stand any nonsense."

"It isn't nonsense."

"It is. Why, you were raving about Meissonier last year."

"Yes, last year; but----"

"Well?" Katherine rose and gazed at him with the austerity of an inquisitor. Ted gave an uneasy
laugh.

"I've been thinking that you and I between us could found a school of our own this year. I've
got the eccentricity, and you've got the cheek. We should build ourselves an everlasting name."

"Do be serious; I shall lose my temper in another minute. Is it the wretched money you're thinking
of?"

"No, it isn't the money altogether." He got up and walked to his easel.

"Then, oh Ted, you know that Paris--Paris in May--must be simply divine!"

"Why don't you go yourself?"

"No, no; that's not the same thing at all. I don't want to go; besides, I can't. I haven't
the time."

"Well, to tell you the truth, Kathy, no more can I. I haven't the time either." He took up
his palette and brushes and began carefully touching up the canvas before him.

"Oh--h!" She stared at him for a minute in silence. Ted looked up suddenly; their eyes met,
and he set his face like a flint.

"Kathy," he said, slowly, "I've behaved in the most ungrateful and abominable manner. I should
like to go to Paris very much, and I--I think I'll start next week."

"Thank you, dear boy; it's the very least you can do."

And they dropped the subject. Ted was the first to speak again.

"By-the-bye, what's on to-morrow morning, Kathy?"

"National Gallery for me." She looked up from her work and saw Ted standing with his hands
in his pockets, gazing with an agonised expression at his portrait of Audrey.

"I suppose she is going to sit again?"

"Well, yes; she may look in for another hour in the morning perhaps."

Ted was not skillful in deceit, and something in his manner told Katherine that the sitting
somehow depended on her absence. She began to see dimly why he had been so frightened at the
idea of going to Paris. She looked over her shoulder.

"You haven't made the corners of her mouth turn up enough. It's just as well, they turn up
too much."

"No, they don't; that's what makes her so pretty."

Katherine went to her work next morning in anything but a cheerful spirit. She had set her
heart on Ted's studying abroad; and now Audrey had come in between, frittering away his time,
and making him restless and unlike himself. To be sure, his powers had expanded enormously
of late; but she was not happy about him, and was half afraid to praise his work. To her mind
there was something feverish and unhealthy in its vivid beauty. It suggested genius outgrowing
its strength. If Audrey really had anything to do with it, if she was coming in any way between
him and the end she dreamed for him, why, then, she could hate Audrey with a deadly hatred.
That was what she said to herself just before she opened the front-door and found Audrey standing
on the doorstep, looking reprehensibly pretty in a gown of white lawn over green silk. Her
wide hat was trimmed with bunches of white tulle and pale green poppies, and she had a little
basket full of lilies of the valley hanging from her wrist.

"You wretch!" she cried, shaking a bunch of lilies at Katherine, as she stood in the narrow
passage; "you're always going out when I'm coming in."

"And you're always coming in when I'm going out. Isn't it funny?"

Audrey said nothing to that, but she kissed Katherine on both cheeks, and pinned a bunch of
lilies at her throat with a little gold pin that she took from her own dress. Then she tripped
lightly upstairs, with a swish, swish, of her silk skirts, wafting lilies of the valley as
she went. Katherine watched her up the first flight, and the hate died out of her heart. After
all, Audrey was so perfect from an artistic point of view that moral disapproval seemed somehow
beside the point.'

"May I come in?" asked Audrey, tapping at the open door of the studio. Ted rose with a reverent
alacrity, very much as you rise to the musical parts of a solemn service in church. He arranged
her chair carefully, with soft cushions for her back and feet. "If you don't mind," said he,
"we must work hard, for I want to finish you this morning, or perhaps to-morrow, if you can
give me another sitting," and he patted a cushion and held it up for her head.

"You can have any number of sittings," said Audrey, ignoring these preparations for her comfort;
"but first of all, I'm going to make your room pretty."

Ted dropped his cushion helplessly and followed her as she moved about the room. First she
took off her gloves in a leisurely manner and laid them down among Ted's wet brushes. Then
she began to arrange the lilies of the valley in a little copper bowl she found on the chimneypiece.
Then she caught sight of her gloves and exclaimed, "Oh, look at my beautiful new gloves, lying
among your nasty paints! Why didn't you tell me, you horrid boy?" Then Ted and she tried to
clean them with turpentine, and made them worse than ever, and between them they wasted half
an hour of the precious morning. After that, Audrey took off her hat and settled herself comfortably
among the cushions; she drew her white fingers through her hair till it stood up in a great
red aureole round her head, and the sitting began.

Ted's heart gave a bound as he set to work. He had learnt by this time to control the trembling
of his hands, otherwise the portrait would never have reached its present perfection. He had
painted from many women in the life school, and always with the same emotions, the same reverence
for womanhood, and the same delight in his own power, tempered by compassion for the model.
But these were so many studies in still life compared with the incarnate loveliness before
him--Audrey: it made him feel giddy to paint the edge of the ruffles about her throat, or the
tip of her shoe. Her beauty throbbed like pulses of light, it floated in air and went to his
head like the scent of her lilies. He had reproduced this radiant, throbbing effect in his
picture. It was a head, the delicate oval of the full face relieved against a background of
atmospheric gold into which the golden surface tints of the hair faded imperceptibly. The eyebrows
were arched a little over the earnest, unfathomable eyes; the lips were parted as if with impetuous
breath; the whole head leaned slightly forward, giving prominence to the chin, which in reality
retreated, a defect chiefly noticeable in profile. Ted had painted what he saw. It might have
been the head of a saint looking for the Beatific Vision; it was only that of an ordinary pretty
woman.

As a rule, they both chattered freely during the sittings. This is, of course, necessary, if
the artist is to know his sitter's face with all its varying expressions; and Audrey had given
Ted a great many to choose from. This morning, however, he worked steadily and in a silence
which she was the first to break.

"What do you mean by talking about one more sitting in that way? You said you'd want six yesterday."

"I did, but----" He leaned back and began tilting his chair to and fro. "The fact is--I'm awfully
sorry, but I'm afraid I'm going to leave England." The young rascal had chosen his words with
a deliberate view to effect, and Audrey's first thoughts flew to America, though not to Hardy.
She moved suddenly in her chair.

"To emigrate? You, with your genius? Surely not!"

"No, rather not; it's not as bad as all that. But--I'm afraid I have to go to Paris for six
months or so."

"Whatever for?"

"Well--I must, you see."

"Must you? And for six months, too; why?"

"Because I--that is--I want to study for a bit in the schools there."

"Oh,"--she leaned back again among her cushions, and looked down at her hands clasped demurely,--"if
you want to go, that's another thing."

"It isn't another thing; and I don't want to go, as it happens."

"Then I am sure you needn't go and study; what can they teach you that you don't know?" she
leaned forward and looked into his face. "You're not going in for that horrid French style,
surely?"

"Well, I'd some thoughts----" he hesitated, and Audrey took courage.

"It can't be--it mustn't be! Oh, do, do give up the idea--for my sake! It'll be your ruin as
an artist." She had risen to her feet, and was gazing at him appealingly.

"You dear little thing, what do you know about the French school or any other?"

"Everything. I take in 'Modern Art,' and I read all the magazines and things, and--I know all
about it."

"You don't know anything about it. All the same----" he paused, biting his lip.

"All the same, what?"

"If I thought you cared a straw whether I went or stayed----"

"Haven't I shown you that I care?"

"No, you haven't."

"Ted!" Audrey made that little word eloquent of pleading, reproachful pathos; but he went on--

"For heaven's sake, don't talk any more rot about art and my genius! Anybody can do it. Do
you think that's what I want to hear from you?" He checked himself suddenly. "I beg your pardon.
Now I think we'll go on, if you don't mind sitting a little longer."

"But I do mind. Either you're very rude, or--I can't understand you. Why do you speak to me
like this?" She had picked up her hat and begun playing with its long pins. As she spoke she
stabbed it savagely in the crown. The nervous action of her hands contrasted oddly with the
pensive Madonna-like pose of her head, but the corners of her mouth were turned up more than
ever, and the tip of her little Roman nose was trembling. Then she drew the pins slowly out
of her hat, and made as if she would put it on. Ted tried to reason, but he could only grasp
two facts clearly--that in another second she would be gone, and that if he left things as
they stood he would have to exchange London for Paris. He leaned against the wall for support,
and looked steadily at Audrey as he spoke.

"You think me a devil, and I can only prevent that by making you think me a fool. I don't care.
I'm insane enough to love you--my curious behaviour must have made that quite obvious. If you'll
say that you care for me a little bit, I won't go to Paris. If you won't, I'll go to-morrow
and stay there."

Audrey had known for some time that something like this would happen. She had meant it to happen.
From the day she first saw Ted Haviland, she had made up her mind to be his destiny; and yet,
now that it had happened, though Ted's words made her heart beat uncomfortably fast, a little
voice in her brain kept on saying, "Not yet--not yet--not yet." She sat down and tried to collect
her thoughts. Ted would be sure to begin again in another second. He did.

"Or if you don't care now, if you'll only say that you might care some day, if you'll say that
it's not an utter impossibility, I won't go. I'll wait five years--ten years--on the off chance,
and hold my tongue about it too, if you tell me to."

Not yet--not yet--not yet.

"Audrey!"

She started as if a stranger had called her name suddenly, for the voice was not like Ted's
at all. Yet it was Ted, Ted in the shabby clothes she had seen him in first, which never looked
shabby somehow on him; but it was not the baby as she knew him. He was looking at her almost
defiantly, a cloud had come over his eyes, and the muscles of his face were set. Audrey saw
the look of unrelenting determination, which is only seen to perfection in the faces of the
very young, but it seemed to her that Ted had taken a sudden leap into manhood.

"Audrey," he said again, and their eyes met. She tried to speak, but it was too late. The boy
had crouched down on the floor beside her, and was clasping her knees like a suppliant before
some marble divinity.

"Don't--Ted, don't," she gasped under her breath.

"I won't. I don't ask you to do it now, before I've made my name. It may take years, but--I
shall make it. And then, perhaps----"

She tried to loosen his fingers one by one, and they closed on her hand with a grip like a
dying man's. Through the folds of her thin dress she could feel his heart thumping obtrusively,
and the air throbbed with the beating of a thousand pulses. Her brain reeled, and the little
voice inside it left off saying "Not yet." She stooped down and whispered hurriedly--

"I will--I will."

The suppliant raised his head, and his fingers relaxed their hold.

"You will, Audrey? So you don't--at the present moment?"

"I do. It wasn't my fault. I didn't know what love was like. I know now."

Passion is absolutely sincere, but it is not bound to be either truthful or consistent. What
has it to do with trains of reasoning, or with the sequence of events in time? Past and future
history are nothing to it. For Audrey it was now--now--now. All foreshadowings, all dateless
possibilities, were swept out of her fancy; or rather, they were crowded into one burning point
of time. Now was the moment for which all other moments had lived and died. Life had owed her
some great thing, and now with every heart-beat it was paying back its long arrears. Henceforth
there would be no more monotony, no more measuring of existence by the hands of the clock,
no more weighing of emotion by the scruple. The revelation had come. Now and for ever it was
all the same; for sensation that knows nothing about time is always sure of eternity.

CHAPTER VII

When Katherine came back from the National Gallery she found Ted alone: he had drawn up the
couch in front of his easel, and lay there gazing at his portrait. The restless, hungry look
had gone from his eyes. There was no triumph there, only an absolute satisfaction and repose.
Face and attitude said plainly, "I have attained my heart's desire. I am young in years, but
old in wisdom. I know what faith and hope and love are, which is more than you do. I am not
in the least excited about them, as you see; I can afford to wait, for these things last for
ever. If you like, you may come and worship with me before my heavenly lady's image; but if
you do, you must hold your tongue." And Katherine, being a sensible woman, held her tongue.
But she took up a tiny pair of white gloves, stained with paint and turpentine, that lay folded
on the easel's ledge, and after examining them critically, laid them on Ted's feet without
a word. A faint smile flickered across his lips. That was all their confession.

After some inward debate, Katherine determined to go over and see Audrey. She had no very clear
notion of what had happened that morning; but she could only think that the ridiculous boy
had proposed to Audrey and been accepted. The idea seemed preposterous; for though she had
been by no means blind to all that had been going on under her eyes for the last few months,
she had never for a moment taken Audrey seriously, or supposed that Ted in his sober senses
could do so either. This morning a horrible misgiving had come over her, and she had gone to
her work in a tumult of mixed feelings. For the present she had made Ted's career the end and
aim of her existence. What she most dreaded for him, next to the pain of a hopeless attachment,
was the distraction of a successful one. A premature engagement is the thing of all others
to blast a man's career at the outset. What good was it, she asked herself passionately, for
her to pinch and save, to put aside her own ambition, to do the journeyman's work that brings
pay, instead of the artist's work that brings praise, if Ted was going to fling himself away
on the first pretty face that took his fancy? Again the feeling of hatred to Audrey surged
up in her heart, and again it died down at the first sight of its object.

Audrey was standing at the window singing a little song to herself. She turned as the door
opened, and when she saw Katherine she started ever so slightly, and stood at gaze like a frightened
fawn. She was attracted by Katherine, as she was by every personality that she felt to be stronger
than her own. Among all artists there is a strain of manhood in every woman, and of womanhood
in every man. Katherine fascinated her weaker sister by some such super-feminine charm. At
the same time, Audrey was afraid of her, as she had been afraid of Hardy in his passion, or
of Ted in his boisterous mirth. There were moments when she thought that Katherine's direct
unquestioning gaze must have seen what she hid from her own eyes, must have penetrated the
more or less artistic disguises without which she would not have known herself. Now her one
anxiety was lest Katherine knew or guessed her treatment of Vincent, and had come to reproach
her with it. Owing to some slight similarity of detail, the events of the morning had brought
the recollection of that last scene with Hardy uppermost in her mind. She had persuaded herself
that her love for Ted was her first experience of passion, as it was his; but at the touch
of one awkward memory the bloom was somehow brushed off this little romance. For these reasons
there was fear in her grey eyes as she put up her face to Katherine's to be kissed.

"Do you know?" she half whispered. "Has he told you?"

"No, he has told me nothing; but I know."

There was silence as the two women sat down side by side and looked into each other's faces.
Katherine's instinct was to soothe and protect the shy creatures that shrank from her, and
Audrey in her doubt and timidity appealed to her more than she had ever done in the self-conscious
triumph of her beauty. She took her hand, caressing it gently as she spoke.

"Audrey--you won't mind telling me frankly? Are you engaged to Ted?"

True to her imitative instincts, Audrey could be frank with the frank. "Yes, I am. But it's
our own little secret, and we don't want anybody to know yet."

"Perhaps you are wise." She paused. How could she make Audrey understand what she had to say?
She was not going to ask her to break off her engagement. In the first place, she had no right
to do so; in the second place, any interference in these cases is generally fatal to its own
ends. But she wanted to make Audrey realise the weight of her responsibility.

"Audrey," she said at last, "do you remember our first meeting, when you thought Ted was a baby?"

"Yes, of course I do. That was only six, seven months ago; and to think that I should be engaged
to him now! Isn't it funny?"

"Very funny indeed. But you were perfectly right. He is a baby. He knows no more than a baby
does of the world, and of the men in it. Of the women he knows rather less than an intelligent
baby."

"I wouldn't have him different. He needn't know anything about other women, so long as he understands
me."

"Well, the question is, does he understand himself? What's more, are you sure you understand
him? Ted is two people rolled into one, and very badly rolled too. The human part of him has
hardly begun to grow yet; he's got no practical common-sense to speak of, and only a rudimentary
heart."

"Oh, Katherine!"

"Quite true,--it's all I had at his age. But the ideal, the artistic side of him is all but
full-grown. That means that it's just at the critical stage now."

"Of course, I suppose it would be." Audrey always said "Of course" when she especially failed
to see the drift of what was said to her.

"Yes; but do you realise all that the next few years will do for him? That they will either
make or ruin his career as an artist? They ought to be years of downright hard work, of solitary
hard work; he ought to have them all to himself. Do you mean to let him have them?"

Audrey lowered her eyes, and sat silent, playing with the ribbons of her dress, while Katherine
went on as if to herself--

"He is so young, so dreadfully young. It would have been soon enough in another ten years'
time. Oh, Audrey, why did you let it come to this?"

"Well, really, Katherine, I couldn't help it. Besides, one has one's feelings. You talk as
if I was going to stand in Ted's way--as if I didn't care a straw. Surely his career must mean
more to his wife than it can to his sister? I know you think that because I haven't been trained
like you, because I've lived a different life from yours, that I can't love art as you do.
You're mistaken. To begin with, I made up my mind ten years ago that whatever I did when I
grew up, I wouldn't marry a nonentity. What do you suppose Ted's fascination was, if it wasn't
his genius, and his utter unlikeness to anybody else?"

"Geniuses are common enough nowadays; there are plenty more where he came from."

"How cynical you are! You haven't met many people like Ted, have you?"

"No, I haven't. Oh, Audrey, do you really care like that? I wonder how I should feel if I were
you, and knew that Ted's future lay in my hands, as it lies in yours."

Audrey's cheeks reddened with pleasure. "It does! It does!" She clasped her little hands passionately,
as if they were holding Ted and his future tight. "I know it. All I want is to inspire him,
to keep him true to himself. Haven't I done it? You know what his work was like before he loved
me. Can you say that he ever painted better than he does now, or even one-half as well?"

Katherine could not honestly say that he had; but she smiled as she answered, "No; but for
the last six months he has done nothing from anybody but yourself. You make a very charming
picture, Audrey, but you can hardly want people to say that your husband can only paint one type."

"My husband can paint as many types as he pleases." Katherine still looked dubious. "Anything
more?"

"Yes, one thing. You say you want to keep Ted true to himself, as you put it. He made up his
mind this morning to go to Paris to study hard for six months. It means a lot of self-sacrifice
for you both, to be separated so soon; but it will be the making of him. You won't let him
change his mind? You won't say anything to keep him back, will you?"

Audrey's face had suddenly grown hard, and she looked away from Katherine as she answered,
"You're not very consistent, I must say. You can't think Ted such an utter baby if you trust
him to go off to Paris all by himself. As to his making up his mind this morning, our engagement
alters all that. After all, how can it affect Ted's career if he goes now or three years hence?"

"It makes all the difference."

"I can't see it. And yet--and yet--I wouldn't spoil Ted's chances for worlds." She rose and
walked a few paces to and fro. "Let me think, let me think!" She stood still, an image of abstract
Justice, with one hand folded over her eyes, and the other clenched as if it held the invisible
scales of destiny, weighing her present, overcharged with agreeable sensations, against her
lover's future. Apparently, after some shifting of the weights, she had made the two balance,
for she clapped her hands suddenly, and exclaimed, with an emphasis on every other word--

"Katherine! An inspiration! We'll go to Paris for our honeymoon, and Ted shall stay there six
months--a year--for ever, if he likes. Paris is the place I adore above all others. I shall
simply live in that dear Louvre!" She added in more matter-of-fact tones, "And I needn't order
my trousseau till I get there. That'll save no end of bother on this side. I hate the way we
do things here. For weeks before your wedding-day to have to think of nothing but clothes,
clothes, clothes--could anything be more revolting?"

"Yes," said Katherine, "to think of them before a funeral."

Audrey looked offended. Death, like religion, is one of those subjects which it is very bad
taste to mention under some circumstances.

Katherine went away more disheartened than ever, and more especially weighed down by the consciousness
that she had made a fool of herself. She knew Audrey to be vain, she divined that she was selfish,
but at least she had believed that she could be generous. By letting her feel that she held
Ted's future in her hands, she had roused all her woman's vague cupidity and passion for power,
and henceforth any appeal to her generosity would be worse than useless. With a little of her
old artistic egoism, Katherine valued her brother's career very much as a thing of her own
making, and the idea of another woman meddling with it and spoiling it was insupportable. It
was as if some reckless colourist had taken the Witch of Atlas and daubed her all over with
frightful scarlet and magenta. But the trouble at her heart of hearts was the certainty that
Audrey, that creature of dubious intellect and fitful emotions, would never be able to love
Ted as his wife should love him.

CHAPTER VIII

All true revelations soon seem as old as the hills and as obvious. Yesterday they were not,
to-day they have struck you dumb, to-morrow they will have become commonplaces, and henceforth
you will be incapable of seeing anything else. So it was with Audrey. Her engagement was barely
a week old before she felt that it had lasted for ever. Not that she was tired of it; on the
contrary, she hoped everything from Ted's eccentricity. She was sick to death of the polished
conventional type--the man who, if he came into her life at all, must be introduced in the
recognised way; while Ted, who had dropped into it literally through a skylight, roused her
unflagging interest and curiosity. She was always longing to see what the boy would say and
do next. Poor Audrey! Her own character was mainly such a bundle of negations that you described
her best by saying what she was not; but other people's positive qualities acted on her as
a powerful stimulant, and it was one for which she perpetually craved. She had found it in
Hardy. In him it was the almost physical charm of blind will, and she yielded to it unwillingly.
She had found it in Ted under the intoxicating form of vivid emotion. Life with Vincent would
have been an unbroken bondage. Life with Ted would have no tyrannous continuity; it would be
a series of splendid episodes. At the same time, it seemed to her that she had always lived
this sort of life. Like the "souls" in Ted's ingenious masterpiece, Audrey had suffered a metempsychosis,
and her very memory was changed. The change was not so much shown in the character of her dress
and her surroundings (Audrey was not the first woman who has tried to be original by following
the fashion); these things were only the outward signs of an inward transformation. If her
worship of the beautiful was not natural, it was not altogether affected. She really appreciated
the things she saw, though she only saw them through as much of Ted's mind as was transparent
to her at the moment. It never occurred to her to ask herself whether she would have chosen
to stand quite so often on the Embankment watching the sun go down behind Battersea Bridge,
or whether she would have sat quite so many hours in the National Gallery looking at those
white-faced grey-eyed Madonnas of Botticelli that Ted was never tired of talking about. It
was so natural that he should be always with her when she did these things, that it was impossible
to disentangle her ideas and say what was her own and what was his. She was not given to self-analysis.

But there were limits to Audrey's capacity for receiving impressions. Between her and the world
where Katherine always lived, and which Ted visited at intervals now becoming rarer and rarer,
there was a great gulf fixed. After all, Audrey had no grasp of the impersonal; she could only
care for any object as it gave her certain emotions, raised certain associations, or drew attention
to herself. She was at home in the dim borderland between art and nature, the region of vanity
and vague sensation. Here she could meet Ted half-way and talk to him about ideals for the
hour together. But in the realm of pure art, as he had told her when she once said that she
liked all his pictures because they were his, personalities count for nothing; you must have
an eye for the thing itself, and the thing itself was the one thing that Audrey could not see.
In that world she was a pilgrim and a stranger; it was peopled with shadowy fantastic rivals,
who left her with no field and no favour; flesh and blood were powerless to contend against
them. They excited no jealousy--they were too intangible for that; but in their half-seen presence
she had a sense of helpless irritation and bewilderment--it baffled, overpowered, and humiliated
her. To a woman thirsting for a great experience, it was hard to find that the best things
lay always just beyond her reach; that in Ted's life, after all of it that she had absorbed
and made her own, there was still an elusive something on which she had no hold. Not that she
allowed this reflection to trouble her happiness long. As Katherine had said, Ted was two people
very imperfectly rolled into one. Consciously or unconsciously, it became more and more Audrey's
aim to separate them, to play off the one against the other. This called for but little skill
on her part. Ted's passion at its white-heat had fused together the boy's soul and the artist's,
but at any temperature short of that its natural effect was disintegration. Audrey had some
cause to congratulate herself on the result. It might or might not have been flattering to
be called a "clever puss" or an "imaginative minx" (Ted chose his epithets at random), whenever
she pointed out some novel effect of colour or picturesque grouping; but it was now July, and
Ted had not done a stroke of work since he put the last touches to her portrait in April.

It was now July, and from across the Atlantic came the first rumours of Hardy's return. Within
a month, or six weeks at the latest, he would be in England, in London. The news set Audrey
thinking, and think as she would the question perpetually recurred, Whether would it be better
to announce her engagement to Ted, or still keep it a secret, still drift on indefinitely as
they had done for the last four months? If Audrey had formed any idea of the future at all,
it was as a confused mirage of possibilities: visions of express trains in which she and Ted
were whirled on for ever through strange landscapes; visions of Parisian life as she pictured
it--a series of exquisite idyls, the long days of quivering sunlight under blue skies, the
brief languid nights dying into dawn, coffee and rolls brought to you before you get up, strawberries
eaten with claret instead of cream because cream makes you ill in hot climates, the Paris of
fiction and the Paris of commonplace report; and with it all, scene after scene in which she
figured as doing a thousand extravagant and interesting things, always dressed in appropriate
costumes, always making characteristic little speeches to Ted, who invariably replied with
some delicious absurdity. The peculiarity of these scenes was, that though they succeeded each
other through endless time, yet neither she nor Ted ever appeared a day older in them. As Audrey's
imagination borrowed nothing from the past, it had no sense of the demands made by the future.
Now, although in publicly announcing her engagement to Ted she would give a fixity to this
floating phantasmagoria which would rob it of half its charm, on the other hand she felt the
need of some such definite and stable tie to secure her against Vincent's claim, the solidity
of which she now realised for the first time. Unable to come to any conclusion, she continued
to think.

The news from America had set old Miss Craven thinking too. She had at first rejoiced at Audrey's
intimacy with the Havilands, for various reasons. She was glad to see her settling down--for
the first time in her volatile life--into a friendship with another girl; to hear of her being
interested in picture-galleries; to find a uniform gaiety taking the place of the restless,
captious moods which made others suffer besides herself. As for the boy, he was a nice clever
boy who would make his way in the world; but he was only "the boy." Three months ago, if anybody
had told Miss Craven that there was a possibility of an engagement between Audrey and Ted Haviland,
she would have laughed them to scorn. But when it gradually dawned on her that Katherine hardly
ever called at the house with her brother, that he and Audrey went everywhere together, and
Katherine never made a third in their expeditions, it occurred to her that she really ought
to speak a word in season. Her only difficulty was to find the season. After much futile watching
of her opportunity, she resolved to trust to the inspiration of the moment. Unfortunately,
the moment of the inspiration happened to be that in which Audrey came in dressed for a row
up the river, and chafing with anxiety because Ted was ten minutes behind time. This at once
suggested the subject in hand. But Miss Craven began cautiously--

"Audrey, my dear, do you think you've enough wraps with you? These evenings on the river are
treacherous."

Audrey gave an impatient twitch to a sort of Elizabethan ruff she wore round her neck.

"How tiresome of Ted to be late, when I particularly told him to be early!"

"Is Miss Haviland going with you? Poor girl, she looks as if a blow on the river would do her
good."

"N-no, she isn't."

"H'm--you'd better wait and have some tea first?"

"I've waited quite long enough already. We're going to drive to Hammersmith, and we shall get
tea there or at Kew."

"I don't want to interfere with your amusements, but doesn't it strike you as--er--a little
imprudent to go about so much with 'Ted,' as you call him?"

"No, of course not. He's not going to throw me overboard. It's the most natural thing in the
world that I should go with him."

"Yes--to you, my dear, and I daresay to the young man himself. But if you are seen together,
people are sure to talk."

"Let them. I don't mind in the least--I rather like it."

"Like it?"

"Yes. You must own it's flattering. People here wouldn't take the trouble to talk if I were
nobody. London isn't Oxford."

"No; you may do many things in Oxford which you mayn't do in London. But times have changed.
I can't imagine your dear mother saying she would 'like' to be talked about."

"Please don't speak about mother in that way; you know I never could bear it. Oh, there's a
ring at the front door! That's Ted." She stood on tiptoe, bending forward, and held her ear
to the half-open door. "No, it isn't; it's some wretched visitor. Don't keep me, Cousin Bella,
or I shall be caught."

"Really, Audrey, now we are on the subject, I must just tell you that your conduct lately has
given me a great deal of anxiety."

"My conduct! What do you mean? I haven't broken any of the seven commandments. (Thank goodness,
they've gone!)"

"I mean that if you don't take care you'll be entangling yourself with young Mr. Haviland,
as you did----"

"As I did with Vincent, I suppose. That is so like you. You're always thinking things, always
putting that and that together, and doing it quite wrong. You were hopelessly out of it about
Vincent. Whether you're wrong or right about Mr. Haviland, I simply shan't condescend to tell
you." And having lashed herself into a state of indignation, Audrey went on warmly--"I'm not
a child of ten. I won't have my actions criticised. I won't have my motives spied into. I won't
be ruled by your miserable middle-class, provincial standard. What I do is nobody's business
but my own."

"Very well, very well; go your own way, and take the consequences. If it's not my business,
don't blame me when you get into difficulties."

Audrey turned round with a withering glance.

"Cousin Bella, you are really too stupid!" she said, with a movement of her foot that was half
rage, half sheer excitement. "Ah, there's Ted at last!" She ran joyously away. Miss Craven
sank back in her chair, exhausted by her unusual moral effort, and too deeply hurt to return
the smile which Audrey flashed back at her, by way of apology, as she flew.

The bitter little dialogue, at any rate, had the good effect of wakening Audrey to the practical
aspects of her problem. Before their engagement could be announced, it was clear that Ted ought
to be properly introduced to her friends. However she might affect to brave it out, Audrey
was sensitive to the least breath of unfavourable opinion, and she did not want it said that
she had picked up her husband heavens knows how, when, and where. If they had been talked about
already, no time should be lost before people realised that Ted was a genius with a future
before him, his sister a rising artist also, and so on. Audrey was busy with these thoughts
as she was being rowed up the river from Hammersmith. At Kew the room where they had tea was
full of people she knew; and as she and Ted passed on to a table in a far corner, she felt,
rather than saw, that the men looked after them, and the women exchanged glances. The same
thing happened at Richmond, where they dined; and there a little knot of people gathered about
the river's bank and watched their departure with more than friendly interest. If she had any
lingering doubts before, Audrey was ready now to make her engagement known, for mere prudence'
sake. And as they almost drifted down in the quiet July evening, between the humid after-glow
of the sunset and the dawn of the moonlit night, Audrey felt a wholly new and delicate sensation.
It was as if she were penetrated for the first time by the indefinable, tender influences of
air and moonlight and running water. The mood was vague and momentary--a mere fugitive reflection
of the rapture with which Ted, rowing lazily now with the current, drank in the glory of life,
and felt the heart of all nature beating with his. Yet for that one instant, transient as it
was, Audrey's decision was being shaped for her by a motive finer than all prudence, stronger
than all sense of propriety. In its temporary transfiguration her love for Ted was such that
she would have been ready, if need were, to fix Siberia for their honeymoon and to-morrow for
their wedding-day. As they parted on her doorstep at Chelsea, between ten and eleven o'clock,
she whispered, "Ted, that row down was like heaven! I've never, never been so happy in all
my life!" If she did not fix their wedding-day then and there, she did the next best thing--she
fixed the day for a dinner to be given in Ted's honour. Not a tedious, large affair, of course.
She was only going to ask a few people who would appreciate Ted, and be useful to him in "the
future."

As it was nearly the end of the season Audrey had no time to lose, and the first thing she
did after her arrival was to startle Miss Craven by the sudden question--

"Cousin Bella, who was the man who rushed out of his bath into the street shouting 'Eureka'?"

"I never heard of any one doing so," said Cousin Bella, a little testily; "and if he did, it
was most improper of him."

"Wasn't it? Never mind; he had an idea, so have I. I think I shall run out on to the Embankment
and shout 'Eureka' too. Aren't you dying to know? I'm going to give a grand dinner for Te--for
Mr. and Miss Haviland; and I'm not going to ask one--single--nonentity,--there! First of all,
we must have Mr. Knowles--of course. Then--perhaps--Mr. Flaxman Reed. H'm--yes; we haven't
asked him since he came up to St. Teresa's. If he isn't anybody in particular, you can't exactly
call him nobody." Having settled the question of Mr. Flaxman Reed, Audrey sat down and sent
off several invitations on the spot.

Owing to some refusals, the dinner-party gradually shrank in size and importance, and it was
not until within four days of its date that Audrey discovered to her dismay that she was "a
man short." As good luck would have it, she met Knowles that afternoon in Regent Street, and
confided to him her difficulty and her firm determination not to fill the gap with any "nonentity"
whatever. Audrey was a little bit afraid of Mr. Percival Knowles, and nothing but real extremity
would have driven her to this desperate course. "If you could suggest any one I know, who isn't
a nonentity, and who wouldn't mind such ridiculously short notice: it's really quite an informal
little dinner, got up in a hurry, you know, for Mr. Haviland, a very clever young artist, and
his sister."

Knowles smiled faintly: he had heard before of the very clever young artist (though not of
his sister). He was all sympathy.

"Sorry. I can't think of any one you know--not a nonentity--but I should like to bring a friend,
if I may. You don't know him, I think, but I believe he very much wants to know you."

"Bring him by all means, if he won't mind such a casual invitation."

"I'll make that all right."

Knowles lifted his hat, and was about to hurry away.

"By-the-bye, you haven't told me your friend's name."

He stopped, and answered with a sibilant incoherence, struggling as he was with his amusement.
But at that moment Audrey's attention was diverted by the sight of Ted coming out of the New
Gallery, and she hardly heard what was being said to her.

"I shall be delighted to see Mr. St. John," she called back, making a random shot at the name,
and went on her way with leisurely haste towards the New Gallery.

CHAPTER IX

On the evening of her dinner Audrey had some difficulty in distributing her guests. After all,
eight had accepted. Besides the Havilands, with Mr. Knowles and his friend Mr. St. John, there
was Mr. Flaxman Reed, who, as Audrey now discovered, greatly to her satisfaction, was causing
some excitement in the religious world by his interesting attitude mid-way between High Anglicanism
and Rome. There were Mr. Dixon Barnett, the great Asiatic explorer, and his wife; and Miss
Gladys Armstrong, the daring authoress of "Sour Grapes" and "Through Fire to Moloch," two novels
dealing with the problem of heredity. Audrey had to contrive as best she might to make herself
the centre of attraction throughout the evening, and at the same time do justice to each of
her distinguished guests. The question was, Who was to take her in to dinner? After weighing
impartially the claims of her three more or less intimate acquaintances, Audrey decided in
favour of the unknown. She felt unusual complacence with this arrangement. Her fancies were
beginning to cluster round the idea of Mr. St. John with curiosity. It was to be herself and
Mr. St. John, then. Mr. Knowles and Miss Armstrong, of course: the critic was so cynical and
hard to please that she felt a little triumphant in having secured some one whom he would surely
be delighted to meet. Mr. Flaxman Reed and Katherine--n-no, Mrs. Dixon Barnett, Mr. Dixon Barnett
falling to Katherine's share. For Ted, quite naturally, there remained nobody but Cousin Bella.
"Poor boy, he'll be terribly bored, I'm afraid, but it can't be helped."

The Havilands were the first to arrive.

"How superb you look!" was Audrey's exclamation, as she kissed her friend on both cheeks and
stepped back to take a good look at her. Katherine's appearance justified the epithet. Her
gown, the work of her own hands, was of some transparent black stuff, swathed about her breasts,
setting off the honey-like pallor of her skin; her slight figure supplied any grace that was
wanting in the draperies. That black and white was a splendid foil for Audrey's burnished hair
and her dress, an ingenious medley of flesh-pink, apple-green, and ivory silk.

"One moment, dear; just let me pin that chiffon up on your shoulder, to make your sleeves look
wider--there!" She hovered round Katherine, spying out the weak points in her dress, and disguising
them with quick, skillful fingers. A woman never looks more charming than when doing these
little services for another. So Ted thought, as he watched Audrey laying her white arms about
his sister, and putting her head on one side to survey the effect critically. To the boy, with
his senses sharpened to an almost feverish subtilty by the incessant stimulus of his imagination,
Audrey was the epitome of everything most completely and joyously alive. Roses, sunlight, flame,
with the shifting, waving lines of all things most fluent and elusive, were in her face, her
hair, the movements of her limbs. Her body was like a soul to its clothes; it animated, inspired
the mass of silk and lace. He could not think of her as she was--the creature of the day and
the hour, modern from the surface to the core. Yet never had she looked more modern than at
this moment; never had that vivid quality, that touch of artificial distinction, appeared more
stereotyped in its very perfection and finish. But Ted, in the first religious fervour of his
passion, had painted her as the Saint of the Beatific Vision; and in the same way, to Ted,
ever since that evening on the river, she recalled none but open-air images. She was linked
by flowery chains of association to an idyllic past--a past of four days ago. Her very caprices
suggested the shy approaches and withdrawals of some divinity of nature. It was by these harmless
fictions, each new one rising on the ruins of the old, that Ted managed to keep his ideal of
Audrey intact.

There was a slight stir in the passage outside the half-open door. Audrey, still busy about
Katherine's dress, seemed not to hear it.

"My dear Audrey!" protested Miss Craven from her corner.

"There, that'll do!" said Katherine, laughing; "you've stuck quite enough pins into me for
one night."

"Stand still, and don't wiggle!" cried Audrey, as the door opened wide. For a second she was
conscious of being watched by eyes that were not Ted's or anything like them. At the same time
the footman announced in a firm, clear voice, "Mr. Knowles and Mr. Langley Wyndham!"

She had heard this time. The look she had seen from the doorway was the same look that had
followed her in the Dean's drawing-room at Oxford. All the emotions of that evening thronged
back into her mind--the vague fascination, the tense excitement, the mortification that resulted
from the wound to her self-love and pride.

So this was Mr. St. John!

A year ago he had refused an introduction to her, and now he wanted to know her; his friend
had said so. He was seeking the acquaintance of his own accord, without encouragement. How
odd it all was! Well, whether his former discourtesy had been intentional or not, he knew how
to apologise for it gracefully.

She had no time to think more about the matter, for her remaining guests came in all together;
and in another five minutes Audrey was suffering from that kind of nightmare in which some
grave issue--you don't know precisely what--hangs on the adjustment of trifles, absurdly disproportionate
to the event, and which disarrange themselves perversely at the dramatic moment. Everything
seemed to go wrong. She had relied on Knowles and Miss Gladys Armstrong for a brilliant display
of intellectual fireworks; but beyond the first casual remarks absolutely required of them,
they had not a word to say to each other. Miss Armstrong managed cleverly enough to strike
a little spark of epigram from the flinty dialogue. It flickered and went out. Knowles smiled
politely at the abortive attempt; but at her first serious remark he shook his head, as much
as to say, "My dear lady, this is a conundrum; I give it up," and finally turned to Katherine
on his left. In fact, he monopolised her during the rest of dinner, much to the annoyance of
Mr. Dixon Barnett, who spent himself in futile efforts to win back her interest,--his behaviour
in its turn rousing the uneasy attention of Mrs. Dixon Barnett. She, again, was so preoccupied
in watching the movements of her lord, that she almost forgot the existence of Mr. Flaxman
Reed, who sat silent and depressed under her shadow.

Wyndham gave Audrey credit for great perspicacity in pairing these two off together. "Poor
fellow," he said to himself; "to preserve him from the temptations of the world and the flesh,
she's considerately sent him in with the devil." For his own part, he devoted himself to Audrey
and his dinner. From time to time he glanced across the table, and whenever he did so the corners
of Knowles's mouth twitched nervously and he began to stroke his upper lip--a provoking habit
of his, seeing that he had no moustache to account for it. Evidently there was some secret
understanding between the two, and Wyndham was gravely and maliciously amused.

Katherine was enjoying herself too, but without malice. She had so few acquaintances and lived
so much in the studio, that it was all fresh life to her. She was pleased with that unconscious
irony of Audrey's which had thrown Knowles and Miss Armstrong together; pleased with the by-play
between Knowles and Wyndham, and with the behaviour of the married couple. It was always a
delight to her to watch strange faces. Mrs. Dixon Barnett was a big woman, with a long head,
and she looked something like a horse with its ears laid back, her hair being arranged to carry
out that idea. The great Asiatic explorer, whose round face wore an expression of permanent
surprise, suggested a man who has met with some sudden shock from which he has never recovered.
Katherine felt sorry for the Asiatic explorer. She felt sorry for Miss Gladys Armstrong too,
a little pale woman with a large gaze that seemed to take you in without looking at you. Her
face, still young and childlike, was scored with the marks of hard work and eager ambition,
and there was bitterness in the downward droop of her delicate mouth. Yet the authoress of
"Sour Grapes" was undeniably a successful woman. And Wyndham too, the successful man--Wyndham's
face attracted Katherine in spite of herself, it was full of such curious inconsistencies.
Altogether it was refined, impressive, almost noble; yet each of the features contradicted
itself, the others, and the whole. The general outline was finely cut, but it looked a little
worn at the edges. The shaven lips were sensitive, but they had hard curves at the corners;
they were firm, without expressing self-restraint. In the same way the nose was fine at the
bridge, and coarse towards the nostrils. The iris of the eyes was beautiful, with its clear
brown streaks on an orb of greenish grey; yet his eyes were the most disagreeable feature in
Wyndham's face. As for Knowles, he interested her with his genial cynicism; but it was a relief
to turn from these restless types to Mr. Flaxman Reed. He had the face of the ideal ascetic--sweet
in its austerity, militant in its renunciation. What in heaven's name was he doing at Audrey
Craven's dinner-table?

Katherine was not too much absorbed in these speculations to see that Ted was behaving very
prettily to old Miss Craven, and making himself useful by filling up awkward pauses with irrelevant
remarks. The boy looked perfectly happy. Audrey's mere presence seemed to satisfy him, though
she had not spoken a dozen words to him that evening, and was separated from him by the length
of the table. At last she rose, and as he held the door open for her to go out, she turned
to him with arched eyebrows and a smile that was meant to say, "You've been shamefully neglected,
I know, but I had to attend to these tiresome people." Katherine saw Mr. Wyndham making a mental
note of the look and the smile. She had taken an instinctive dislike to that man.

Upstairs in the drawing-room the five women settled down in a confidential group, and with
one accord fell to discussing Mr. Wyndham. Miss Craven began it by mildly wondering whether
he "looked so disagreeable on purpose, or because he couldn't help it." On the whole, she inclined
to the more charitable view.

"What do you say, Kathy?" asked Audrey, without looking up.

"I agree with Miss Craven in thinking nature responsible for Mr. Wyndham's manners."

Mrs. Dixon Barnett disapproved of Katherine, but she joined in here with a guttural assent.

"Poor man," said Miss Gladys Armstrong, "he certainly hasn't improved since that affair with
Miss Fraser."

Audrey looked up suddenly,--"What affair?"

"Don't you know? They were engaged a long time, wedding-day fixed and everything, when she
broke it off suddenly, without a word of warning."

"Why?"

"Why indeed! She left her reasons to the imagination."

"When did it happen?"

"Just about this time last year. I can't think what made her do it, unless she had a turn for
psychical research--raking in the ashes of his past, and that sort of thing."

"Was he very much cut up about it?"

"He didn't whine. But he's got an ugly wound somewhere about him. Curious man, Langley Wyndham.
I haven't got to the bottom of him yet; and I flatter myself I know most men. My diagnosis
is generally pretty correct. He's a very interesting type."

"Very," said Audrey below her breath. The novelist knitted her brows and fell into a reverie.
Her interest in Langley Wyndham was not a purely professional one. Audrey reflected too. "Just
about this time last year. That might account for things." She would have liked to ask more;
but further discussion of his history was cut short by the entrance of Wyndham himself, followed
by the rest.

Mr. Flaxman Reed was the first to take the empty seat by Audrey's side. He remembered the talk
he had with her at Oxford--that talk which had provoked Wyndham's sarcastic comments. Himself
a strange compound of intellectual subtilty and broad simplicity of character, he had taken
Audrey's utterances in good faith. She had spoken to him of spiritual things, in one of those
moments of self-revelation which, he knew well, come suddenly to those--especially to women--whose
inner life is troubled. But this was not the atmosphere to revive such themes in. He had no
part in Audrey's and in Wyndham's world,--the world which cared nothing for the principles
he represented, those two great ideals which he served in his spirit and his body--the unity
of the Church and the celibacy of the priesthood. But Audrey interested him. He had first met,
last seen her, during a spiritual and intellectual crisis. He had stood alone then, severed
from those dearest to him by troubled seas of controversy; and a word, a look, had passed which
showed that she, this woman, sympathised with him. It was enough; there still clung to her
the grave and tender associations of that time.

To-night the woman was unable to give him her whole-hearted attention. Audrey was disturbed
and preoccupied. Ted was lounging at the back of her chair, hanging on her words; Wyndham and
Miss Armstrong were sitting on the other side of her, and she felt herself straining every
nerve to catch what they were saying.

"Yes," said Miss Armstrong in the tone of a proud parent, "'Through Fire to Moloch' was my
first. In that book I threw down the gauntlet to Society. It shrugged its shoulders and took
no notice. My second, 'Sour Grapes,' was a back-hander in its face. It shrieked that time,
but it read 'Sour Grapes.'"

"Which at once increased the demand for 'Through Fire to Moloch.' I congratulate you."

Miss Armstrong ignored the impertinent parenthesis. "The critics abused me, but I expected
that. They are men, and it was the men I exposed----"

Knowles, who was standing near, smiled, and blushed when he caught himself smiling. Wyndham
laughed frankly at his confusion, and Audrey grew hot and cold by turns. What was the dreadful
joke those two had about Miss Armstrong? She leaned back and looked up at Ted sweetly.

"Ted, I should like to introduce you to Mr. Knowles. He'll tell you all about that illustrated
thing you wanted to get on to."

"I'm afraid," said Knowles, "that's not in my line: I don't know anything about any illustrated
things."

"Well, never mind; I want you to know something about Mr. Haviland, anyhow."

This was just what Knowles wanted himself. He was deeply interested in the situation as far
as he understood it, and he looked forward to its development. This little diversion created,
Miss Armstrong continued with imperturbable calm. But Audrey, listening with one ear to Mr.
Flaxman Reed, only heard the livelier parts of the dialogue.

"Life isn't all starched linen and eau-de-Cologne," said Miss Armstrong, sententiously.

"Did I ever say it was?" returned Wyndham.

"Virtually you do. You turn your back on average humanity."

"Pardon me, I do nothing of the kind. I use discrimination."

"Nature has no discrimination."

"Exactly. And Nature has no consideration for our feelings, and very little maidenly reserve.
Therefore we've invented Art."

Audrey leaned forward eagerly. She felt an unusual exaltation. At last she was in the centre
of intellectual life, carried on by the whirl of ideas. She answered her companion at random.

"Yes," Mr. Flaxman Reed was saying, "my work is disheartening. Half my parish are animals,
brutalised by starvation, degraded out of all likeness to men and women."

"How dreadful! What hard work it must be!"

"Hard enough to find decent food and clothing for their bodies. But to have to 'create a soul
under those ribs of death'----" he paused. His voice seemed suddenly to run dry.

"Yes," said Audrey in her buoyant staccato, "I can't think how you manage it."

There was a moment of silence. Wyndham had turned from Miss Armstrong; Knowles and Ted had
long ago joined Miss Haviland at the other end of the room, where Mr. Dixon Barnett, still
irresistibly attracted by Katherine, hovered round and round the little group, with the fatal
"desire of the moth for the star." Audrey stood up; Miss Armstrong was holding out her hand
and pleading a further engagement. The little woman looked sour and ruffled: Wyndham's manner
had acted on her like vinegar on milk. She was followed by Mr. Flaxman Reed. Wyndham dropped
into the seat he left.

"Dixon," said Mrs. Barnett in a low voice which the explorer knew and obeyed. They were going
on to a large "At Home."

Audrey turned to Wyndham with a smile, "I hope you are not going to follow them, Mr. Wyndham?"

"No; I'm not a person of many engagements, I'm thankful to say. Barnett hasn't much the cut
of a great explorer, has he?"

"No; but those wiry little men can go through a great deal."

"A very great deal. Is Mrs. Barnett a friend of yours?"

"No, not especially. Why?"

"Mere curiosity. That mouth of hers ought to have a bit in it. It's enough to send any man
exploring in Central Asia. I can understand Barnett's mania for regions untrodden by the foot
of man--or woman."

Audrey laughed a little nervously. "I made a mistake in introducing him to Miss Haviland."

"It was a little cruel of you. But not half so unkind as asking Miss Armstrong to meet Knowles.
That was a refinement of cruelty."

"Why? What have I done? Tell me."

"Didn't you know that Knowles went for Miss Armstrong in last week's 'Piccadilly'? Criticised,
witticised, slaughtered, and utterly made game of her?"

"No? I'd no idea! I thought they'd be delighted to meet each other; and I know so few really
clever people, you know" (this rather plaintively). "He does cut up people so dreadfully, too."

"He cut her up into very small pieces. Knowles does these things artistically. He's so urbane
in his brutality; that's what makes it so crushing. Are you an admirer of Miss Armstrong?"

He looked her full in the face, and Audrey blushed. She had read Miss Armstrong's works, and
liked them, because it was the fashion; but not for worlds would she have admitted the fact now.

"I don't think I am. I've not read all her books."

"Did you like them?"

"I--I hardly know. She's written so many, and I can't understand them--at least not all of them."

Wyndham smiled. She had read all of them, then.

"I'm glad to hear it. I can't understand them myself; but I detest them, all the same."

"I thought so. I saw you were having an argument with her."

"Oh, as for that, I agreed with her--with her theory, that is, not with her practice; that's
execrable. But whatever she says I always want to support the other side."

He changed the subject, much to Audrey's relief.

"I think you knew Mr. Flaxman Reed at Oxford?"

"Yes, slightly. He's an old friend of my uncle's."

"There's something infinitely pathetic about him. I've an immense respect for him--probably
because I don't understand him. I was surprised to meet him here."

"Really, you are very uncomplimentary to me."

"Am I? Mr. Reed has renounced all the pleasant things of life--hence my astonishment at seeing
him here. Do you find him easy to get on with?"

"Perfectly." She became absorbed in picking the broken feathers out of her fan. She took no
interest in Mr. Flaxman Reed. What she wanted was to be roused, stimulated by contact with
a great intellect; and the precious opportunity was slipping minute by minute from her grasp.
Wyndham was wasting it in deliberate trivialities. She longed to draw him into some subject,
large and deep, where their sympathies could touch, their thoughts expand and intermingle.
She continued tentatively, with a suggestion of self-restrained suffering in her voice, "I
don't think I have any right to discuss Mr. Reed. You know--I have no firm faith, no settled
opinions."

It was an opening into the larger air, a very little one; she had no knowledge or skill to
make it bigger, but she was determined to show herself a woman abreast of her time. Wyndham
leaned back and looked at her through half-opened eyelids.

"You are no longer convinced of the splendid logic of the Roman faith?"

She started. His words recalled vividly that evening at Oxford, though she would not have recognised
them as hers but for the quotation marks indicated by Wyndham's tone.

"No--that was a year ago. What did you know about me then?"

"Nothing. I divined much."

"You are right. How well you remember!" She leaned forward. Her face was animated, eager, in
its greed of sympathy, understanding, acknowledgment. Clear and insistent, with a note as of
delicate irony, the little porcelain clock in the corner sounded eleven. Knowles and others
were making a move. Wyndham rose.

"I remember most things worth remembering."

Five minutes afterwards Audrey, wrapt in thought, was still standing where Wyndham had left
her. Miss Craven and Katherine had gone upstairs, and she was alone with Ted. Suddenly she
clenched her hands together, at the full length of her white arms, and turned to him in an
agony of tenderness, clinging to him like an overwrought child, and lavishing more sweetness
on him than she had done since the day of their engagement. Ted was touched with the unusual
pathos of her manner. He put it down to sorrow at their separation during the whole of a long
evening.

CHAPTER X

It was the third week in August; summer was dying, as a London summer dies, in days of feverish
sunlight and breathless languor. Everywhere there was the same torpor, the same wornout, desiccated
life in death. It was in the streets with their sultry pallor, in the parks and squares where
the dust lay like a grey blight on every green thing. Everywhere the glare accentuated this
toneless melancholy. It was the symbol of the decadence following the brilliant efflorescence
of the season, the exhaustion after that supreme effort of Society to amuse itself. This lassitude
is felt most by those who have shared least in the amusement, the workers who must stay behind
in the great workshop because they are too busy or too poor to leave it.

There was one worker, however, who felt nothing of this depression. Langley Wyndham had reasons
for congratulating himself that everybody was out of town, and that he was left to himself
in his rooms in Dover Street. For one thing, it gave him opportunity for cultivating Miss Craven's
acquaintance. For another, he had now a luxurious leisure in which to polish up the proofs
of his last novel, and to arrange his ideas for its successor. Compared with this great work,
all former efforts would seem to the taste they had created as so much literary trifling. Hitherto
he had been merely trying his instrument, running his fingers over the keys in his easy professional
way; but these preliminary flourishes gave no idea of the constructive harmonies to follow.
And now, on a dull evening, some three weeks after Audrey's dinner-party, he was alone in his
study, smoking, as he leaned back in his easy-chair, in one of those dreamy moods which with
him meant fiction in the making, the tobacco-smoke curling round his head the Pythian fumes
of his inspiration. The study was curiously suggestive of its owner's inconsistencies. With
its silk cushions, Oriental rugs, and velvet draperies, its lining of books, and writing-table
heaped with manuscripts and proofs, it witnessed to his impartial love of luxury and hard work.
It told other secrets too. The cigar-case on the table beside him was embroidered by a woman's
hand, the initials L. W. worked with gold thread in a raised monogram. Two or three photographs
of pretty women were stuck by their corners behind the big looking-glass over the fireplace,
together with invitation cards, frivolous little notes, and ball programmes. On one end of
the mantel-board there was a photograph of Knowles; on the other, the one nearest Wyndham's
chair, an empty frame of solid silver. The photograph and the frame represented the friendship
and the love of his life.

To-night he had left his proofs untouched on the writing-table, and had settled himself comfortably
to his pipe, with the voluptuous satisfaction of a man who has put off a disagreeable duty.
He felt that delicious turmoil of ideas which with him accompanied the building up of a story
round its central character. Not that he yet understood that character. Wyndham had his intuitions,
but he was not the man to trust them as such; it was his habit to verify them by a subsequent
logic. His literary conscience allowed nothing to take the place of the experimental method,
the careful observation, and arranging of minute facts, intimate analytical study from the
life. No action was too small, no emotion too insignificant, for his uncompromising realism.
He had applied the same method to his own experience. Whatever came in his way, the tragedy
or comedy of his daily life, his moods of passion and apathy, the aspirations of his better
moments, all underwent the same disintegrating process. He had the power of standing aloof
from himself, of arresting the flight of his own sensations, and criticising his own actions
as a disinterested spectator. Thus he made no experiment on others that he had not first tried
on his own person. If any man ever understood himself, that man was Langley Wyndham. He was
by no means vain of this distinction; on the contrary, he would have said that as a man's inner
consciousness is the only thing he has any direct knowledge of, he must be a fool if he can
live with himself--the closest of all human relations--for thirty-five years without understanding
his own character.

What he really prided himself on was his knowledge of other people, especially of women. Unfortunately,
for the first few years of his literary life he knew no women intimately: he had many acquaintances
among them, a few enemies, but no friends; and the little he knew of individuals had not tended
to raise his opinion of women in general. Consequently he drew them all, as he saw them, from
the outside; the best sort with a certain delicacy and clearness of outline, the result of
unerring eyesight and the gift of style; the worst sort with an incisive, almost brutal touch
that suggested the black lines bitten out by some powerful acid. His work "took" because of
its coarser qualities, the accentuated bitterness, the startling irony, the vigorous, characteristic
phrase. Those black strokes were not introduced to throw up the grey wash or pencilled shading;
Wyndham's cynicism was no mere literary affectation, it was engrained in his very nature. He
had gone through many phases of disillusionment (including disgust at his own success) before
that brief crisis of feeling which ended in his engagement to Miss Fraser. Then, for the first
time in his life, a woman's nature had been given to him to know. It was a glorious opportunity
for the born analyst; and for the first time in his life he let an opportunity go. He loved
Alison Fraser, and he found that love made understanding impossible. He never wanted to understand
her; the relentless passion for analysis was absorbed in a comprehensive enthusiasm which embraced
the whole of Alison and took no count of the parts. To have pulled her to pieces, even with
a view to reconstruction, would have been a profanation of her and of his love. For a whole
year the student of the earthly and the visible lived on the substance of things unseen--on
faith in the goodness of Alison Fraser. By a peculiar irony it was her very goodness--for she
was a good woman--which made her give up Wyndham. As Miss Gladys Armstrong had guessed (or
as she would have put it, diagnosed), a detail of Wyndham's past life had come to Miss Fraser's
knowledge, as these details always come, through a well-meaning friend. It was one which made
it difficult for her to reconcile her marriage with Wyndham to her conscience. And because
she loved him, because the thought of him, so hard to other women, so tender to herself, fascinated
her reason and paralysed her will--flattering the egoism inherent even in the very good--because
she was weak and he was irresistibly strong, she cut herself from him deliberately, open-eyed,
and with one stroke. She had just sufficient strength for the sudden breaking off of their
engagement, none for explanation, and none, alas! to save her from regretting her act of supererogatory
virtue.

Wyndham gave no sign of suffering. He simply sank back into himself, and became the man he
had been before, plus his experience of feeling, and minus the ingenuousness of his self-knowledge.
He took instead to self-mystification, trying to persuade himself that because he could not
have Alison, Alison was not worth having. After that, it was but a step to palming off on his
reason the monstrous syllogism that because Alison was unworthy, and Alison was a woman, therefore
all women were unworthy. Except for purely literary purposes, he had done with the sex. He
became if anything more intently, more remorselessly analytical, more absolutely the student
of human nature. He lived now in and for his work.

He struck out into new paths; he was tired of his neutral washes, and striking effects in black
and white. He had begun to dream of glorious subtilties of design and colour. Novels were lying
in his head ten deep. He had whole note-books full of germs and embryos, all neatly arranged
in their separate pigeon-holes. In some he had jotted down a name and a date, or a word which
stood for a whole train of ideas. In others he had recorded some illustration as it occurred
to him; or a single sentence stood flanked by a dozen variants--Wyndham being a careful worker
and sensitive to niceties of language. To-night he was supremely happy. He saw his way to a
lovely little bit of psychological realism. All that had been hitherto wanting to this particular
development of his art had been the woman. In Audrey Craven he had found the indispensable
thing--intimacy without love, or even, as he understood the word, friendship. She was the type
he had long desired, the feminine creature artless in perpetual artifice, for ever revealing
herself in a succession of disguises.

He was beginning to adjust his latest impressions to his earlier idea of her. He recalled the
evening when he had first seen her--the hot, crowded drawing-room, the heavy atmosphere, the
dull faces coming and going, and the figure of Audrey flashing through it all. She had irritated
him then, for he had not yet classified her. He had tried not to think of her. She dogged his
thoughts with most unmaidenly insistence; her image lay in wait for him at every cross-road
of association; it was something vivid yet elusive, protean yet persistent. He recalled that
other evening of her dinner-party--their first recognised meeting. Her whole person, which
at first sight had impressed him with its emphatic individuality, now struck him as characterless
and conventional. And yet--what was she like? She was like a chameleon. No, she wasn't; he
recollected that the change of colour was a vital process in that animal. She was like an opal--all
sparkle when you move it, and at rest dull, most undeniably dull. No, that wasn't it exactly.
She was a looking-glass for other people's personalities (he hated the horrid word, and apologised
to himself for using it), formless and colourless, reflecting form and colour. After a moment's
satisfaction with this last fancy, he became aware that he was being made the fool of metaphor.
That was not his way. To find out what lay at the bottom of this shifting personality, what
elemental thoughts and feelings, if any, the real Audrey was composed of; to see for himself
the play of circumstances on her plastic nature, and know what reaction it was capable of--in
a word, to experimentalise in cold blood on the living nerve and brain tissue, was his plan
of work for the year 1896.

Making a mental note of several of the above phrases for future use, Wyndham knocked the ashes
out of his pipe and went to bed, where he dreamed that the Devil, in evening dress, was presenting
him with Audrey's soul--done up in a brown wrapper marked "MS. only"--for dissection.

CHAPTER XI

It was in no direct accordance with his literary plans, though it may have been preordained
in some divine scheme of chances, that Wyndham found himself next Sunday attending evensong
at St. Teresa's, Lambeth. It so happened that Audrey and the Havilands had chosen that very
evening to go and hear, or, as Ted expressed it, see Flaxman Reed. He wanted Flaxman Reed's
head for a study. Ted seldom condescended to enter any church of later date than the fifteenth
century, and, architecturally speaking, he feared the worst from St. Teresa's. Indeed, smoke,
fog, and modern Gothic genius have made the outside of that building one with the grimy street
it stands in, and Ted was not prepared for the golden beauty of the interior. His judgment
halted as if some magic effect of colour had blinded it to stunted form and pitiful perspective.
But the glory of St. Teresa's is its music. The three late-comers were shown into seats in
the chancel as the choir were singing the Magnificat. Music was the one art to which Audrey's
nature responded spontaneously after its kind. She knelt down and covered her face with her
hands for a prayer's space, while the voices of the choir and organ shook her on every side
with a palpable vibration. She was conscious then of a deep sense of religion merging in a
faint expectancy, a premonition of things to follow. She rose from her knees and found an explanation
of this in the fact that Langley Wyndham was standing in the opposite seat below the choir.
She was not surprised; for her the unexpected was always about to happen. It had happened now.

She tried not to see or think of him; but she felt him as something illuminating and intensifying
her consciousness. She heard the vicar's voice like a fine music playing in the background.
Then organ and choir burst into the anthem. It was a fugue; the voices seemed to have gathered
together from the ends of the world, flying, pursuing and flying, doubled, trebled, quadrupled
in their flight, they met and parted, they overtook and were overtaken. And now it was no longer
a fugue of sounds--it was a fugue of all sensations. The incense rose and mingled with the
music; the music fled and rose, up among the clustering gas-jets, up to the chancel roof where
it lost itself in a shimmering labyrinth of gold and sapphire, and died in a diminuendo of
light and sound. Audrey looked up, and as her eyes met Wyndham's, it seemed as if a new and
passionate theme had crashed into her fugue, dominating its harmonies, while the whole rushed
on, more intricate, more tumultuous than before. Her individuality that had swum with the stream
became fluent and coalesced with it now, soul flooded with sense, and sense with soul. She
came to herself exhausted and shivering with cold. Flaxman Reed was in the pulpit. He stood
motionless, with compressed lips and flashing eyes, as he watched the last deserters softly
filing out through the side-aisles. The lights were turned low in nave and chancel; Ted wriggled
in his seat until he commanded a good view of the fine head, in faint relief against a grey-white
pillar, stone on stone; and Flaxman Reed flung out his text like a challenge to the world:
"The things which are seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen are eternal." The
words suggested something piquantly metaphysical, magnificently vague, and Audrey followed
the sermon a little way. But Flaxman Reed was in his austerest, most militant mood. He was
a master of antithesis, and to Audrey there was something repellent in his steel-clad thoughts,
his clear diamond-pointed sentences. No eloquence had any charm for her that was not as water
to reflect her image, or as wind to lift and carry her along. Her fancy soon fluttered gently
down to earth, and she caught herself wondering whether Wyndham would walk back to Piccadilly
or go in a hansom.

She was still pursuing this train of thought as they left the church, when she proposed that
they should go back to Chelsea by Westminster instead of Lambeth Bridge. Wyndham overtook them
as they turned down to the river by St. Thomas's Hospital. He stopped while Audrey pointed
out the beauty of the scene with her little air of unique appreciation. "Isn't it too lovely
for words? The suggestion--the mystery of it!" Her voice had a passionate impatience, as if
she chafed at the limitations of the language. "Who says London's cold and grey? It's blue.
And yet what would it be without the haze?" Wyndham smiled inscrutably: perhaps he wondered
what Miss Audrey Craven would be without the haze?

"What did you think of the service?" she asked presently. By this time she and Wyndham were
walking together a little in advance of the others.

"I didn't hear it. I was watching Flaxman Reed all the time." This statement, as Audrey well
knew, was not strictly correct.

"So was I. My uncle says if he stays in the church he'll be the coming man."

"The coming man? H'm. He's been going back ever since I knew him. At present he's got to the
thirteenth century; he may arrive at the Nicene age, but he'll never have a hold on his own.
He's nothing but a holy anachronism."

"Oh? I thought you didn't understand him?"

"In one way I do, in another I don't. You see I knew him at Oxford when I was a happy undergraduate."
(Audrey could not imagine Langley Wyndham ever being an undergraduate; it seemed to her that
he must always have been a Master of Arts.) "I knew the real Flaxman Reed, and he was as logical
a sceptic as you or I. There was an epidemic of ideas in our time, and the poor fellow was
frightened, so he took it--badly. Of course he made up his mind that he was going to die, and
he was horribly afraid of dying. So instead of talking about his interesting symptoms, as you
or I might do" ("You or I"--again that flattering association!), "he quietly got rid of the
disease by attacking its source."

"How?"

"Well, I forget the precise treatment, but I think he took equal parts of St. Augustine and
St. Thomas Aquinas, diluted with aqua sacra. He gave me the prescription, but I preferred the
disease."

"At any rate he was in earnest."

"Deadly earnest. That's the piety of the fraud."

"You surely don't call him a fraud?"

"Well--a self-deceiver. Isn't that the completest and most fatal form of fraud? He fights and
struggles to be what he isn't and calls it renouncing self."

"He renounces the world too--and everything that's pleasant."

"I'm afraid that doesn't impress me. I can't forget that he renounced reason because it was
unpleasant. Rather than bear a little spiritual neuralgia, he killed the nerve of thought."

"How terrible!" said Audrey, though she had no very precise notion of what was involved in
that operation.

"To us--not to him. Yet he talks about doing good work for his generation."

"Why shouldn't he? He works hard enough."

"Unfortunately his generation doesn't want his work or him either. It's too irrevocably pledged
to reality. There's one thing about him though--his magnificent personality. I believe he has
unlimited influence over some men and most women."

Audrey ignored the last suggestion. "You seem to find him very interesting."

"He is profoundly interesting. Not in himself so much, but in his associations. Do you know,
when I saw you in church to-night it struck me that he might possibly influence you."

"Never! I should have to give up my intellect first, I suppose. I'm not prepared to do that."
Wyndham smiled again. "Why, what made you think he would influence me?"

"I'd no right to think anything at all about it, but I know some women take him for a hierophant."

"Some women? Do you think I'm like them?"

"You are like nothing but yourself. I was only afraid that he might persuade you to renounce
yourself and become somebody else, which would be a pity."

"Don't be alarmed. I'm not so impressionable as you think."

"Aren't you? Be frank. Didn't you feel to-night that he might have a revelation for you?"

"No. And yet it's odd you should say so. I have felt that, but--not with him. I shall never
come under that influence."

"I hope not." (It was delightful to have Langley Wyndham "hoping" and being "afraid" for her.)
"He belongs to the dead--you to the living."

What a thing it is to have a sense of style, to know the words that consecrate a moment! They
were crossing Westminster Bridge now, and Audrey looked back. On the Lambeth end of the bridge
Ted and Katherine were leaning over the parapet; she looked at them as she might have looked
at two figures in a crowd. Lambeth and St. Teresa's seemed very far away. She said so, and
her tone implied that she had left illusion behind her on the Surrey side.

Wyndham said good-bye at Westminster. Audrey was not quite pleased with his manner of hailing
a hansom; it implied a conscious loss of valuable time.

"What fools we were to let him catch us up," said Ted as they walked towards Pimlico. Audrey
made no answer. She was saying to herself that Langley Wyndham had read her, and--well, she
hardly thought he would take the trouble to read anything that was not interesting.

CHAPTER XII

Audrey had made a faint protest against Wyndham's realistic presentation of Flaxman Reed. In
doing so she was not guided by any insight into the character of that divine, or by any sympathy
with his aims. Indeed she could not have understood him if she had tried. Her thoughts had
never travelled along that avenue of time down which Wyndham had tracked his pathetic figure
to the thirteenth century. She merely wanted to avoid a slavish acquiescence in Wyndham's view,
to guard a characteristic intellectual attitude. Intellect has its responsibilities, and she
was anxious to show herself impartial. In all this Flaxman Reed counted for nothing. It was
intolerable to her that Wyndham should have classed her even for a moment with those weak emotional
creatures who submitted to his influence. Why, he might just as well have said that she was
influenced by Ted Haviland; the fact being that no engaged woman ever preserved her independence
more completely than she had done. Had devotion to Ted interfered with her appreciation of
Wyndham? Then she reflected that Wyndham did not know about her engagement any more than other
people.

So when Mr. Flaxman Reed called, as he did on Monday afternoon, Audrey met him with a mind
secure against any malignant charm. His most innocent remarks excited her suspicion.

"I'm glad you've found your way to St. Teresa's. We don't often get such a strong contingent
from the other side." By "the other side" Mr. Reed meant Middlesex, but to Audrey the phrase
was insidiously controversial. She determined to take her stand once and for all.

"I'm afraid my heterodoxy is incorrigible. So I should say is Mr. Langley Wyndham's."

The vicar raised his eyebrows in mild surprise. "I don't know why he came--unless it was for
old acquaintance' sake."

"Ah! you knew him, didn't you? Do tell me about him. He's public property, you know."

"I daresay, but I have no right to discuss him. We hardly ever meet now; if we did we shouldn't
agree. We are enigmas to each other."

"Yes," she said meditatively, and with a faint reproduction of Wyndham's manner, "I should
say you would be. He belongs so essentially to the present, don't you think?"

Flaxman Reed flushed painfully. "And I to the past--is that what you mean?"

"Yes, I think I do."

"You may be right. I suppose he is very modern--a decadent who would rather die with his day
than live an hour behind it--who can't see that the future may have more kindred with the past
than with the present. Mind you, I'm not talking of him, but of his school."

"Then you read him? Of course--everybody reads him."

"I've not much time for any reading that lies outside my work. But I read his first book when
it came out. Is it from him you get what you call your heterodoxy?"

"No. You have to think these things out for yourself."

Audrey was led into making this statement simply by the desire to please. That eternally feminine
instinct told her that at the moment she would be most interesting to Flaxman Reed in the character
of a forlorn sceptic. His face sharpened with a sudden distrust.

"What, have you got the malady of the century--the disease of thought? Surely this is something
new?"

"It is. One can't go on for ever in the old grooves. One must think."

"Yes; that curse is laid upon us for our sins."

Audrey smiled a bitter smile, as much as to say that she must have committed some awful crime
to be so tormented with intellect as she was.

"I suppose," he continued guilelessly, "every earnest mind must go through this sooner or later."

"Yes, but I've come out on what you call the other side. I can't go back, can I?"

"No; but you can go round."

Audrey shook her head sadly, feeling all the time how nice it was to be taken seriously.

"Why not? Why not compromise? What is life but compromise? What else is my own position as
an Anglican priest? I daresay you know that my heart is not altogether with the Church I serve?"
He checked himself; he had not meant to strike this personal note. And how could he explain
the yearning of his heart for the great heart of the Mother-church? This would have been possible
last year at Oxford, but not now. "I tell you this because I feel that it might perhaps help you."

"No; I know what you will say next. You will tell me to stop thinking because it hurts me."

"I won't. You will go on thinking in spite of me. But your intellect will be feeding on itself.
You will get no farther. Thought can never be satisfied with thought."

Flaxman Reed was only a simple pure-minded priest, but Wyndham himself could not have chosen
words more subtly calculated to establish the "influence." To have two such champions battling
for possession of her soul was exciting enough in all conscience, but she was inexpressibly
flattered by that dramatic conception of herself as a restless intellect struggling with the
storms of doubt. It would be hard to say how Flaxman Reed came to believe in any real passion
of thought behind Audrey's spiritual coquetry. His ministration to a living illusion was almost
as touching as his devotion to a dead ideal. But Audrey herself was too completely the thrall
of the illusion to feel compunction.

There was no voice to warn him that his enthusiasm was the prey of the eternal vanity. He leaned
back in his meditative hieratic attitude, his elbows resting on the arm of his chair, his thin
hands joined at the finger-tips, wondering what he should say to help her. After all, Audrey
had stated her case a little vaguely--there was a reticence as to details. These, however,
he easily supplied from his own experience, supposing hers to have been more or less like it.
He said he wished he had known of this before, that he had spoken sooner, wincing perceptibly
as Audrey pointed out the inexpediency of discussing eternal things on so temporal an occasion
as her dinner-party. He did not mean that. His time now was short; he had a stupid parish meeting
at five o'clock. He went rapidly over the ground, past immemorial stumbling-stones of thought,
refuting current theories, suggesting lines of reading; in his excitement he even recommended
some slight study of Patristics. There was nothing like getting to the sources--Polycarp and
Irenæus were important; or he could lend her Lightfoot. But he did not want to overwhelm her
with dogmas--mere matter for the intellect--he would prefer her to accept some truths provisionally
and see how they worked out. After all, the working out was everything. He wanted her to see
that it was a question of will. In the crisis of his own life he had helped himself most by
helping others--practically, he meant--seeing after his poor people, and so on. Didn't she
think it might be the same with her?

Audrey looked grave. It was good to be taken seriously, but this was going a little too far.

Didn't she think she could "do something? Other ladies----"

Flaxman Reed was doing well, very well indeed, but he had spoiled it all by that hopelessly
inartistic touch. Any man of the world could have told him that to mention "other ladies" to
Audrey--to take her out of the circle of supreme intelligences in which he had placed her ten
minutes ago, and to confuse her with the rank and file of parochial underlings and hangers-on--was
death to the "influence." It was an insult to her glorious womanhood. Some people might even
have objected that such crass ignorance of the world he renounced detracted from the merit
of the renunciation. Her voice was very cold and distant as she answered him. "What do you
suppose I could do? If you mean slumming, I've never been down a slum in my life." No, he didn't
mean slumming exactly. To tell the truth, he could not fancy Audrey mingling with the brutal
side of life. He would have shrunk from giving her work that he committed without a pang to
his deaconesses and sisters.

"Do you mean mothers' meetings then, and that sort of thing? I couldn't."

No, he didn't mean mothers' meetings either. But he thought she might like to come sometimes
to their social evenings.

"Social evenings"--that was worse than all. He had plunged in his nervousness to the lowermost
bathos. Audrey saw that he looked puzzled and disheartened. She crossed over to her writing-desk,
wrote out a cheque for five pounds, and gave it to him with the prettiest action in the world.
"I want you to take that for your poor people. I wish I could help in some other way, but I
can't. I am so sorry." The apology was sweetness itself, but she had the air of having settled
her account with humanity--and him. He thanked her gravely and took his leave, reminding her
that whenever she needed his help, it would still be there. She remained musing some time after
he had gone.

He little guessed how nearly he had won the victory. Perhaps he would have scorned any advantage
gained by an appeal to her sex, though he had conceded much to it--more than he well knew.

CHAPTER XIII

August was a miserable month for Katherine in the hot attic, hard at work on her own pictures,
and too often finishing the various orders for black and white which Knowles had after all
managed to put in Ted's way. She could have stood the hard work if she had not been more than
ever worried on Ted's account. With her feminine instinct sharpened by affection, she foresaw
trouble at hand--complications which it would never have entered into the boy's head to consider.
For reasons of her own Audrey was still keeping her engagement a secret. She was less regular,
too, in making appointments, fixing days for Ted to go over and see her; and more often than
not he missed her if he happened to call at Chelsea Gardens of his own accord. At the same
time she came to Devon Street as often as, or oftener than, ever, and there her manner to Ted
had all its old charm, with something added; it was more deeply, more seriously affectionate
than before. And yet it was just in these tender passages that Katherine detected the change
of key. That tenderness was not remorse, as she might have supposed. It had nothing to do with
the past, being purely an emotion of the passing moment. Audrey was playing a new part. Her
mind was swayed by a fresh current of ideas; it had suffered the invasion of a foreign personality.
The evidence for this was purely psychological, but it all pointed one way. A sudden display
of new interests, a startling phrase, a word hitherto unknown in Audrey's vocabulary, her way
of handling a book, the alternate excitement and preoccupation of her manner, they were all
unmistakable. Katherine had noticed the same signs in the days of Audrey's first absorption
in Ted. She had caught his tricks, his idioms, his way of thinking. She had even begun to see,
like Ted, the humour of things, and to make reckless speeches, not quite like Ted, that shocked
cousin Bella's sense of propriety. Katherine had smiled at her innocent plagiarism, and wondered
at the transforming power of love. And now--Audrey was actually undergoing another metempsychosis.
Under whose influence? Here again Katherine's instinct was correct. It was Wyndham's presence
that in three weeks had brought about the change. Yes; in that impressive affection, in the
pleading tremor of her voice, in her smiles and caresses, Audrey was acting a part before one
invisible spectator. She played as if Wyndham were standing by and looking on. Her love for
Ted had been a reality; therefore it served as a standard to measure all emotions by--it made
this new passion of the imagination a thing of flesh and blood. No wonder that she would not
announce her engagement. At the best of times her fluent nature shrank from everything that
was fixed and irrevocable--above all from the act of will that trammelled her wandering fancy,
the finality that limited her outlook upon life. And now it was impossible. The three weeks
in which she had known Wyndham had shown her that, compared with that complex character, that
finished intellect, Ted was indeed little better than a baby. Not that she could have done
without Ted--far from it. As yet Wyndham was still the unknown, shadowy, far-off, and unapproachable.
The touch of Ted's hand seemed to make him living, to bring him nearer to her. Ted still stood
between her and the void where there is no more revelation, no hope, no love--and Hardy would
be in London in another week.

Katherine had not guessed all the truth, any more than Audrey had herself; but she had guessed
enough to make her extremely anxious. Audrey was not the wife she could have wished for Ted:
she disapproved of his marriage with her as a certain hindrance to his career; but, above all,
she dreaded for him the agony of disappointment which must follow if Audrey gave him up. She
had no very clear idea of what it would mean to him; but judging his nature by what she had
seen of it, she feared some shock either to his moral system or to his artistic powers. She
longed to speak to him about it; but Ted and she were not accustomed to handling their emotions,
and of late they had avoided all personal questions not susceptible of humorous treatment.
After this persistent choosing of the shallows, she shrank from a sudden plunge into the depths.
She felt strongly, and with her strong feeling was a bar to utterance.

At last an incident occurred which laid the subject open to frivolous discussion.

Katherine was painting one afternoon, and Ted was leaning out of the window, which looked south-west
to Chelsea, his thoughts travelling in a bee-line towards the little brown house. Suddenly
he drew his head in with an exclamation.

"Uncle James, by Jove! He'll be upon us in another minute. I'm off!" And he made a rush for
his bedroom.

Katherine had only time to wipe the paint from her brush, to throw a tablecloth over the Apollo
and a mackintosh over the divine shoulders of the Venus--Mr. Pigott was a purist in art, and
Katherine respected his prejudices--when her uncle arrived, panting and inarticulate.

"Well, uncle, this is a surprise! How are you?"

"No better for climbing up that precipice of yours. What on earth possessed you to come to
this out-of-the-way hole?"

"It's a good room for painting, you see----"

"What's that? Couldn't you find a good room in West Kensington, instead of planting yourself
up here away from us all?"

This was a standing grievance, as Katherine knew.

"Well, you see, it's nicer here by the river, and it's cheaper too; and--how's aunt Kate?"

"Your aunt Kate has got a stye in her eye."

"Dear me, I'm very sorry to hear it. And you, uncle?"

"Poorly, very poorly. I ought not to have got out of my bed to-day. One of my old attacks.
My liver's never been the same since I caught that bad chill at your father's funeral."

Uncle James looked at Katherine severely, as if she had been to blame for the calamity. His
feeling was natural. One way or another, the Havilands had been the cause of calamity in the
family ever since they came into it. Family worship and the worship of the Family were different
but equally indispensable forms of the one true religion. The stigma of schism, if not of atheism,
attached to the Havilands in departing from the old traditions and forming a little sect by
themselves. Mr. Pigott meant well by them; at any time he would have helped them substantially,
in such a manner as he thought fit. But, one and all, the Havilands had refused to be benefited
in any way but their own; their own way, in the Pigotts' opinion, being invariably a foolish
one--"between you and me, sir, they hadn't a sound business head among them." As for Ted and
Katherine, before the day when he had washed his hands of Ted in the office lavatory, uncle
James had tried to play the part of an overruling Providence in their affairs, and the young
infidels had signified their utter disbelief in him. Since then he had ceased to interfere
with his creatures; and latterly his finger was only to be seen at times of marked crisis or
disturbance, as in the arrangements for a marriage or a funeral.

An astounding piece of news had come to his ears, which was the reason of his present visitation.
He hastened to the business in hand.

"What's this that I hear about Ted, eh?"

"I don't know," said Katherine, blushing violently.

"I'm told that he's taken up with some woman, nobody knows who, and that they're seen everywhere
together----"

"'Who told you this?"

"Your cousin Nettie. She's seen them--constantly--in the National Gallery and the British Museum,
carrying on all the time they're pretending to look at those heathen gods and goddesses"--Katherine
glanced nervously round the studio. "They actually make assignations--they meet on the steps
of public places. Nettie has noticed her hanging about waiting for him, and some young friends
of hers saw them dining together alone at the Star and Garter. Now what's the meaning of all this?"

Katherine was too much amused to answer yet; she wanted to see what her uncle would say next.
He shook his head solemnly.

"I knew what it would be when you two had it all your own way. As for you, Katherine, you took
a very grave responsibility on your shoulders when you persuaded your young brother to live
with you here, in this neighbourhood, away from all your relations. Your influence has been
for anything but good."

"My dear uncle, you are so funny; but you're mistaken. I know Miss Craven, the lady you mean,
perfectly well; she and Ted are great friends, and it's all right, I assure you."

"Do you mean to tell me he is engaged to this young lady he goes about with?"

Katherine hesitated: if she had felt inclined to gratify a curiosity which she considered impertinent,
she was not at liberty to betray their secret.

"I can't tell you that, for I'm not supposed to know."

"Let me tell you, then, that it looks bad--very bad. To begin with, your cousin Nettie strongly
disapproves of the young woman's appearance, so loud and over-dressed, evidently got up to
attract. But it lies in a nutshell. If he's not engaged to her, why is he seen everywhere with
her? If he is engaged to her, and she's a respectable woman--I say if she's respectable, why
doesn't he introduce her to his family? Why doesn't he ask your aunt Kate to call on her?"

"Well, you see, supposing they are engaged, they wouldn't go and proclaim it all at once; and
in any case, that would depend more on Miss Craven than Ted. I can't tell you any more than
I have done; and I'd be greatly obliged if you wouldn't allow Ted's affairs to be gossiped
about by cousin Nettie or anybody else."

She was relieved for the moment by the entrance of Mrs. Rogers with the tea-tray.

"Tea, uncle?"

"No, thank you, none of your cat-lap. I must see Ted himself. Where is he?"

"I'm not sure, but I think he's gone out."

Mrs. Rogers looked up from her tray, pleased to give valuable information.

"Mr. 'Aviland is in 'is bedroom, m'm; I 'eard 'im as I come up."

"Oh, I'll go and tell him then."

She found Ted dressing himself carefully before calling on Audrey. She wasted five minutes
in trying to persuade him to see his uncle. Ted was firm.

"Give him my very kindest regards, and tell him a pressing engagement alone prevents my waiting
on him."

With that he ran merrily downstairs. His feet carried him very swiftly towards Audrey.

Katherine gave the message, with some modifications; and Mr. Pigott, seeing that no good was
to be gained by staying, took his leave.

Ted came back sooner than his sister had expected. He smiled faintly at the absurd appearance
of the Venus in her mackintosh, but he was evidently depressed. He looked mournfully at the
tea-table.

"I'm afraid the tea's poison, Ted, and it's cold."

"It doesn't matter, I don't want any."

"Had tea at Audrey's?"

"No."

He strode impatiently to the table and took up one of the illustrations Katherine had been
working at.

"What's up?" said she.

"Oh--er--for one thing, I've heard from the editor of the 'Sunday Illustrated.' He's in a beastly
bad temper, and says my last batch of illustrations isn't funny enough. The old duffer's bringing
out a religious serial, and he must have humour to make it go down."

Katherine was relieved. To divert him, she told him the family's opinion as to his relations
with Audrey. That raised his spirits so far that he called his uncle a "fantastic old gander,"
and his cousin Nettie an "evil-minded little beast."

"After all, Ted," said Katherine, judicially, "why does Audrey go on making a mystery of your
engagement?"

"I don't know and I don't care," said Ted, savagely.

Surely it was not in the power of that harmless person, the editor of the "Sunday Illustrated,"
to move him so? Something must have happened.

What had happened was this. As Ted was going into the little brown house at Chelsea he had
met Mr. Langley Wyndham coming out of it; and for the first time in his life he had found Audrey
in a bad temper. She was annoyed, in the first place, because the novelist had been unable
to stay to tea. She had provided a chocolate cake on purpose, the eminent man having once approved
of that delicacy. (It was a pretty way Audrey had, this remembering the likings of her friends.)
She was also annoyed because Ted's coming had followed so immediately on Wyndham's going. It
was her habit now, whenever she had seen Wyndham, to pass from the reality of his presence
into a reverie which revived the sense of it, and Ted's arrival had interfered with this pastime.
The first thing the boy did, too, was to wound her tenderest susceptibilities. He began playing
with the books that lay beside her.

"What a literary cat it is!"

She frowned and drew in her breath quickly, as if in pain. He went on turning over the pages--it
was Wyndham's "London Legends"--with irreverent fingers.

"I should very much like to know----" said Audrey to Ted, and stopped short.

"What would you very much like to know, Puss?"

"What you saw in me, to begin with."

"I haven't the remotest idea--unless it was your intellect."

"I should also like to know," said Audrey to the teapot, "why people fall in love?"

"The taste is either natural or acquired. Some take to it because they like it; some are driven
to it by a hereditary tendency or an unhappy home. I do it myself to drown care."

"Will you have any tea?" asked Audrey, sternly.

"No, thank you, I won't."

She laughed, as she might have laughed at a greedy child for revenging on its stomach the injury
done to its heart. Poor Ted, he was fond of chocolate cake too! She would have given anything
at that moment if she could have provoked him into quarrelling with her.

Instead of quarrelling, he stroked her beautiful hair as if she had been some soft but irritable
animal. He said he was sure her dear little head was aching because she was so bad-tempered;
he implored her not to eat too much cake, and promised to call again another day, when he hoped
to find her better. So he left her, and went home with a dead weight at his heart.

Towards evening his misery became so acute that he could no longer keep it to himself. They
were on the leads, in the long August twilight, Katherine sitting with her back against the
tall chimney, watching the reflection of the sunset in the east, the boy lying at her feet,
with his heels in the air and his head in the nasturtiums. The time, the place, the attitude
were all favourable to confidences, and Ted wound up his by asking Katherine what she thought
of Audrey? Now was the moment to rid herself of the burden that weighed on her; Ted might never
be in so favourable a mood again. She spoke very gently.

"Ted, I am going to hurt your feelings. I don't quite know how to tell you what I think of
her. She's not good enough for you, to begin with----"

"I know she's not intelligent. She can't help that."

"And she's not affectionate. Oh, Ted, forgive me! but she doesn't love you--she can't, it's
not in her. She loves no one but herself."

"She is a little selfish, but she can't help that either. It makes no difference."

"So I fear. And then she's years older than you are, and you can't marry for ages; don't you
see how impossible it all is?"

Her voice thrilled with her longing to impress him with her own conviction. His passion was
wrestling with a ghastly doubt, but it was of the kind that dies hard.

"Of course it's quite impossible now"--neither he nor Katherine considered the question of
Audrey's money, they had never thought of it--"but, as she said herself, in five years' time,
when she's thirty and I'm twenty-five, the difference in our ages won't be so marked."

"It will be as marked as ever, even if your intellect grows at its present rate of development."

"I've admitted that she's a little deficient in parts; and, as you justly observe, stupidity,
like death, is levelling. We should suit each other exactly in time."

"Ah, if you can see that, why, oh why, did you fall in love with her?"

"She asked me that this afternoon. I said it was because she was so clever. It was because
I was a fool--stupidity came upon me like a madness--I wish to heaven I'd never done it. It's
played the devil with my chances. I was sitting calmly on the highroad to success, with my
camp-stool and my little portable easel, not interfering in the least with the traffic, when
she came along like a steam-roller, knocked me down, crushed me, and rolled me out flat. I
shall never recover my natural shape; and as for the camp-stool and the portable easel--these
things are an allegory. But I love her all the same."

Katherine laughed in spite of herself, but she understood the allegory. Would he ever recover
his natural shape? To that end she was determined to make him face the worst.

"Ted, what would you do, supposing--only supposing--she were to fling you over for--for some
one else?"

"I should blow my brains out, if I had any left. Verdict, suicide while in a state of temporary
insanity."

"Suicide of a genius! That would be a fine feather in Audrey's cap."

"She always had exquisite taste in dress. Besides, she's welcome to it--or to any little trifle
of the kind."

It was useless attempting to make any impression on him. She gave it up. Ted, however, was
so charmed with the idea of suicide that he spent the rest of the evening discussing ways and
means. He was not going to blow his brains out, or to take poison in his bedroom, or do anything
disagreeable that would depreciate Mrs. Rogers's property. On the whole, drowning was the cheapest,
and would suit him best, if he could summon up spirits for it. Only he didn't want to spoil
the river for her. It must be somewhere below London Bridge, say Wapping Old Stairs. Here Katherine
suggested that he had better go to bed.

He went, and lay awake all night in a half-fever. When Katherine went into his room the next
morning (ten o'clock had struck, and there was no appearance of Ted), she found him lying in
a deep sleep; one arm was flung outside the counterpane, the hand had closed on a crumpled
sheet of paper. It was Audrey's last note of invitation--the baby had taken it to bed with him.

"Poor boy--poor, poor Ted!"

But, for all her sympathy, love, the stupidity that comes on you like a madness, was a thing
incomprehensible to Katherine.

CHAPTER XIV

The next day Audrey's head was aching to some purpose. She had been going through a course
of Langley Wyndham. Yesterday he had brought her his last book, "London Legends," and she had
sat up half the night to read it. She was to tell him what she thought of it, and her ideas
were in a whirl.

She stayed in bed for breakfast, excused herself from lunch, left word with the footman that
she was not at home that afternoon, and sent down another message five minutes afterwards that,
if by any chance Mr. Wyndham were to call, he might be admitted. "Not that he's in the least
likely to come after being here yesterday," she said to herself; and yet, as she sat alone
in the drawing room, she listened for the ringing of bells, the opening of doors, and the sound
of footsteps on the stairs. Every five minutes she looked at the clock, and her heart kept
time to its ticking. Half-past two. In any case he wouldn't come before three; and yet--surely
that was the front-door bell. No. Three o'clock, four o'clock--he would be more likely to drop
in about tea-time. Five o'clock; tea came in on the stroke of it, and still no Wyndham. Half-past
five--he had once called later than that when he wanted to find her alone. Something told her
that he would come to-day. He would be anxious to know what she thought of his book. She was
in that state of mind when people trust in intuitions, failing positive evidence. Surely in
some past state of existence she had sat in that chair, surrounded by the same objects, thinking
the same thoughts, and that train of ideas had been completed by the arrival of Wyndham. Science
accounts for this sensation by supposing that one half of the brain, more agile than another,
jumps to its conclusion before its tardier fellow can arrive. To Audrey it was a prophecy certain
of fulfilment. And all the time her head kept on aching. The poor little brain went on wandering
in a maze of its own making. How truly she had, in cousin Bella's phrase, "entangled herself"
with Hardy, with Ted, and possibly, nay probably, with Wyndham. She saw no escape from the
dreadful situation. And as a dark background to her thoughts there hung the shadow of Hardy's
return. She only realised it in these moods of reaction that followed the exaltation of the
last three weeks. And to make matters worse, for the first time in her life she was dissatisfied
with herself. Not that she was in the least aware of the deterioration of her character. She
took no count of the endless little meannesses and falsehoods which she was driven into by
her position. Simple straightforward action was impossible. This much was evident to her, that
whatever course she took now, she must end by forfeiting some one's good opinion: Hardy's first--well,
she could get over that; but Ted's? Katherine's? Wyndham's?--if he came to know everything?
It was there, in that last possibility, that she suffered most.

Half-past six. She had given up Wyndham and her belief in psychical prophecy, and was trying
to find relief from unpleasant reflections in a book, when Wyndham actually appeared. He came
in with the confident smile of the friend sure of a welcome at all hours.

"Forgive my calling at this unholy time. I knew if I came earlier I should find you surrounded
by an admiring crowd. I wanted to see you alone."

"Quite right. I am always at home to friends."

They dropped into one of those trivial dialogues which were Audrey's despair in her intercourse
with Wyndham.

Suddenly his tone changed. He took up "London Legends."

"As you've already guessed, my egregious vanity brings me here. I don't know whether you've
had time to look at the thing----"

"I sat up to finish it last night."

"Indeed. What did you think of it?"

"Don't ask me. I didn't criticise--sympathy comes first."

"Excuse me, it doesn't. Criticism comes first with all of us. Sympathy comes last of all--when
we know the whole of life, and understand it."

"What would my poor little opinion be worth?"

"Everything. A really unbiassed judgment is the rarest thing in the world, and there's always
a charm about naïve criticism."

"I couldn't put the book down. Can I say more?"

"Yes, of course you can say more. You can tell me which legend you disliked least; you can
criticise my hero's conduct, and find fault with my heroine's manners; you can object to my
plot, pick holes in my style. No, thank goodness, you can't do that; but you can take exception
to my morality."

She sat silent, waiting for her cue, and trying to collect her thoughts, which were fluttering
all abroad in generalities.

He went on with a touch of bitterness in his voice--

"I thought so. It's the old stumbling-block--my morality. If it hadn't been for that, you would
have told me, wouldn't you? that my figures breathe and move, that every touch is true to life.
But you daren't. You are afraid of reality; facts are so immoral."

It would be impossible to describe the accent of scorn which Wyndham threw into this last word.

"I thought your book very clever--in spite of the facts."

"Facts or no facts, you'd rather have your beliefs, wouldn't you?"

"No, no; I lost them all long ago!" cried Audrey, indignantly.

"I don't mean the old vulgar dogmas, of course, but the dear little ideals that shed such a
rosy light on things in general, you know. Ah! that's what you want; and when an artist paints
the real thing for you, you say, 'Thank you; yes, it's very clever, I see; but I prefer the
pretty magic-lantern views, and the limelight of life.'"

"Not at all. I've much too great a regard for truth."

"I know. You're always looking for Truth, with a capital T; but, when it comes to the point,
you'd rather have two miserable little half-truths than one honest whole truth about anything.
That's why you disliked my book."

"I didn't."

"Oh, yes, you did. What you disliked about it was this. It made you see men and women, not
as you imagined them, but as God made them. You saw, that is, the naked human soul, stripped
of the clumsy draperies that Puritanism wraps round it. You saw below the surface--below the
top-dressing of education, below the solid layer of traditional morality--deep down to the
primitive passions, the fire of the clay we're all made of. You saw love and hate, forces which
are older than all religions and all laws, older than man and woman, and which make men and
women what they are. And they seemed to you not commonplaces, which they are--but something
worse. You don't know that these facts are the stuff of art, because they are the stuff of
nature; that it takes multitudes of such facts, not just one or two picked out because of their
'moral beauty'--for you purists believe in the beauty of morality as well as in the immorality
of beauty--to make up a faithful picture of life. And you shuddered, didn't you? as you laid
down the book you sat up half the night to read, and you said it was ugly, revolting; you couldn't
see any perfect characters in it--only character in the making, only wretched men and women
acting according to certain disagreeable laws, which are none the less immutable because one
half of the world professes to ignore their existence. You said, 'Take away the whole world
of nature, take away logic and science and art, but leave me--leave me my ideals!' Isn't that it?"

The torrent of his rhetoric swept her away, she knew not whither. But in his last words she
had caught her cue. If she was ever to be an influence in Wyndham's life, encouraging, inspiring
his best work, she must not suffer him to speak lightly of "ideals." It seemed to her that
her methods with Ted were crude compared with her management of Wyndham.

"Oh, don't, don't! It's dreadful! But you are right. I can't live without ideals. All the great
artists had them. You have them yourself, or at least you had them. I don't know what to think
about your book--I can't think, I can only feel; and I read between the lines. Surely you feel
with me that there's nothing worth living for except morality? Surely you believe in purity
and goodness?"

Her face was flushed, her hands were clasped tightly together in her intensity. So strong was
the illusion her manner produced, that for one second Wyndham could have been convinced of
her absolute sincerity. Not long--no, not long afterwards, her words were to come back to him
with irony.

"Morality? I've the greatest respect for it. But after all, its rules only mark off one little
corner from the plain of life. Out there, in the open, are the fine landscapes and the great
highroads of thought. And if you are to travel at all, you must go by those ways. There's dust
on them, and there's mud--plenty of mud; but--there are no others."

"I would be very careful where I put my feet, though. I don't like muddy boots."

"I daresay not; who does? But the traveller is not always thinking about his boots."

"Don't let's talk about boots." She made a little movement with her mouth, simulating disgust.

"Your own metaphor; but never mind. A propos des bottes, I should like----" he broke off and
added in a deep, hieratic voice, "To the pure all things are pure, but to the Puritan most
things are impure. I wish I could make you see that; but it's a large subject. And besides,
I want to talk about you."

"Me?"

"Yes, you. With all your beliefs, there was a time, if I'm not much mistaken, when you were
pleased to doubt the existence of your charming self?"

She looked up with a smile of pleasure and of perfect comprehension. He could hardly have said
anything more delicately caressing to her self-love. It seemed, then, that every word she had
uttered in his hearing had been weighed and treasured up. She could hardly be supposed to know
that this power of noticing and preserving such little personal details was one of the functions
of the literary organism. If a woman like Miss Fraser had been flattered by it, what must have
been its effect on the susceptible Audrey?

"So you remember that too?" she said, softly.

"Yes; it impressed me at the time. Now I know you better I don't wonder at it. It's the fault
of your very lovely and feminine idealism, but you seem to me to have hardly any hold on the
fact of existence, to be unable to realise it. If I could only give you the sense of life--make
you feel the movement, the passion, the drama of it! My books have a little of that; they've
got the right atmosphere, the smell of life. But never mind my books. I don't want you to have
another literary craze--I beg your pardon, I mean phase; you seem to have had an artistic one
lately."

He rose to go.

"I've always cared for the great things of life," said she.

"Ah yes--the great things, stamped with other people's approval. I want you to love life itself,
so that you may be yourself, and feel yourself being."

Her whole nature responded as the strings of the violin to the bow of the master. "Life" was
one of those words which specially stirred her sensibility. As Wyndham had foreseen, it was
a word to conjure with; and now, as he had willed, the idea of it possessed her. She repeated
mechanically--

"Life--to love life for itself----"

"And first--you must know life in order to love it."

She sighed slightly, as if she had taken in a little more breath to say good-bye. The ideal
was flown. She had received the stamp of Wyndham's spirit, as if it had been iron upon wax.
It was her way of being herself and feeling herself being.

The same evening she wrote a little note to Ted that ran thus:--

    "DEAREST TED,--I have been thinking it all over, ever since
    yesterday, and I am convinced that my only right course is to break
    off our engagement. It has all been a mistake--mine and yours. Why
    should we not recognise it, instead of each persisting in making the
    other miserable? I release you from your promise to me, and will
    always remain very affectionately yours,         AUDREY CRAVEN."

She had just sent the note to the post, when a servant came in with a telegram. It was from
Hardy, announcing his arrival at Queenstown. And she had trusted to her engagement to Ted for
protection against Vincent's claim.

If she had only waited!

CHAPTER XV

"Great strength and safety with heaviest charges." "Absolute immunity from all risk of blowing
open." "The combination of a perfect trigger action with a perfect cocking action." Ted Haviland
was standing outside the window of a gunsmith's shop in the King's Road, Chelsea, reading the
enticing legends in which Mr. Webley sets forth the superiority of his wares above those of
all other makers. It was the second day after he had got Audrey's letter. In his least hopeful
moods he had never expected that blow; and when it fell, as a bolt from the blue, he was stunned
and could not realise that he was struck. He imagined all kinds of explanations to account
for Audrey's conduct. It was a misunderstanding, a sudden freak; there was some mystery waiting
to be solved; some one--his cousin Nettie probably--had spread some story about him which had
reached Audrey. The scandal already spread in the family would have been enough; she could
hardly have identified its loudly dressed heroine as herself. It only remained for him to clear
his character. Anything, anything rather than believe in what all healthy youth revolts against--the
irrevocable, the end.

He had tried three times to see Audrey, and she was "not at home"; though the third time he
had seen her go into the house not two minutes before. That instant he had turned away with
a stinging mist in his eyes and the blood surging in his brain. His thoughts now leaped to
the end as blindly as they had shrunk from it before. He had no definite idea of shooting himself
when he turned into the King's Road--his one object was to go in any direction rather than
home; but the shop window, with its stacks of rifles and cards displaying "Mark I." revolvers,
arranged on them like the spokes of a wheel, caught his attention. He was possessed with the
desire to have a revolver of his own, no matter for what purpose.

He had just chosen a "Mark I.," and was going into the shop to buy it, when he heard his name
called in a loud hearty voice, "Ted, you bounder! stop!" and his arm was pulled with a grip
that drew him backward from the doorstep.

"Hardy!"

He knew the voice, but it was hard to recognise the man. A thick black beard, a face that might
have been tanned with bark, trousers tucked into high boots, and tightened with a belt like
a horse-girth, an old Norfolk jacket stained with travel and the chase, a canvas shirt laced
with a red cord and tassels, and a plate-like hat of grey felt flapping about his ears, made
Hardy look something like a cowboy or a bandit. So singular was the apparition that had plucked
Ted back from the abyss, that the Furies and the infernal phantoms vanished into smoke before
it. It brought with it a breath of Atlantic seas and of winds from the far West.

"You young rascal! so it's you, is it? I didn't know you from Satan, till I saw you turn round
after flattening your nose against what's-his-name's plate-glass. I wish I were in your shoes."

"Do you?" said Ted, with a grimace. "H'm. Why?"

"Because your whole expression suggests--partridges!"

"Does it? As it happens, I was thinking about a revolver."

"Potting burglars, eh? About all the sport you poor devils of Cockneys will get on the First."

"Look here, Hardy, this is uncanny. Where did you spring from?"

"Straight from Euston this afternoon, from Queenstown yesterday morning, before that from the
other side of the Rockies."

"That accounts for your amazing get-up."

"Yes; and, by Jove! after a year in a log-hut on the wrong side of a precipice, you're glad
to get your feet on London pavement, and smell London smells again. And look there, Ted! There
isn't a lovelier sight on God's earth than a well-dressed Englishwoman. Where are we going?
How about that revolver?"

Ted had forgotten all about it. Hardy's sane, open-air spirits had infected him so far that
he had let himself be dragged at a rapid pace up the King's Road, where their progress attracted
considerable attention. As Hardy strode on, with his long swinging legs, he appeared to be
scattering the crowd before him.

"Never mind the thing now; it'll keep. How that girl stares! Does she take us for banditti?"

"Not you, you puppy, in that coat and topper. No mistaking you for anything but what you are--the
sickly product of an effete civilisation. Don't be frightened, you haven't gone off in the
least; you're a little pale, but prettier than you were, if anything."

"I say you ought to be in the bosom of your family."

"I haven't got a family."

"Well, what brings you here of all places in the world?"

"My cousin Audrey Craven."

There was no reserve about Hardy. At the name, so unexpectedly spoken, the under-world opened
again for Ted, with all its Furies. They walked on for some minutes in silence, then Hardy
began again--

"I called to see her. Of course she was out. Hard lines, wasn't it?"

Ted forced himself to speak. "Oh yes, beastly hard."

"You must have met her lately. How is she looking?"

"Oh, remarkably cheerful, when I last saw her."

"When was that?" Hardy asked, a little anxiously.

"The day before yesterday."

"Ah! She'd got my telegram then."

Ted bit his lip. They were too much absorbed, he in his misery and Hardy in his joy, for either
to be conscious of the other's feeling.

"Old boy," said Hardy, as they turned out of the King's Road, "what have you got to do?"

"Nothing."

"Then come and help me to hunt up some diggings. How about Devon Street?"

"I don't know; but I suppose we can look," said Ted, dismally. Hardy's spirits were beginning
to pall on him.

"I may as well go and look up Katherine, while I'm about it. Dear old Sis, I suppose she'll
be out too."

"Not she--she's too busy for that."

"Not too busy to see her old playfellow, you bet your boots."

He was so glad to see everybody again that he was sure everybody must be glad to see him. In
his rapture at being in London, the place he loathed and execrated a year ago, he could have
embraced the stranger in the street. Those miles of pavement, those towering walls that seemed
to make streets of the sky as he looked up, all that world of brick and mortar was Audrey's
world, the ground for her feet, the scene of all her doings. The women that went by wore the
fashions she would be wearing now. At any moment she herself might turn out of some shop-door,
round some corner. A faint hope that he might find her with Katherine had led him to Devon Street.

But Ted's, not Audrey's, were the first hands that touched his; and it was not Audrey, but
his "little half-sister," that gave Hardy his first welcome home.

"Well, Sis?"

"Vincent! is it you?"

There was nothing in the words but the glad courtesy of the woman who had been his playfellow
in the days when he was a boy and she a tomboy, but they went to Hardy's heart and dried up
his speech. They were the first kind words he had heard since he left England.

Katherine put away her work and made him sit in the one comfortable chair the studio afforded;
Mrs. Rogers was sent for cakes and cream at a moment's notice; and the resources of the tiny
household were taxed to their utmost to do honour to the returned emigrant. Even Ted forgot
his gloom for the time being, and took his part in these hospitable rites. Then came the question
of Hardy's lodgings. Mrs. Rogers was consulted, and, being unable to name any landlady of greater
respectability than herself, and her ground-floor happening to be to let--the rarest thing
in the world for her--she suggested that "the gentleman should try it for a week or two, till
'e could suit 'isself elsewhere. But, though I sy it as shouldn't, when a gentleman comes to
me, sir, 'e wants to sty. My larst gentleman, 'e'd a styd with me till 'e was took awy in 'is
coffin if I'd a kep' 'im; but Lor' bless you, my dear, 'e was that pertic'ler I couldn't do
with 'is fads, not at fancy prices, I couldn't. I 'ad to tell 'im to gow, for Mussy's syke,
where 'e'd git 'is own French cook, and 'is own butler to black 'is 'arf-doz'n pyre o' boots
all at once for 'im." This was the recognised fiction by which Mrs. Rogers accounted for the
departure of any of her lodgers. Lest it should seem to speak badly for her willingness and
for the quality of the attendance at No. 12, she invariably added, "Not but wot I'd work my
'ead orf to please any gentleman that is a gentleman; and when you've eaten one of my dinners,
sir, you won't want nobody else to cook and do for you no more." And though Ted had pointed
out to her the sinister ambiguity of this formula, she had never invented any other.

The ground-floor was seen; and after Mrs. Rogers, on her part, had stipulated for cold lunches
three days in the week, and not more than one bath in the one day; and after Katherine, on
Hardy's part, had suggested sundry innovations, involving the condemnation of all the pictures
and ornaments she could lay her hands on,--a piece of sacrilege which Mrs. Rogers regarded
more in sorrow than in anger, as indicating a pitiable aberration of intellect,--the rooms
were taken from that date.

Was it Chance, or Necessity, or Providence, that caused Ted and Hardy to meet at the parting
of the ways?--that waked Ted from the dream of self-destruction, and lodged Hardy under the
same roof with Katherine Haviland?

His arrangements completed, Hardy hurried off again to Chelsea. Audrey, he thought, had expected
him by a later train, and would be back by six o'clock, waiting for him. This time the footman
met him with a little note from his mistress. Audrey had never dreamed that Vincent could get
up to town so quickly. She was so sorry she had missed him; especially as she had had to go
to bed with a feverish cold and a splitting headache. She would be delighted to see him if
he could call to-morrow afternoon, between three and four. And she was always very affectionately
his.

He was bitterly disappointed, but his disappointment was nothing to his trouble about Audrey's
illness. Feverish colds contracted in August often prove fatal. But he was not utterly cast
down. There was still to-morrow.

He went back to Devon Street slowly, for he felt tired, out of all proportion to his muscular
exertions that day. During the evening, which he spent in the Havilands' studio, his depression
gave way before the prospect of seeing Audrey to-morrow. He looked at Katherine's pictures,
gave her a great deal of advice, and expressed the utmost astonishment at the progress she
had made. He considered "The Witch of Atlas" particularly fine.

"It was painted four years ago, and as a matter of fact I haven't made a bit of progress since.
But never mind, you're quite right. It isn't half bad."

She bent over her picture lovingly, brushed away the dust from the canvas, and turned it resolutely
with its face to the wall. She had not looked at it since the day of renunciation. Her work
led Hardy on to talk of his, and he grew eloquent about the book, "Sport West of the Rockies,"
which, as he had once told Audrey, was "to make posterity sit up." He had the manuscript downstairs
in his bag. Some day he would read them a chapter or two; it would give them some idea of wild
virgin Nature, of what a sportsman's life really was--the best life, perhaps, take it all round,
to be lived on this earth; it was to be the Pioneer-book of its subject. Hardy was always at
his ease with Ted and Katherine. Self-restraint was superfluous in their company; they knew
him too well, and liked him in spite of their knowledge. They were used to his tempestuous
bursts of narrative, and would laugh frankly in his face, while he joined in the laugh with
the greatest enjoyment. With him ornamental story-telling was an amusing game, in which, if
you were clever enough to catch him lying, you had won and he had lost, that was all.

To-night he lay back in his chair and expanded gloriously. He told tales of perilous adventure
by flood and field, by mountain and forest; of the wild chase of moose and wapiti among the
snows of the Rockies; of the fierce delight of single-handed combat with grizzly bears, the
deadliest of their kind; of how he, Hardy, had been rolled down a cañon, locked in the embrace
of a furry fiend that he had stabbed in the throat one second before the fatal hug. He told
of the melting of the snows in forest rivers; of the flood that swept away the lonely traveller's
encampment, and bore him, astride on a log of driftwood, five miles amid wrack and boulders
on its whirling current; of deliverance through a pious Indian and his canoe, which he entered
as by a miracle in mid-stream, and without upsetting any of the three. He told of long wanderings
in the twilight solitudes of Canadian forests; of dangers from wolves and the wild coyotes,
half-dog, half-wolf, heard nightly howling round the Indian camp-fires; and from the intangible
malice of the skunk, a beautiful but dreadful power, to be propitiated with bated breath and
muffled footstep. He told, too, of the chip-munks, with their sharp twittering bark; and he
contrived to invest even these tiny creatures with an atmosphere of terror--for it is well
known that their temper is atrocious, and that a colony of them will set upon the unfortunate
traveller who happens to offend one, and leave nothing of him but his bones and the indigestible
portions of his clothing. And over all he cast the glamour of his fancy, as if it had been
the red light of the prairie sunsets; in it he appeared transfigured, a half-mythical personage,
heroic, if not indeed divine. The whole of it had appeared word for word in the pages of the
Pioneer-book.

"Ah, Sis," he observed complacently at the end of it, "that's all copy for 'Sport West of the
Rockies.' When that comes out you'll soon see me at the top of the tree. Why aren't you an
artist in words? Why don't you use the pen instead of the brush?"

He implied that if her ambition had been literary he would have raised her to a position just
below him, on the highest pinnacle of earthly fame. Then he passed, by a gentle transition,
to another subject.

"By-the-bye, have you two seen much of my cousin Audrey?"

This second utterance of the name was too much for Ted's overstrained nerves. He got up, stifled
a yawn, and held out his hand to Hardy.

"I say, do you mind if I go to bed now? I can't for the life of me keep awake."

"Good-night, old fellow; I'm afraid I've sent you to sleep with my yarns."

"Not a bit. We'll have some more to-morrow."

To-morrow?

"What's the matter with the boy, Kathy? He looks seedy."

"Oh, nothing. He's not over-strong, perhaps, but he's all right."

"What's he doing with himself here?"

"Painting. Oh, Vincent, I should like you to see some of his things, now he's gone!"

All her pride in her brother was roused, perhaps by Vincent's boasting. She lifted the white
linen cloth that covered one of Ted's easels, and revealed the portrait of Audrey. She had
not guessed the truth; if she had, she would not have looked at Vincent just then. The effect
she had produced was unmistakable. The blood rose to his face in a wave that died suddenly
away, leaving a yellowish pallor under its sunburn.

"How beautiful!" he said softly, more to himself than Katherine.

He gazed at the portrait as if his eyes would never be satisfied with seeing. The pathos in
his face gave it a sort of spirituality; and Katherine noticed his hand trembling as he helped
her to cover the picture again.

"It's like her--as only genius could make it."

Only genius? Did he think that only genius had wrought that work of transfiguration, in which
Katherine found it hard to see any likeness to the woman as she knew her now? She had read
the secret of Vincent's hope. Ought she to let him believe a lie? Did not she, Ted's sister,
of all people owe him the truth? No. Vincent's eyes looked as if they wanted sleep before everything.
Sufficient unto the night is the evil thereof. And perhaps, after all, she had been mistaken.
Hardy held out his hand, said a short good-night, and was gone before she could say more.

There flashed back on her the memory of Audrey's first visit to her. She recalled her little
self-conscious air of possession in speaking of her cousin. She was morally certain that Audrey
had treated Vincent as she had treated Ted.

"Beware of the woman who kisses you on both cheeks; it's too much for friendship, and too little
for love!"

Hardy went out of doors, turned on to the Embankment, and so on to Chelsea, for the third time
that day. He wanted to assure himself of Audrey's nearness by one more sight of the brown brick
shrine that held her. The house stood as he had seen it once before, asleep in the yellow gaslight,
shut in from the road by the trees, screened from the lamps on the Embankment by the storm-shutters
folded over its windows, guarding its secrets well, all but two windows on the second floor,
which were open to the night. That was Audrey's room, he knew. Little fool! Ill with a feverish
cold, and sleeping with open windows! For about half an hour he walked up and down on the Embankment
opposite, like a sentry on duty, his long shadow blackening and fading as he passed from light
to light.

When he got back to his rooms, he felt a sensation that had sometimes come upon him after a
long day's hunting, a feeling of deadly fatigue and stifling emptiness, as if the rest of his
body were drained of the blood that choked his heart. He opened his travelling-bag, took out
a large silver flask, looked at it, sighed, shuddered slightly, poured about two tablespoonfuls
of brandy down his throat; and then, with a gesture of indescribable disgust, emptied the remainder
out of the window into the yard below. He undressed and got into bed quickly, turned over on
his right side for greater ease, and was soon asleep and dreaming of to-morrow.

CHAPTER XVI

There was no sleep for Ted that night. Towards morning he fell into a doze, broken by unpleasant
dreams, and woke with a confused consciousness of trouble. It had been connected in his dreams
with Hardy's return, and, once awake, the knowledge that he was in the same house with him
was insupportable. Not that he had yet guessed how Vincent stood to Audrey; he had simply a
nervous dread of hearing him talk about her. The casual utterance of her name went through
him like a sword, and in his present mood Vincent's boisterous spirit disturbed and irritated
him. More to get away from him than with any definite idea of work, he spent his morning at
the National Gallery, touching up the copy of the Botticelli Madonna which Katherine had begun
long ago for Audrey. He had set to work almost mechanically, with a sense that whatever he
did at the present moment was only provisional,--only a staving off of the intolerable future;
but soon the technical difficulties of his task absorbed him, and he became interested in spite
of himself. He was so passive to the spiritual influences of line and colour, that perhaps
the beauty of the grey-eyed girl Madonna may have given him something of its own tranquillity.

Unfortunately the good effects of his morning's industry were undone when he got home, by finding
Hardy alone in the studio, sitting before Audrey's portrait. He had dragged the easel to the
light, and had been studying the canvas for some minutes before Ted came in. The boy stifled
an angry exclamation.

"Ted," said Hardy, "what do you want for this picture?"

"I don't want anything for it."

"Nonsense! Every good picture has its price."

"This one hasn't, anyway."

"Look here, and don't be a young fool. This is the best thing you've done in your life or ever
will do. I'm in rather low water at present, but wait till I've heard from my British Columbian
agent, or, better still, wait till the Pioneer-book comes out, and I'll give you a hundred
for it, honour bright, if you'll let me have it at once."

"I can't let you have it at once, and I won't let you have it at all."

"The deuce you won't! Come, fix your own price."

"I'm not a swindling dealer, and I'm not a liar, though you mightn't think it. I told you I
wasn't going to let you have it at any price."

"H'm. Do you mind telling me one thing? Are you going to sell it to any one else?"

"I'm not going to sell it to any one. I'm going to keep it myself."

They looked at each other with steady eyes, each understanding and each defying the other's
thought. Hardy's face was the first to soften. He put his hand on Ted's shoulders. "All right,
old boy. We've hit each other hard this time. The least we can do is to hold our tongues about
it." And he left him.

Hardy spoke with the magnanimity of imperfect comprehension. He had been defeated in his purpose
of buying Audrey's portrait; but however great his discomfiture, he, being the successful lover,
could afford a little pity for Ted as the victim of a hopeless passion. To Ted, on the other
hand, the revelation of Hardy's feelings threw light on Audrey's conduct. It accounted for
everything that was most inexplicable in it. It must have been the news of Hardy's return that
made her break off her engagement so suddenly. His instinct told him that she had probably
given her word to her cousin before he left England; jealousy suggested that she had cared
for him all the time. He tried to reason it out, but stopped short of the obvious conclusion
that, if these things were altogether as he supposed, her engagement to himself must have been
merely an amusement hit upon by Audrey to fill up a dull interval. He preferred to regard it
as a mystery. And now all reasoning gave way before the desire to see her again, and know the
truth from herself once for all.

To Audrey, as the fountain of truth, he accordingly went, choosing a time between half-past
two and three when she was most likely to be in. As he reached her door, it was being held
open for her to go out, and she was standing in the outer hall buttoning her gloves. She drew
back when she saw Ted, but escape was impossible. He saw the movement and the flash of her
little white teeth as she bit her lip with annoyance.

She came forward smiling.

"Oh, is it you, Ted? As you see, I'm just going out."

"You will see me before you go?"

"I can't possibly. I've got to go and call on an uncle and aunt at the Hôtel Metropole."

"I'm very sorry. But I won't keep you more than ten minutes."

"I can't spare ten minutes. I'm late as it is, and I have to be back by half-past three. I've
got an appointment."

"You've not time to get there and back. You'd better put it off."

"I can't, Ted. They're only up from Friday till Monday. Dean Craven has to preach at the Abbey
to-morrow. Come again."

"I can't come again."

"Well, then----" she hesitated. "You may walk part of the way with me."

He went with her down the short flagged path that led to the gate. Once out of the servant's
hearing, he stopped, and looked firmly in her face.

"I must see you now, and it had better be in the house. I've only one question to ask you.
Five minutes will be enough for that--at least it won't be my fault if it isn't."

She had laid her hand on the gate, which Ted held shut, and her mouth was obstinately set.
Something in his voice conquered her self-will. She turned and led the way to the house.

"You had better come into the morning-room."

He followed her; she closed the door, and they stood facing each other a moment without speaking.

"Well, Ted?" Her voice went to his heart with its piercing sweetness.

"Audrey, why did you write that letter?"

"Because it was easier to write what I did than to say it. Do you want to hold me to my word?"

"No. I want to know your reasons for breaking it. You haven't given me any yet."

"I did, Ted. I told you it had all been a mistake--yours and mine."

"Speak for yourself. Where was my mistake?"

"The mistake was in our ever getting engaged at all--in our thinking that we cared for each other."

"I cared enough for you, didn't I?"

"No, you didn't. You only thought you did. Katherine told me----"

"What did Katherine tell you?"

"That you hadn't any feelings, that you really cared for nothing but your painting, that you'd
only a ru--rudimentary heart."

"Really? That is interesting. When did she tell you that?"

"The very day we were engaged."

"And you believed her?"

"Not then. I did afterwards."

"How long afterwards--the other day?"

"Ye-yes; I think so."

"I see--when you wanted to believe it. Not before."

She was trembling, but she gathered together all her feeble forces for the defence.

"No, no; don't you remember? At the very first--the day of our engagement--we were both so
miserable at the idea of your going away--we did it all so recklessly--before either of us
thought. You see, Ted, you were so very young."

"It's a pity that didn't strike you before."

"It did, it did; but I wouldn't think of it. I blinded myself. The fact is, we were both as
mad as hatters. You know people can't get married in that state. We should have had to wait
for a--a lucid interval."

Ted recognised the miserable pleasantry; it was what he had said to her himself a day or two
after their engagement. The phrase had amused Audrey at the time and lodged in her memory.
She borrowed it now in her hour of need, and laughed, unconscious of her plagiarism.

"I understand perfectly. You want to get rid of me as a proof of your own sanity. Is that it?"

She looked up in the utmost surprise. "Not to get rid of you, Ted, of course not. I shall still
keep you as my best friend."

"Thanks. You had better not try to do that. I'm told I've no talent for friendship."

"Then I suppose, after this, you'd rather I cut you, if we meet?"

"You can please yourself about that."

"You may be sure I shall. Oh, Ted, I didn't expect that from you! But it's quite right. Hit
hard, I can't defend myself."

"Please don't attempt it, there's no occasion to. Only tell me one thing."

"Well?" She sat down as if wearied with this unnecessary trifling.

He paused.

"It's evident that you don't care about me. Do you care for any one else?"

"You've no right to ask me that."

"Haven't I? I thought I had; and, if you'll only think a minute, you'll agree with me."

She put her head on one side as if gravely considering the question.

"No. You've no right to ask me that."

"Let me put it differently--since your feelings are sacred, you needn't tell me anything about
them. Were you engaged to Hardy before you knew me?"

"That question is even more impertinent than the last."

"I beg your pardon then. Don't answer it, if you don't like to."

He turned away.

"Don't go yet, Ted. I haven't done. Listen. I was thoughtless, I was mistaken" (Audrey was
anxious to escape the imputation of a big fault by the graceful confession of a little one),
"but I'm not as bad as you think me. You think I cared for Vincent. I didn't. I never cared
a straw about him--never. You were the first."

"Was I? Not the last though, it seems."

"Perhaps not. But I deceived myself before I deceived you."

"Well, you took me in completely, if it's any satisfaction to you. Never mind, Audrey; you've
done your best to remedy that now."

He had turned, and his hand was on the door to go, when he heard her calling him back softly.

"Ted----" She had followed him to the door, he felt the touch of her little gloved hand on
his coat-sleeve; under the black meshes of her veil he saw her eyes shining with tears that
could not fall. He hesitated.

"Forgive me," she whispered.

"Not till you have answered my question."

"Which question, Ted?"

"The impertinent one."

"About Vincent?"

"Yes."

Her eyes had been fixed on the ground, now they glanced up quickly.

"Did Vincent tell you I was engaged to him?"

"No."

Her eyelids drooped again; then, urged to desperation by her own cowardice, she raised them
and looked in his face to answer. And as she looked, she saw for the first time how changed
it was. Its bloom was gone, the lines were set and hard: Ted looked years older than his age.

"Don't believe him if he ever says so. I am not engaged to him, and I never was."

"Thanks. That was all I wanted to know."

He turned on his heel and left her. He knew that she had lied.

He left her in a state of vague consternation. She had been prepared for an outburst of feeling
on Ted's part, in which case she would have remained mistress of the field without loss of
dignity. As it had happened, the victory was certainly not with her. This was contrary to all
her expectations. She had looked for protestations, emotions--in short, a scene; but not for
cold, dispassionate cross-examination. It was so unlike Ted--Ted, who was always giving himself
away; it was more the sort of thing she could have fancied Wyndham saying under the same circumstances.
She had seen something of this impersonal manner once or twice before, in those rare moments
when they had discussed some picture, or Ted had talked to her about his work or Katherine's.
It had annoyed her then; she thought it showed a want of enthusiasm. Now the boy's heartless
self-possession amazed and overpowered her. Audrey was incapable of imagining what she had
not seen, and she had never got to the bottom of the Haviland character; never divined its
gravity under the mask of frivolity; never proved its will, nor reckoned with its pride. Three
days ago she would have laughed at the idea of referring any moral question to Ted's judgment,
for she had taken no pains to hide her faults from him; she had been selfish, reckless, vain,
capricious, by turns and altogether, and it had made no difference then. Now she felt that
he had condemned her. To be sure, she had told him a lie; but what was that in the catalogue
of her offences?

It was everything. He could have forgiven anything but that.

CHAPTER XVII

But Ted's notion of morality was a question Audrey had no time to go into. A violent ring at
the front-door bell recalled her to herself, and made her glance at the clock. It was a quarter-past
three. She had wasted half an hour in fruitless discussion with Ted, and it left her ill-prepared
for the stormy interview to follow. Her nerve gave way before the prospect of that hour with
Hardy. She might have escaped it if it had not been for Ted, for she had meant to call early
on her uncle and aunt, and bring them back with her to Chelsea, so that it would be impossible
for Vincent to see her alone. Ted's coming had made that scheme useless. She listened. Yes,
it was Vincent; she had heard his voice in the hall.

"I told him between three and four. Anybody else would have known that meant half-past four."

She spent ten minutes after Hardy was announced gathering herself together to meet him. She
would have thought of sending for Miss Craven, an old device of hers when she wanted to avoid
explanations; but Miss Craven was away. Her only hope was in some casual caller.

Meanwhile Hardy was striding up and down the drawing-room, waiting impatiently for Audrey.
He was a little hurt at being shown into an empty room; he had expected to find the small thing
sitting there to welcome him. That ten minutes was the longest he had ever spent,--it was the
meeting-point in time for two eternities. As his thought leaped forward to the future it was
thrown back upon the past. Then, as he gazed about him half mechanically, he was aware that
his eyes were looking for the things they had been used to, and could not find them. Everything
was changed in that room he had run in and out of as a boy. The familiar furniture, the signs
and tokens of Audrey's daily presence, the old-fashioned knick-knacks which had delighted her
mother's heart, all were gone. His aunt's portrait was no longer there; in its place hung the
photogravure of the Madonna di San Sisto. Instead of the cosy corner where he had lain at Audrey's
feet his last night in England, there stood a polished rosewood secretary, thrown open, showing
its empty pigeon-holes. Everywhere he looked it was the same; there were new things all around
him. If he could have read their secret he would have seen that that room was the picture of
Audrey's soul; the persons who had by turns taken possession of it had left there each one
the traces of his power. If you could have cut a vertical section through Audrey's soul, you
would have found it built up in successive layers of soul. When you had dug through Wyndham,
you came to Ted; when you had got through Ted, you came upon Hardy, the oldest formation of
all. The room was instructive as a museum filled with the records of these changes. But the
specimens were badly arranged, recent deposits lying side by side with relics of an earlier
period: thus the floor was covered with the bearskin given by Hardy and the Persian rugs laid
down during the Art age. The rosewood secretary and a little revolving book-case by Audrey's
chair marked the change wrought by Wyndham. They were part of modern history and the memory
of man. Hardy, in the midst of these curiosities of natural science, was like a lay visitor
without a guide: he admired, he wondered, he recognised an object here and there, but of what
it all meant he had not the ghost of an idea.

He left off wondering, and waited, listening for the feet that used to fall so lightly on the
stairs.

At last the door opened softly, and Audrey stood before him. But she stood still, looking at
him as if uncertain whether to go or stay.

"Audrey!" His face lit up with joy, his heart bounded.

"How do you do, Vincent?"

He held out his arms, and she came to him slowly, without a word. She let him hold her for
an instant, closing her eyes to hide the fear in them; let him lift her veil and kiss her cheeks
and mouth. Then she turned her face away, put out her hands against his chest, and pushed him
from her.

"Audrey! What have I done?"

"Oh! I don't know, I don't know!"

She walked away to the looking-glass over the chimneypiece, and took off her gloves and veil.
She wanted to gain time. Hardy followed her to the opposite side of the fireplace.

"Whatever possessed you, Vincent, to grow that horrid beard?"

He had forgotten the change in his personal appearance. He looked in the glass and was startled
by his own reflection. Owing to the agony of the shock she had given him, his face was still
grey and drawn. The poor fellow tried to smile, and that made matters worse.

"I daresay it was a nasty shock. Did it make you feel as if I was somebody else?"

"Oh no; it has not altered you much. It's not that. But--I hate beards, as you know."

There was silence. Hardy was struggling with the old stifling sensation in his heart. Emotion
was bad for him.

"Is this all you've got to say to me, after being a year away?"

She looked at him, shook her head, and played with the ornaments on the mantel-board.

"Why can't you speak to me? Has anything happened? Is anybody dead?"

"No; but I wish I was."

"Why do you say that?"

"Because----" She was trying to wring the neck off a little china image now. "Oh, Vincent,
don't think me very unkind! but I--I'd rather, another time, you didn't show your cousinly
affection quite in that way. That's all."

He covered his eyes with one hand to shut out the sight of Audrey.

"No, that's not all, I see. There's something else behind that,--there must be. Has anything
happened?"

She bowed her head and sighed, a long shivering sigh. The china image slipped through her fingers,
and was broken to bits on the hearthstone.

"Audrey--what is it?"

He took her by the wrists and drew her gently to him. As he touched her he saw her face whiten
and her eyes dilate.

"Do you remember last year when you said you loved me?--when you promised to be my wife? Do
you remember how you said good-bye to me then? Now you won't speak to me. What have you been
doing to make you hate me? Or what stupid idea have you got into your head about me?"

"Nothing--nothing. Only--I want you to understand that what you said just now is out of the
question. It can't be."

"Why not? You promised; so it could be once, why not now?"

"Because--because--I never really promised, you know."

"You never promised! You little liar! You may want to break your promise, but you can hardly
say you didn't make it."

"I never made it--not of my own free will. You took advantage of me; you forced me into it.
You teased me till I said I cared for you, and--I didn't."

"So, then, you told me a lie? You wrote lie after lie to me in your letters for a year?"

She writhed away from him, but he still held her by the wrists, face to face with him, the
length of their arms apart.

"Let me go, Vincent! You've no right to hold me in this way. You're hurting my arm!"

Unconsciously his grasp had tightened till the diamond mounted on one of her thread-like bracelets
was pressed into her flesh and made it bleed.

"See there!"

He let her go. She sat down and put her pocket-handkerchief to her wrist.

"If you tell lies, Audrey, what am I to believe? What you said then, or what you say now?"

"I'm telling the truth now, because I don't want this wretched misunderstanding to go any further."

"Can't you speak plainly? Do you mean this, that you don't love me?"

"Yes. It's true. I don't love you; I can't--at least, not like that."

"I can't believe it! It's impossible! As long as I can remember, whatever you said or did,
you made me think you loved me. You said last year you'd be my wife; but that's nothing. Long
before that, you let me live on the hope of it, year after year. It's inconceivable that you
could have done these things if you didn't care for me. Even you couldn't be such an unfeeling
little fiend."

"No, no; you worked on my feelings. You wouldn't let me have any will of my own. And now you
want me to marry you whether I like it or not. Whatever happens, I can't do that, Vincent."

"Why not?"

"Must I tell you?"

"Isn't that the very least you can do?"

"Well--you know, Vincent, you've been very wild; you've told me so yourself a thousand times."

"Is it that? You knew that long ago."

"I never realised it till now. Now I know that I can only really love some one strong and good,
whose goodness would help me and make me good too."

Audrey's infantile irony made Hardy laugh. That laugh frightened her.

"Do you think I don't know that?" he said. "What do you suppose I went out of England for?
It wasn't to shoot, or to farm either. It was to get away out of the reach of temptation, to
live in a pure air, and make myself pure for your sake. Do you know, Audrey, I was out there,
without a soul to speak to, a year, one horrible long year, fighting the devil, waiting till
I could come back and tell you that I was fit to love you. God knows I'm not all I ought to
be,--who is? At least, I'm not ashamed now to ask you to be my wife. Will you never forget
the past?"

She had hesitated before, but now Hardy's humility put her in the position of the superior,
and his piteous confession gave her the words she wanted.

"No. It's no use. Once for all, I do not love you; and if I did, I could not marry any man
who had led the life you have."

"Very well. Remember, Audrey, if I wasn't good enough for you, I was good enough as men go.
Now, I'll go to the devil, and give my whole mind to it. But I've a great deal to say to you
before I go. You object to my life. Good or bad, it's your own work. It's women like you who
make men like me. You knew my weakness, and played on it. You could have helped me, if you'd
only given me up honestly at first, as another woman would have done; but you didn't want to
do that. I'd have left England long before, if you'd let me go: you knew it, and you kept me
here, though you saw me going to the bad. Oh, you were an artist in your own line! You knew
the effect of every word, every touch, every movement of yours, and you went out of your way
to--to make goodness impossible for me. God knows why, but you liked--you liked to see me longing
for what you never meant to give me. And because I didn't come out of that ordeal quite clean,
you talk to me about my life, and tell me you are too good and pure to marry me. Are you really
so very much better than I am, after all?"

She sat still at first, with her eyes half closed, afraid to look up, afraid to move or speak,
waiting for something to happen, for some one to come and stop Vincent. But the scourging voice
went on with a relentless brutality, laying bare the secret places of her soul, its unconscious
hypocrisy, its vanity, its latent capacity for evil. She answered the closing question with
an inarticulate sound like a sob. It might have softened him, if he had not been deaf to everything
but his own passion.

"Don't suppose I flatter myself I'm the only victim. How about that young fool Ted Haviland?"

She sprang to her feet. Fear, that had made her lie to Ted, made her tell the truth to Hardy.
That fear was deep-rooted; it dated from the days when they were children and Vincent had the
mastery in all their play.

