'What I say,' said Trevor.  'The old man you saw to-day in the studio was Baron Hausberg. 
He is a great friend of mine, buys all my pictures and that sort of thing, and gave me a commission
a month ago to paint him as a beggar.  Que voulez-vous?  La fantaisie d'un millionnaire!  And
I must say he made a magnificent figure in his rags, or perhaps I should say in my rags; they
are an old suit I got in Spain.'

'Baron Hausberg!' cried Hughie.  'Good heavens!  I gave him a sovereign!' and he sank into
an armchair the picture of dismay.

'Gave him a sovereign!' shouted Trevor, and he burst into a roar of laughter.  'My dear boy,
you'll never see it again.  Son affaire c'est l'argent des autres.'

'I think you might have told me, Alan,' said Hughie sulkily, 'and not have let me make such
a fool of myself.'

'Well, to begin with, Hughie,' said Trevor, 'it never entered my mind that you went about distributing
alms in that reckless way.  I can understand your kissing a pretty model, but your giving a
sovereign to an ugly one--by Jove, no!  Besides, the fact is that I really was not at home
to-day to any one; and when you came in I didn't know whether Hausberg would like his name
mentioned.  You know he wasn't in full dress.'

'What a duffer he must think me!' said Hughie.

'Not at all.  He was in the highest spirits after you left; kept chuckling to himself and rubbing
his old wrinkled hands together.  I couldn't make out why he was so interested to know all
about you; but I see it all now.  He'll invest your sovereign for you, Hughie, pay you the
interest every six months, and have a capital story to tell after dinner.'

'I am an unlucky devil,' growled Hughie.  'The best thing I can do is to go to bed; and, my
dear Alan, you mustn't tell any one.  I shouldn't dare show my face in the Row.'

'Nonsense!  It reflects the highest credit on your philanthropic spirit, Hughie.  And don't
run away.  Have another cigarette, and you can talk about Laura as much as you like.'

However, Hughie wouldn't stop, but walked home, feeling very unhappy, and leaving Alan Trevor
in fits of laughter.

The next morning, as he was at breakfast, the servant brought him up a card on which was written,
'Monsieur Gustave Naudin, de la part de M. le Baron Hausberg.'  'I suppose he has come for
an apology,' said Hughie to himself; and he told the servant to show the visitor up.

An old gentleman with gold spectacles and grey hair came into the room, and said, in a slight
French accent, 'Have I the honour of addressing Monsieur Erskine?'

Hughie bowed.

'I have come from Baron Hausberg,' he continued.  'The Baron--'

'I beg, sir, that you will offer him my sincerest apologies,' stammered Hughie.

'The Baron,' said the old gentleman with a smile, 'has commissioned me to bring you this letter';
and he extended a sealed envelope.

On the outside was written, 'A wedding present to Hugh Erskine and Laura Merton, from an old
beggar,' and inside was a cheque for 10,000 pounds.

When they were married Alan Trevor was the best man, and the Baron made a speech at the wedding
breakfast.

'Millionaire models,' remarked Alan, 'are rare enough; but, by Jove, model millionaires are
rarer still!'

THE PORTRAIT OF MR. W. H.

CHAPTER I

I had been dining with Erskine in his pretty little house in Birdcage Walk, and we were sitting
in the library over our coffee and cigarettes, when the question of literary forgeries happened
to turn up in conversation.  I cannot at present remember how it was that we struck upon this
somewhat curious topic, as it was at that time, but I know that we had a long discussion about
Macpherson, Ireland, and Chatterton, and that with regard to the last I insisted that his so-called
forgeries were merely the result of an artistic desire for perfect representation; that we
had no right to quarrel with an artist for the conditions under which he chooses to present
his work; and that all Art being to a certain degree a mode of acting, an attempt to realise
one's own personality on some imaginative plane out of reach of the trammelling accidents and
limitations of real life, to censure an artist for a forgery was to confuse an ethical with
an aesthetical problem.

Erskine, who was a good deal older than I was, and had been listening to me with the amused
deference of a man of forty, suddenly put his hand upon my shoulder and said to me, 'What would
you say about a young man who had a strange theory about a certain work of art, believed in
his theory, and committed a forgery in order to prove it?'

'Ah! that is quite a different matter,' I answered.

Erskine remained silent for a few moments, looking at the thin grey threads of smoke that were
rising from his cigarette.  'Yes,' he said, after a pause, 'quite different.'

There was something in the tone of his voice, a slight touch of bitterness perhaps, that excited
my curiosity.  'Did you ever know anybody who did that?' I cried.

'Yes,' he answered, throwing his cigarette into the fire,--'a great friend of mine, Cyril Graham.
He was very fascinating, and very foolish, and very heartless.  However, he left me the only
legacy I ever received in my life.'

'What was that?' I exclaimed.  Erskine rose from his seat, and going over to a tall inlaid
cabinet that stood between the two windows, unlocked it, and came back to where I was sitting,
holding in his hand a small panel picture set in an old and somewhat tarnished Elizabethan frame.

It was a full-length portrait of a young man in late sixteenth- century costume, standing by
a table, with his right hand resting on an open book.  He seemed about seventeen years of age,
and was of quite extraordinary personal beauty, though evidently somewhat effeminate.  Indeed,
had it not been for the dress and the closely cropped hair, one would have said that the face
with its dreamy wistful eyes, and its delicate scarlet lips, was the face of a girl. In manner,
and especially in the treatment of the hands, the picture reminded one of Francois Clouet's
later work.  The black velvet doublet with its fantastically gilded points, and the peacock-blue
background against which it showed up so pleasantly, and from which it gained such luminous
value of colour, were quite in Clouet's style; and the two masks of Tragedy and Comedy that
hung somewhat formally from the marble pedestal had that hard severity of touch-- so different
from the facile grace of the Italians--which even at the Court of France the great Flemish
master never completely lost, and which in itself has always been a characteristic of the northern
temper.

'It is a charming thing,' I cried, 'but who is this wonderful young man, whose beauty Art has
so happily preserved for us?'

'This is the portrait of Mr. W. H.,' said Erskine, with a sad smile. It might have been a chance
effect of light, but it seemed to me that his eyes were quite bright with tears.

'Mr. W. H.!' I exclaimed; 'who was Mr. W. H.?'

'Don't you remember?' he answered; 'look at the book on which his hand is resting.'

'I see there is some writing there, but I cannot make it out,' I replied.

'Take this magnifying-glass and try,' said Erskine, with the same sad smile still playing about
his mouth.

I took the glass, and moving the lamp a little nearer, I began to spell out the crabbed sixteenth-century
handwriting.  'To the onlie begetter of these insuing sonnets.' . . . 'Good heavens!' I cried,
'is this Shakespeare's Mr. W. H.?'

'Cyril Graham used to say so,' muttered Erskine.

'But it is not a bit like Lord Pembroke,' I answered.  'I know the Penshurst portraits very
well.  I was staying near there a few weeks ago.'

'Do you really believe then that the sonnets are addressed to Lord Pembroke?' he asked.

