"Yes!" said Felix with a sob. He had not yet seen her since coming to this fateful knowledge;
for Phebe and Hilda had joined her at the sea-side where they were still staying. But if his
father had gone down into depths of darkness, his mother had risen so much the higher in his
reverence and love. She had become a saint and a martyr in his eyes; and to save her from a
moment's grief seemed to be a cause worth dying for.

"I came to tell you all," he went on, "and to say I cannot any more hope that you will give
Alice to me. God alone knows what it costs me to give her up: and she will suffer too for a
while, a long while, I fear; for we have grown together so. But it must be. Alice cannot marry
a man who has not even an unblemished name to offer to her."

"You should ask Alice herself about that," said Canon Pascal quietly.

A thrill of rapture ran through Felix, and he grasped the shoulder, on which his hand still
rested, more firmly. What! was it possible that this second father of his knew all his disgrace
and dishonor, how his teeth were set on edge by the sour grapes which he had not eaten, and
yet was willing that Alice should share his name and his lot? There was no fear as to what
Alice would say. He recollected how Phebe spoke, as if her thoughts dwelt more on his father's
sorrow and sad death, than on his sin; and Alice would be the same. She would cover it with
a woman's sweet charity. He could not command his voice to speak; and after a minute's pause
Canon Pascal continued--

"Yes! Alice, too, knows all about it. I told her beside your father's grave. And do you suppose
she said, 'Here is cause enough for me to break with Felix'? Nay, I believe if the sin had
been your own, Alice would have said it was her duty to share it, and your repentance. Shall
our Lord come to save sinners, and we turn away from their blameless children? Yet I thought
it must be so at first, I own it, Felix; at first, while my eyes were blinded and my heart
hardened; and I looked at it in the light of the world. But then I be-thought me of your mother.
Shall not she make good to you the evil your father has wrought? If he dishonored your name
in the eyes of a few, she has brought honor to it, and made it known far beyond the limits
it could have been known through him. The world will regard you as her son, not as his."

"But I came also to tell you that I wish to leave the country," said Felix. "There is a difficulty
in getting young men for our colonial work; and I am young and strong, stronger than most young
men in the Church. I could endure hardships, and go in for work that feebler men must leave
untried; you have taken care of that for me. Such a life would be more like old Felix Merle's
than a London curacy. You let your own sons emigrate, believing that the old country is getting
over-populated; and I thought I would go too."

"Why?" asked Canon Pascal, turning round in his chair, and looking up searchingly into his face.

In a few words, and in short broken sentences, Felix told him of Nixey's charge, and the change
it had wrought in the London curacy, upon which he had entered with so much enthusiasm and delight.

"It will be the same wherever I go in England," he said in conclusion; "and I cannot face them
boldly and say it is all a falsehood."

"You must live it down," answered Canon Pascal; "go on, and take no notice of it."

"But it hinders my work sadly," said Felix, "and I cannot go on in the Brickfields. There might
be a row any evening, and then the story would come out in the police-courts; and what could
I say? At least, I must give up that."

