The head editor has been in here raising the mischief, and tearing his hair and kicking the
furniture about, and abusing me like a pickpocket. He says that every time he leaves me in
charge of the paper for half an hour, I get imposed upon by the first infant or the first idiot
that comes along. And he says that that distressing item of Mr. Bloke's is nothing but a lot
of distressing bosh, and has no point to it, and no sense in it, and no information in it,
and that there was no sort of necessity for stopping the press to publish it.

Now all this comes of being good-hearted. If I had been as unaccommodating and unsympathetic
as some people, I would have told Mr. Bloke that I wouldn't receive his communication at such
a late hour; but no, his snuffling distress touched my heart, and I jumped at the chance of
doing something to modify his misery. I never read his item to see whether there was anything
wrong about it, but hastily wrote the few lines which preceded it, and sent it to the printers.
And what has my kindness done for me? It has done nothing but bring down upon me a storm of
abuse and ornamental blasphemy.

Now I will read that item myself, and see if there is any foundation for all this fuss. And
if there is, the author of it shall hear from me.

       *       *       *       *       *

I have read it, and I am bound to admit that it seems a little mixed at a first glance. However,
I will peruse it once more.

       *       *       *       *       *

I have read it again, and it does really seem a good deal more mixed than ever.

       *       *       *       *       *

I have read it over five times, but if I can get at the meaning of it, I wish I may get my
just deserts. It won't bear analysis. There are things about it which I cannot understand at
all. Nor do most men choose to run away in battle, to fall in love, or to talk about the weather
in order to satisfy their desire for a preconceived end. If, indeed, a man were followed through
one ordinary day, without his knowing it, by a cinematographic camera and a phonograph, and
if all his acts and sayings were reproduced before him next day, he would be astonished to find
how few of them were the result of a deliberate search for the means of attaining ends.
 On the contrary,
it is obscure--and not only obscure, but utterly incomprehensible. Was the breaking of Mr.
Schuyler's leg, fifteen years ago, the "distressing accident" that plunged Mr. Bloke into unspeakable
grief, and caused him to come up here at dead of night and stop our press to acquaint the world
with the circumstance? Or did the "distressing accident" consist in the destruction of Schuyler's
mother-in-law's property in early times? Or did it consist in the death of that person herself
three years ago (albeit it does not appear that she died by accident)? In a word, what did
that "distressing accident" consist in? What did that drivelling ass of a Schuyler stand in
the wake of a runaway horse for, with his shouting and gesticulating, if he wanted to stop
him? And how the mischief could he get run over by a horse that had already passed beyond him?
And what are we to take "warning" by? And how is this extraordinary chapter of incomprehensibilities
going to be a "lesson" to us? And, above all, what has the intoxicating "bowl" got to do with
it, anyhow? It is not stated that Schuyler drank, or that his wife drank, or that his mother-in-law
drank, or that the horse drank--wherefore, then, the reference to the intoxicating bowl? It
does seem to me that if Mr. Bloke had let the intoxicating bowl alone himself, he never would
have got into so much trouble about this exasperating imaginary accident. I have read this
absurd item over and over again, with all its insinuating plausibility, until my head swims,
but I can make neither head nor tail of it. There certainly seems to have been an accident
of some kind or other, but it is impossible to determine what the nature of it was, or who
was the sufferer by it. I do not like to do it, but I feel compelled to request that the next
time anything happens to one of Mr. Bloke's friends, he will append such explanatory notes
to his account of it as will enable me to find out what sort of an accident it was and whom
it happened to. I had rather all his friends should die than that I should be driven to the
verge of lunacy again in trying to cipher out the meaning of another such production as the
above. I said I could make your paper of interest to all classes--and I have.

The Killing of Julius Cæsar "Localized"

    Being the only true and reliable account ever published; taken from
    the "Roman Daily Evening Fasces," of the date of that tremendous
    occurrence.

Nothing in the world affords a newspaper reporter so much satisfaction as gathering up the
details of a bloody and mysterious murder, and writing them up with aggravating circumstantiality.
He takes a living delight in this labor of love--for such it is to him, especially if he knows
that all the other papers have gone to press, and his will be the only one that will contain
the dreadful intelligence. A feeling of regret has often come over me that I was not reporting
in Rome when Cæsar was killed--reporting on an evening paper, and the only one in the city,
and getting at least twelve hours ahead of the morning-paper boys with this most magnificent
"item" that ever fell to the lot of the craft. Other events have happened as startling as this,
but none that possessed so peculiarly all the characteristics of the favorite "item" of the
present day, magnified into grandeur and sublimity by the high rank, fame, and social and political
standing of the actors in it. 

If my book is read by any of those official or unofficial thinkers, I would urge that the study
of human nature in politics, if ever it comes to be undertaken by the united and organised efforts
of hundreds of learned men, may not only deepen and widen our knowledge
of political institutions, but open an unworked mine of political
invention.

  
  
  PART I
  
  The Conditions of the Problem
  CHAPTER I

IMPULSE AND INSTINCT IN POLITICS

Whoever sets himself
to base his political thinking on a re-examination of the working
of human nature, must begin by trying to overcome his own tendency
to exaggerate the intellectuality of mankind. An investor, for instance,
desires good security combined with five per cent interest. As the result of that affray, it
  is our painful duty, as public journalists, to record the death
  of one of our most esteemed citizens--a man whose name is known
  wherever this paper circulates, and whose fame it has been our
  pleasure and our privilege to extend, and also to protect from
  the tongue of slander and falsehood, to the best of our poor
  ability. We refer to Mr. J. Cæsar, the Emperor-elect.

  "The facts of the case, as nearly as our reporter could
  determine them from the conflicting statements of eyewitnesses,
  were about as follows:--The affair was an election row, of
  course. Nine-tenths of the ghastly butcheries that disgrace the
  city nowadays grow out of the bickerings and jealousies and
  animosities engendered by these accursed elections. Rome would be
  the gainer by it if her very constables were elected to serve a
  century; for in our experience we have never even been able to
  choose a dog-pelter without celebrating the event with a dozen
  knockdowns and a general cramming of the station-house with
  drunken vagabonds overnight. It is said that when the immense
  majority for Cæsar at the polls in the market was declared the
  other day, and the crown was offered to that gentleman, even his
  amazing unselfishness in refusing it three times was not
  sufficient to save him from the whispered insults of such men as
  Casca, of the Tenth Ward, and other hirelings of the disappointed
  candidate, hailing mostly from the Eleventh and Thirteenth and
  other outside districts, who were overheard speaking ironically
  and contemptuously of Mr. Cæsar's conduct upon that occasion.

  "We are further informed that there are many among us who think
  they are justified in believing that the assassination of Julius
  Cæsar was a put-up thing--a cut-and-dried arrangement, hatched by
  Marcus Brutus and a lot of his hired roughs, and carried out only
  too faithfully according to the programme. Whether there be good
  grounds for this suspicion or not, we leave to the people to
  judge for themselves, only asking that they will read the
  following account of the sad occurrence carefully and
  dispassionately before they render that judgment.

  "The Senate was already in session, and Cæsar was coming down
  the street towards the Capitol, conversing with some personal
  friends, and followed, as usual, by a large number of citizens. Its
  body of facts is being yearly added to; it has already caused
  the abandonment of much dreary waste of time; has given many thousands
  of teachers a new outlook on their work, and has increased the
  learning and happiness of many tens of thousands of children. The reply was, 'Yes, they are come, but not gone yet.'
  At this moment Artemidorus stepped up and passed the time of day,
  and asked Cæsar to read a schedule or a tract or something of the
  kind, which he had brought for his perusal. Mr. Decius Brutus
  also said something about an 'humble suit' which he wanted
  read. Artemidorus begged that attention might be paid to his
  first, because it was of personal consequence to Cæsar. The
  latter replied that what concerned himself should be read last,
  or words to that effect. Artemidorus begged and beseeched him to
  read the paper instantly.[1] However, Cæsar shook him off, and
  refused to read any petition in the street. He then entered the
  Capitol, and the crowd followed him.

  "About this time the following conversation was overheard, and we
  consider that, taken in connection with the events which
  succeeded it, it bears an appalling significance: Mr. Papilius
  Lena remarked to George W. Cassius (commonly known as the 'Nobby
  Boy of the Third Ward'), a bruiser in the pay of the Opposition,
  that he hoped his enterprise to-day might thrive; and when
  Cassius asked, 'What enterprise?' he only closed his left eye
  temporarily and said with simulated indifference, 'Fare you
  well,' and sauntered towards Cæsar. Marcus Brutus, who is
  suspected of being the ringleader of the band that killed Cæsar,
  asked what it was that Lena had said. Cassius told him, and
  added, in a low tone, 'I fear our purpose is discovered.'

