They did not see the figure of another boy, in a gingham shirt, blue overalls, and a torn straw
hat, sitting on a stone back of Mealy, smiling complacently. Not until the stranger walked
down to the water's edge where Mealy sat did the other boys spy him.

"Who is it?" asked Abe.

"I never saw him before," replied Jimmy Sears.

"Oh, I'll tell you who it is," returned Abe, after looking the stranger over. "It's the new
boy. Him an' his old man come to town yesterday. They say he's a fighter. He licked every boy
in the Mountain Jumpers this mornin'."

By this time the new boy was standing over Mealy, saying, "How you gittin' along?"

Mealy looked up, and said with the petulance of a spoiled child, "Hush your mouth, you old
smartie! What good d't do you to go an' tie my clo'es?"

Piggy and Jimmy and Abe came hurrying to the landing. They heard the new boy retort, "Who said
I tied your clo'es?" Mealy made no reply. The new boy repeated the query. Mealy saw the boys
in the water looking on, and his courage rose; for Mealy was in the primary department of life,
and had not yet learned that one must fight alone. He answered, "I did," with an emphasis on
the "I," as he tugged at the last knot. The new boy had been looking Mealy over, and he replied
quickly, "You're a liar!"

There was a pause, during which Mealy looked helplessly for some one to defend him. He was
sure that his companions would not stand there and see him whipped. One of the boys in the
water said diplomatically, "Aw, Mealy, I wouldn't take that!"

"You're another," faltered Mealy, who looked supplication and surprise at his friends, and
wondered if they were really going to desert him. The new boy waded around Mealy, and leaned
over him, and said, shaking his fist in the freckled face, "You're a coward, and you don't
dast take it up and fight it out."

Mealy's cheeks flushed. He felt anger mantling his frame. He was one of those most pitiable
of mortals whose anger brings tears with it. The last knot in the shirt was all but conquered,
when Mealy bawled in a scream of passionate sobs,--

"When I git this shirt fixed I'll show you who's a coward."

The new boy sought a level place on the bank for a fight, and sneered, "Oh, cry baby! cry baby!
Say, boys, where's its bottle?"

Mealy rose with a stone in each hand, and hobbled over the pebbles, trying, "Touch me now!
Touch me if you dare!"

"Aw, you coward! drop them rocks," snarled the new boy.

Mealy looked at his friends imploringly. He felt lonely, deserted, and mistreated, but he saw
in the faces of his comrades the reflection of the injunction to put down the stones. He did
so, and his anger began to cool. But he whimpered again, "Well now, touch me if you dare!"

The new boy came over briskly, and made a feint to slap the naked lad, who warded off the blow,
sniffling, "You just leave me alone. I ain't hurtin' you." The boys in the water laughed--it
seemed to Mealy such a cruel laugh. Anger enveloped him again, and he struck out blindly through
his tears, hand over hand, striking the new boy in the mouth and making it bleed, before he
realized that the fight had begun. The new boy tried to clinch Mealy, but the naked body slipped
away from him; and just then the combatants saw the satisfied grin freeze on the faces of the
boys in the water. A step crunched the gravel near them, and in a moment that flashed vividly
with rejoicing that the fight was ended, then with abject, chattering terror, Mealy Jones saw
his father approaching. Mealy did not run. The uplifted cane and the red, perspiring face of
his father transfixed the lad, yet he felt called upon to say something. His voice came from
a dry throat, and he spoke through an idiotic grin as he said, "I didn't know you wanted me, pa."

After the burst of his father's anger ten awful minutes of shame passed for Mealy while he
was putting on his wet clothes. The boys in the water swam noiselessly upstream to the roots
of the elm-tree, where he saw them looking at his disgrace. During those ten minutes Mealy
realized that his father's deepening silence portended evil; so he tried to draw his father
into a discussion of the merits of the case by whimpering from time to time, "Well, I guess
they ast me to come," or "Piggy said it wouldn't hurt, 'cause 't ain't in dog days," or "I
wasn't in where it was deep. I was only a-wadin'." The new boy, who was seated upon a log near
by with a stone in his hand, which he had picked up fearing the elder Jones would join the
fray, sniffed audibly. He called to the other boys derisively, "Say, any of you boys got the
baby's blocks?" It did not lift the mantle of humiliation that covered Mealy to hear his father
reply to the new boy, "That will do for you, sir." While Mealy wept he wiped away his tears
first with one hand and then with the other, employing the free hand in fastening his clothes
together. He did not fear the punishment that might be in store for him. He was thinking of
the agony of his next meeting with Piggy Pennington. Mealy fancied that Abe Carpenter, who
was a quiet, philosophical boy, would not tease him, but horror seized him when he thought
of Piggy.

As Mealy fastened his last button, he felt his father's finger under his collar, and his own
feet shambling blindly over the pebbles, up the path, into the bushes; he heard the boys in
the water laugh with the new boy, and then--stories differ. The boys say that he howled lustily,
"Oh, pa, I won't do it any more," over and over again. Mealy Jones says that it didn't hurt a bit.

This much is certain: that Master Harold Jones walked through the town that day a few feet
ahead of his fathers who tapped the boy's legs with a hooked cane whenever his steps lagged.
At the door of the Jones home Mrs. Jones stood to welcome the martial procession, which she
saw, and then heard, approaching some time before it arrived. To his wife, whose face pictured
anxious grief, Mr. Jones said, as he turned the captive over to her: "I found this young gentleman
in swimming--swimming and fighting. I have attended to his immediate wants, I believe. I leave
him to you."

Harold Jones was but a lad--a good lad whose knowledge of the golden text was his Sunday-school
teacher's pride. Yet he had collected other scraps of useful information as he journeyed through
life. One of these was a perfectly practical familiarity with the official road map to his
mother's heart. Therefore, when he crossed the threshold of the Jones home Harold began at
once to weep dolefully.

"Harold Jones, what do you mean by such conduct?" asked his mother.

The boy stood by the window long enough to see that his father had turned the corner toward
the town. Then he fell on the floor, and began to bewail his lot, refusing to answer the first
question his mother asked, but telling instead how "all the other boys in this town can go
swimmin' when they want to," hinting that he wouldn't care, if papa had only just come and
brought him home, but that papa--and this was followed by a vocal cataract of woe that made
the dish-pans ring.

He noted that his mother bent over him and said, "My poor boy;" at which sign little Harold
punctured the levees of his grief again, and said he "never was goin' to face any of the boys
in this town again"--he "just couldn't bear it." Mrs. Jones paused in her work at this, put
down a potato that she was peeling, and stood up stiffly, saying in a freezing tone, "Harold
Jones, you don't mean to tell me that your father punished you in front of those other little
boys?"

