I have tried in this book to set down some of those experiences.  I have had but one object
in so doing, and that object has been to give the father and mother, the brother and sister,
the wife and child and friend of the boys "Over There" an accurate heart-picture.  I have not
attempted the too great task of showing the soul of the soldier, although I have tried to picture
him at some of his great moments when he forgets himself and rises to glorious heights, just
as he might do at home if the opportunity called.

I have tried to show his experiences on the transports, when he lands in France, his welcome
there, the reactions of the trench life; something of his self-sacrifice, his willingness to
serve even unto the end; his courage, his sunshine.  I have also given some other pictures
of France that aim to show his heart-relations to his allies and to the folks at home. 

. 'He is at your service, it was Churchill Menschengedraenge, State wigs, Militaerpersonen -. Of the
court church bells here and salute shots. We stand out from under the archway in the Episcopal
court. Now we go two to find me a colossus. I only see a feathered hat, violence, including a nose
and lowered into the collar of jet-black goatee: 'Wertmueller' the Great asked, 'Who do we bury ?'--'
I do not know' I say. We enter the cathedral between the pews of the ship. 'Wertmueller', asks the
other, "whom they sing a requiem ?'--' I Do not know I say impatiently. 'Small value Mueller,' he says, alternate
'up again to the Toes and see who is there first laid out '. - Now I differ considerably in
the corners pall of the signature and the crest of the Jena Chen, and at the same moment turns
He, standing next to me, to my face - pale with smoldering eyes. 'Damn it, Colonel' I say, 'You
lying there in front under the cloth with Euern seven death wounds and leads here a discourse with
me! Are you double? Is that reasonable? Is that logical? Go your to hell teaser! " As he said
reflected: 'You have nothing to advance me - do Do not airs. You, too, value Mueller, are dead
'"

Pfannenstiel it cold over ran. This dream on the eve of the bloody campaign, no doubt, which is
outside the general in the kingdom was imminent, it seemed of grave omen, and he meditated
on the word spiritual winning bids.

Mueller was also value his dream after he told him once, not once again . Get rid of "The colonel
was crushed by his sweetheart with an ax like a bull" He was taken into loud thoughts, "I
will not be as good traps -.

But well then! not die in a bed angle! "

Perhaps he thought of poison, for he was at the court of Vienna in a persistent intrigue involved
and had made there by his ambition mortal enemies.

"Before I pack my suitcase," he continued after a pause, "I should
like to have a Make people happy - "

The candidate scored the water in his eyes, not in selfish thoughts,
but selfless joy of this beautiful movement, but it dried quickly
when the General finished his sentence: "- especially if it could
be a strong link to practical jokes."

The superstitious feeling that had been converted to the general, was voruebergegangen quickly.
"What is your concern?" he asked his guest with one of those abrupt turns that it were familiar.
"You did not come here to tell you to leave my dreams."

Now the generals told Pfannenstiel with an innocent list, for he wanted
his Love, despair, for which he trusts him not an organ, not tell
him about how the Study of the Odyssey taken an irresistible desire,
the home of Homer, the golden Hellas know.

Since he knew no other way to satisfy his wanderlust, whether he came into his mind that with
the Lord for the Feldkaplanei his Venetian company to report, so the station in the Greek possessions
of the Republic. "It is finished," he concluded, "and if you are weighed me a little, your wist
me to the place."

Value Mueller looked at him sharply. "I am the last," he said, "of a young man a dangerous career
dissuaded! But he must be qualified to do so. Your Knochengerueste, Friend, is a deal not been
enough. The first best relegated bully of Leipzig or Jena will impress my guys more than your
face, John. You getting that from the Head. Will you see the south, seek services as a tutor to
a young gentleman and it knocks the clothes! But even that you can not suited. The best thing
is, you stay at home. Look out! Counting all the tops at the lake
- that the pastor of Canaan.

Here is Your Rhodes, here is dancing - will say preaches - What are
the tracks of bourgeois professions there, as that of your kind you
drive?

You do not know which leg belongs to the end, to maltreat souveraen for life. Is dependent on your
mood, "and he made the gesture, as he handles a horse's bridle, which was carried by a careless
boy.

There was a pause. Again accused the General of the candidates
on an observing eye.

"You are a fair person," he said, "and it was
you serious, you would Greek Adventure existed. How does this with
a panhandle that I see before me? As an eel is below the stones.  In a week from that night more than two-thirds of them had been killed. When Bishop
McConnell asked them what they would like to sing, this great crowd of sturdy, bare-kneed soldiers
of democracy, who had borne the brunt of battle for three years, asked for "O God, Our Help
in Ages Past."

Yes, I know that the boys sing the rag-time, but this must not be the only side of the picture.
They sing the old hymns, too, and memories of nights "down the line," when I have heard them
in small groups and in great crowds singing the old, old hymns of the church, have burned their
silhouettes into my memory never to die.

One night I remember being stopped by a sentry at "Dead Man's Curve," because the Boche was
shelling the curve that night, and we had to stop until he "laid off," as the sentry told us.
Between shells there was a great stillness on the white road that lay like a silver thread
under the moonlight.  The shattered stone buildings, with a great cathedral tower standing
like a gaunt ghost above the ruins, were tragically beautiful under that mellow light.  One
almost forgot there was war under the charm of that scene until "plunk! plunk! plunk!" the
big shells fell from time to time.  But the thing that impressed me most that waiting hour
was not the beauty of the village under the moonlight, but the fact that the lone sentry who
had stopped us, and who amid the shelling stood silently, was unconsciously singing an old
hymn of the church, "Rock of Ages, Cleft for Me."  I got down from my truck and walked over
to where he was standing.

"Great old hymn, isn't it, lad?"

"I'll say so," was his laconic reply.

"Belong to some church back home?" I asked him.

"Folks do; Presbyterians," he replied.

"Like the old hymns?" I asked.

"Yes, it seems like home to sing 'em."

I didn't get to talk with him for a few minutes, for he had to stop another truck.  Then he
came back.

"Folks at home, Sis and Bill and the kid, mother and father, used to gather around the piano
every Sunday evening and sing 'em.  Didn't think much of them then, but liked to sing.  But
they mean a lot to me over here, especially when I'm on guard at nights on this 'Dead Man's
Curve.'  Seems like they make me stronger."  As I walked away I still heard him humming "Rock
of Ages, Cleft for Me."

One of the most vivid song silhouettes that I remember is that of a great crowd of negroes
singing in a Y. M. C. A. hut.  There must have been a thousand of them.  I was to speak to
them on "Lincoln Day."  I remember how their white teeth shone through the semidarkness of
that candle-lighted hut, and how their eyes gleamed, and how their bodies swayed as they sang
the old plantation melodies.

The first song startled me with the universality of its simple expression.  It was an adaptation
of that old melody which the negroes have sung for years, "It's the Old-Time Religion."

A boy down front led the singing.  A curt "Sam, set up a tune," from the Tuskegee colored secretary
started it.

This boy sat with his back to the audience.  He didn't even turn around to face them.  Low
and sweetly he started singing.  You could hardly hear him at first.  Then a few boys near
him took up the music.  Then a few more.  Then it gradually swept back over that crowd of men
until every single negro was swaying to that simple music, and then it was that I caught the
almost startlingly appropriate words:

  "It is good for a world in trouble;
  It is good for a world in trouble;
  It is good for a world in trouble;
    And it's good enough for me.

Then much to my astonishment they did something that I have since learned is the very way that
these songs grew from the beginning.  They extemporized a verse for the day, and they did it
on the spot.  I made absolutely certain of that by careful investigation.

"That first verse, 'It is good for a world in trouble,' is certainly a most appropriate one
for these times in France," I said aside to the secretary.

"Yes," he replied; "if ever this pore ole worl' needed the sustainin' power of the religion
of the Christ, it does now; an' if ever this pore ole worl' was in trouble, that time suttinly
is right now," he added with fervor.

Another Silhouette of Song that stands out against the background of memory is that of a hymn
that I heard in Doctor Charles Jefferson's church just before I sailed for France.  I was lonely.
I walked into that great city church a stranger, as thousands of boys who have sailed from
New York have done.  I never remember to have been so unutterably lonely and homesick.  It
was cold in the city, and I was alone.  I turned to a church.  Thousands of boys have done
the same, may the mothers and fathers of America know, and they have found comfort.  If the
parents of this great nation could know how well their boys are guarded and cared for in New
York City before they sail, they would have a feeling of comfort.

I sat down in this great church.  I was thinking more of other Sabbath mornings at home, with
my wife and baby, than anything else.  A hymn was announced.  I stood up mechanically, but
there was no song in my throat.  There was a great lump of loneliness only.  But suddenly I
listened to the words they were singing.  Had they selected that hymn just for me?  It seemed
so.  It so answered the loneliness in my heart with comfort and quiet.  That great congregation
was singing:

  "Peace, perfect peace;
  With loved ones far away;
  In Jesus' keeping, we are safe; and they."

A great sense of peace settled over my heart, and I have quoted that old hymn all over France
to the boys, and they have been comforted. Many a boy has asked me to write him a copy of that
verse to stick in his note-book.  It seemed to give a sense of comfort to the lads, for their
loved ones, too, were "far away," and since I have come home I find that this, too, comes as
a great comfort hymn to those who are here lonely for their boys "over there."

And who shall forget the silhouette of approaching the shores of France by night as they have
sailed down along the coast, cautiously and carefully, to find the opening of the submarine
nets?  Who shall forget the sense of exhilaration that the news that land was near brought?
Who shall forget the crowding to the railings by all on board to scan anxiously through the
night for the first sight of land?  Then who shall forget seeing that first light from shore
flash out through the darkness of night?  Who shall forget the red and green and white lights
that began to twinkle, and gleam, and flash, and signal, and call?  How beautiful those lights
looked after the long, dangerous, eventful, and dark voyage, without a single light showing
on the ship!  And who shall forget the man along the railing who said, "I never knew before
the meaning of that old song, 'The Lights Along the Shore'"?  And then, who can forget the
fact that suddenly somebody started to sing that old hymn, "The Lights Along the Shore," and
of how it swept along the lower decks, and then to the upper decks, until a whole ship-load
of people was singing it?  And then who shall forget how somebody else started "Let the Lower
Lights Be Burning"?  Can such scenes ever be obliterated from one's memory?  No, not forever.
That silhouette remains eternally!

Five great transports were in.  They were lined up along the docks in the locks.  A Y. M. C.
A. secretary was standing on the docks yelling up a word of welcome to the crowded railings
of the great transports. The boats were not "cleared" as yet.  It would take an hour, and the
secretary knew that something must be done, so he started to lead first one ship and then another
in singing.

"What shall we sing, boys?" he would shout up to them from the docks below.  Some fellow from
the railing yelled, "Keep the Home Fires Burning," and that fine song rang out from five thousand
throats.  I have heard it sung in the camps at home, I have heard it sung in great huts in
France, but I never heard it when it sounded so significant and so sweet in its mighty volume
as it sounded coming from that great khaki-lined transport, which had just landed an hour before
in France. I stood beside the song-leader there on the docks looking up at that great mass
of American humanity, a hundred feet above us, so far away that we could not recognize individual
faces, on the high decks of one of the largest ships that sails the seas, and as that sweet
song of war swept out over the docks and across the white town, and back across the Atlantic,
I said to myself: "That volume sounds as if it could make itself heard back home."

The man beside me said: "The folks back home hear it all right, for they are eagerly listening
for every sound that comes from that crowd of boys.  Yes, the folks back home hear it, and
they'll 'keep the home fires burning' all right.  God bless them!"

The last Silhouette of Song stands out against a background of green trees and spring, and
the odor of a hospital, and Red Cross nurses going and coming, and boys lying in white robes
everywhere.  My friend the song-leader had gone with me to hold the vesper service in the hospital.
Then we visited in the wards in order to see those who were so severely wounded that they could
not get to the service.

There was a little group of men in one room.  The first thing I knew my friend had them singing.
At first they took to it awkwardly.  Then more courageously.  Then sweetly there rang through
the hospital the strains of "My Daddy Over There."

It melted my heart, for I have a baby girl at home who says to the neighbors, "My daddy is
the prettiest man in the world," and believes it.  I said to Cray: "Why did you sing that particular
song?"

"Oh," he replied, "my baby's name is 'Betty,' and I found a guy whose baby's name is 'Betty'
too, and we had a sort of club formed; and another guy had a baby boy, and then I just thought
they'd like to sing 'My Daddy Over There.'  But we ended up with 'Jesus, Lover of My Soul,'
so that ought to suit you."

"Suit me, man?  Why I got a 'Betty' baby of my own, and that 'Daddy Over There' song you sang
is the sweetest thing I've heard in France, and it will help those daddies more than a hymn
would.  I'm glad you got them to singing."

And now I'm back home, and I thought the Silhouettes of Song were all over, but I stepped into
a church the other Sunday.  Up high above the sacred altars of that church fluttered a beautiful
silk service flag. It was starred in the shape of a letter "S."  In the circle of each "S"
was a red cross.  The church had two members in the Red Cross.  Above the "S" and below it
were two red triangles.  The church had men in the service of the Y. M. C. A.  Then grouped
about the "S" were the stars of boys in the service.

As I looked up at this cross a flood of memories swept over me.  I could not keep back the
tears.  All the love, all the loneliness, all the heartache, all the pride, all the hope of
the folks at home, their reverence, their loyalty, was summed up in that flag.  I stood to
sing, my eyes brimming with tears.  The great congregation started that beautifully sweet hymn
that is being sung all over America in the churches in loving memory of the boys over there:

  "God save our splendid men,
  Send them safe home again,
    God save our men.
  Make them victorious,
  Patient and chivalrous,
  They are so dear to us,
    God save our men.

  God keep our own dear men,
  From every stain of sin,
    God keep our men.
  When Satan would allure,
  When tempted, keep them pure,
  Be their protection sure--
    God keep our men.

  God hold our precious men,
  And love them to the end.
    God hold our men.
  Held in Thine arms so strong
  To Thee they all belong.
  This ever be our song:
    God hold our men."

I stood the pressure until that great congregation came to that line "They are so dear to us,"
and the voice of the mother beside me broke, and she had to stop.  Then I had to stop, too,
and we looked at each other through our tears and smiled and understood, so that when she sweetly
said, "I have a boy over there," her words were superfluous. And so I have added another memory
of song to the hours that will never die.

II

SHIP SILHOUETTES

It was nearing the dawn, and flaming heralds gave promise of a brilliant day coming up out
of France to the east.  Three of us stood in the "crow's-nest" on an American transport, where
we had been standing our "watch" since four o'clock that morning.

Suddenly as we peered through our glasses off to the west we saw the masts of a great cruiser
creeping above the horizon of the sea.  We reported it to the "bridge," where it was confirmed.
Then in a few minutes we saw another mast, and then another, and another; four, five, six,
seven, eight, nine, ten, twenty--five, six--twenty-six ships coming up over the western horizon,
bound for France, bearing the most precious burden that ever a caravan of the sea carried across
the waters of the deep; American boys!  Your boys!

It was a marvellous sight.  We had been so intently watching this that we had forgotten about
the dawn.  Then we turned for a minute, and off to the east a brilliant red dawn was splashing
its way out of the sea.

"What are those dots on the sun?" Doctor Freeman shouted to me.

"Why, I believe it's the convoy of destroyers coming out to meet those transports," I replied.

Then before our eyes, up out of the eastern horizon, just as we had watched the transports
and the cruiser come up over the western horizon, those slender guardians of the deep came
toward us in formation.  There were ten of them, and they met the great American convoy just
abreast our transport.  We saw the American flag fly to the winds on each ship, and the flashing
of signal-lights even in the dawning.

"Those destroyers coming out of the east against that sunrise remind me of the experiences
one has in France in these vivid war days," I said to my fellow watcher in the "crow's-nest."

"How is that?"

"They stand out like the Silhouettes of Mountain Peaks against a crimson sunrise," I replied.

And so have many Silhouettes of the Sea stood out.

There was the afternoon that we stood on the deck of a ship bound for France.  The voyage had
been full of dangers.  Submarines had harassed us for days.  One night such a lurch came to
the ship as threw everybody about in their staterooms.  We thought it was a storm until the
morning came, and we were informed that it was a sudden lurch to avoid a submarine.  The voyage
had been full of uneasiness, and now we were coming to the most dangerous part of it, the submarine
zone.

Everybody was on deck.  It was Sunday afternoon.  Suddenly off to the east several spots appeared
on the horizon.  What were they, friendly craft or enemy ships?

Nobody knew, not even the captain.  There was a wave of uneasiness over the boat.

Speculation was rife.

Then we saw the signal boy go aft, and in a moment the tricolor of France was fluttering in
the winds, and we knew that the approaching craft were friendly.  Then through powerful glasses
we could make them out to be long, low-lying, lithe, swift destroyers coming out to meet us.
They were a welcome sight.  Like "hounds of the sea" they came, long and lean.  Headed straight
for us, they came like the winds.  Then suddenly a slight mist began to fall, but not enough
to obscure either the destroyers or the sun.  Through this mist the sun burned its way, and
almost as if a miracle had been performed by some master artist, a beautiful rainbow arched
the sky to the east, and under the arch of this rainbow fleetly sailed those approaching destroyers.

It was a beautiful sight, a Silhouette of the Sea never to be forgotten while memory lasts.
The French flag fluttered, the band started to play the "Marseillaise," and a ship-load of
happy people sang it. The father to me is the income of all Schwarzroecke and you
are to me the dearest of all figures. I will give the elderly a satisfaction. Know what? I go
to church with you tomorrow - the rehabilitated his father to town and country. "

Rachel seemed little prospect of this construction. "Godfather," she said, "You have me out
of the baptism be considered elevated and made a vow to my temporal and eternal salvation. For the
latter ye can you do nothing, for it is on this point at yourself very windy. But that is a reason,
even to ruin my time? You should seems to me, on the contrary to think, make me happy at least on this
earth - and your making me unhappy!

They crushed a tear.

- "Well said grumbled," the general said. "Patches, I am the mountain spirit and you have three
wishes from me too well.

"

"Well," replied the lady, in detail on the joke.

"First: Heals the father of his unspiritual hunting pleasure! "

-... "Impossible is in your blood it is a value Mueller But I can
of his passion provide a harmless path.

Second? "

"Secondly ..." Rachel hesitated.

"Let me speak in your place, girl. Second, give the captain Leo Kilchsperger Holiday advertising,
betrothal and marriage. "

- "No!" Rachel replied eagerly.

- "He's a perfect gentleman."

- "A perfect gentleman, and much depends on to what I make renunciation,
Godfather."

- "A limited point of view."

- "I hold him, Godfather."

.
- "All right .-- So another Second Second procure mountain spirit,
the candidate Pfannenstiel Feldkaplanei the coveted him in the Venetian
service.

"

- "Never!" cried the Wertmuellerin. "What? The unfortunate desire
among the Feldkaplanei Euerm Venetian mob?

The gentle and good man? That is why he has come to you?

"

The General replied in the affirmative.

"I talk him out of it."

- "Speak to him of the inspiration is not rampant plague and fever
in the Morea."

- "Sometimes."

- "Reading be infrequent shipwrecked
in the Adriatic Sea?"

- "Every now and then."

- "The company in
Venice is not terribly bad?"

- "The good is there, as everywhere,
the bad and quite excellent."

- "Godfather, he is not allowed out
at any price!"

. - "Well then, is another second connected to the
third party, the mountain spirit, make the candidate Panhandle to
the well-appointed parish priest of Mythikon and give it to me woman!

"

Rachel blushed. "Yes, Mountain Spirit," she said bravely.

This resolute response from the sight of the general masses.

"He's a neat nature," he praised, "but it lacks the masculinity that the figures entrances its irresistible
- "

- "Bah," she made lightly and went on resolutely: "Godfather, you have a dozen battles won,
your corrupt Euern most cunning enemies of the Imperial Palace in the game, you are a famous and
welterfahrner husband - objected Hundertteilchen of your mind because
I - what I say - us to make happy, and we will you know his life thanks.

"

The general sat down on the empty stone bench and put in the hands
of deep reflection on its knees, as an Egyptian deity.

He touched the two pistols in his Pockets, and it suddenly flashed
into his sharp gray eyes, and he broke into an unruly From laughter
as he had not laughed since decades, in a true Schulbubengelaechter.

Since he was also jumped quickly to the interior of the peninsula,
turning his repeated an echo of this outbreak boisterous merriment
in so ghastly and grotesque manner, that it was as if all were fauns
and Panisken the belly of Au over a great and God-forgotten incident.

The general calm down. He seemed to his touch and the chance of success with sharp intellect to
examine. The venture appealed to him.

"Count on me, my child," said his paternal.

- "Hear, godfather,
the father may not be hurt!"

- "Nothing but good."

- "Do not panhandle
gezaust!"

Wertmueller shrugged.

"The plays a minor role."

- "And you will Euern have fun doing it?"
asked the girl tense, as the laughter but they had done something
serious.

- "I'll have my fun there."

- "Can not fail it?"

- "The
plan is founded on human folly, and therefore perfectly But something
opportunity. belongs to every success.

"

- "And it fails?"

- "So Rudolfswert Mueller paid the bill."
Once again, the girl remembered quite seriously, but her feisty nature
won the day it. She had about it an absolute confidence in the bold
deduction and themselves within certain limits to the loyalty of their
relatives. That a malicious string would run along, she knew - it
was just the purchase price of their happiness - but she knew also
that investment Mueller love her and why his ghost would not drive
too far.
They had no time to wait for me.  They were American boys on their errands of mercy, and the
front was calling them.  I knew that something must be going on off toward the front lines,
for the rumbling of the big guns had been going on for an hour. As these ambulances passed
me--more than twenty-five of them passed as silent ships pass in the night--that phrase kept
singing: "Traveller, hast thou ever seen so great a grief as mine?"

Then I drove a bit farther on my way, and off across a field I saw the walls of a great hospital.
It was an evacuation hospital, and I had visited in its wards many times after a raid, when
hundreds of our boys had been brought in every night and day, with four shifts of doctors kept
busy day and night in the operating-room caring for them.  As I thought of all that I had seen
in that hospital, again that singing phrase of the crucifix at the crossroads was on my lips:
"Traveller, hast thou ever seen so great a grief as mine?"

A mile farther, and just a few feet from the road, I passed a little "God's acre" that I knew
so well.  As its full meaning swept over me there in the darkness of that night, the heartache
and loneliness of the folks at home whose American boys were lying there, some two hundred
of them, the old crucifix phrase expressed it all:

"Traveller, hast thou ever seen so great a grief as mine?"

And, somehow, as I drove back by the crucifix in the darkness of the next morning, about two
o'clock, I had to stop again and with my flash-light spell out the lettering on the cross.

Then suddenly it dawned on me that this was France speaking to America:

"Traveller, hast thou ever seen so great a grief as mine?"

And when I paused in the darkness of that night and thought of the one million and a quarter
of the best manhood of France who had given their lives for the precious things that we hold
most dear: our homes, our children, our liberty, our democracy; and when I thought that France
had saved that for us; and when I remembered the funeral processions that I had seen every
day since I had been in France, and when I remembered the women doing the work of men, handling
the baggage of France, ploughing the fields of France; doing the work of men because the men
were all either killed or at the front; when I remembered the little fatherless children that
I had seen all over France, whose sad eyes looked up into mine everywhere I went; and when
I remembered the young widows (every woman of France seems to be in black); and when I remembered
the thousands of blind men and boys that I had seen being led helplessly about the streets
of the cities and villages of France; and when I remembered that lonely wife that one Sunday
afternoon in Toul I had watched go and kneel beside a little mound and place flowers there--the
dates on the stone of which I later saw were "March, 1916," then I cried aloud in the darkness
as I realized the tremendous sacrifice that France has made for the world, as well as England
and Belgium.  "No, France!  No, England!  No, little Belgium! this traveller has never seen
so great a grief as thine!"

"No, mothers and fathers, little children, wives, brothers, sisters of France, and England,
and Belgium, this traveller, America, has never seen so great a grief as thine!"

And later I learned, after living in the Toul sector for two months, that the challenging sentence
on the crucifix had been read by nearly every boy who had passed it; and all had.  Either he
had read it himself or it had been quoted to him, and this one crucifix question had much to
do with challenging the boys who passed it to a new understanding of all that France had passed
through in the war.

The American boys have learned to respect the French soldier because of the sacrifice that
he has made.  The American soldier remembers that crowd of men called "Kitchener's Mob," which
Kitchener sent into the trenches of France to stem the tide of inhumanity, and to whom he gave
a message: "Go!  Sacrifice yourselves while I raise an army in England!"  The American soldier
knows all of this.  He knows that little Belgium might have said to all the world, "The forces
were too great for us," and she could have stepped aside and the world would have forgiven her.

But instead she chose deliberately to sacrifice herself for the cause of freedom, and sacrifice
herself she did.  And that sentence on the crossroads crucifix in the Toul sector, day after
day, sends its reminder into the heart of the American soldiers, who stop their trucks and
their ammunition wagons, pause their weary marches to read it; sends its reminder of the sacrifices
that our allies have already made, and the sacrifices that we may be called upon to make. 
"Traveller, hast thou ever seen so great a grief as mine?"

And the American officer and soldier must admit that he has not; and he prays God silently
in the night as he rides by on his horse, or as he drives by on his motor-truck, or as he flashes
by on his motor-cycle, though they may be willing to suffer as France has suffered, if need
be, prays God that that may never be necessary, for the American soldier, since he has been
in France, has seen what suffering means.

And so that crossroads crucifix stands out against the lurid night of France, with its reminder
constantly before the American soldier, and it tends to make him more gentle with French children
and women, and more kindly with French men. Only the day before yesterday drove a full boat of pilgrims
Richterswyl around those Au with a great noise and singing. I stood in my vineyard and think:
the fool! - Counter your house down, they are still. 'That's the respect', I say to myself Yes,
I had taken. As soon as they are right under Euern windows so breaks out the Spottliedlein.
You know the one where they send home to the value Mueller Mugnaia! Good thing you were verritten!
I got annoyed perjured myself in my vines ... "

"Silence!" it continued the general angrily, for the old insult that repealed siege spent now
on his soul, even sharper than before, when he would be with those
ink reported that emerges only after years black and unvertilglich.

But he controlled himself and changed the tone.

"Some confusion belongs to every Comedy" he said, "but when it reaches
its peak, it has a rapid turn to good Close of help, otherwise even
the crazy boring.

"Reverend and dear neighbors!

"Yesterday, late into the night I wrote to my will and twelve strike Clock signed. I know your
warm interest in everything that I do leave, and be declining; allowed for, that I read to
you some of it. "

He pulled a manuscript from his pocket and unfolded it. "The entrance, where I have a little bit
about the value of things philosophy, I disregard ... 'If I, Rudolf Mueller value ever die ...',
but that did not belong hither ...", he continued flipping. "Here! 'Castle Elgg and domination,
which I purchased from the honest savings of my last campaign, remains as Fideikommiss in my
family ', etc.' Item - For since that rule an excellent, but has neglected the hunt and sent a Beutestuecken
very same campaign, but still incomplete armory, so I have that after my death, my cousin, the
pastor Wilpert value Mueller, named Castle inhabit and rule and to apply, hunt manufacturing,
the armory at all and to perfection and in every way to unlock his end about it and grant it, if indeed
such spiritual master will decide , Can be formulated in Mythikon-use
office and antistite probant to the candidate to transfer Pfannenstiel,
which candidate I my sponsored child, Rachel Wertmuellerin, to admit
women, not without the father's consent, however, and with adding
three thousand Zuerchergulden I wrapped the young lady, in my blessing
leave.

"

"Phew", drew the general breath, "these movements a devil of language, the German!" -

The pastor felt like a shipwrecked, and burying the same wave on shore
carries.

His passion verhaengnisvolle settled, a man of understanding, recognized He immediately that it's only
the General and to be as pleasant open a way could lead him from
disgrace.

He expressed his evil and benefactors with a kind of emotion
the hand and shook this to him with the words, by "I come, it is not
your pity be, cousin! They had already burned
their way into my heart and into the hearts of that whole division of American soldiers, that
division which has since so distinguished itself at Belleau Woods!  But now America has a new
understanding of the meaning of that sentence, for America, too, is suffering, and she is sacrificing.

"Traveller, hast thou ever seen so great a grief as mine?"

"Yes, France; we understand now."

IV

SILHOUETTES SPIRITUAL

It was the gas ward.  I had held a vesper service that evening and had had a strange experience.
Just before the service I had been introduced to a lad who said to the chaplain who introduced
me that he was a member of my denomination.

The boy could not speak above a whisper.  He was gassed horribly, and in addition to his lungs
being burned out and his throat, his face and neck were scarred.

"I have as many scars on my lungs as I have on my face," he said quite simply.  I had to bend
close to hear him.  He could not talk loud enough to have awakened a sleeping child.

He said to me: "I used to be leader of the choir at home.  At college I was in the glee-club,
and whenever we had any singin' at the fraternity house they always expected me to lead it.
Since I came into the army the boys in my outfit have depended upon me for all the music. 
In camp back home I led the singing.  Even the Y. M. C. A. always counted on me to lead the
singing in the religious meetings.  Many's the time I have cheered the boys comin' over on
the transport and in camp by singin' when they were blue.  But I can't sing any more.  Sometimes
I get pretty blue over that.  But I'll be at your meeting this evening, anyway, and I'll be
right down on the front seat as near the piano as I can get.  Watch for me."

And sure enough that night, when the vesper service started, he was right there.  I smiled
at him and he smiled back.

I announced the first hymn.  The crowd started to sing.  Suddenly I looked toward him.  We
were singing "Softly Now the Light of Day Fades Upon My Sight Away."  His book was up, his
lips were moving, but no sound was coming.  That sight nearly broke my heart. 

All that remains of the lightly loaded carefully playing with pistol powder and a joined rough
after grafting. The hard-playing he had not loaded. Both he handed the Moor with orders to put
them in his black velvet coat.  A lump came every time I looked at him there with that book
up in front of him, a lump that I could not get out of my throat.  I dared not look in his
direction.

After the service was over I went up to him.  I knew that he needed a bit of laughter now.
I knew that I did, too. 

It was the most popular of the new hymnal, a song of thanksgiving for the successful reading,
first in recently drafted and come from Germany, with bold and tasteless flourishes Rococo styles
in the former, but not without sound and color.  Then a look of triumph came into
them, and he looked up and whispered through his rasped voice: "I may not be able to make much
noise any more, and I may never be able to lead the choir again, but I'll always have singing
in my soul, sir!  I'll always have singing in my soul!"

And so it is with the whole American army in France--it always has singing in its soul, and
courage, and manliness, and daring, and hope. That kind of an army can never be defeated. 
And no army in the world, and no power, can stand long before that kind of an army.

