This same morning the edict was carried to the Parliament, which refused to register it, and
sent a deputation to M. le Duc d'Orleans with its reasons for this, at which the Regent was
much vexed.  The next morning an ordonnance of the King was pasted all over the town, prohibiting
the people, under heavy penalties, to assemble, and announcing that in consequence of the disturbances
which had taken place the previous day at the bank, that establishment would remain closed
until further notice, and no more money would be paid by it.  Luck supplied the place of prudence;
for people knew not how they were to live in the meanwhile, yet no fresh disturbance occurred
fact which shows the goodness and obedience of the people, subjected to so many and to such
strange trials.  Troops, however, were collected at Charenton, who were at work upon the canal
of Montargis: some regiments of cavalry and of dragoons were stationed at Saint-Denis, and
the King's regiment was posted upon the heights of Chaillot.  Money was sent to Gonesse to
induce the bakers to come as usual, and for fear they should refuse bank notes, like the Paris
workmen and shopkeepers, nearly all of whom would no longer receive any paper, the regiment
of the guards had orders to hold itself ready, and the musketeers to keep within their quarters,
their horses saddled and bridled.

As for the Parliament, M. le Duc d'Orleans determined to punish its disobedience by sending
it to Blois.  This resolution was carried in full council.  The Regent hoped that the Parliamentary
men, accustomed to the comfort of their Paris homes, and to the society there of their wives;
children, and friends, would soon grow tired of being separated from them, and of the extra
expense they would be put to, and would give in. I agreed to the project, although I saw, alas!
that by this exile the Parliament would be punished, but would be neither conciliated nor tamed
into submission.  To make matters worse, Blois was given up, and Pontoise was substituted for
it!  This latter town being close to Paris, the chastisement became ridiculous, showed the
vacillating weakness of the Regent, and encouraged the Parliament to laugh at him.  One thing
was, however, well done.  The resolution taken to banish the Parliament was kept so secret
that that assembly had not the slightest knowledge of it.

On Sunday, the 21st of July, squadrons of the guards, with officers at their head, took possession,
at four o'clock in the morning, of all the doors of the Palais de justice.  The musketeers
seized at the same time upon the doors of the Grand Chamber, whilst others invaded the house
of the Chief-President, who was in much fear during the first hour.  Other musketeers went
in parties of four to all the officers of the Parliament, and served them with the King's order,
commanding them to repair to Pontoise within twice twenty-four hours.  All passed off very
politely on both sides, so that there was not the slightest complaint: several members obeyed
the same day and went to Pontoise.

Rather late in the evening M. le Duc d'Orleans sent to the Attorney- General 200,000 livres
in coin, and as much in bank notes of 100 livres, and of 10 livres to be given to those who
should need them for the journey, but not as gifts.  The Chief-President was more brazen and
more fortunate; he made so many promises, showed so much meanness, employed so much roguery,
that abusing by these means the feebleness and easiness of the Regent, whom he laughed at,
he obtained more than 100,000 ecus for his expenses.  The poor prince gave him the money, under
the rose, in two or three different payments, and permitted the Duc de Bouillon to lend him
his house at Pontoise, completely furnished, and the garden of which, on the banks of the river,
is admirable and immense, a masterpiece of its kind, and had been the delight of Cardinal Bouillon,
being perhaps the only thing in France he regretted.  With such fine assistance the Chief-
President--on bad terms with his companions, who had openly despised him for some time--perfectly
made it up with them.  He kept at Pontoise open table for the Parliament; all were every day
at liberty to use it if they liked, so that there were always several tables, all equally,
delicately, and splendidly served.  He sent, too, to those who asked for them, liquors, etc.,
as they could desire.  Cooling drinks and fruits of all kinds were abundantly served every
afternoon, and there were a number of little one and two-horse vehicles always ready for the
ladies and old men who liked a drive, besides play-tables in the apartments until supper time.
The result of all this magnificence was, as I have said, that the Chief-President completely
reinstated himself in the good graces of his companions; but it was at the expense of the Regent,
who was laughed at for his pains.  A large number of the members of the Parliament did not
go to Pontoise at all, but took advantage of the occasion to recreate themselves in the country.
Only a few of the younger members mounted guard in the assembly, where nothing but the most
trivial and make- believe business was conducted.  Everything important was deliberately neglected.
Woe!  to those, therefore, who had any trial on hand.  The Parliament, in a word, did nothing
but divert itself, leave all business untouched, and laugh at the Regent and the government.
Banishment to Pontoise was a fine punishment!

This banishment of the Parliament to Pontoise was followed by various financial operations
and by several changes in the administrations.  Des Forts had the general control of the finances
and all authority, but without the name.  The disordered state of the exchequer did not hinder
M. le Duc d'Orleans from indulging in his strange liberalities to people without merit and
without need, and not one of whom he could possibly care a straw for.  He gave to Madame la
Grande Duchesse an augmentation of her pension of 50,000 livres; one of 8,000 livres to Trudaine:
one of 9,000 livres to Chateauneuf; one of 8,000 livres to Bontems, chief valet de chambre
of the King; one of 6,000 livres to the Marechal de Montesquieu; one of 3,000 livres to Faucault;
and one of 9,000 livres to the widow of the Duc d'Albemarle, secretly remarried to the son
of Mahoni.

All this time the public stock-jobbing still continued on the Place Vendome.  The Mississippi
had tempted everybody.  It was who should fill his pockets first with millions, through M.
le Duc d'Orleans and Law. The crowd was very great.  One day the Marechal de Villars traversed
the Place Vendome in a fine coach, loaded with pages and lackeys, to make way for which the
mob of stock-jobbers had some difficulty.  The Marechal upon this harangued the people in his
braggart manner from the carriage window, crying out against the iniquity of stock-jobbing,
and the shame it cast upon all.  Until this point he had been allowed to say on, but when he
thought fit to add that his own hands were clean, and that he had never dabbled in shares,
a voice uttered a cutting sarcasm, and all the crowd took up the word, at which the Marechal,
ashamed and confounded, despite his ordinary authority, buried himself in his carriage and
finished his journey across the Place Vendome at a gentle trot in the midst of a hue and cry,
which followed him even beyond, and which diverted Paris at his expense for several days, nobody
pitying him.

At last it was found that this stock-jobbing too much embarrassed the Place Vendome and the
public way; it was transferred, therefore, to the vast garden of the Hotel de Soissons.  This
was, in fact, its proper place.  Law, who had remained at the Palais Royal some time, had returned
to his own house, where he received many visits.  The King several times went to see the troops
that had been stationed near Paris; after this they were sent away again.  Those which had
formed a little camp at Charenton, returned to Montargis to work at the canal making there.

Law, for commercial reasons, had some time ago caused Marseilles to be made a free port.  The
consequence of this was that an abundance of vessels came there, especially vessels from the
Levant, and from want of precautions the plague came also, lasted a long while, desolated the
town, province; and the neighbouring provinces.  The care and precautions afterwards taken
restrained it as much as possible, but did not hinder it from lasting a long time, or from
creating frightful disorders.  These details are so well known that they can be dispensed with
here.

I have a few more words to say of Law and his Mississippi.  The bubble finally burst at the
end of the year (1720).  Law, who had no more resources, being obliged secretly to depart from
the realm, was sacrificed to the public.  His flight was known only through the eldest son
of Argenson, intendant at Mainbeuge, who had the stupidity to arrest him.  The courier he despatched
with the news was immediately sent back, with a strong reprimand for not having deferred to
the passport with which Law had been furnished by the Regent.  The financier was with his son,
and they both went to Brussels where the Marquis de Prie, Governor of the Imperial Low Countries,
received them very well, and entertained them.  Law did not stop long, gained Liege and Germany,
where he offered his talents to several princes, who all thanked him; nothing more.  After
having thus roamed, he passed through the Tyrol, visited several Italian courts, not one of
which would have him, and at last retired to Venice. This republic, however, did not employ
him.  His wife and daughter followed him some time after.  I don't know what became of them
or of the son.

Law was a Scotchman; of very doubtful birth; tall and well made; of agreeable face and aspect;
gallant, and on very good terms with the ladies of all the countries he had travelled in. 
His wife was not his wife; she was of a good English family and well connected; had followed
Law for love; had had a son and a daughter by him, passed for his wife, and bore his name without
being married to him.  This was suspected towards the end; after his departure it became certain.
She had one eye and the top of one cheek covered by an ugly stain as of wine; otherwise she
was well made, proud, impertinent in her conversation and in her manners, receiving compliments,
giving next to none, paying but few visits, these rare and selected, and exercising authority
in her household.  I know not whether her credit over her husband was great; but he appeared
full of regard, of care, and of respect for her; at the time of their departure they were each
about fifty and fifty-five years old. Law had made many acquisitions of all kinds and still
more debts, so that this tangle is not yet unravelled by the committee of the council appointed
to arrange his affairs with his creditors.  I have said elsewhere, and I repeat it here, that
there was neither avarice nor roguery in his composition.  He was a gentle, good, respectable
man, whom excess of credit and fortune had not spoiled, and whose deportment, equipages, table,
and furniture could not scandalise any one.  He suffered with singular patience and constancy
all the vexations excited by his operations, until towards the last, when, finding himself
short of means and wishing to meet his difficulty, he became quick and bad- tempered, and his
replies were often ill-measured.  He was a man of system, of calculation, of comparison, well
and profoundly instructed in these things, and, without ever cheating, had everywhere gained
at play by dint of understanding--which seems to me incredible--the combinations of cards.

His bank, as I have elsewhere said, was an excellent thing for a republic, or for a country
like England, where finance is as in a republic.  His Mississippi he was the dupe of, and believed
with good faith he should make great and rich establishments in America.  He reasoned like
an Englishman, and did not know how opposed to commerce and to such establishments are the
frivolity of the (French) nation, its inexperience, its avidity to enrich itself at once, the
inconvenience of a despotic government, which meddles with everything, which has little or
no consistency, and in which what one minister does is always destroyed by his successor.

Law's proscription of specie, then of jewels, so as to have only paper in France, is a system
I have never comprehended, nor has anybody, I fancy, during all the ages which have elapsed
since that in which Abraham, after losing Sarah, bought, for ready-money, a sepulchre for her
and for her children.  But Law was a man of system, and of system so deep, that nobody ever
could get to the bottom of it, though he spoke easily, well and clearly, but with a good deal
of English in his French.

He remained several years at Venice, upon very scanty means, and died there a Catholic, having
lived decently, but very humbly, wisely, and modestly, and received with piety the last sacraments
of the Church.

Thus terminates all I have to say of Law.  But a painful truth remains. I have to speak of
the woful disorder in the finances which his system led to, disorder which was not fully known
until after his departure from France.  Then people saw, at last, where all the golden schemes
that had flooded upon popular credulity had borne us;--not to the smiling and fertile shores
of Prosperity and Confidence, as may be imagined; but to the bleak rocks and dangerous sands
of Ruin and Mistrust, where dull clouds obscure the sky, and where there is no protection against
the storm.

CHAPTER CII

Not long after the flight of Law, that is to say, on Sunday, the 24th of January, of the new
year, 1721, a council was held at the Tuileries, at four o'clock in the afternoon, principally
for the purpose of examining the state of the finances and of Law's Bank and India Company.
It was, in fact, high time to do something to diminish the overgrown disorder and confusion
everywhere reigning.  For some time there had been complete stagnation in all financial matters;
the credit of the King had step by step diminished, private fortune had become more and more
uncertain.  The bag was at last empty, the cards were cast aside, the last trick was played:
The administration of the finances had passed into the hands of La Houssaye, and his first
act was to call the attention of the Regency Council to the position of the bank and the company.
We were prepared to hear that things were in a very bad state, but we were scarcely prepared
to find that they so closely resembled utter ruin and bankruptcy.

I need not relate all that passed at this council; the substance of it is enough.  From the
statement there of M. le Duc d'Orleans, it appeared that Law had issued 1,200,000,000 livres
of bank notes more than he ought to have issued.  The first 600,00,000 livres had not done
much harm, because they had been kept locked up in the bank; but after the 22nd of May, another
issue of 600,000,000 had taken place, and been circulated among the public, without the knowledge
of the Regent, without the authorisation of any decree.  "For this," said M. le Duc d'Orleans,
"Law deserved to be hanged, but under the circumstances of the case, I drew him from his embarrassment,
by an ante-dated decree, ordering the issue of this quantity of notes."

Thereupon M. le Duc said to the Regent, "But, Monsieur, why, knowing this, did you allow him
to leave the realm?"

"It was you who furnished him with the means to do so," replied M. le Duc d'Orleans.

"I never asked you to allow him to quit the country," rejoined M. le Duc.

"But," insisted the Regent, "it was you yourself who sent him his passports."

"That's true," replied M. le Duc, "but it was you who gave them to me to send to him; but I
never asked you for them, or to let him leave the realm.  I know that I have the credit for
it amongst the public, and I am glad of this opportunity to explain here the facts of the case.
I was against the proposition for sending M. Law to the Bastille, or to any other prison, because
I believed that it was not to your interest to sanction this, after having made use of him
as you had; but I never asked you to let him leave the realm, and I beg you, Monsieur, in presence
of the King, and before all these gentlemen, to say if I ever did."

"'Tis true," replied the Regent, "you never asked me; I allowed him to go, because I thought
his presence in France would injure public credit, and the operations of the public."

"So far was I from asking you," said M. le Duc, "that if you had done me the honour to demand
my opinion, I should have advised you to take good care not to let him depart from the country."

This strange conversation, which roused our astonishment to an incredible point, and which
was sustained with so much out-spoken freedom by M. le Duc, demands a word or two of explanation.

M. le Duc was one of those who, without spending a farthing, had drawn millions from Law's
notes and shares.  He had had large allotments of the latter, and now that they had become
utterly valueless, he had been obliged to make the best of a bad bargain, by voluntarily giving
them up, in order to lighten the real responsibilities of the Company.  This he had done at
the commencement of the Council, M. le Prince de Conti also. But let me explain at greater length.

The 22nd of May, the day of the decree, was the period at which commenced the final decay of
the Company, and of the bank, and the extinction of all confidence by the sad discovery that
there was no longer any money wherewith to pay the bank notes, they being so prodigiously in
excess of the coin.  After this, each step had been but a stumble: each operation a very feeble
palliation.  Days and weeks had been gained, obscurity had been allowed to give more chance,
solely from fear of disclosing the true and terrible state of affairs, and the extent of the
public ruin.  Law could not wash his hands of all this before the world; he could not avoid
passing for the inventor and instrument, and he would have run great risk at the moment when
all was unveiled.  M. le Duc d'Orleans, who, to satisfy his own prodigality, and the prodigious
avidity of his friends, had compelled Law to issue so many millions of livres of notes more
than he had any means of paying, and who had thus precipitated him into the abyss, could not
let him run the chance of perishing, still less to save him, could he proclaim himself the
real criminal.  It was to extricate himself from this embarrassment that he made Law leave
the country, when he saw that the monstrous deceit could no longer be hidden.

This manifestation, which so strongly interested the shareholders, and the holders of bank
notes, especially those who had received shares or notes as favours due to their authority,
and who could show no other title to them, threw every one into despair.  The most important
holders, such as the Princes of the Blood, and others, whose profits had been immense, had
by force or industry delayed this manifestation as long as possible.  As they knew the real
state of affairs, they felt that the moment all the world knew it also, their gains would cease,
and their paper become worthless, that paper from which they had drawn so much, and which had
not cost them a farthing!  This is what induced M. le Duc d'Orleans to hide from them the day
of this manifestation, so as to avoid being importuned by them; and by a surprise, to take
from them the power of preparing any opposition to the measures it was proposed to carry out.
M. le Duc, when he learned this, flew into a fury, and hence the strange scene between him
and M. le Duc d'Orleans, which scandalised and terrified everybody in the Council.

M. le Duc d'Orleans, who, from taste, and afterwards from necessity, lived upon schemes and
trickery, thought he had done marvels in saddling M. le Duc with the passport of Law.  He wished
to lay the blame of Law's departure upon M. le Duc; but as I have shown, he was defeated by
his own weapons.  He had to do with a man as sharp as himself.  M. le Duc, who knew he had
nothing to fear, would not allow it to be supposed that he had sanctioned the flight of the
financier.  That was why he pressed M. le Duc d'Orleans so pitilessly, and forced him to admit
that he had never asked him to allow Law to leave the country.

The great and terrible fact brought out by this Council was, that Law, without the knowledge
or authority of the Regent, had issued and disseminated among the public 600,000,000 livres
of notes; and not only without being authorised by any edict, but contrary to express prohibition.
But when the Regent announced this, who did he suppose would credit it?  Who could believe
that Law would have had the hardihood to issue notes at this rate without the sanction and
approbation of his master?

However, to leave once and for all these unpleasant matters, let me say what was resolved upon
by way of remedy to the embarrassments discovered to exist.  The junction of the India Company
with the bank, which had taken place during the previous February, had led to transactions
which made the former debtor to the latter to an immense amount.  But the bank being a governmental
establishment, the King became thus the creditor of the Company.  It was decreed, in fact,
that the Company should be considered as debtor to the King.  It was decided, however, that
other debtors should receive first attention.  Many private people had invested their money
in the shares of the Company.  It was not thought just that by the debt of the Company to the
King, these people should be ruined; or, on the other hand, that those who had left the Company
in good time, who had converted their shares into notes, or who had bought them at a low price
in the market, should profit by the misfortune of the bona fide shareholders.  Accordingly,
commissioners, it was decided, were to be named, to liquidate all these papers and parchments,
and annul those which did not proceed from real purchases.

M. le Duc said, upon this, "There are at least eighty thousand families, the whole of whose
wealth consists of these effects; how are they to live during this liquidation?"

La Houssaye replied, that so many commissioners could be named, that the work would soon be done.

And so the Council ended.

But I must, perforce, retrace my steps at this point to many other matters, which I have left
far behind me in going on at once to the end of this financial labyrinth.  And first let me
tell what happened to that monstrous personage, Alberoni, how he fell from the lofty pinnacle
of dower on which he had placed himself, and lost all consideration and all importance in the
fall.  The story is mightily curious and instructive.

CHAPTER CIII

Alberoni had made himself detested by all Europe,--for all Europe, in one way or another, was
the victim of his crimes.  He was detested as the absolute master of Spain, whose guides were
perfidy, ambition, personal interest, views always oblique, often caprice, sometimes madness;
and whose selfish desires, varied and diversified according to the fantasy of the moment, were
hidden under schemes always uncertain and oftentimes impossible of execution.  Accustomed to
keep the King and Queen of Spain in chains, and in the narrowest and obscurest prison, where
he allowed them to communicate with no one, and made them see, feel, and breathe through him,
and blindly obey his every wish; he caused all Spain to tremble, and had annihilated all power
there, except his own, by the most violent acts, constraining himself in no way, despising
his master and his mistress, whose will and whose authority he had utterly absorbed. He braved
successively all the powers of Europe, and aspired to nothing less than to deceive them all,
then to govern them, making them serve all his ends; and seeing at last his cunning exhausted,
tried to execute alone, and without allies, the plan he had formed.

This plan was nothing less than to take away from the Emperor all that the peace of Utrecht
had left him in Italy; all that the Spanish house of Austria had possessed there; to dominate
the Pope and the King of Sicily; to deprive the Emperor of the help of France and England,
by exciting the first against the Regent through the schemes of the ambassador Cellamare and
the Duc du Maine; and by sending King James to England, by the aid of the North, so as to keep
King George occupied with a civil war.  In the end he wished to profit by all these disorders,
by transporting into Italy (which his cardinalship made him regard as a safe asylum against
all reverses) the immense treasures he had pillaged and collected m Spain, under pretext of
sending the sums necessary to sustain the war, and the conquests he intended to make; and this
last project was, perhaps, the motive power of all the rest.  The madness of these schemes,
and his obstinacy in clinging to them, were not discovered until afterwards.  The astonishment
then was great indeed, upon discovering the poverty of the resources with which he thought
himself capable of carrying out these wild projects.  Yet he had made such prodigious preparations
for war, that he had entirely exhausted the country without rendering it able for a moment
to oppose the powers of Europe.

Alberoni, abhorred in Spain as a cruel tyrant, in France, in England, in Rome, and by the Emperor
as an implacable and personal enemy, did not seem to have the slightest uneasiness.  Yet he
might have had some, and with good cause, at the very moment when he fancied himself most powerful
and most secure.

The Regent and the Abbe Dubois, who for a long time had only too many reasons to regard Alberoni
as their personal enemy, were unceasingly occupied in silently plotting his fall; they believed
the present moment favourable, and did not fail to profit by it.  How they did so is a curious
fact, which, to my great regret, has never reached me.  M. le Duc d'Orleans survived Dubois
such a few months that many things I should have liked to have gained information upon, I had
not the time to ask him about; and this was one.

All I know is, that what Alberoni always dreaded, at last happened to him.  He trembled, at
every one, no matter of how little importance, who arrived from Parma (the Queen of Spain,
it has not been forgotten, was of that Duchy); he omitted nothing by the aid of the Duke of
Parma, and by other means, to hinder the Parmesans from coming to Madrid; and was in terror
of the few of those whose journey he could not hinder, and whose dismissal he could not obtain.

Among these few people there was nobody he feared so much as the Queen's nurse, whom he drew
up with a round turn occasionally, so to speak, but less from policy than ill-temper.  This
nurse, who was a rough country- woman of Parma, was named Donna Piscatori Laura.  She had arrived
in Spain some years after the Queen, who had always liked her, and who made her, shortly after
her arrival, her 'assofeta', that is to say, her chief 'femme de chambre'; an office more considerable
in Spain than with us. Laura had brought her husband with her, a peasant in every way, seen
and known by nobody; but Laura had intelligence, shrewdness, cleverness, and ambitious views,
in spite of the external vulgarity of her manners, which she had preserved either from habit,
or from policy, for make herself less suspected.  Like all persons of this extraction, she
was thoroughly selfish.  She was not unaware how impatiently Alberoni endured her presence,
and feared her favour with the Queen, whom he wished to possess alone; and, more sensible to
the gentle taps she from time to time received from him, than to his ordinary attentions, she
looked upon him simply as a very formidable enemy, who kept her within very narrow limits,
who hindered her from profiting by the favour of the Queen, and whose design was to send her
back to Parma, and to leave nothing undone until he had carried it out.

This is all the information I have ever been able to obtain.  The probability is, that Donna
Laura was gained by the money of the Regent and the intrigues gained Dubois; and that she succeeded
in convincing the Queen of Spain that Alberoni was a minister who had ruined the country, who
was the sole obstacle in the way of peace, and who had sacrificed everything and everybody
to his personal views, their Catholic Majesties included.  However, as I relate only what I
know, I shall be very brief upon this interesting event.

Laura succeeded.  Alberoni, at the moment he least expected it, received a note from the King
of Spain ordering him to withdraw at once, without attempting to see him or the Queen, or to
write to them; and to leave Spain in twice twenty-four hours!  An officer of the guards was
to accompany him until his departure: How this overruling order was received, and what the
Cardinal did, I know not; I only know that he obeyed it, and took the road for Arragon.  So
few precautions had been taken, that he carried off an immense number of papers, money, and
jewels; and it was not until a few days had elapsed, that the King of Spain was informed that
the original will of Charles the Second could not be found.  It was at once supposed that Alberoni
had carried away this precious document (by which Charles the Second named Philippe V. King
of Spain), in order to offer it, perhaps, to the Emperor, so as to gain his favour and good
graces.  Alberoni was stopped.  It was not without trouble, the most terrible menaces, and
loud cries from him, that he surrendered the testament, and some other important papers which
it was perceived were missing.  The terror he had inspired was so profound, that, until this
moment, no one had dared to show his joy, or to speak, though the tyrant was gone.  But this
event reassured every one against his return, and the result was an unexampled overflow of
delight, of imprecations, and of reports against him, to the King and Queen, of the most public
occurrences (which they alone were ignorant of) and of. private misdeeds, which it was no longer
thought necessary to hide.

M. le Duc d'Orleans did not restrain his joy, still less the Abbe Dubois; it was their work
which had overthrown their personal enemy; with him fell the wall of separation, so firmly
erected by Alberoni between the Regent and the King of Spain; and (at the same time) the sole
obstacle against peace.  This last reason caused joy to burst out in Italy, in Vienna, in London;
and peace between France, and Spain soon resulted.

The allied princes felicitated themselves on what had happened; even the Dutch were ravished
to be delivered of a minister so double-dealing, so impetuous, so powerful.  M. le Duc d'Orleans
dispatched the Chevalier de Morcieu, a very skilful and intelligent man, and certainly in the
hands of the Abbe Dubois, to the extreme confines of the frontiers to wait for Alberoni, accompanying
him until the moment of his embarkation in Provence for Italy; with orders never to lose sight
of him, to make him avoid the large towns and principal places as much as possible; suffer
no honours to be rendered to him; above all, to hinder him from communicating with anybody,
or anybody with him; in a word, to conduct him civilly, like a prisoner under guard.

Morcieu executed to the letter this disagreeable commission; all the more necessary, because,
entirely disgraced as was Alberoni, everything was to be forced from him while traversing a
great part of France, where all who were adverse to the Regent might have recourse to him.
Therefore it was not without good reason that every kind of liberty was denied him.

It may be imagined what was suffered by a man so impetuous, and so accustomed to unlimited
power; but he succeeded in accommodating himself to such a great and sudden change of condition;
in maintaining his self- possession; in subjecting himself to no refusals; in being sage and
measured in his manners; very reserved in speech, with an air as though he cared for nothing;
and in adapting himself to everything without questions, without pretension, without complaining,
dissimulating everything, and untiringly pretending to regard Morcieu as an accompaniment of
honour.  He received, then, no sort of civility on the part of the Regent, of Dubois, or of
anybody; and performed the day's journeys, arranged by Morcieu, without stopping, almost without
suite, until he arrived on the shores of the Mediterranean, where he immediately embarked and
passed to the Genoa coast.

Alberoni, delivered of his Argus, and arrived in Italy, found himself in another trouble by
the anger of the Emperor, who would suffer him nowhere, and by the indignation of the Court
of Rome, which prevailed, on this occasion, over respect for the purple.  Alberoni for a long
time was forced to keep out of the way, hidden and a fugitive, and was not able to approach
Rome until the death of the Pope.  The remainder of the life of this most extraordinary man
is not a subject for these memoirs.  But what ought not to be forgotten is the last mark of
rage, despair, and madness that he gave in traversing France.  He wrote to M. le Duc d'Orleans,
offering to supply him with the means of making a most dangerous war against Spain; and at
Marseilles, ready to embark, he again wrote to reiterate the same offers, and press them on
the Regent.

I cannot refrain from commenting here upon the blindness of allowing ecclesiastics to meddle
with public affairs; above all, cardinals, whose special privilege is immunity from everything
most infamous and most degrading.  Ingratitude, infidelity, revolt, felony, independence, are
the chief characteristics of these eminent criminals.

Of Alberoni's latter days I will say but a few words.

At the death of Clement XI., legal proceedings that had been taken to deprive Alberoni of his
cardinalship, came to an end.  Wandering and hidden in Italy, he was summoned to attend a conclave
for the purpose of electing a new Pope.  Alberoni was the opprobrium of the sacred college;
proceedings, as I have said, were in progress to deprive him of his cardinalship.  The King
and Queen of Spain evidently stimulated those proceedings: the Pope just dead had opposed him;
but the cardinals would not agree to his disgrace; they would not consent to strip him of his
dignity.  The example would have been too dangerous.  That a cardinal, prince, or great nobleman,
should surrender his hat in order to marry, the store of his house demands it; well and good;
but to see a cardinal deprive himself of his hat by way of penitence, is what his brethren
will not endure.  A cardinal may be poisoned, stabbed, got rid of altogether, but lose his
dignity he never can.  Rome must be infallible, or she is nothing.

