The engraving shows a reduced representation of a very elegant specimen of modern lace--the
reduction in size being necessary in order to present the whole design. In making the lace,
narrow braid and cord are used for the foundation of the design, and then the filling-in stitches
are made and at the same time rings and buttons and bars and picots are introduced. Some of
the filling-in stitches are combinations--as in the figures with very open bars where point
d'Espagne and point Brabançon are combined, and at the middle section of the central figure
where point de Valenciennes and point Brabançon are combined. Other stitches used are d'Alençon
bars, Raleigh bars, church stitch, point de Bruxelles, "spiders," Sorrento bars, and picots.
The greater the variety in the filling-in stitches, the more beautiful the lace. A picot edge
finishes the lace in a very dainty manner along its lower outline, while a cord forms the upper
edge.

No. 44.

DESIGN FOR MODERN LACE.

This design may be made up in Battenburg braid, or of point or Honiton braid according to the
texture of the lace desired. In making it for garments or articles that are to be renovated
occasionally, the Battenburg braids are advisable; but for daintier uses, point or Honiton
may be chosen. The Raleigh-bar stitch, point de Bruxelles, and "spiders" may be used in following
the outlines given for stitches.

No. 45.

CORNER IN MODERN LACE.

The suggestions given above will also apply to this design, which may be used for a table spread,
or a handkerchief, according to the braid selected. As illustrated, the design is of pretty
dimensions for a doily or a toilet-cushion cover, or for a handkerchief. All of the bar work
seen may be done with single threads instead of the complete Raleigh method, and the rosettes
or "spiders" may be larger or smaller as preferred.

No. 46.

PILLOW-SHAM OF BATTENBURG LACE AND LINEN. 

The prisoner received this care and sympathy as he might have received the ministration of angels.
The attendance was almost entirely confined to Montier and his wife, but now and then Elizabeth
also could serve him. She served him with her heart, with unobtrusive zeal that was exhaustless
as the zeal of love. Unobserved, she watched, as well as waited on him; and oh, how jealous
and impatient of time and authority did she become! Her pity knew no limit; it beamed from her
eyes, spoke through her voice, was unceasing in activity. He was to her a romance terrible
and sweet, a romance that had more abundant fascination than the world could show beside.
She went up to his room one morning, carrying his breakfast. The square is made of the finest household linen and is completed with a broad hem-stitched
hem before the lace is added. The lace design may be obtained in any width desired by sending
to a professional lace-maker; or, a clever student may be able to enlarge the design herself.

No. 47.

DESIGN FOR PRINCESS OR DUCHESSE LACE COLLAR AND CUFFS.

Although this design is represented very small, it is sufficiently clear to convey a good idea
of its outlines, and enable a student of average ability to adapt it to collar and cuffs of
any size desired. Raleigh bars are used in connecting the various portions of the braids, while
any of the fine stitches preferred may be chosen to fill in around the loops of the blossoms
and foliage. A fine picot braid finishes the edge.

No. 48.

ENGLISH NEEDLE-POINT LACE.

This engraving illustrates a very beautiful specimen of modern-point lace in a design combining
the lily and the rose. Raleigh bars and buttons render the heavy part of the work effective,
while the daintier point stitches and bars are used to fill in the floral sections--coarse
and fine thread being used in the work.

This lace, like any of the varieties now fashionable may be made wide or narrow, or fine or
coarse by designs furnished as required by lace-makers in general; and the patterns may also
be developed in silk or ribbon needle-point, which is a style of ornamentation appearing extensively
as a decoration for scarfs, piano and table covers, mantel valences, etc., etc.

No. 49.

ROYAL BATTENBURG LACE.

This design was among the first ones of this lace to appear, and is fully entitled to its royal
name. Fancy Battenburg braid was selected for the foundation, and various stitches chosen for
filling-in purposes. Among the stitches are point de Bruxelles, made similarly to the Italian
lace stitch, point de fillet, plain Raleigh bars, point d'Alençon, rosettes, rings and point
de Grecque. The central figure conveys a hint of the outlines of the royal crown, and the lace
is really sumptuous in design and texture. In 1883, Mrs. Grace McCormick, the originator of
the design and lace was awarded a diploma for her work which was forwarded from Washington,
where she applied for a patent for her specimens of Royal Battenburg lace, of which this is one.

No. 50.

ROMAN LACE (CORAL PATTERN).

The design here given is for a lappet or scarf-end, and will afford a suggestion for the making
of larger articles or edging in similar arrangements of braid. It will be observed that the
braid forms irregular lines that recall the branchings of coral, and it will be a very easy
matter for an amateur lace-maker to similarly arrange her braid for any purpose she desires.
Fine Raleigh bars form the connecting work, and a button-hole picot-finish is made along the
edge of the braid which forms the border. In making an edging, a definite outline could be
kept for the lower edge, and above this an irregular or indefinite outline arranged.

No. 51.

TIDY OF BATTENBURG LACE.

The tidy here illustrated is made entirely of Battenburg lace, and is a beautiful specimen
of this kind of work. The border design is the same as the one previously described for a pillow-sham,
except that but one row of the blossoms and foliage is used. The center is composed of rows
of braid crossed to form squares or open spaces that are filled in with rosettes in point d'Angleterre.
This center is attached to the braid at the inner edge of the border by a series of bars arranged
in d'Alençon style and then wrought with the thread after the method used in d'Anvers bars. By-and-by
she said, speaking low, but with firm accent,--

"I am sorry I asked you anything about it; but I will never speak of it again. I heard it was
for religion; but I know you could not hurt the Truth.

They said you fought against the Church.

Then I believe the Church was wrong.

I am not afraid to say it. I want you to understand. Of course I cannot do anything for you; only
I was so in hopes that I could! You must not be angry with me, Sir, for hoping that."

The integrity of nature that spoke in these words came to the hearer's heart with wondrous power
and freshness. He looked at Elizabeth; she was gazing full on him,
and lofty was the bearing of the girl; she had set her own fears and
all danger and suspicion at defiance in these words. The engraving is sufficiently plain
to enable the worker to decide which stitches are used alone or in combination, and to guide
her correctly in their application. The picot-edge is done in point de Venise stitch.

No. 53.

MODERN-POINT LACE EDGING.

This is an easy design to follow and is simply made. Heavy Sorrento bars with picot loops form
the ground-work, while the filling-in stitches are of the same class done in fine thread in
regular squares and also a combination of point de fillet and point de Grecque. A dainty picot-finish
is added at the lower edge. This edging is pretty for bordering draperies or decorating dresses,
and may be made as fine or as coarse as desired.

No. 54.

SQUARE IN MODERN-POINT LACE.

In this design will be observed a favorite combination--the rose and the butterfly. Close inspection
will also disclose that the filling-in stitches are of a diverse character, and that to this
diversification much of the beauty of the work is due. As most of the stitches are easily recognized,
and as the copyist can easily adapt methods for the combinations seen, it will not be necessary
to definitely describe them.

The square may be used for a scarf-end in connection with the edging No. 53 seen on page 91,
if the braid selected is sufficiently fine. When coarser braid is chosen, the square will be
pretty for doilies, tidies or the center of a table spread. The design may be daintily made
up of ribbon, with silk for the stitches. In this event it may be set into a scarf or drapery
of China or Surah silk with charming results.

No. 55.

LOUIS XIV. CURTAIN-LACE.

This is a very popular decoration for curtains and vestibule doors and is made of heavy écru
or white net and braid. The design selected is generally a border with a corner piece, and
sometimes a center piece. The specimen here given is simply a square of the net decorated as
illustrated to convey an idea of this at present fashionable curtain lace. Obliged to complete no
course of education, to pass no examination, they are at once let loose upon the country whenever
they feel like it, to build what go by the names of railroads and
bridges, but are in reality traps in which to lose both life and money.

Then écru or white Battenburg braid is used to follow the design, and is shaped into the leaves
and flowers seen, rings being used for the centers of the blossoms and écru or white cord for
the stems. The net is cut from under the rings at the centers of the large roses, and each
opening is filled in with point de fillet and English wheels. The effect is very rich and the
work is not difficult to do.

When a curtain is thus embroidered or decorated with braid, it is bordered the same as the
square illustrated, or upon that principle, with rows and points of Battenburg braid. Ribbon
is often used in this way for tidies, bureau scarfs and various other little household decorations,
and in this event the flower and foliage tints may be carried out in the design.

DARNED-NET SCARFS, KERCHIEFS, TIDIES, EDGINGS, INSERTIONS, ETC., ETC., WITH DESIGNS FOR THE
SAME AND OTHER ARTICLES.

Bobbin net, or "bobbinet," or "net" as it is now commonly called, was first made by machinery
in 1809, and was so called because the threads from which it was made were wound upon bobbins,
and twisted into meshes instead of being looped in knitting style as they were previous to
the invention of the machine. The latter was invented by John Heathcoat, the son of an English
farmer; but to France must be given the credit of introducing the "darned work" by which some
of its costliest net laces were first made. From these laces originated the industry of darning
net by machinery and by hand, and in all grades from fine silk-blonde and Brussels net to the
coarsest wash net, such as is used for curtains and draperies.

