                                                      Feet.
"Cubs one year old measure . . . . . .  Males    4-1/2 to 5-1/2
                                        Females  4     to 5
 Ditto two years old . . . . . . . . .  Males    5-1/2 to 7
                                        Females  5     to 6-1/2
 Ditto three years old . . . . . . . .  Males    7     to 8-1/2
                                        Females  6-1/2 to 7-1/2

"When they reach three years of age they lose their 'milk' canines, which are replaced by the
permanent fangs, and at this period the mother leaves them to cater for themselves."

The cubs are interesting pets if taken from the mother very young. I have reared several, but
only kept one for any length of time. I have given a full description of Zalim and his ways
in 'Seonee.' He was found by my camp followers with another in a nullah, and brought to me.
The other cub died, but Zalim lived to grow up into a very fine tiger, and was sent to England.
I never allowed him to taste raw flesh. He had a little cooked meat every day, and as much
milk as he liked to drink, and he throve well on this diet. When he was too large to be allowed
to roam about unconfined I had a stout buffalo-leather collar made for his neck, and he was
chained to a stump near the cook-room door. With grown-up people he was perfectly tame, but
I noticed he got restless when children approached him, and so made up my mind to part with
him before he did any mischief.

I know nothing of the habits of the tiger of the grass plains, but those of the hill tiger
are very interesting, the cattle lifter especially, as he is better known to men. Each individual
has his special idiosyncrasy. I wrote of this once before as follows: "Strange though it may
seem to the English reader that a tiger should have any special character beyond the general
one for cruelty and cunning, it is nevertheless a fact that each animal has certain peculiarities
of temperament which are well known to the villagers in the neighbourhood. They will tell you
that such a one is daring and rash; another is cunning and not to be taken by any artifice;
that one is savage and morose; another is mild and harmless. There are few villages in the
wilder parts of the Seonee and Mandla districts without an attendant tiger, which undoubtedly
does great damage in the way of destroying cattle, but which avoids the human inhabitants of
the place. So accustomed do the people get to their unwelcome visitor that we have known the
boys of a village turn a tiger out of quarters which were reckoned too close, and pelt him
with stones. On one occasion two of the juvenile assailants were killed by the animal they
had approached too near. Herdsmen in the same way get callous to the danger of meddling with
so dreadful a creature, and frequently rush to the rescue of their cattle when seized. On a
certain occasion one out of a herd of cattle was attacked close to our camp, and rescued single-handed
by it's owner, who laid his heavy iron-bound staff across the tiger's back; and, on our rushing
out to see what was the matter, we found the man coolly dressing the wounds of his cow, muttering
to himself: 'The robber, the robber! My last cow, and I had five of them!' He did not seem
to think he had done anything wonderful, and seemed rather surprised that we should suppose
that he was going to let his last heifer go the way of all the others.

"It is fortunate for these dwellers in the backwoods that but a small percentage of tigers
are man-eaters, perhaps not five per cent., otherwise village after village would be depopulated;
as it is the yearly tale of lives lost is a heavy one."[12]

[Footnote 12: 'Seonee.']

Tigers are also eccentric in their ways, showing differences in disposition under different
circumstances. I believe that many a shikari passes at times within a few yards of a tiger
without knowing it, the tendency of the animal being to crouch and hide until the strange-looking
two-legged beast has passed. The narrowest escape I ever had is an instance. I had hunted a
large tiger, well known for the savageness of his disposition, on foot from ravine to ravine
on the banks of the Pench, one hot day in June, and, giving him no rest, made sure of getting
him about three o'clock in the afternoon. He had been seen to slip into a large nullah, bordered
on one side by open country, a small water-course draining into it from the fields; here was
one large beyr bush, behind which I wished to place myself, but was persuaded by an old shikari
of great local reputation to move farther on. Hardly had we done so when our friend bounded
from under the bush and disappeared in a thicket, where we lost him. Ten days after this he
was killed by a friend and myself, and he sustained his savage reputation by attacking the
elephant without provocation--a thing a tiger seldom does. I had hunted this animal several
times, and on one occasion saw him swim the Pench river at one of its broadest reaches. It
was the only time I had seen a tiger swim, and it was interesting to watch him powerfully breasting
the stream with his head well up. Tigers swim readily, as is well known. I believe it is not
uncommon to see them take to the water in the Sunderbunds; and a recent case may be remembered
when two of them escaped from the King of Oude's Menagerie, and one swam across the Hooghly
to the Botanical Gardens.

There has been some controversy about the way in which tigers kill their prey. I am afraid
I cannot speak definitely on the subject, although I have on several occasions seen tigers
kill oxen and ponies. I do not think they have a uniform way of doing it, so much depends upon
circumstance--certain it is that they cannot smash in the head of a buffalo with a stroke,
as some writers make out, but yet I have known them make strokes at the head, in a running
fight, for instance, between a buffalo and a tiger--in which the former got off--and in the
case of human beings. Of two men killed by the same tiger, one had his skull fractured by a
blow; the other, who was killed as we were endeavouring to drive the tiger out of the village,
was seized by the loins. He died immediately; the man with the fractured skull lingered some
hours longer. Another case of a stroke at the head happened once when I had tied out a pony
for a tiger that would not look at cows, over which I had sat for several successive nights.
A tiger and tigress came out, and the former made a rush at the tattu, who met him with such
a kick on the nose that he drew back much astonished; the tigress then dashed at the pony,
and I, wishing if possible to save the plucky little animal's life, fired two barrels into
her, rolling her over just as she struck at his head. But it was too late; the pony dropped
at the blow and died--not from concussion, however, but from loss of blood, for the jugular
vein had been cut open as though it had been done with a knife. So much for the head stroke,
which is, I may say, exceptional. As a general rule I think the tiger bears down his victim
by sheer weight, and then, by some means which I should hesitate to define, although I have
seen it, the head is wrenched back, so as to dislocate the vertebrae. One evening two cows
were killed before me. I was going to say the tiger sprang at one, but correct myself--it is
not a spring, but a rush on to the back of the animal; he seldom springs all fours off the
ground at once. I have never seen a tiger get off his hind legs except in bounding over a fallen
tree, or in and out of a ravine. In this case he rushed on to the cow and bore it to the ground;
there was a violent struggle, and in the dusky light I could not tell whether he used his mouth
or paws in wrenching back the head, which went with a crack. The thing was done in a minute,
when he sprang once more to his feet, and the second cow was hurled to the ground in like manner.
As his back was turned to me I fired somewhat hastily, thinking to save the cow, but only wounded
the tiger, which I lost. Both the cows, however, had their necks completely broken. I cannot
now remember the position of the fang-marks in the throat. On another occasion I came across
five out of a herd that had been killed, probably by young tigers; every one had the neck broken.

Mr. Sanderson says that herdsmen have described to him how they have noticed the operation:
"Clutching the bullock's fore-quarters with his paws, one being generally over the shoulder,
he seizes the throat in his jaws from underneath and turns it upwards and over, sometimes springing
to the far side in doing so, to throw the bullock over and give the wrench which dislocates
its neck. This is frequently done so quickly that the tiger, if timid, is in retreat again
almost before the herdsmen can turn round." This account seems reliable. A tiger may seize
by the nape in order to get a temporary purchase, but it would be awkward for him to pull the
head back far enough to snap the vertebral column.

Now for a few remarks in conclusion. I have written more on the subject than I intended. That
tigers are carrion feeders is well known, but that sometimes they prefer high meat to fresh
I had only proof of once. A tiger killed a mare and foal, on which he feasted for three days;
on the fourth nothing remaining but a very offensive leg; we tied out a fine young buffalo
calf for him within a yard or two of the savoury joint. The tiger came during the night and
took away the leg, without touching the calf; and, devouring it, fell asleep, in which condition
we, having tracked him up the nullah, found and killed him. 

We have already alluded to the great number of gods who were known to the Egyptians, but it will
be readily imagined that it was only those who were thought to deal with man's destiny, here and
hereafter, who obtained the worship and reverence of the people of Egypt. These were, comparatively,
limited in number, and in fact may be said to consist of the members
of the great company of the gods of Heliopolis, that is to say, of
the gods who belonged to the cycle of Osiris.

These may be briefly described as follows:--

1. TEMU or ATMU, i.e., the "closer" of the day, just as Ptah was the "opener" of the day. In
the story of the creation he declares that he evolved himself under the form of the god Khepera,
and in hymns he is said to be the "maker of the gods", "the creator of men", etc., and he usurped
the position of R[=a] among the gods of Egypt. His worship must have been already very ancient
at the time of the kings of the Vth dynasty, for his traditional form is that of a man at that
time.

2. SHU was the firstborn son of Temu. According to one legend he sprang direct from the god,
and according to another the goddess Hathor was his mother; yet a third legend makes him the son
of Temu by the goddess Ius[=a]set. He it was who made his way between
the gods Seb and Nut and raised up the latter to form the sky, and
this belief is commemorated by the figures of this god in which he
is represented as a god raising himself up from the earth with the
sun's disk on his shoulders. He was badly scratched, but had escaped
any serious fang wounds from his having, as he said, seen the tiger coming at him, and stuffed
his blanket into his open mouth, whilst he belaboured him with his axe. Anyhow but for his
buffalos he would have been a dead man in three minutes more.

THE PARDS OR PANTHERS.

To these are commonly assigned the name of Leopard, which ought properly to be restricted to
the hunting leopard (Felis jubata), to which we have also misappropriated the Indian name Chita,
which applies to all spotted cats, Chita-bagh being spotted tiger. The same term, derived from
the adjective chhita, spotted or sprinkled, applies in various forms to the other creatures,
such as Chital, the spotted deer (Axis), Chita-bora, a kind of speckled snake, &c. Leopardus
or lion-panther was, without doubt, the name given by the ancients to the hunting leopard,
which was well known to them from its extending into Africa and Arabia. Assuredly the prophet
Habakkuk spoke of the hunting chita when he said of the Chaldaeans: "That bitter and hasty
nation . . . their horses also are swifter than the leopards," for the pard is not a swift
animal, whereas the speed of the other is well known.

The name was given to it by the ancients on the supposition that it was a cross between the
lion and the pard, from a fancied resemblance to the former on account of the mane or ruff
of hair possessed by the hunting leopard. Apparently this animal must have been more familiar
to our remote ancestors than the pard, for the name has been attached for centuries to the
larger spotted Cats indiscriminately. I have not time just now to attempt to trace the species
of the leopard which formerly graced the arms of the English kings, but I should not be surprised
if it were the guepard or chita. The old representations were certainly attenuated enough;
and the animal must have been familiar to the crusaders, as we know it was before them to the
Romans.

Mr. Blyth, who speculated on the origin of the name, in one of his able articles on the felines
of India in the India Sporting Review of April 1856, makes no allusion to the above nor to
the probable confusion that may have arisen in the middle ages over the spotted Cats. Although
the term leopard, as applied to panthers, has the sanction of almost immemorable custom, I
do not see why, in writing on the subject, we should perpetuate the misnomer, especially as
most naturalists and sportsmen are now inclined to make the proper distinction. I have always
avoided the use of the term leopard, except when speaking of the hunting chita, preferring
to call the others panthers.

Then again we come on disputed ground. Of panthers how many have we, and how should they be
designated? I am not going farther afield than India in this discussion beyond alluding to
the fact that the jaguar of Brazil is almost identical with our pard as far as marking goes,
but is a stouter, shorter-tailed animal, which justifies his being classed as a species; therefore
we must not take superficial colouring as a test, but class the black and common pards together;
the former, which some naturalists have endeavoured to made into a separate species (Felis
melas), being merely a variety of the latter. They present the same characteristics, although
Jerdon states that the black is the smaller animal. They have been found in Java to inhabit
the same den, according to Professor Reinwardt and M. Kuhl, and they inter-breed, as has been
proved by the fact that a female black pard has produced a black and a fulvous cub at the same
birth. This is noticed by Mr. Sanderson in his book, and he got the information from the director
of the Zoological Society's Menagerie at Amsterdam. "Old Fogy," a constant contributor to the
old India Sporting Review, a good sportsman and naturalist, with whom Blyth kept up a correspondence,
wrote in October 1857 that, "in a litter of four leopard cubs one was quite black; they all
died, but both the parents were of the ordinary colour and marking; they were both watched
at their cave, and at last shot, one with an arrow through the heart. Near a hill village a
black male leopard was often seen and known to consort with an ordinary female. I have observed
them myself once, if not twice."

An observant sportsman, "Hawkeye," in one of his letters to the South of India Observer, remarks
that "on one occasion a gentleman saw an old leopard accompanied by two of her offspring, one
red, the other black." He also says he has never known "of two black leopards in company,"
but black pards have bred in zoological gardens. I am told that cubs have been born in the
Calcutta Garden, but they did not live. General MacMaster, in his notes on Jerdon, makes the
pertinent remark: "If however black panthers are only accidental, it is odd that no one has
yet come on a black specimen of one of the larger cats, F. leo tigris." I see no reason why
such should not yet be discovered; he was perhaps not aware that the jaguar of Brazil, which
comes next to the tiger, has been found black (Felis nigra of Erxleben). A black tiger would
be a prize. General MacMaster relates that he once watched a fine black cat basking in the
sun, and noticed that in particular lights the animal exhibited most plainly the regular brindled
markings of the ordinary gray wild or semi-wild cat. These markings were as black or blacker
than the rest of his hair. His mother was a half-wild gray brindle.

I think we have sufficient evidence that the black pard is merely a variety of the common one,
but now we come to the pards themselves, and the question as to whether there are two distinct
species or two varieties; Blyth, Jerdon and other able naturalists, although fully recognizing
the differences, have yet hesitated to separate them, and they still remain in the unsatisfactory
relation to each other of varieties. I feel convinced in my own mind that they are sufficiently
distinct to warrant their being classed, and specifically named apart. It is not as I said
before, that we should go upon peculiarities of marking and colour, although these are sufficiently
obvious, but on their osteology and also the question of interbreeding and production. Grant
their relative sizes, one so much bigger than the other, and the difference in colour and marking,
has it ever been known that out of a litter of several cubs by a female of the larger kind,
one of the smaller sort has been produced, or vice versa? This is a question that yet remains
for investigation. My old district had both kinds in abundance, and I have had scores of cubs,
of both sorts, brought to me--cubs which could be distinguished at a glance as to which kind
they belonged to, but I never remember any mixture of the two. As regards the difference in
appearance of the adults there can be no question. The one is a higher, longer animal, with
smooth shiny hair of a light golden fulvous, the spots being clear and well defined, but, as
is remarked by Sir Walter Elliot, the strongest difference of character is in the skulls, those
of the larger pard being longer and more pointed, with a ridge running along the occiput, much
developed for the attachment of the muscles, whereas the smaller pard has not only a rougher
coat, the spots being more blurred, but it is comparatively a more squat built animal, with
a rounder skull without the decided occipital ridge. There is a mass of evidence on the point
of distinctness--Sir Walter Elliot, Horsfield, Hodgson, Sir Samuel Baker, Johnson (author of
'Field Sports in India'), "Mountaineer," a writer in the Bengal Sporting Review, even Blyth
and Jerdon, all speak to the difference, and yet no decided separation has been made. There
is in fact too much confusion and too many names. For the larger animal Felis pardus is appropriate,
and the leopardus of Temminck, Schreber and others is not. Therefore that remains; but what
is the smaller one to be called? I should say Felis panthera which, being common to Asia and
Africa, was probably the panther of the Romans and Greeks. Jerdon gives as a synonym F. longicaudata
(Valenciennes), but I find on examination of the skulls of various species that F. longicaudata
has a complete bony orbit which places it in Gray's genus Catolynx, and it is too small for
our panther. We might then say that we have the pard, the panther, and the leopard in India,
and then we should be strictly correct. Some sportsmen speak of a smaller panther which Kinloch
calls the third (second?) sort of panther, but this differs in no respect from the ordinary
one, save in size, and it is well known that this species varies very much in this respect.
I am not singular in the views I now express. Years ago Colonel Sykes, who was a well known
naturalist, said of the pard: "It is a taller, stronger, and slighter built animal than the
next species, which I consider the panther."

The skull of the pard in some degree resembles that of the jaguar, which again is nearest the
tiger, whereas that of the panther appears to have some affinity to the restricted cats. In
disposition all the pards and panthers are alike sanguinary, fierce and incapable of attachment.
The tiger is tameable, the panther not so. I have had some experience of the young of both,
and have seen many others in the possession of friends; and though they may, for a time, when
young, be amusing pets, their innate savageness sooner or later breaks out. They are not even
to be trusted with their own kind. I have known one to turn on a comrade in a cage, kill and
devour him, and some of my readers may possibly remember an instance of this in the Zoological
Gardens at Lahore, when, in 1868, a pard one night killed a panther which inhabited the same
den, and ate a goodly portion of him before dawn. They all show more ferocity than the tiger
when wounded, and a man-eating pard is far more to be dreaded than any other man-eater, as
will be seen farther on from the history of one I knew.

NO. 202. FELIS PARDUS. The Pard (Jerdon's No. 105).

NATIVE NAMES.--Tendua, Chita or Chita-bagh, Adnara; Hindi, Honiga; Canarese, Asnea; Mahratti,
Chinna puli; Telegu, Burkal; Gondi, Bay-heera; and Tahr-hay in the Himalayas.

HABITAT.--Throughout India, Burmah, and Ceylon, and extending to the Malayan Archipelago.

DESCRIPTION.--A clean, long limbed, though compact body; hair close and short; colour pale
fulvous yellow, with clearly defined spots in rosettes; the head more tiger-like than the next
species; the skull is longer and more pointed, with a much developed occipital ridge.

SIZE.--Head and body from 4-1/2 to 5-1/2 feet; tail from 30 to 38 inches.

This is a powerful animal and very fierce as a rule, though in the case of a noted man-eater
I have known it exhibit a curious mixture of ferocity and abject cowardice. It is stated to
be of a more retiring disposition than the next species, but this I doubt, for I have frequently
come across it in the neighbourhood of villages to which it was probably attracted by cattle.
It may not have the fearlessness or impudence of the panther, which will walk through the streets
of a town and seize and devour its prey in a garden surrounded by houses, as I once remember,
in the case of a pony at Seonee, but it is nevertheless sufficiently bold to hang about the
outskirts of villages. Those who have seen this animal once would never afterwards confuse
it with what I would call the panther. There is a sleekness about it quite foreign to the other,
and a brilliancy of skin with a distinctness of spots which the longer, looser hair does not
admit of. But with all these external differences I am aware that there will be objection to
classifying it as a separate species, unless the osteological divergences can be satisfactorily
determined, and for this purpose it would be necessary to examine a large series of authenticated
skulls of the two kinds.

The concurrence of evidence as to the habits of this species is that it is chiefly found in
hilly jungles preying on wild animals, wild pigs, and monkeys, but not unfrequently, as I know,
haunting the outskirts of villages for the sake of stray ponies and cattle. The largest pard
I have ever seen was shot by one of my own shikaris in the act of stalking a pony near a village.
I was mahseer-fishing close by at the time, and had sent on the man, a little before dusk,
to a village a few miles off, to arrange for beating up a tiger early next day. Jerdon says
this is the kind most common in Bengal, but he does not say in what parts of Bengal, and on
what authority. I have no doubt it abounds in Sontalia and Assam, and many other hilly parts.
At Colgong, Mr. Barnes informed him that many cases of human beings killed by pards were known
in the Bhaugulpore district. At Seonee we had one which devastated a tract of country extending
to about 18 miles in diameter. He began his work in 1857 by carrying off a follower of the
Thakur of Gurwarra, on whom we were keeping a watch during the troublous times of the mutiny.
My brother-in-law, Colonel Thomson and I, went after him under the supposition that it was
a tiger that had killed the man, and it was not till we found the body at the bottom of a rocky
ravine that we discovered it was a pard. During the beat he came out before us, went on, and
was turned back by an elephant and came out again a third time before us; but we refrained
from firing as we expected a man-eating tiger. I left Seonee for two years to join the Irregular
Corps to which I had been posted, and after the end of the campaign, returned again to district
work, and found that the most dreaded man-eater in the district was the pard whose life we
had spared. There was a curious legend in connection with him, like the superstitious stories
of Wehr wolves in Northern Europe. I have dealt fully with it in "Seonee," and Forsyth has
also given a version of it in the 'Highlands of Central India,' as he came to the district
soon after the animal was destroyed. Some of the aborigines of the Satpura Range are reputed
to have the power of changing themselves into animals at will, and back again into the human
form. The story runs, that one day one of these men, accompanied by his wife, came to a glade
in the jungle where some nilgai were feeding. The woman expressed a wish for some meat, on
which the husband gave her a root to hold, and to give him to smell on his return. He changed
himself into a pard, killed one of the nilgai, and came bounding back for the root; but the
terrified woman lost her nerve, flung away the charm, and rushed from the place. The husband
hunted about wildly for the root, but in vain; and then inflamed with rage he pursued her,
and tore her to pieces and continued to wreak his vengeance on the human race. Such was the
history of the man-eating panther of Kahani, as related in the popular traditions of the country,
and certainly everything in the career of this extraordinary animal tended to foster the unearthly
reputation he had gained. Ranging over a circle, the radius of which may be put at eighteen
miles, no one knew when and where he might be found. He seemed to kill for killing's sake,
for often his victims--at times three in a single night--would be found untouched, save for
the fatal wound in the throat. The watcher on the high machaun, the sleeper on his cot in the
midst of a populous village, were alike his prey. The country was demoralized; the bravest
hunters refused to go after him; wild pigs and deer ravaged the fields; none would dare to
watch the growing crops. If it had been an ordinary panther who would have cared? Had not each
village its Shikari? men who could boast of many an encounter with tiger and bear, and would
they shrink from following up a mere animal? Certainly not; but they knew the tradition of
Chinta Gond, and they believed it. What could they do?

On the morning of the second day, after leaving Amodagurh, the two sportsmen neared Sulema,
a little village not far from Kahani, out of which it was reported the panther had taken no
less than forty people within three years. There was not a house that had not mourned the loss
of father, or mother, or brother, or sister, or wife or child, from within this little hamlet.
Piteous indeed were the tales told as our friends halted to gather news, and the scars of the
few who were fortunate enough to have escaped with life after a struggle with the enemy, were
looked at with interest; but the most touching of all were the stories artlessly told by a
couple of children, one of whom witnessed the death of a sister, and the other of a brother,
both carried off in broad daylight, for the fell destroyer went boldly to work, knowing that
they were but weak opponents."[13] I was out several times after this diabolical creature,
but without success; as I sat out night after night I could hear the villagers calling from
house to house hourly, "Jagte ho bhiya! jagte ho!" "Are you awake, brothers? are you awake!"
All day long I scoured the country with my elephant, all night long I watched and waited. My
camp was guarded by great fires, my servants and followers were made to sleep inside tents,
whilst sentries with musket and bayonet were placed at the doors; but all to no purpose. The
heated imagination of one sentry saw him glowering at him across the blazing fire. A frantic
camp-follower spoilt my breakfast next morning ere I had taken a second mouthful, by declaring
he saw him in an adjoining field. Then would come in a tale of a victim five miles off during
the night, and then another, and sometimes a third. I have alluded before to his cowardice;
in many cases a single man or boy would frighten him from his prey. On one occasion, in my
rounds after him, I came upon a poor woman bitterly crying in a field; beside her lay the dead
body of her husband. He had been seized by the throat and dragged across the fire made at the
entrance of their little wigwam in which they had spent the night, watching their crops. The
woman caught hold of her husband's legs, and, exerting her strength against the man-eater's,
shrieked aloud. He dropped the body and fled, making no attempt to molest her or her little
child of about four years of age. This man was the third he had attacked that night.

[Footnote 13: 'Seonee.']

He was at last killed, by accident, by a native shikari who, in the dusk, took him for a pig
or some such animal, and made a lucky shot; but the tale of his victims had swelled over two
hundred during the three years of his reign of terror.

NO. 203. FELIS PANTHERA. The Panther.

NATIVE NAMES.--Chita, Gorbacha, Hindi; Beebeea-bagh, Mahrathi; Bibla, of the Chita-catchers;
Ghur-hay or Dheer-hay of the hill tribes; Kerkal, Canarese.

HABITAT.--India generally, Burmah and Ceylon, extending also into the Malayan countries.

DESCRIPTION.--Much smaller than the last, with comparatively shorter legs and rounder head;
the fur is less bright; the ground-work often darker in colour, and the rosettes are more indistinct
which is caused by the longer hairs intermingling and breaking into the edges of the spots;
tail long and furry at the end. According to Temminck the tail is longer than that of the last
species, having 28 caudal vertebrae against 22 of the other; if this be found to be the normal
state, there will be additional grounds for separating the two.

SIZE.--Head and body, 3 to 3-1/2 feet; tail, 2-1/2 feet; height from 1-1/2 to 2 feet.

This animal is more common than the pard, and it is more impudent in venturing into inhabited
places. This is fortunate, for it is seldom a man-eater, although perhaps children may occasionally
be carried off. I have before mentioned one which killed and partially devoured a pony in the
heart of a populous town, and many are the instances of dogs being carried off out of the verandahs
of Europeans' houses. A friend of mine one night being awoke by a piteous howl from a dog,
chained to the centre pole of his tent, saw the head and shoulders of one peering in at the
door; it retreated but had the audacity to return in a few minutes. Jerdon and other writers
have adduced similar instances. It is this bold and reckless disposition which renders it easier
to trap and shoot. The tiger is suspicious to a degree, and always apprehensive of a snare,
but the panther never seems to trouble his head about the matter, but walks into a trap or
resumes his feast on a previously killed carcase, though it may have been moved and handled.
There is another thing, too, which shows the different nature of the beast. There is little
difficulty in shooting a panther on a dark night. All that is necessary is to suspend, some
little distance off, a common earthen gharra or water pot, with an oil light inside, the mouth
covered lightly with a sod, and a small hole knocked in the side in such a way as to allow
a ray of light to fall on the carcase. No tiger would come near such an arrangement, but the
panther boldly sets to his dinner without suspicion, probably from his familiarity with the
lights in the huts of villages.

I may here digress a little on the subject of night shooting. Every one who has tried it knows
the extreme difficulty in seeing the sights of the rifle in a dark night. The common native
method is to attach a fluff of cotton wool. On a moonlight night a bit of wax, with powdered
mica scattered on it, will sometimes answer. I have seen diamond sights suggested, but all
are practically useless. My plan was to carry a small phial of phosphorescent oil, about one
grain to a drachm of oil dissolved in a bath of warm water. A small dab of this, applied to
the fore and hind sights, will produce two luminous spots which will glow for about 40 or 50
seconds or a minute.

Dr. Sal Muller says of this species that it is occasionally found sleeping stretched across
the forked branch of a tree, which is not the case with either the tiger or the pard. According
to Sir Stamford Raffles, the Rimau-dahan or clouded panther (miscalled tiger) Felis macrocelis,
has the same habit.

I would remark in conclusion that in the attempt to define clearly the position of these two
animals the following points should be investigated by all who are interested in the subject
and have the opportunity.

First the characteristics of the skull:--

viz.--Length, and breadth as compared with length of each, with presence or absence of the
occipital ridge.

2ndly.--Number of caudal vertebrae in the tails of each.

3rdly.--Whether in a litter, from one female, cubs of each sort have been found.

NO. 204. FELIS UNCIA. The Ounce or Snow Panther (Jerdon's No. 106).

NATIVE NAMES.--Iker, Tibetan; Sah, Bhotia; Phale, Lepcha; Burrel-hay, Simla hillmen; Thurwag
in Kunawur. The Snow-Leopard of European sportsmen. 

"God is the eternal One, He is eternal and infinite; and endureth
for ever and aye; He hath endured for countless ages, and He shall
endure to all eternity.

"God is the hidden Being, and no man hath
known His form.

DESCRIPTION.--Pale yellowish or whitish isabelline, with small spots on the head and neck,
but large blotchy rings and crescents, irregularly dispersed on the shoulders, sides and haunches;
from middle of back to root of tail a medium irregular dark band closely bordered by a chain
of oblong rings; lower parts dingy white, with some few dark spots about middle of abdomen;
limbs with small spots; ears externally black; tail bushy with broad black rings.

SIZE.--Head and body about 4 feet 4 inches; tail, 3 feet; height, about 2 feet.

I have only seen skins of this animal, which is said to frequent rocky ground, and to kill
Barhel, Thar, sheep, goats, and dogs, but not to molest man. This species is distinguishable
from all the preceding felines by the shortness and breadth of the face and the sudden elevation
of the forehead--Gray. Pupil round--Hodgson.

NO. 205. FELIS DIARDII vel MACROCELIS. The Clouded Panther (Jerdon's No. 107).

NATIVE NAMES.--Tungmar, Lepcha; Zik, Bhotia; Lamchitta, of the Khas tribe (Jerdon). Rimau dahan
of Sumatra.

HABITAT.--Nepal, Sikim, Assam, Burmah, and down the Malayan Peninsula to Sumatra, Java and Borneo.

DESCRIPTION.--A short-legged long-bodied animal, with a very elongated skull; the upper canines
are the longest in comparison of all living felines, and in this respect it comes nearest to
the extinct species Felis smilodon. The ground-work of the colouring is a pale buff, with large,
irregular, cloud-like patches of black. Blyth remarks that the markings are exceedingly beautiful,
but most difficult to describe, as they not only vary in different specimens, but also in the
two sides of one individual. Jerdon's description is as follows: "Ground colour variable, usually
pale greenish brown or dull clay brown, changing to pale tawny on the lower parts, and limbs
internally, almost white however in some. In many specimens the fulvous or tawny hue is the
prevalent one; a double line of small chain-like stripes from the ears, diverging on the nape
to give room to an inner and smaller series; large irregular clouded spots or patches on the
back and sides edged very dark and crowded together; loins, sides of belly and belly marked
with irregular small patches and spots; some black lines on the cheeks and sides of neck, and
a black band across the throat; tail with dark rings, thickly furred, long; limbs bulky, and
body heavy and stout; claws very powerful." Hodgson stated that the pupil of the eye is round,
but Mr. Bartlett, whose opportunities of observation have been much more frequent, is positive
that it is oval.

SIZE.--Head and body, 3-1/2 feet; tail, 3 feet, but Jerdon states it grows to a larger size.

This is one of the most beautiful of all the cat family. It is not, however, one of the most
elegant in form and motion, but its colouring is exquisite; it is quite an arboreal feline,
and is found only in forests, frequently sleeping or lying in wait across the forked branches
of trees, from which habit it acquires its Malayan name, dahan, signifying the forked branch
of a tree. The young seem to be easily tamed, according to Sir Stamford Raffles, who describes
two which he had in confinement. Dr. Jerdon also states the same, he having procured a young
one in the neighbourhood of Darjeeling. In the Zoological Gardens in London there was a very
fine specimen about four years ago. Professor Parker says of it: "It was not always to be seen,
as it was kept during the day fastened up in one of the sleeping apartments at the back of
a cage in the lion-house, and was left out only for about half an hour before the gardens closed.
It was well worth stopping to see. As soon as the iron door of its cell was raised, it would
come out into the large cage with a peculiar sailor-like slouch, for owing to the shortness
of its legs, its gait was quite different to that of an ordinary cat, and altogether less elegant.
The expression of the face, too, was neither savage nor majestic nor intelligent, but rather
dull and stupid. It was fond of assuming all sorts of queer attitudes." Brehm describes one
as lying prone on a thick branch placed in its cage, with all four legs hanging down straight,
two on each side of the branch--certainly a remarkable position for an animal to assume of
its own free will.

The type of this animal constitutes the genus Neofelis of Gray, containing two species, this
and the Neofelis (leopardus) brachyurus of Formosa.

NO. 206. FELIS VIVERRINA. The Large Tiger-Cat (Jerdon's No. 108).

NATIVE NAMES.--Mach-bagral, Bagh-dasha, Bengali; Bunbiral, Khupya-bagh, Hindi; Handoon-deeva,
Singhalese.

