=The Children to be Affected Society's Chief Care.=--Above all, we must place the children
affected by any decision that gives society a broken family in the front rank of interest and
of protective care. If the paid attorney were eliminated, divorces would certainly be lessened
in number. If publicity were avoided in all divorce proceedings, much of the harm to children
arising from separation of married couples would be avoided. If, in addition, there were advisory
aid to the confused and unhappy, many now drifting to complete division of interest and affection
would be enabled to start on again toward better realization of married opportunity. If, in
further addition, the Domestic Relations Courts were changed with the supervisory care of all
children whose parents were legally separated, and the well-being of those children made the
chief legal concern even if it required the complete separation from both father and mother,
more fathers and mothers would hesitate to place themselves where their parental control and
their parental influence would be so minimized. Yet who doubts that among the rich as well
as among the poor such judicial protection and care of the children, whom the broken family
leaves without true parental care, is needed? To give children into the hands of either parent
alone is in many such cases no fitting substitute for the normal home influence. In any case,
there should be an external conscience and an external solicitude enlisted in the interest
of every child whose parents have made such a failure of marriage and the home that the divorce
court is the only refuge.

This does not ignore the fact that many couples separate to the advantage of the children,
that many parents are quite innocent of any cause for the broken family, that many times there
is a rehabilitation of the family life on other lines that means full nurture and development
for the children. The fact remains, however, that the average child of divorced parents has
to meet difficulties and face disadvantages in life which the child of permanently united fathers
and mothers does not suffer, and, for such, some exterior protection and supervision should
be provided.

=A Uniform or Federal Divorce Law.=--Many persons deeply interested in lessening the number
of divorces in the United States place much dependence upon a "Uniform Divorce Law" for the
whole country, as giving a basis for wise legislation. Recently, Senator Jones, of the State
of Washington, introduced in the Senate a resolution proposing a new amendment to the Federal
Constitution by which, if it passed, Congress would have power "to establish and enforce by
appropriate legislation uniform laws as to marriage and divorce." The fact that a couple may
be legally married in one state of our Union and illegally practicing bigamy or adultery in
another state gives a plausible reason for such a Constitutional Amendment. And perhaps the
searching investigation and discussion which would precede such a definite change in our national
law, if such change were made, would be of great use in clarifying the public mind, and securing
a consensus of opinion as to what should and what should not be allowed in this matter. Yet
it is doubtful if such a law would, in itself, bring down the number of divorces, now estimated
by those advocating the law as "one in every eight to ten marriages," or prevent the ratio
of increase in divorces to increase in population (now estimated "as increase in population
in a given period, 60 per cent., and increase in divorces in the same period, 160 per cent."),
or really mend our family ills. The dependency upon Constitutional amendments and upon legislation
of every kind has, many believe, reached the utmost limit of social serviceability in this
country. The deeper question in all such propositions is this: What, under the Constitution
as first affirmed and later amended, is proper subject for Federal legislation, and what should
be left to state and local action? We have not reached a political unity as to the basic elements
of just and effective political method in the division of social control between the nation
and the various states. The habit of rushing to the National Congress for Federal legislation
with no plan or logical aim in relation to such division, is one that may well be curbed.

=Education Our Chief Reliance.=--Meanwhile, all must insist that education, character-training
for strong, unselfish, noble personalities, is our main dependence, and must ever be in the
effort to make family life more stable, and more socially helpful. Men and women must be made
competent to self-control, and steadied with a sense of obligation to others, and animated
by an ideal of faithfulness to contract, and of devotion to securing mutual rights in a mutual
plan of life together. Such education for character, must be our chief dependence in efforts
to lessen divorces, as in the effort to do away with all social evils. There is no magic in
marriage, there is no magic even in parenthood, to make weak, and selfish and superficial and
ignorant and stupid and despotic people into guardians of the best interests of home. A man
or a woman is successful in the family order, only on the same basis as is demanded in all
other relations of life, the basis of justice, good sense, right feeling, and an honest effort
to realize high ideals.

=Helps Toward Family Unity.=--What remains for society to do, after general moral training
has worked its full service of individual preparation for good intent and wise choices and
competent mastery of family arrangements, must be done or attempted on the basis rather of
helps toward permanence, than of prohibition of release from marriage mistakes and wrongs.

We have left undone much we should have done to make it easier for young people to find their
true mates, to start right in married life, and to bear the burdens of parenthood without stumbling
on the way. Let us not add mistakenly to the duties left undone the attempt to do things we
should not, namely, to overbear instead of aiding the personal life.

There is nothing that works more tragedy of suffering than broken vows in marriage, whether
the fact of the actual separation be publicly acknowledged or not. How many a disillusioned
man or woman has felt with the poet:

    "To look upon the face of a dead friend
      Is hard; but there is deeper woe--
    To look upon our friendship lying dead
      While we live on, and eat, and sleep--
    Mere bodies from which all the soul has fled,
      And that dead thing year after year to keep
    Locked in cold silence on its dreamless bed."

=Shall Society Favor the Remarriage of Divorced Persons?=--Now that the moral sense of most
people allows another trial on Love's Rialto, there are many individuals who can leave "that
dead thing" to find its own grave, and in the light of some new and dearer affection go on
to a renewed promise and joy of life. Can we think that wrong? Who shall dare to say that alone
of all mistakes of youth, a mistaken choice in marriage shall be for all life a sentence of
doom? Who shall dare to limit the power of rehabilitation of the family order, even when what
has failed is the central heart of married love? Our gospel of hope and courage, and renewal
of opportunity, and rebirth of affection must know no limits if we would rightly trust the
spirit within our being.

But for the shallow, and the selfish, and the pleasure-seeker without reverence for the right
way of life, and for the scoffer at all high moods of feeling and of ideal aim, there can be
little to justify his flitting about on the very outmost limits of true love. For such, some
check must be had in ordered rules and legal bonds, in order that the race-life shall go on
in safety and in social health. Meanwhile, although there is much to give us pause and to demand
serious study and earnest and wise social work in the situation revealed by the divorce court
statistics, there is nothing that need give hysterical alarm lest the home is being destroyed
and the family abolished. On the contrary, there probably was never a time when so many people
were really happy, each and every member of the family, in the home relation; and hence never
a time when it was clearer that to keep the home stable and permanent, and make marriage successful
in the vast majority of cases, we have only to get better and wiser people in larger proportion.

To understand the real reason for marital unhappiness and for family instability, to know that
such reason inheres primarily in personal character and not in any statute, is to begin work
for the real cure and prevention of such unhappiness and instability. The broken family may
be a sad necessity, alike for individuals concerned, and for the well-being of society. To
prevent that tragedy is a social duty than which none is more pressing or more open to social
effort.

=Turning From Compulsory to Attractive Methods of Reform.=--To undertake that social task,
the psychology of social effort must be turned from compulsive methods of prevention of legal
divorce, when such divorce is sought, to ways of making marriage choices wiser, marriage experience
more sane and better balanced by sense of obligation to the nearer and more remote of social
relations, and by putting at the command of all, the helpful sympathy and the social guidance
that can alone hold to firm and noble lines the wavering and the weak.

QUESTIONS ON THE BROKEN FAMILY

  1. Is the admitted increase in divorce wholly a testimony to
     moral degeneracy? If so, what can be done about it? If not,
     what else does it indicate?

  2. What are the main points to work for in order to reduce the
     number of divorces, and to remove the social evils of which
     divorces are only the symptom?

  3. Should the social psychology be directed principally toward
     preventing people from getting divorce or from remarrying after
     divorce, or toward making marriage so generally successful that
     fewer people want to separate?

  4. What is specially needed in education both of youth and the
     adult in the United States in the interest of family stability
     and family success?

  5. Make a list of causes that in your opinion justify legal
     separation or divorce and find out whether or not these causes
     are named in the statutes of your State. If they are not, what
     should be done about it?

  6. What is done for and with the children of legally separated and
     divorced persons in your State? For the
  thistle a blade of grass, later a drop of nourishing milk, later a
  nobler man. Man perfects himself as well as the world by
  working."--CARLYLE.

  "Every man's task is his life preserver."--EMERSON.

    "What was his name? I do not know his name.
    No form of bronze and no memorial stones
    Show me the place where lie his mouldering bones.
      Only a cheerful city stands,
      Builded by his hardened hands;
        Only ten thousand homes,
          Where every day
          The cheerful play
        Of love and hope and courage comes;
    These are his monuments, and these alone,--
    There is no form of bronze and no memorial stone."
                    --EDWARD EVERETT HALE.

    "Let us now praise the artificer and the workmaster
    Who is wakeful to finish his work.
    These put their trust in their hands
    And each becometh wise in his own work.
    For these maintain the fabric of the world
    And in the handiwork of their craft is their prayer."
                    --ECCLESIASTICUS.

=Changes from Ancient to Modern Forms of Labor.=--The change from the domestic and handicraft
stage in industry to the capitalized, power-driven, machine-dominated, and highly specialized
work-system of the present day has been often described and is a part of all the economic problems
of modern times. We do not need here to rehearse the details of that change or to speak of
its effect upon workers in general. What we must do, however, is to trace specifically some
of the results of that industrial change in the constitution and in the development of family life.

In the old order the worker owned his tool, selected his material, controlled the process of
his task, and often was master of the sale of the finished product. Hence, as has so often
been shown, the character of a man was so obviously a part of the stock-in-trade of the worker,
his judgment, probity and skill were so clearly causes of his success in handicraft, that the
ethical training of life came definitely through the exercise of work-power. Now, as we are
often reminded, the worker is divorced from the management and control of his work-process
and is a "hand," merely attached to a machine that others must choose, buy and install, the
product of which is in only an infinitesimal part his responsibility and of the profit from
which another takes the lion's share. This has made many feel that ethical training in life
must come to the worker from his leisure hours only, and that his task must be always merely
a routine one, to be got through with as soon as possible each day in order that he may "live"
in the hours left from work. This idea cannot be accepted by anyone who realizes the character-drill
that may inhere in any form of useful labor. The need is to permeate the methods of modern
industry with the creative spirit, to mix the management of all business and manufacturing
with the brains of workmen as well as of directors and to make a new connection, strong, obvious,
and thought-compelling, between the worker and the control and responsibility of his work.
While this is being accomplished the results of the change from handicraft to machine work
in the family order must be understood and unsocial elements in that change minimized. It must
be remembered that among the opportunities of character-training in work lost by the man, the
woman and the child and youth, by the change in industrial methods, is the constant influence
of the home life while at work. The old industries clustered about the fireside. It made the
household a work-place, and some feel that this was a detriment to home life and that we have
a better chance to make real centres of love and happiness now that we have taken out of the
domestic field almost all the elements of manufacture and of trade. However that may be, this
much is sure, that when father and mother worked together, and children learned how to work
while still within the family influence, it was easier than it is now to make the daily task
one of mutual coöperation and mutual service within the family circle.

=The Old Household a Work-place.=--We have passed laws now, forbidding "home industries" because
so many "sweated trades" find their last and often impregnable fortress in the crowded rooms
of the tenement living-places. This may be necessary and may be well to do, but the fact remains
that something inhered in the old domestic training of children and youth in useful work within
the home which was lost when the factory was built and the young workers had to seek their
jobs outside the family circle. And that something of work-drill and habit-forming in the interest
of self-support and family usefulness we are now trying to reintroduce into the education of
children and youth by elaborate and costly "manual training," "Pre-vocational and Vocational
courses" and similar departments in the schools.

=Welfare Managers in Modern Times.=--The fact that hours of work and conditions affecting the
workers can be standardized more easily when those workers are massed in large numbers under
one recognized owner and manager of a great industry has sometimes blinded us to the need of
each young person to have constantly near at hand a personal representative of society's interest
in the development of his character; some interpreter of social customs and ideals to follow
which will make for his advantage. We are trying now to get "Welfare Managers," paid chaperons,
nurses and teachers, into business concerns to take the place of older forms of social direction
and care for youthful workers. These functionaries often do much good and are recognized expressions
of the social interest of employers. Since they are installed avowedly for the purpose of making
conditions better for the younger, weaker, less trained and more needy of the workers, "Welfare
Managers" often find a hostile or at least indifferent attitude toward their efforts on the
part of the higher paid, the better established, and more competent women workers, especially
those organized in Trade Unions with the slogan of "Not Charity, but Justice." They do, however,
reach with light and leading some of the darker sides of modern industry as related to the
younger workers.

=Child-labor.=--The student of industrial history knows that child-labor is not a new evil.
Children were often overworked and cruelly driven when parents, guardians, and those to whom
they were "bound out" as apprentices were the only taskmasters and their labor was wholly within
the household. Indeed, Hutchins and Harrison, in their History of Factory Legislation, declare
that "it is not easy to say whether children were really worked harder in the early factories
than under the domestic system which they replaced." Edith Abbott, in her excellent summary
of The Early History of Child Labor in America, shows clearly that at the bottom of the ancient
desire to use very young persons in industry was a conviction that work, constant and hard
work, is the only safeguard against evil. "Satan finds some mischief still for idle hands to
do" was not a figure of speech to our ancestors, it was statement of a sober fact. This feeling
led naturally to the conditions that gave Samuel Slater, the pioneer in textile manufacture
in New England, a collection of child workers in his first mill as his only laborers and at
ages between seven and twelve years.

We are now able to see and remedy some evils of child-labor in the factory system which passed
unnoticed and for which no prohibitive law was in existence in the handicraft stage. It is
true, however, as all must recognize, that the modern specialization of labor and modern use
of machines allows a wholesale exploitation of youth and of physical weakness impossible in
older forms of industry. Hence the facts of modern industry justify and make necessary the
"Child Labor Movement." Yet vital and strong as that movement is, we have to-day, as has been
stated in another connection, a misuse of children by millions in industry. We have also a
dangerous overuse of youth in industry, and we have a reckless waste of mothers and of potential
mothers in unsuitable work. We have also certain dangers to family life in the turning of attention
and of ambition of young people away from family interests into fields of industrial activity
which are inimical to family success. This makes the problem of the family and the workers
one of great difficulty and one to be given the most serious attention on the part of those
who are themselves above the economic conditions which operate to complicate that problem among
the poor and struggling.

