Year. Bibles. Testaments. Portions. Total. 1910, 5,309 8,971 70,594 84,874 1911, 5,665 11,481
79,525 96,671 1912, 9,083 11,842 85,024 105,949

The Calle del Principe is now rapidly being pulled down and new buildings taking the place
of those Borrow knew. Two later copies in my possession bear on their title-pages 'Lundra,
1871' and 'Lundra, 1872.' But the Bible Society in Spain has long ceased to handle or to sell
any gypsy version of St. Luke's Gospel.

[120] And in Darlow's Letters of George Borrow to the Bible Society, pp. 180-4.

[121] Darlow, Letters of George Borrow to the Bible Society.

[122] The story of all the negotiations concerning this imprisonment and release is told by
Dr. Knapp (Life, vol. i, pp. 279-297), and is supplemented by Mr. Herbert Jenkins by valuable
documents from the Foreign Office Papers at the Record Office.

[123] Printed by Mr. Darlow in Letters of George Borrow to the Bible Society, pp. 359-379.

[124] Darlow, George Borrow's Letters to the Bible Society, p. 414.

CHAPTER XIX

BORROW'S SPANISH CIRCLE

There are many interesting personalities that pass before us in Borrow's three separate narratives,[125]
as they may be considered, of his Spanish experiences. We would fain know more concerning the
two excellent secretaries of the Bible Society--Samuel Brandram and Joseph Jowett. We merely
know that the former was rector of Beckenham and was one of the Society's secretaries until
his death in 1850;[126] that the latter was rector of Silk Willoughby in Lincolnshire, and
belonged to the same family as Jowett of Balliol. But there are many quaint characters in Borrow's
own narrative to whom we are introduced. There is Maria Diaz, for example, his landlady in
the house in the Calle de Santiago in Madrid, and her husband, Juan Lopez, also assisted Borrow
in his Bible distribution. Very eloquent are Borrow's tributes to the pair in the pages of
The Bible in Spain. I were an ungrate not to speak well of her,' We get a glimpse of Maria
and her husband long years afterwards when a pensioner in a Spanish almshouse revealed himself
as the son of Borrow's friends. Eduardo Lopez was only eight years of age when Borrow was in
Madrid, and he really adds nothing to our knowledge.[127] Then there were those two incorrigible
vagabonds--Antonio Buchini, his Greek servant with an Italian name, and Benedict Mol, the Swiss
of Lucerne, who turns up in all sorts of improbable circumstances as the seeker of treasure
in the Church of St. James of Compostella--only a masterly imagination could have made him
so interesting. Concerning these there is nothing to supplement Borrow's own story. But we
have attractive glimpses of Borrow in the frequently quoted narrative of Colonel Napier,[128]
and this is so illuminating that I venture to reproduce it at greater length than previous
biographers have done. Edward Elers Napier, who was born in 1808, was the son of one Edward
Elers of the Royal Navy. His widow married the famous Admiral Sir Charles Napier, who adopted
her four children by her first husband. Edward Elers, the younger, or Edward Napier, as he
came to be called, was educated at Sandhurst and entered the army, serving for some years in
India. Later his regiment was ordered to Gibraltar, and it was thence that he made several
sporting excursions into Spain and Morocco. Later he served in Egypt, and when, through ill-health,
he retired in 1843 on half-pay, he lived for some years in Portugal. In 1854 he returned to
the army and did good work in the Crimea, becoming a lieutenant-general in 1864. He died in
1870. He wrote, in addition to these Excursions, several other books, including Scenes and
Sports in Foreign Lands.[129] It was during his military career at Gibraltar that he met George
Borrow at Seville, as the following extracts from his book testify. Borrow's pretension to
have visited the East is characteristic--and amusing:--

     1839. Saturday 4th.--Out early, sketching at the Alcazar.
     After breakfast it set in a day of rain, and I was reduced to
     wander about the galleries overlooking the 'patio.' Nothing so
     dreary and out of character as a rainy day in Spain. Community of thoughts
     and occupation generally tends to bring people together.
     Under these circumstances, I was rather puzzled as to what
     language I should address him in. At last, putting a bold face
     on the matter, I approached him with a 'Bonjour, monsieur, quel
     triste temps!'

     'Yes, sir,' replied he in the purest Parisian accent; 'and it
     is very unusual weather here at this time of the year.'

     'Does "monsieur" intend to be any time at Seville?' asked I. He
     replied in the affirmative. We were soon on a friendly footing,
     and from his varied information I was both amused and
     instructed. Still I became more than ever in the dark as to his
     nationality; I found he could speak English as fluently as
     French. I tried him on the Italian track; again he was
     perfectly at home.

     He had a Greek servant, to whom his gave his orders in Romaïc.

     In such varied discourse did the hours pass so swiftly away
     that we were not a little surprised when Pépé, the 'mozo' (and
     I verily believe all Spanish waiters are called Pépé),
     announced the hour of dinner; after which we took a long walk
     together on the banks of the river. But, on our return, I was
     as much as ever in ignorance as to who might be my new and
     pleasant acquaintance.

     I took the first opportunity of questioning Antonio Baillie
     (Buchini) on the subject, and his answer only tended to
     increase my curiosity. He said that nobody knew what nation the
     mysterious 'Unknown' belonged to, nor what were his motives for
     travelling. In his passport he went by the name of ----, and as
     a British subject, but in consequence of a suspicion being
     entertained that he was a Russian spy, the police kept a sharp
     look-out over him. Spy or no spy, I found him a very agreeable
     companion; and it was agreed that on the following day we
     should visit together the ruins of Italica.

     May 5.--After breakfast, the 'Unknown' and myself, mounting
     our horses, proceeded on our expedition to the ruins of
     Italica. Crossing the river, and proceeding through the
     populous suburb of Triano, already mentioned, we went over the
     same extensive plain that I had traversed in going to San
     Lucar, but keeping a little more to the right a short ride
     brought us in sight of the Convent of San Isidrio, surrounded
     by tall cypress and waving date-trees. This once richly-endowed
     religious establishment is, together with the small
     neighbouring village of Santi Ponci, I believe, the property of
     the Duke of Medina Coeli, at whose expense the excavations are
     now carried on at the latter place, which is the ancient site
     of the Roman Italica. It was he who translated Borrow's appeal to the
Spanish Prime Minister to be permitted to distribute Scio's New
Testament. He watched over Borrow with brotherly solicitude, and wrote
him more than one excellent letter, of which the two following from my
Borrow Papers, the last written at the close of the Spanish period, are
the most interesting:

To Mr. George Borrow

(Translated from the Spanish)

                PIAZZA DI SPAGNA 17, ROME, 7 April 1838.

     DEAR FRIEND,--I received your letter, and thank you for the
     same. I know the works under the name of 'Boz,' about which you
     write, and also the Memoirs of the Pickwick Club, and
     although they seemed to me good, I have failed to appreciate
     properly their qualities, because much of the dramatic style
     and dialogue in the same are very difficult for those who know
     English merely from books. I made here a better acquaintance
     than that of Mezzofanti (who knows nothing), namely, that of
     Prof. Michel-Angelo Lanci, already well-known on account of his
     work, La sacra scrittura illustrata con monumenti
     fenico-assiri ed egiziani, etc., etc. (The Scriptures,
     illustrated with Ph[oe]nician-Assyrian and Egyptian monuments),
     which I am reading at present, and find very profound and
     interesting, and more particularly very original. He has
     written and presented me a book, Esposizione dei versetti del
     Giobbe intorno al cavallo (Explanation of verses of Job about
     a horse), and in these and other works he proves himself to be
     a great philologist and Oriental scholar. I meet him almost
     daily, and I assure you that he seems to me to know everything
     he treats thoroughly, and not like Gayangos or Calderon, etc.,
     etc. His philosophic works have created a great stir here, and
     they do not please much the friars here; but as here they are
     not like the police barbarians there, they do not forbid it, as
     they cannot. Lanci is well known in Russia and in Germany, and
     when I bring his works there, and you are there and have not
     read them, you will read them and judge for yourself.

     Wishing you well, and always at your service, I remain, always
     yours,

                LUIS DE USÓZ Y RIO.

To Mr. George Borrow

(Translated from the Spanish)

                NAPLES, 28 August 1839.

     DEAR FRIEND,--I received your letter of the 28 July written
     from Sevilla, and I am waiting for that which you promise me
     from Tangier.

     I am glad that you liked Sevilla, and I am still more glad of
     the successful shipment of the beloved book. In distributing
     it, you are rendering the greatest service that generous
     foreigners (I mean Englishmen) can render to the real freedom
     and enlightenment in Spain, and any Spaniard who is at heart a
     gentleman must be grateful for this service to the Society and
     to its agent. In my opinion, if Spain had maintained the
     customs, character, and opinions that it had three centuries
     ago, it ought to have maintained also unity in religious
     opinions: but that at present the circumstances have changed,
     and the moral character and the advancement of my unfortunate
     country would not lose anything in its purification and
     progress by (the grant of) religious liberty.

     You are saying that I acted very light-mindedly in judging
     Mezzofanti without speaking to him. You know that the other
     time when I was in Italy I had dealings and spoke with him, and
     that I said to you that he had a great facility for speaking
     languages, but that otherwise he was no good. Because I have
     seen him several times in the Papal chapels with a certain air
     of an ass and certain grimaces of a blockhead that cannot
     happen to a man of talent. I am told, moreover, that he is a
     spy, and that for that reason he was given the hat. I know,
     moreover, that he has not written anything at all. For that
     reason I do not wish to take the trouble of seeing him.

     As regards Lanci, I am not saying anything except that I am
     waiting until you have read his work without passion, and that
     if my books have arrived at Madrid, you can ask my brother in
     Santiago.

     You are judging of him and of Pahlin in the way you reproach me
     with judging Mezzofanti; I thank you, and I wish for the
     dedication Gabricote; and I also wish for your return to
     Madrid, so that in going to Toledo you would get a copy of
     Aristophanes with the order that will be given to you by my
     brother, who has got it.

