 Just below them were two Germans, with Red Cross bands upon their arms. At the sight of the Americans,
the Germans dropped their stretcher, turned and fled around a curve.

The sound of the shots fired after them was lost in the clatter of
the machine guns above.

(1) To whatever degree we may imagine a man to be exempt from the influence of the external
world, we never get a conception of freedom in space. Every human action is inevitably conditioned
by what surrounds him and by his own body. I lift my arm and let it fall. My action seems to
me free; but asking myself whether I could raise my arm in every direction, I see that I raised
it in the direction in which there was least obstruction to that action either from things
around me or from the construction of my own body. I chose one out of all the possible directions
because in it there were fewest obstacles. For my action to be free it was necessary that it
should encounter no obstacles. To conceive of a man being free we must imagine him outside
space, which is evidently impossible.

(2) However much we approximate the time of judgment to the time of the deed, we never get
a conception of freedom in time. For if I examine an action committed a second ago I must still
recognize it as not being free, for it is irrevocably linked to the moment at which it was
committed. Can I lift my arm? I lift it, but ask myself: could I have abstained from lifting
my arm at the moment that has already passed? To convince myself of this I do not lift it the
next moment. But I am not now abstaining from doing so at the first moment when I asked the
question. Time has gone by which I could not detain, the arm I then lifted is no longer the
same as the arm I now refrain from lifting, nor is the air in which I lifted it the same that
now surrounds me. The moment in which the first movement was made is irrevocable, and at that
moment I could make only one movement, and whatever movement I made would be the only one.
That I did not lift my arm a moment later does not prove that I could have abstained from lifting
it then. And since I could make only one movement at that single moment of time, it could not
have been any other. And as human nature is the same the world over, there was many an upright
resident of the "Valley of the Three Forks o' the Wolf" who left
the plow standing in the furrow because the yelp and baying of the
hounds grew warm upon the mountainside.

The families of mountain men are usually large in number, and the estate of Old Coonrod has passed
through a long division. He had eight children, and his son Elijah Pile, the branch of the
family to which Sergeant York belongs, had eleven children. I raise my arm to perform an action independently of any cause, but my wish to
perform an action without a cause is the cause of my action.

But even if--imagining a man quite exempt from all influences, examining only his momentary
action in the present, unevoked by any cause--we were to admit so infinitely small a remainder
of inevitability as equaled zero, we should even then not have arrived at the conception of
complete freedom in man, for a being uninfluenced by the external world, standing outside of
time and independent of cause, is no longer a man.

In the same way we can never imagine the action of a man quite devoid of freedom and entirely
subject to the law of inevitability.

