There are yet other and more cogent reasons which prevent any great change from being easily
effected in the principles of a democratic people. I have already adverted to them at the commencement
of this part of my work. If the influence of individuals is weak and hardly perceptible amongst
such a people, the power exercised by the mass upon the mind of each individual is extremely
great--I have already shown for what reasons. I would now observe that it is wrong to suppose
that this depends solely upon the form of government, and that the majority would lose its
intellectual supremacy if it were to lose its political power. In aristocracies men have often
much greatness and strength of their own: when they find themselves at variance with the greater
number of their fellow-countrymen, they withdraw to their own circle, where they support and
console themselves. Such is not the case in a democratic country; there public favor seems
as necessary as the air we breathe, and to live at variance with the multitude is, as it were,
not to live. The multitude requires no laws to coerce those who think not like itself: public
disapprobation is enough; a sense of their loneliness and impotence overtakes them and drives
them to despair.

Whenever social conditions are equal, public opinion presses with enormous weight upon the
mind of each individual; it surrounds, directs, and oppresses him; and this arises from the
very constitution of society, much more than from its political laws. As men grow more alike,
each man feels himself weaker in regard to all the rest; as he discerns nothing by which he
is considerably raised above them, or distinguished from them, he mistrusts himself as soon
as they assail him. Not only does he mistrust his strength, but he even doubts of his right;
and he is very near acknowledging that he is in the wrong, when the greater number of his countrymen
assert that he is so. The majority do not need to constrain him--they convince him. In whatever
way then the powers of a democratic community may be organized and balanced, it will always
be extremely difficult to believe what the bulk of the people reject, or to profess what they
condemn.

This circumstance is extraordinarily favorable to the stability of opinions. When an opinion
has taken root amongst a democratic people, and established itself in the minds of the bulk
of the community, it afterwards subsists by itself and is maintained without effort, because
no one attacks it. He laughed at his wit, became grave, then shook out another laugh.

"See," he added, pointing to the ground all about us strewn with morsels of tile; "the roof cracks,
but it still holds," he added, pointing upwards at the old tower of St. Martin's. "And now, M'sieur,
I shall take you to my house; tenez, figure to yourself," and he laid a fine, richly veined,
strong old hand upon my arm with a charming gesture. "I have been
here twenty-five years; I bought all the antique furniture of my predecessor.


Time, events, or the unaided individual action of the mind, will sometimes undermine or destroy
an opinion, without any outward sign of the change. It has not been openly assailed, no conspiracy
has been formed to make war on it, but its followers one by one noiselessly secede--day by
day a few of them abandon it, until last it is only professed by a minority. In this state
it will still continue to prevail. As its enemies remain mute, or only interchange their thoughts
by stealth, they are themselves unaware for a long period that a great revolution has actually
been effected; and in this state of uncertainly they take no steps--they observe each other
and are silent. The majority have ceased to believe what they believed before; but they still
affect to believe, and this empty phantom of public opinion in strong enough to chill innovators,
and to keep them silent and at respectful distance. We live at a time which has witnessed the
most rapid changes of opinion in the minds of men; nevertheless it may be that the leading
opinions of society will ere long be more settled than they have been for several centuries
in our history: that time is not yet come, but it may perhaps be approaching. As I examine
more closely the natural wants and tendencies of democratic nations, I grow persuaded that
if ever social equality is generally and permanently established in the world, great intellectual
and political revolutions will become more difficult and less frequent than is supposed. Because
the men of democracies appear always excited, uncertain, eager, changeable in their wills and
in their positions, it is imagined that they are suddenly to abrogate their laws, to adopt
new opinions, and to assume new manners. But if the principle of equality predisposes men to
change, it also suggests to them certain interests and tastes which cannot be satisfied without
a settled order of things; equality urges them on, but at the same time it holds them back;
it spurs them, but fastens them to earth;--it kindles their desires, but limits their powers.
This, however, is not perceived at first; the passions which tend to sever the citizens of
a democracy are obvious enough; but the hidden force which restrains and unites them is not
discernible at a glance.

Amidst the ruins which surround me, shall I dare to say that revolutions are not what I most
fear coming generations? If men continue to shut themselves more closely within the narrow
circle of domestic interests and to live upon that kind of excitement, it is to be apprehended
that they may ultimately become inaccessible to those great and powerful public emotions which
perturb nations--but which enlarge them and recruit them. When property becomes so fluctuating,
and the love of property so restless and so ardent, I cannot but fear that men may arrive at
such a state as to regard every new theory as a peril, every innovation as an irksome toil,
every social improvement as a stepping-stone to revolution, and so refuse to move altogether
for fear of being moved too far. I dread, and I confess it, lest they should at last so entirely
give way to a cowardly love of present enjoyment, as to lose sight of the interests of their
future selves and of those of their descendants; and to prefer to glide along the easy current
of life, rather than to make, when it is necessary, a strong and sudden effort to a higher
purpose. Furnes

Furnes

The old red brick, flat topped, tower of St. Nicholas was the magnet which drew us to this dear
sleepy old town, in the southwest corner of the Belgian littoral;
and here, lodged in the historic hostel of the "Nobèle Rose" we spent
some golden days. The name of the town is variously pronounced by
the people Foorn, Fern, and even Fearn. I doubt if many travelers
in the Netherlands ever heard of it. Yet the town is one of great
antiquity and renown, its origin lost in the dimness of the ages.

Chapter XXII: Why Democratic Nations Are Naturally Desirous Of Peace, And Democratic Armies Of War

