A TRAMP ABROAD, Part 5.
     197.  IT'S THE FASHION
     198.  WHAT WE EXPECTED
     199.  WE MISSED THE SCENERY
     200.  THE TOURISTS
     201.  THE YOUNG BRIDE
     202.  "IT WAS A FAMOUS VICTORY
     203.  PROMENADE IN INTERLAKEN
     204.  THE JUNGFRAU BY M.T.
     205.  STREET IN INTERLAKEN
     206.  WITHOUT A COURIER
     207.  TRAVELING WITH A COURIER
     208.  TAIL PIECE
     209.  GRAPE AND WHEY PATIENTS
     210.  SOCIABLE DRIVERS
     211.  A MOUNTAIN CASCADE
     212.  THE GASTERNTHAL
     213.  EXHILARATING SPORT
     214.  FALLS
     215.  WHAT MIGHT BE
     216.  AN ALPINE BOUQUET
     217.  THE END OF THE WORLD
     218.  THE FORGET-ME-NOT
     219.  A NEEDLE OF ICE
     220.  CLIMBING THE MOUNTAIN
     221.  SNOW CREVASSES
     222.  CUTTING STEPS
     223.  THE GUIDE
     224.  VIEW FROM THE CLIFF
     225.  GEMMI PASS AND LAKE DAUBENSEE
     226.  ALMOST A TRAGEDY
     227.  THE ALPINE LITTER
     228.  SOCIAL BATHERS
     229.  DEATH OF COUNTESS HERLINCOURT
     230.  THEY'VE GOT IT ALL
     231.  MODEL FOR AN EMPRESS
     232.  BATH HOUSES AT LEUKE
     233.  THE BATHERS AT LEUKE
     234.  RATTIER MIXED UP
     235.  TAIL PIECE

CONTENTS:

CHAPTER XXIX Everything Convenient--Looking for a Western Sunrise--Mutual Recrimination--View
from the Summit--Down the Mountain--Railroading--Confidence Wanted and Acquired

CHAPTER XXX A Trip by Proxy--A Visit to the Furka Regions--Deadman's Lake--Source of the Rhone--Glacier
Tables--Storm in the Mountains--At Grindelwald--Dawn on the Mountains--An Explanation Required--Dead
Language--Criticism of Harris's Report

CHAPTER XXXI Preparations for a Tramp--From Lucerne to Interlaken--The Brunig Pass--Modern
and Ancient Chalets--Death of Pontius Pilate--Hermit Home of St Nicholas--Landslides--Children
Selling Refreshments--How they Harness a Horse--A Great Man--Honors to a Hero--A Thirsty Bride--For
Better or Worse--German Fashions--Anticipations--Solid Comfort--An Unsatisfactory Awakening--What
we had Lost--Our Surroundings

CHAPTER XXXII The Jungfrau Hotel--A Whiskered Waitress--An Arkansas Bride--Perfection in Discord--A
Famous Victory--A Look from a Window--About the Jungfrau

CHAPTER XXXIII The Giesbach Falls--The Spirit of the Alps--Why People Visit Them--Whey and
Grapes as Medicines--The Kursaal--A Formidable Undertaking--From Interlaken to Zermatt on Foot--We
Concluded to take a Buggy--A Pair of Jolly Drivers--We meet with Companions--A Cheerful Ride--Kandersteg
Valley--An Alpine Parlor--Exercise and Amusement--A Race with a Log

CHAPTER XXXIV An Old Guide--Possible Accidents--Dangerous Habitation--Mountain Flowers--Embryo
Lions--Mountain Pigs--The End of The World--Ghastly Desolation--Proposed Adventure--Reading-up
Adventures--Ascent of Monte Rosa--Precipices and Crevasses--Among the Snows--Exciting Experiences--lee
Ridges--The Summit--Adventures Postponed

CHAPTER XXXV A New Interest--Magnificent Views--A Mule's Prefereoces--Turning Mountain Corners--Terror
of a Horse--Lady Tourists--Death of a young Countess--A Search for a Hat--What We Did Find--Harris's
Opinion of Chamois--A Disappointed Man--A Giantess--Model for an Empress--Baths at Leuk--Sport
in the Water--The Gemmi Precipices--A Palace for an Emperor--The Famous Ladders--Considerably
Mixed Up--Sad Plight of a Minister

CHAPTER XXIX

[Looking West for Sunrise]

He kept his word. We heard his horn and instantly got up. It was dark and cold and wretched.
As I fumbled around for the matches, knocking things down with my quaking hands, I wished the
sun would rise in the middle of the day, when it was warm and bright and cheerful, and one
wasn't sleepy. We proceeded to dress by the gloom of a couple sickly candles, but we could
hardly button anything, our hands shook so. I thought of how many happy people there were in
Europe, Asia, and America, and everywhere, who were sleeping peacefully in their beds, and
did not have to get up and see the Rigi sunrise--people who did not appreciate their advantage,
as like as not, but would get up in the morning wanting more boons of Providence. While thinking
these thoughts I yawned, in a rather ample way, and my upper teeth got hitched on a nail over
the door, and while I was mounting a chair to free myself, Harris drew the window-curtain,
and said:

"Oh, this is luck! We shan't have to go out at all--yonder are the mountains, in full view."

That was glad news, indeed. It made us cheerful right away. One could see the grand Alpine
masses dimly outlined against the black firmament, and one or two faint stars blinking through
rifts in the night. Fully clothed, and wrapped in blankets, and huddled ourselves up, by the
window, with lighted pipes, and fell into chat, while we waited in exceeding comfort to see
how an Alpine sunrise was going to look by candlelight. By and by a delicate, spiritual sort
of effulgence spread itself by imperceptible degrees over the loftiest altitudes of the snowy
wastes--but there the effort seemed to stop. I said, presently:

"There is a hitch about this sunrise somewhere. It doesn't seem to go. What do you reckon is
the matter with it?"

"I don't know. It appears to hang fire somewhere. I never saw a sunrise act like that before.
Can it be that the hotel is playing anything on us?"

"Of course not. The hotel merely has a property interest in the sun, it has nothing to do with
the management of it. It is a precarious kind of property, too; a succession of total eclipses
would probably ruin this tavern. Now what can be the matter with this sunrise?"

Harris jumped up and said:

"I've got it! I know what's the matter with it! We've been looking at the place where the sun
SET last night!"

"It is perfectly true! Why couldn't you have thought of that sooner? Now we've lost another
one! And all through your blundering. It was exactly like you to light a pipe and sit down
to wait for the sun to rise in the west."

"It was exactly like me to find out the mistake, too. You never would have found it out. I
find out all the mistakes."

"You make them all, too, else your most valuable faculty would be wasted on you. D. v. b. This
portion of the tract is, of course, merely a translation, but it
includes a passage or two from Homer, cleverly rendered into English
verse.

Here we come to the word Finis, and here, I take it, it was originally
intended that the tract should end; but as it was thought that it
would hardly be of sufficient bulk for the money (4d., or 6d. at the
utmost), a sort of appendix was added, which, on some accounts, is
the most interesting part of the work.

 They had their red guide-books open at the diagram of the view,
and were painfully picking out the several mountains and trying to impress their names and
positions on their memories. It was one of the saddest sights I ever saw.

Two sides of this place were guarded by railings, to keep people from being blown over the
precipices. The view, looking sheer down into the broad valley, eastward, from this great elevation--almost
a perpendicular mile--was very quaint and curious. Counties, towns, hilly ribs and ridges,
wide stretches of green meadow, great forest tracts, winding streams, a dozen blue lakes, a
block of busy steamboats--we saw all this little world in unique circumstantiality of detail--saw
it just as the birds see it--and all reduced to the smallest of scales and as sharply worked
out and finished as a steel engraving. The numerous toy villages, with tiny spires projecting
out of them, were just as the children might have left them when done with play the day before;
the forest tracts were diminished to cushions of moss; one or two big lakes were dwarfed to
ponds, the smaller ones to puddles--though they did not look like puddles, but like blue teardrops
which had fallen and lodged in slight depressions, conformable to their shapes, among the moss-beds
and the smooth levels of dainty green farm-land; the microscopic steamboats glided along, as
in a city reservoir, taking a mighty time to cover the distance between ports which seemed
only a yard apart; and the isthmus which separated two lakes looked as if one might stretch
out on it and lie with both elbows in the water, yet we knew invisible wagons were toiling
across it and finding the distance a tedious one. This beautiful miniature world had exactly
the appearance of those "relief maps" which reproduce nature precisely, with the heights and
depressions and other details graduated to a reduced scale, and with the rocks, trees, lakes,
etc., colored after nature.

I believed we could walk down to Waeggis or Vitznau in a day, but I knew we could go down by
rail in about an hour, so I chose the latter method. I wanted to see what it was like, anyway.
The train came along about the middle of the afternoon, and an odd thing it was. The locomotive-boiler
stood on end, and it and the whole locomotive were tilted sharply backward. There were two
passenger-cars, roofed, but wide open all around. These cars were not tilted back, but the
seats were; this enables the passenger to sit level while going down a steep incline.

There are three railway-tracks; the central one is cogged; the "lantern wheel" of the engine
grips its way along these cogs, and pulls the train up the hill or retards its motion on the
down trip. About the same speed--three miles an hour--is maintained both ways. Whether going
up or down, the locomotive is always at the lower end of the train. It pushes in the one case,
braces back in the other. The passenger rides backward going up, and faces forward going down.

We got front seats, and while the train moved along about fifty yards on level ground, I was
not the least frightened; but now it started abruptly downstairs, and I caught my breath. And
I, like my neighbors, unconsciously held back all I could, and threw my weight to the rear,
but, of course, that did no particular good. I had slidden down the balusters when I was a
boy, and thought nothing of it, but to slide down the balusters in a railway-train is a thing
to make one's flesh creep. Sometimes we had as much as ten yards of almost level ground, and
this gave us a few full breaths in comfort; but straightway we would turn a corner and see
a long steep line of rails stretching down below us, and the comfort was at an end. One expected
to see the locomotive pause, or slack up a little, and approach this plunge cautiously, but
it did nothing of the kind; it went calmly on, and went it reached the jumping-off place it
made a sudden bow, and went gliding smoothly downstairs, untroubled by the circumstances.

It was wildly exhilarating to slide along the edge of the precipices, after this grisly fashion,
and look straight down upon that far-off valley which I was describing a while ago.

There was no level ground at the Kaltbad station; the railbed was as steep as a roof; I was
curious to see how the stop was going to be managed. But it was very simple; the train came
sliding down, and when it reached the right spot it just stopped--that was all there was "to
it"--stopped on the steep incline, and when the exchange of passengers and baggage had been
made, it moved off and went sliding down again. The train can be stopped anywhere, at a moment's
notice.

There was one curious effect, which I need not take the trouble to describe--because I can
scissor a description of it out of the railway company's advertising pamphlet, and save my ink:

"On the whole tour, particularly at the Descent, we undergo an optical illusion which often
seems to be incredible. All the shrubs, fir trees, stables, houses, etc., seem to be bent in
a slanting direction, as by an immense pressure of air. They are all standing awry, so much
awry that the chalets and cottages of the peasants seem to be tumbling down. It is the consequence
of the steep inclination of the line. Those who are seated in the carriage do not observe that
they are going down a declivity of twenty to twenty-five degrees (their seats being adapted
to this course of proceeding and being bent down at their backs). They mistake their carriage
and its horizontal lines for a proper measure of the normal plain, and therefore all the objects
outside which really are in a horizontal position must show a disproportion of twenty to twenty-five
degrees declivity, in regard to the mountain."

By the time one reaches Kaltbad, he has acquired confidence in the railway, and he now ceases
to try to ease the locomotive by holding back. Thenceforth he smokes his pipe in serenity,
and gazes out upon the magnificent picture below and about him with unfettered enjoyment. There
is nothing to interrupt the view or the breeze; it is like inspecting the world on the wing.
However--to be exact--there is one place where the serenity lapses for a while; this is while
one is crossing the Schnurrtobel Bridge, a frail structure which swings its gossamer frame
down through the dizzy air, over a gorge, like a vagrant spider-strand.

One has no difficulty in remembering his sins while the train is creeping down this bridge;
and he repents of them, too; though he sees, when he gets to Vitznau, that he need not have
done it, the bridge was perfectly safe.

So ends the eventual trip which we made to the Rigi-Kulm to see an Alpine sunrise.

CHAPTER XXX

[Harris Climbs Mountains for Me]

An hour's sail brought us to Lucerne again. I judged it best to go to bed and rest several
days, for I knew that the man who undertakes to make the tour of Europe on foot must take care
of himself.

Thinking over my plans, as mapped out, I perceived that they did not take in the Furka Pass,
the Rhone Glacier, the Finsteraarhorn, the Wetterhorn, etc. I immediately examined the guide-book
to see if these were important, and found they were; in fact, a pedestrian tour of Europe could
not be complete without them. Of course that decided me at once to see them, for I never allow
myself to do things by halves, or in a slurring, slipshod way.

I called in my agent and instructed him to go without delay and make a careful examination
of these noted places, on foot, and bring me back a written report of the result, for insertion
in my book. I instructed him to go to Hospenthal as quickly as possible, and make his grand
start from there; to extend his foot expedition as far as the Giesbach fall, and return to
me from thence by diligence or mule. I told him to take the courier with him.

He objected to the courier, and with some show of reason, since he was about to venture upon
new and untried ground; but I thought he might as well learn how to take care of the courier
now as later, therefore I enforced my point. I said that the trouble, delay, and inconvenience
of traveling with a courier were balanced by the deep respect which a courier's presence commands,
and I must insist that as much style be thrown into my journeys as possible.

So the two assumed complete mountaineering costumes and departed. A week later they returned,
pretty well used up, and my agent handed me the following: Official Report

OF A VISIT TO THE FURKA REGION.

BY H. HARRIS, AGENT About seven o'clock in the morning, with perfectly fine weather, we started
from Hospenthal, and arrived at the MAISON on the Furka in a little under QUATRE hours. The
want of variety in the scenery from Hospenthal made the KAHKAHPONEEKA wearisome; but let none
be discouraged; no one can fail to be completely R'ECOMPENS'EE for his fatigue, when he sees,
for the first time, the monarch of the Oberland, the tremendous Finsteraarhorn. A moment before
all was dullness, but a PAS further has placed us on the summit of the Furka; and exactly in
front of us, at a HOPOW of only fifteen miles, this magnificent mountain lifts its snow-wreathed
precipices into the deep blue sky. The inferior mountains on each side of the pass form a sort
of frame for the picture of their dread lord, and close in the view so completely that no other
prominent feature in the Oberland is visible from this BONG-A-BONG; nothing withdraws the attention
from the solitary grandeur of the Finsteraarhorn and the dependent spurs which form the abutments
of the central peak.

With the addition of some others, who were also bound for the Grimsel, we formed a large XHVLOJ
as we descended the STEG which winds round the shoulder of a mountain toward the Rhone Glacier.
We soon left the path and took to the ice; and after wandering amongst the crevices UN PEU,
to admire the wonders of these deep blue caverns, and hear the rushing of waters through their
subglacial channels, we struck out a course toward L'AUTRE CÔTE and crossed the glacier successfully,
a little above the cave from which the infant Rhone takes its first bound from under the grand
precipice of ice. Half a mile below this we began to climb the flowery side of the Meienwand.
One of our party started before the rest, but the HITZE was so great, that we found IHM quite
exhausted, and lying at full length in the shade of a large GESTEIN. We sat down with him for
a time, for all felt the heat exceedingly in the climb up this very steep BOLWOGGOLY, and then
we set out again together, and arrived at last near the Dead Man's Lake, at the foot of the
Sidelhorn. This lonely spot, once used for an extempore burying-place, after a sanguinary BATTUE
between the French and Austrians, is the perfection of desolation; there is nothing in sight
to mark the hand of man, except the line of weather-beaten whitened posts, set up to indicate
the direction of the pass in the OWDAWAKK of winter. Near this point the footpath joins the
wider track, which connects the Grimsel with the head of the Rhone SCHNAWP; this has been carefully
constructed, and leads with a tortuous course among and over LES PIERRES, down to the bank
of the gloomy little SWOSH-SWOSH, which almost washes against the walls of the Grimsel Hospice.
We arrived a little before four o'clock at the end of our day's journey, hot enough to justify
the step, taking by most of the PARTIE, of plunging into the crystal water of the snow-fed lake.

The next afternoon we started for a walk up the Unteraar glacier, with the intention of, at
all events, getting as far as the Hütte which is used as a sleeping-place by most of those
who cross the Strahleck Pass to Grindelwald. We got over the tedious collection of stones and
DÉBRIS which covers the PIED of the GLETCHER, and had walked nearly three hours from the Grimsel,
when, just as we were thinking of crossing over to the right, to climb the cliffs at the foot
of the hut, the clouds, which had for some time assumed a threatening appearance, suddenly
dropped, and a huge mass of them, driving toward us from the Finsteraarhorn, poured down a
deluge of HABOOLONG and hail. Fortunately, we were not far from a very large glacier-table;
it was a huge rock balanced on a pedestal of ice high enough to admit of our all creeping under
it for GOWKARAK. A stream of PUCKITTYPUKK had furrowed a course for itself in the ice at its
base, and we were obliged to stand with one FUSS on each side of this, and endeavor to keep
ourselves CHAUD by cutting steps in the steep bank of the pedestal, so as to get a higher place
for standing on, as the WASSER rose rapidly in its trench. A very cold BZZZZZZZZEEE accompanied
the storm, and made our position far from pleasant; and presently came a flash of BLITZEN,
apparently in the middle of our little party, with an instantaneous clap of YOKKY, sounding
like a large gun fired close to our ears; the effect was startling; but in a few seconds our
attention was fixed by the roaring echoes of the thunder against the tremendous mountains which
completely surrounded us. This was followed by many more bursts, none of WELCHE, however, was
so dangerously near; and after waiting a long DEMI-hour in our icy prison, we sallied out to
talk through a HABOOLONG which, though not so heavy as before, was quite enough to give us
a thorough soaking before our arrival at the Hospice.

The Grimsel is CERTAINEMENT a wonderful place; situated at the bottom of a sort of huge crater,
the sides of which are utterly savage GEBIRGE, composed of barren rocks which cannot even support
a single pine ARBRE, and afford only scanty food for a herd of GMWKWLLOLP, it looks as if it
must be completely BEGRABEN in the winter snows. Enormous avalanches fall against it every
spring, sometimes covering everything to the depth of thirty or forty feet; and, in spite of
walls four feet thick, and furnished with outside shutters, the two men who stay here when
the VOYAGEURS are snugly quartered in their distant homes can tell you that the snow sometimes
shakes the house to its foundations.

Next morning the HOGGLEBUMGULLUP still continued bad, but we made up our minds to go on, and
make the best of it. Half an hour after we started, the REGEN thickened unpleasantly, and we
attempted to get shelter under a projecting rock, but being far to NASS already to make standing
at all AGRÉABLE, we pushed on for the Handeck, consoling ourselves with the reflection that
from the furious rushing of the river Aar at our side, we should at all events see the celebrated
WASSERFALL in GRANDE PERFECTION. Nor were we NAPPERSOCKET in our expectation; the water was
roaring down its leap of two hundred and fifty feet in a most magnificent frenzy, while the
trees which cling to its rocky sides swayed to and fro in the violence of the hurricane which
it brought down with it; even the stream, which falls into the main cascade at right angles,
and TOUTEFOIS forms a beautiful feature in the scene, was now swollen into a raging torrent;
and the violence of this "meeting of the waters," about fifty feet below the frail bridge where
we stood, was fearfully grand. While we were looking at it, GLÜECKLICHEWEISE a gleam of sunshine
came out, and instantly a beautiful rainbow was formed by the spray, and hung in mid-air suspended
over the awful gorge.

On going into the CHALET above the fall, we were informed that a BRUECKE had broken down near
Guttanen, and that it would be impossible to proceed for some time; accordingly we were kept
in our drenched condition for EIN STUNDE, when some VOYAGEURS arrived from Meiringen, and told
us that there had been a trifling accident, ABER that we could now cross. On arriving at the
spot, I was much inclined to suspect that the whole story was a ruse to make us SLOWWK and
drink the more at the Handeck Inn, for only a few planks had been carried away, and though
there might perhaps have been some difficulty with mules, the gap was certainly not larger
than a MMBGLX might cross with a very slight leap. Near Guttanen the HABOOLONG happily ceased,
and we had time to walk ourselves tolerably dry before arriving at Reichenback, WO we enjoyed
a good DINÉ at the Hotel des Alps.

Next morning we walked to Rosenlaui, the BEAU IDÉAL of Swiss scenery, where we spent the middle
of the day in an excursion to the glacier. This was more beautiful than words can describe,
for in the constant progress of the ice it has changed the form of its extremity and formed
a vast cavern, as blue as the sky above, and rippled like a frozen ocean. A few steps cut in
the WHOOPJAMBOREEHOO enabled us to walk completely under this, and feast our eyes upon one
of the loveliest objects in creation. The glacier was all around divided by numberless fissures
of the same exquisite color, and the finest wood-ERDBEEREN were growing in abundance but a
few yards from the ice. I drew aside my curtain, and made my bow, amid the silent wonderment
of my auditors. Then I said:--

'Ladies and gentlemen: You now see before you the redoubtable Fantadimo Fantodimus, master of
ceremonies for the Great Humbug Troupe. You also see before you, ladies and gentlemen, Mons.
Belitz, the renowned magician, Mademoiselle Heliotrope, the graceful
danseuse, Signor Strawstekowski, Herr Balamsass; and, in short, ladies
and gentlemen, you see before you the sum and substance of the Great
Humbug Troupe, as it exists in all its original splendor.

We salute you!
'My friends, you were drawn here to-night by the extravagantly worded
and outlandish representations of a poster which promised you only
one single thing, namely, that you should behold a Great Traveling
Humbug. We left Grindelwald just as a thunder-storm
was dying away, and we hoped to find GUTEN WETTER up above; but the rain, which had nearly
ceased, began again, and we were struck by the rapidly increasing FROID as we ascended. Two-thirds
of the way up were completed when the rain was exchanged for GNILLIC, with which the BODEN
was thickly covered, and before we arrived at the top the GNILLIC and mist became so thick
that we could not see one another at more than twenty POOPOO distance, and it became difficult
to pick our way over the rough and thickly covered ground. Shivering with cold, we turned into
bed with a double allowance of clothes, and slept comfortably while the wind howled AUTOUR
DE LA MAISON; when I awoke, the wall and the window looked equally dark, but in another hour
I found I could just see the form of the latter; so I jumped out of bed, and forced it open,
though with great difficulty from the frost and the quantities of GNILLIC heaped up against it.

A row of huge icicles hung down from the edge of the roof, and anything more wintry than the
whole ANBLICK could not well be imagined; but the sudden appearance of the great mountains
in front was so startling that I felt no inclination to move toward bed again. The snow which
had collected upon LA FÊNTRE had increased the FINSTERNISS ODER DER DUNKELHEIT, so that when
I looked out I was surprised to find that the daylight was considerable, and that the BALRAGOOMAH
would evidently rise before long. Only the brightest of LES E'TOILES were still shining; the
sky was cloudless overhead, though small curling mists lay thousands of feet below us in the
valleys, wreathed around the feet of the mountains, and adding to the splendor of their lofty
summits. We were soon dressed and out of the house, watching the gradual approach of dawn,
thoroughly absorbed in the first near view of the Oberland giants, which broke upon us unexpectedly
after the intense obscurity of the evening before. "KABAUGWAKKO SONGWASHEE KUM WETTERHORN SNAWPO!"
cried some one, as that grand summit gleamed with the first rose of dawn; and in a few moments
the double crest of the Schreckhorn followed its example; peak after peak seemed warmed with
life, the Jungfrau blushed even more beautifully than her neighbors, and soon, from the Wetterhorn
in the east to the Wildstrubel in the west, a long row of fires glowed upon mighty altars,
truly worthy of the gods.

The WLGW was very severe; our sleeping-place could hardly be DISTINGUEÉ from the snow around
it, which had fallen to a depth of a FLIRK during the past evening, and we heartily enjoyed
a rough scramble EN BAS to the Giesbach falls, where we soon found a warm climate. At noon
the day before Grindelwald the thermometer could not have stood at less than 100 degrees Fahr.
in the sun; and in the evening, judging from the icicles formed, and the state of the windows,
there must have been at least twelve DINGBLATTER of frost, thus giving a change of 80 degrees
during a few hours.

I said:

"You have done well, Harris; this report is concise, compact, well expressed; the language
is crisp, the descriptions are vivid and not needlessly elaborated; your report goes straight
to the point, attends strictly to business, and doesn't fool around. It is in many ways an
excellent document. But it has a fault--it is too learned, it is much too learned. What is
'DINGBLATTER'?

"'DINGBLATTER' is a Fiji word meaning 'degrees.'"

"You knew the English of it, then?"

"Oh, yes."

"What is 'GNILLIC'?

"That is the Eskimo term for 'snow.'"

"So you knew the English for that, too?"

"Why, certainly."

"What does 'MMBGLX' stand for?"

"That is Zulu for 'pedestrian.'"

"'While the form of the Wellhorn looking down upon it completes the enchanting BOPPLE.' What
is 'BOPPLE'?"

"'Picture.' It's Choctaw."

"What is 'SCHNAWP'?"

"'Valley.' That is Choctaw, also."

"What is 'BOLWOGGOLY'?"

"That is Chinese for 'hill.'"

"'KAHKAHPONEEKA'?"

"'Ascent.' Choctaw."

"'But we were again overtaken by bad HOGGLEBUMGULLUP.' What does 'HOGGLEBUMGULLUP' mean?"

"That is Chinese for 'weather.'"

"Is 'HOGGLEBUMGULLUP' better than the English word? Is it any more descriptive?"

"No, it means just the same."

"And 'DINGBLATTER' and 'GNILLIC,' and 'BOPPLE,' and 'SCHNAWP'--are they better than the English
words?"

"No, they mean just what the English ones do."

"Then why do you use them? Why have you used all this Chinese and Choctaw and Zulu rubbish?"

"Because I didn't know any French but two or three words, and I didn't know any Latin or Greek
at all."

"That is nothing. Why should you want to use foreign words, anyhow?"

"They adorn my page. They all do it."

"Who is 'all'?"

"Everybody. Everybody that writes elegantly. Anybody has a right to that wants to."

"I think you are mistaken." I then proceeded in the following scathing manner. "When really
learned men write books for other learned men to read, they are justified in using as many
learned words as they please--their audience will understand them; but a man who writes a book
for the general public to read is not justified in disfiguring his pages with untranslated
foreign expressions. It is an insolence toward the majority of the purchasers, for it is a
very frank and impudent way of saying, 'Get the translations made yourself if you want them,
this book is not written for the ignorant classes.' There are men who know a foreign language
so well and have used it so long in their daily life that they seem to discharge whole volleys
of it into their English writings unconsciously, and so they omit to translate, as much as
half the time. That is a great cruelty to nine out of ten of the man's readers. What is the
excuse for this? The writer would say he only uses the foreign language where the delicacy
of his point cannot be conveyed in English. Very well, then he writes his best things for the
tenth man, and he ought to warn the nine other not to buy his book. However, the excuse he
offers is at least an excuse; but there is another set of men who are like YOU; they know a
WORD here and there, of a foreign language, or a few beggarly little three-word phrases, filched
from the back of the Dictionary, and these are continually peppering into their literature,
with a pretense of knowing that language--what excuse can they offer? The foreign words and
phrases which they use have their exact equivalents in a nobler language--English; yet they
think they 'adorn their page' when they say STRASSE for street, and BAHNHOF for railway-station,
and so on--flaunting these fluttering rags of poverty in the reader's face and imagining he
will be ass enough to take them for the sign of untold riches held in reserve. I will let your
'learning' remain in your report; you have as much right, I suppose, to 'adorn your page' with
Zulu and Chinese and Choctaw rubbish as others of your sort have to adorn theirs with insolent
odds and ends smouched from half a dozen learned tongues whose A-B ABS they don't even know." 

Not an auditor was present!

I descended to the bar-room. It was full of loungers, smoking, dozing,
and drinking. Without entering, I hastened across the way to the post-office.

I
returned to the hotel and called out the landlord.

CHAPTER XXXI

[Alp-scaling by Carriage]

We now prepared for a considerable walk--from Lucerne to Interlaken, over the Bruenig Pass.
But at the last moment the weather was so good that I changed my mind and hired a four-horse
carriage. It was a huge vehicle, roomy, as easy in its motion as a palanquin, and exceedingly
comfortable.

We got away pretty early in the morning, after a hot breakfast, and went bowling over a hard,
smooth road, through the summer loveliness of Switzerland, with near and distant lakes and
mountains before and about us for the entertainment of the eye, and the music of multitudinous
birds to charm the ear. Sometimes there was only the width of the road between the imposing
precipices on the right and the clear cool water on the left with its shoals of uncatchable
fish skimming about through the bars of sun and shadow; and sometimes, in place of the precipices,
the grassy land stretched away, in an apparently endless upward slant, and was dotted everywhere
with snug little chalets, the peculiarly captivating cottage of Switzerland.

The ordinary chalet turns a broad, honest gable end to the road, and its ample roof hovers
over the home in a protecting, caressing way, projecting its sheltering eaves far outward.
The quaint windows are filled with little panes, and garnished with white muslin curtains,
and brightened with boxes of blooming flowers. Across the front of the house, and up the spreading
eaves and along the fanciful railings of the shallow porch, are elaborate carvings--wreaths,
fruits, arabesques, verses from Scripture, names, dates, etc. The building is wholly of wood,
reddish brown in tint, a very pleasing color. It generally has vines climbing over it. Set
such a house against the fresh green of the hillside, and it looks ever so cozy and inviting
and picturesque, and is a decidedly graceful addition to the landscape.

One does not find out what a hold the chalet has taken upon him, until he presently comes upon
a new house--a house which is aping the town fashions of Germany and France, a prim, hideous,
straight-up-and-down thing, plastered all over on the outside to look like stone, and altogether
so stiff, and formal, and ugly, and forbidding, and so out of tune with the gracious landscape,
and so deaf and dumb and dead to the poetry of its surroundings, that it suggests an undertaker
at a picnic, a corpse at a wedding, a puritan in Paradise.

In the course of the morning we passed the spot where Pontius Pilate is said to have thrown
himself into the lake. The legend goes that after the Crucifixion his conscience troubled him,
and he fled from Jerusalem and wandered about the earth, weary of life and a prey to tortures
of the mind. Eventually, he hid himself away, on the heights of Mount Pilatus, and dwelt alone
among the clouds and crags for years; but rest and peace were still denied him, so he finally
put an end to his misery by drowning himself.

