Dora had been very busy, putting her little room in perfect order, for she had formed a plan,
which she meant to carry out as soon as this was done. The happy noise of the six children
had so excited the lonely little girl that she was filled with the strongest desire to see
them come back again, to see them get out of the carriage, and to see what would happen next;
whether they wouldn't perhaps come into the garden where the triumphal arch stood, and then
she could have a nearer view. She had made a little plan for watching them if they came into
the garden. She thought that she might perhaps find a hole in the hedge that divided Mrs. Kurd's
little garden from the large grounds next door, through which she could get a good view of
what the children were doing, and how they looked. The child did not know what Aunt Ninette
would say to this, but she determined to ask directly. At the door of her aunt's room she met
Mrs. Kurd, who had come to call them to supper. Dora made her request then and there, to be
allowed to go into the little garden, but her aunt said that it was now supper time, and after
supper it would be quite too late. Mrs. Kurd put in a word in Dora's favor, saying that no
one would be out there, and it would be safe for Dora to run about there as much as she chose,
and at last Aunt Ninette consented to allow her to go out for a while after supper. The child
could scarcely eat, so great was her excitement. She listened all the while for the sound of
the returning wheels and the children's voices, but nothing was to be heard. When supper was
over, her aunt said,

"You may go out now for a little while, but don't go far from the house."

Dora promised not to leave the garden, and ran off to search the hedge for the opening she
wanted. It was a white-thorn hedge, and so high and thick that the child could see neither
through it nor over it, but down near the ground were here and there thin places, where one
could look into the next garden; but only by lying close on the ground. Little did Dora mind
that; her one idea was to see the children. She had never seen so large a family, boys and
girls, big and little, and all so happy and merry. And to have seen them all climbing into
the carriage and driving off together! What a jolly party! She lay down on the ground in a
little heap, and peered through the hedge. There was nothing to be heard; the garden beyond
was still; the odor of the flowers was wafted to her on the cool, evening air, and she felt
as if she could not get enough of it into her lungs. How beautiful it must be in there, she
thought; to be able to walk about among the flower-beds! to sit under the tree where the red
apples were hanging! And there under the thick branches stood a table, covered with all sorts
of things which she could not see plainly, but which shimmered white as snow in the evening
light. She was quite absorbed in wonder and curiosity, when--there--that was the carriage,
and all the merry voices talking together. The children had returned. Dora could hear very
plainly. Now all was still again; they had gone into the house. Now they were coming out again;
now they were in the garden.

Mr. Birkenfeld had just returned from a long journey. The children had all gone down to the
lake, to meet him at the landing when the steamboat came in. Their mother had remained at home
to complete the preparations for the grand reception and the feast in the garden under the
big apple-tree. The father's home-coming after so long an absence was a very joyful occasion
for the family, and must be celebrated as such.

As soon as the carriage stopped at the door, the mother came running out to meet her husband.
All the children jumped down, one after another, and the cat and the dog too, and they all
crowded into the large hall, where the welcomings and greetings grew so loud and so violent
that the father hardly knew where he was, nor which way to turn as they all pressed about him.

"Now one at a time, my children, and then I can give you each a good kiss," he said at last,
when he succeeded in making himself heard through the tumult, "first the youngest, and then
the others according to age. Now, my little Hunne, what have you to tell me?"

So saying, Mr. Birkenfeld drew his chubby five-year old boy to his knees. The child's name
was Hulreich, but as he had always called himself Hunne, the other children and the parents
had adopted the nick-name. Moreover, Julius, the eldest brother, declared that the baby's little
stumpy nose made him look like a Hun, and so the name was very appropriate. But his mother
would not admit the resemblance.

The little one had so much to tell his father, that there was not time to wait for the end
of his story, and it had to be cut short.

"Bye and bye, little Hunne, you shall tell me all about it. Now it is time for Wili and Lili."
And giving the twins each a kiss he asked them, "Well now, have you been very good and happy?
and obedient, too, all this long time?"

"Almost always," replied Wili rather timidly, while Lili, recalling certain deviations from
perfect obedience during her father's absence, thought it best not to make any answer. The
twins were eight years old, and perfectly inseparable, never more so than in planning and carrying
out various delightful plans, of whose mischievousness they were really only half conscious.

"And you, Rolf, how is it with you?" said the father, turning to a twelve-year old lad with
a high forehead, and a strong, firm neck. "Plenty of Latin learned? More new puzzles ready?"

"I have been doing both, father," said the boy. "But the children will not guess my riddles,
and my mother has not time to try."

"That is too bad," said his father, kindly and turning to the eldest daughter, a girl of nearly
thirteen, he drew her to his side and said tenderly,

"And you Paula, are you still alone in your garden walks? have you no dear friend with you yet?"

"No, of course not, father, but it is beautiful to have you at home again," she answered as
she embraced him.

"And I hope my 'big Jule,' is using his vacation in some sensible way?"

"I combine the agreeable with the useful," said Julius gaily, returning his father's embrace.
"You must know, father, that the hazel-nuts are almost ripe and I am watching them carefully,
and meantime I am riding Castor a good deal, so that he may not grow too lazy."

Julius was at home now only for the summer holidays, his school being in a distant town. He
was seventeen, and tall, even too tall for his years so that in the family he was generally
called "Big Jule."

Mr. Birkenfeld now turned to shake hands with the children's governess and the dear friend
of the family, Miss Hanenwinkel, when Jule interrupted him.

"Come papa, I beg that you will do the rest of your greetings in the garden, where a most astonishing
reception awaits you."

But his words cost him dear, for Wili and Lili sprang upon him as he spoke, pinching, pounding
and thumping him to give him to understand that the "surprise" was not a thing to be talked
about beforehand. He defended himself to the best of his ability.

"Lili, you little gad-fly, you, stop, stop, I tell you. I will make it all right," and he shouted
to his father,

"I mean you are to go into the garden where my mother has prepared all sorts of delicious things
for your supper, to celebrate your return."

"That is delightful. We shall find a big table spread under my favorite apple-tree. That is
a surprise worth having. Come then let us all go into the garden."

He drew his wife's arm in his, and they walked out to the garden, the whole swarm following,
Wili and Lili capering about in most noisy delight that their father should suppose that he
knew what the "surprise" was already.

As they passed out into the garden they passed under the great triumphal arch, with red lanterns
hung on each side, lighting up the large tablet, on which was an inscription in big letters.

"Oh, oh, how splendid!" cried the father, now really surprised, "a beautiful arch and a poem
of welcome. I must read them aloud:"

    "Here we stand in welcome
        Beside the garden door,
     How glad we are that you're at home!
        We feared you'd come no more,
     So long you've stayed--but now to-day
        Forgot is all our pain.
     The whole world now is glad and gay,
        Papa is here again!"

"That is fine--Rolf must have been the author of that, was he not?" and Wili and Lili jumped
about more than ever, crying out,

"Yes, yes, Rolf wrote it, but we planned it all out and he made the verses, and Jule put up
the poles and then we fetched the fir twigs."

"That was a delightful surprise, my children," said their father, much gratified. "How pretty
the garden looks, all lighted up with red and blue and yellow lanterns. It looks like an enchanted
spot, and now for my favorite apple-tree."

The garden did look very pretty. The little paper lanterns had been made up a long time before,
and this very morning Jule had fastened them about on all the trees and high bushes, and while
the hand-shaking and kissing had been going on in the house, Battiste and Trine had lighted
the candles. The big apple-tree was dotted all over with them, so that it looked like a huge
out-of-doors Christmas tree, and the red apples shone so prettily in the flickering light,
that altogether it would have been difficult to imagine a more charming scene.

The table, spread with a white cloth and loaded with all sorts of nice dishes, looked irresistibly
attractive.

"What a beautiful banquet-hall," cried the delighted father, "and how good the feast will taste!
But what is this? Another poem?" and to be sure, a large white placard hung by two cords from
the high bushes behind the apple-tree, and on it were the following lines:

    "My first is good for man to be--
            Better than wealth.
     My second we have longed to see
            Our father do in health.
     My whole with merry hearts we cry
     Today, and shout it to the sky."

"A riddle! Rolf made this too, I am sure," said he, clapping the boy kindly on the shoulder.
"I will begin to guess it as soon as I can. Now we must sit down and enjoy these good things
before us, and the pleasure of being all together again."

So they all took their places at the table, and each had his or her own story to tell of what
had happened, and what had been done during the separation. There was so much to say that there
seemed no chance for a pause.

At last however, came a silence, when lo! Mr. Birkenfeld drew a huge bundle from beneath his
chair, and began to open the wrapper, while the children looked on with the greatest interest,
knowing very well that that bundle held some gift for each one of them. First came a pair of
shining spurs for "big Jule," then a lovely book with blue covers for Paula. Next a long bow
with a quiver and two feather arrows. "This is for Rolf," said the father, adding as he showed
the boy the sharp points of the arrows, "and for Rolf only, for he knows how to use it properly.
It is not a plaything, and Wili and Lili must never dream of playing with it, for they might
easily hurt themselves and others with it." 

In fact, the sun had loitered so long, with a friendly look back-turned into these inland States,
that people forgot that the summer had gone, and skies and air and fields were merry-making
together, when they lent their color and vitality to these few bleak
days, and then suddenly found that they had entertained winter unawares.

Down

on the lee coast of New Jersey, however, where the sea and wind spend the year making ready for
their winter's work of shipwreck, this storm, though grayer and colder there than elsewhere, toned
into the days and nights as a something entirely matter-of-course and consonant. In summer it
would have been at home there. Its aspect was different, also, as
I said.

But little rain fell here; the wind lashed the ocean into fury along the coast, and then rolled
in long, melancholy howls into the stretches of barren sand and interminable
pine forest; the horizon contracted, though at all times it is narrower
than anywhere else, the dome of the sky wider,--clouds and atmosphere
forming the scenery, and the land but a round, flat standing-place:
but now the sun went out; the air grew livid, as though death were
coming through it; solid masses of gray, wet mist moved, slower than
the wind, from point to point, like gigantic ghosts gathering to the
call of the murderous sea.

"Yonder go the shades of Ossian's heroes," said Mary Defourchet to
her companion, pointing through the darkening air.

They were driving carefully in an old-fashioned gig, in one of the
lulls of the storm, along the edge of a pine wood, early in the afternoon.

The old Doctor,--for it was MacAulay, (Dennis,) from over in Monmouth County, she was with,--the
old man did not answer, having enough to do to guide his mare, the sleet drove so in his eyes.
Besides, he was gruffer than usual this afternoon, looking with the trained eyes of an old water-dog
out to the yellow line of the sea to the north.

Miss Defourchet pulled the oil-skin cloth closer about her knees,
and held her tongue; she relished the excitement of this fierce fighting
the wind, though; it suited the nervous tension which her mind had
undergone lately.



"Aunt Ninette," said the little girl timidly, for she knew she had staid out too long, "you
need not be frightened; it is all dark again in the garden; the fire is all out."

Her aunt cast a rapid glance from the window, and saw that this was true; everything was dark,
even the last lantern extinguished. Some one was moving about among the trees, evidently to
make sure that all was safe.

"This is too terrible! Who would have believed that such things could happen?" said Aunt Ninette,
half scolding, half-whimpering. "Go to bed now Dora. To-morrow we will move away, and find
another house, or leave the place altogether."

The child obeyed quickly, and went up to her little bedroom, but it was long, very long, before
she could sleep. She still saw the illuminated garden, the sparkling apple tree, and the father
and mother with their happy children gathered about them. She thought of the time when she
too could tell her father everything, and the thought doubled her sense of her own loneliness,
and of the happiness of those other children.

And the child had become so much interested in the life beyond the hedge, and so almost fond
of that good father and mother, whom she had been watching, that the thought of going away
again as her aunt threatened, was a very sad one. She could not go to sleep. Presently she
seemed to see the children with their kind father again, and her own father was standing with
them, and she heard these words,

    "God holds us in his hand,
    God knows the best to send."

And so she fell asleep, and in her dreams she again saw the shining apple-tree, and the merry
group under its branches.

On investigating the cause of the fire, it was discovered that Wili and Lili had conceived
the happy thought of turning the riddle into a transparency, so that suddenly the company might
see it shining with red light behind it, like the motto behind the Christmas tree, "Glory to
God in the highest."

So they withdrew silently from the company, fetched two candles, climbed upon some high steps,
which had been brought when the placard was put in place, and held the candles as near as possible
to the card. As they did not perceive any expression of surprise on the faces of the company
at the table, they raised their candles higher and higher, nearer and nearer, until the paste-board
suddenly took fire, and the flame quickly spread to the bushes above.

The twins readily confessed themselves the cause of the mischief, and were sent to bed with
but a gentle reproof, so as not to spoil the general effect of the festivity, but they were
seriously warned never to play with fire again as long as they lived.

Soon all was quiet in the great house, and the moon looked peacefully down on the trees and
the sleeping flowers in the silent garden.

CHAPTER IV.

ALL SIX.

"We shall not be able to remain here; Mrs. Kurd," were the first words spoken by Mrs. Ehrenreich
when she came to breakfast the next morning. "We have come into such an objectionable neighborhood
that we must move away today."

Mrs. Kurd stood still in the middle of the room, quite speechless, and stared at the lady as
if unable to grasp her meaning.

"I am fully convinced of the absolute necessity of our immediate departure," said Aunt Ninette,
with emphasis. 

It lasted a week, and brought the winter,--for autumn had lingered unusually late that year;
the fat bottom-lands of Pennsylvania, yet green, deadened into swamps, as it passed over them:
summery, gay bits of lakes among the hills glazed over with muddy
ice; the forests had been kept warm between the western mountains,
and held thus late even their summer's strength and darker autumn
tints, but the fierce ploughing winds of this storm and its cutting
sleet left them a mass of broken boughs and rotted leaves.

 You know they were having a family festival,
and they were of course unusually lively."

"Indeed! if this is your method of celebrating family festivals in these parts, first a tempest
of shouts and cries and then a fire with all its accompanying noise and hubbub, I can only
say that such a neighborhood seems to me not only undesirable for an invalid, but positively
dangerous."

"I do not think you can call the fire a part of the celebration," said Mrs. Kurd gently. "It
was an accident, and it was very quickly extinguished, you must admit. A more orderly and well
regulated family is nowhere to be found, and I cannot understand how the lady and gentleman
can seriously think of leaving. I can assure you that no other such spot is to be found in
all Tannenburg! If the gentleman needs quiet he will do well to walk into the wood, where it
is healthful and quiet too."

After talking awhile, Mrs. Ehrenreich became more composed, and seated herself at the breakfast
table, where Mr. Titus and Dora also took their places.

At the other house, breakfast had long been finished. The father had gone about his business,
and the mother was occupied with her household affairs. Rolf was off to his early recitations
in Latin, with the pastor of a neighboring parish. Paula was taking her music-lesson of the
governess, and Wili and Lili took this opportunity to look over their lessons once more. Little
Hunne sat in the corner with his newly-acquired nut-cracker before him, gravely studying its
grotesque face.

Presently 'big Jule' came in, whip in hand, all booted and spurred from his morning ride.

