251)

I.  Germanicus, the father of Caius Caesar, and son of Drusus and the younger Antonia, was,
after his adoption by Tiberius, his uncle, preferred to the quaestorship [377] five years before
he had attained the legal age, and immediately upon the expiration of that office, to the consulship
[378].  Having been sent to the army in Germany, he restored order among the legions, who,
upon the news of Augustus's death, obstinately refused to acknowledge Tiberius as emperor [379],
and offered to place him at the head of the state.  In which affair it is difficult to say,
whether his regard to filial duty, or the firmness of his resolution, was most conspicuous.
Soon afterwards he defeated the enemy, and obtained the honours of a triumph.  Being then made
consul for the second time [380], before he could enter upon his office he was obliged to set
out suddenly for the east, where, after he had conquered the king of Armenia, and reduced Cappadocia
into the form of a province, he died at Antioch, of a lingering distemper, in the thirty-fourth
year of his age [381], not without the suspicion of being poisoned.  For besides the livid
spots which appeared all over his body, and a foaming at the mouth; when his corpse was burnt,
the heart was found entire among the bones; its nature being such, as it is supposed, that
when tainted by poison, it is indestructible by fire. [382]

II.  It was a prevailing opinion, that he was taken off by the contrivance of Tiberius, and
through the means of Cneius Piso.  This person, who was about the same time prefect of Syria,
and made no secret of his position being such, that (252) he must either offend the father
or the son, loaded Germanicus, even during his sickness, with the most unbounded and scurrilous
abuse, both by word and deed; for which, upon his return to Rome, he narrowly escaped being
torn to pieces by the people, and was condemned to death by the senate.

III.  It is generally agreed, that Germanicus possessed all the noblest endowments of body
and mind in a higher degree than had ever before fallen to the lot of any man; a handsome person,
extraordinary courage, great proficiency in eloquence and other branches of learning, both
Greek and Roman; besides a singular humanity, and a behaviour so engaging, as to captivate
the affections of all about him.  The slenderness of his legs did not correspond with the symmetry
and beauty of his person in other respects; but this defect was at length corrected by his
habit of riding after meals.  In battle, he often engaged and slew an enemy in single combat.
He pleaded causes, even after he had the honour of a triumph.  Among other fruits of his studies,
he left behind him some Greek comedies.  Both at home and abroad he always conducted himself
in a manner the most unassuming.  On entering any free and confederate town, he never would
be attended by his lictors.  Whenever he heard, in his travels, of the tombs of illustrious
men, he made offerings over them to the infernal deities.  He gave a common grave, under a
mound of earth, to the scattered relics of the legionaries slain under Varus, and was the first
to put his hand to the work of collecting and bringing them to the place of burial.  He was
so extremely mild and gentle to his enemies, whoever they were, or on what account soever they
bore him enmity, that, although Piso rescinded his decrees, and for a long time severely harassed
his dependents, he never showed the smallest resentment, until he found himself attacked by
magical charms and imprecations; and even then the only steps he took was to renounce all friendship
with him, according to ancient custom, and to exhort his servants to avenge his death, if any
thing untoward should befall him.

