Supper warmed us, and we went immediately to bed--but first, as Mr. Baedeker requests all tourists
to call his attention to any errors which they may find in his guide-books, I dropped him a
line to inform him he missed it by just about three days. I had previously informed him of
his mistake about the distance from Allerheiligen to Oppenau, and had also informed the Ordnance
Depart of the German government of the same error in the imperial maps. I will add, here, that
I never got any answer to those letters, or any thanks from either of those sources; and, what
is still more discourteous, these corrections have not been made, either in the maps or the
guide-books. But I will write again when I get time, for my letters may have miscarried.

We curled up in the clammy beds, and went to sleep without rocking. We were so sodden with
fatigue that we never stirred nor turned over till the blooming blasts of the Alpine horn aroused
us.

It may well be imagined that we did not lose any time. We snatched on a few odds and ends of
clothing, cocooned ourselves in the proper red blankets, and plunged along the halls and out
into the whistling wind bareheaded. We saw a tall wooden scaffolding on the very peak of the
summit, a hundred yards away, and made for it. We rushed up the stairs to the top of this scaffolding,
and stood there, above the vast outlying world, with hair flying and ruddy blankets waving
and cracking in the fierce breeze.

"Fifteen minutes too late, at last!" said Harris, in a vexed voice. "The sun is clear above
the horizon."

"No matter," I said, "it is a most magnificent spectacle, and we will see it do the rest of
its rising anyway."

In a moment we were deeply absorbed in the marvel before us, and dead to everything else. The
great cloud-barred disk of the sun stood just above a limitless expanse of tossing white-caps--so
to speak--a billowy chaos of massy mountain domes and peaks draped in imperishable snow, and
flooded with an opaline glory of changing and dissolving splendors, while through rifts in
a black cloud-bank above the sun, radiating lances of diamond dust shot to the zenith. The
cloven valleys of the lower world swam in a tinted mist which veiled the ruggedness of their
crags and ribs and ragged forests, and turned all the forbidding region into a soft and rich
and sensuous paradise.

We could not speak. We could hardly breathe. We could only gaze in drunken ecstasy and drink
in it. Presently Harris exclaimed:

"Why--nation, it's going DOWN!"

Perfectly true. We had missed the MORNING hornblow, and slept all day. This was stupefying.

Harris said:

"Look here, the sun isn't the spectacle--it's US--stacked up here on top of this gallows, in
these idiotic blankets, and two hundred and fifty well-dressed men and women down here gawking
up at us and not caring a straw whether the sun rises or sets, as long as they've got such
a ridiculous spectacle as this to set down in their memorandum-books. They seem to be laughing
their ribs loose, and there's one girl there that appears to be going all to pieces. I never
saw such a man as you before. I think you are the very last possibility in the way of an ass."

"What have I done?" I answered, with heat.

"What have you done? You've got up at half past seven o'clock in the evening to see the sun
rise, that's what you've done."

"And have you done any better, I'd like to know? I've always used to get up with the lark,
till I came under the petrifying influence of your turgid intellect."

"YOU used to get up with the lark--Oh, no doubt--you'll get up with the hangman one of these
days. But you ought to be ashamed to be jawing here like this, in a red blanket, on a forty-foot
scaffold on top of the Alps. And no end of people down here to boot; this isn't any place for
an exhibition of temper."

And so the customary quarrel went on. When the sun was fairly down, we slipped back to the
hotel in the charitable gloaming, and went to bed again. We had encountered the horn-blower
on the way, and he had tried to collect compensation, not only for announcing the sunset, which
we did see, but for the sunrise, which we had totally missed; but we said no, we only took
our solar rations on the "European plan"--pay for what you get. He promised to make us hear
his horn in the morning, if we were alive.