HOW TO BECOME LIKE CHRIST

CONTENTS

  How to Become Like Christ
  The Transfiguration
  Indiscreet Importunity
  Shame on Account of God's Displeasure
  Naaman Cured
  The Lame Man at the Temple Gate

HOW TO BECOME LIKE CHRIST.

I suppose there is almost no one who would deny, if it were put to him, that the greatest possible
attainment a man can make in this world is likeness to The Lord Jesus Christ. Certainly no
one would deny that there is nothing but character that we can carry out of life with us, and
that our prospect of good in any future life will certainly vary with the resemblance of our
character to that of Jesus Christ, which is to rule the whole future. We all admit that; but
almost every one of us offers to himself some apology for not being like Christ, and has scarcely
any clear reality of aim of becoming like Him. Why, we say to ourselves, or we say in our practice,
it is really impossible in a world such as ours is to become perfectly holy. One or two men
in a century may become great saints; given a certain natural disposition and given exceptionally
favouring circumstances, men may become saintly; but surely the ordinary run of men, men such
as we know ourselves to be, with secular disposition and with many strong, vigorous passions--surely
we can really not be expected to become like Christ, or, if it is expected of us, we know that
it is impossible. On the contrary, Paul says, "We all," "we all." Every Christian has that
for a destiny: to be changed into the image of his Lord. And he not only says so, but in this
one verse he reveals to us the mode of becoming like Christ, and a mode, as we shall find,
so simple and so infallible in its working that a man cannot understand it without renewing
his hope that even he may one day become like Christ.

In order to understand this simplest mode of sanctification we must look back at the incident
that we read in the Book of Exodus (xxxiv. 29-35.). Paul had been reading how when Moses came
down from the mount where he had been speaking with God his face shone, so as to dazzle and
alarm those who were near him.

They at once recognised that that was the glory of God reflected from him; and just as it is
almost as difficult for us to look at the sun reflected from a mirror as to look directly at
the sun, so these men felt it almost as difficult to look straight at the face of Moses as
to look straight at the face of God. But Moses was a wise man, and he showed his wisdom in
this instance as well as elsewhere. He knew that that glory was only on the skin of his face,
and that of course it would pass away. It was a superficial shining. And accordingly he put
a veil over his face, that the children of Israel might not see it dying out from minute to
minute and from hour to hour, because he knew these Israelites thoroughly, and he knew that
when they saw the glory dying out they would say, "God has forsaken Moses. We need not attend
to him any more. His authority is gone, and the glory of God's presence has passed from him."
So Moses wore the veil that they might not see the glory dying out. But whenever he was called
back to the presence of God he took off the veil and received a new access of glory on his
face, and thus went "from glory to glory."

"That," says Paul, "is precisely the process through which we Christian men become like Christ."
We go back to the presence of Christ with unveiled face; and as often as we stand in His presence,
as often as we deal in our spirit with the living Christ, so often do we take on a little of
His glory. The glory of Christ is His character; and as often as we stand before Christ, and
think of Him, and realise what He was, our heart goes out and reflects some of His character.
And that reflection, that glory, is not any longer merely on the skin of the face; as Paul
wishes us to recognise, it is a spiritual glory, it is wrought by the spirit of Christ upon
our spirit, and it is we ourselves that are changed from glory to glory into the very image
of the Lord.

Now obviously this mode of sanctification has extraordinary recommendations. In the first place,
it is absolutely simple. If you go to some priest or spiritual director, or minister of the
Gospel, or friend, and ask what you are to do if you wish to become a holy man, why, even the
best of them will almost certainly tell you to read certain books, to spend so much time in
prayer and reading your Bible, to go regularly to church, to engage in this and that good work.
If you had applied to a spiritual director of the middle ages of this world's history and of
the history of Christianity, he would have told you that you must retire from the world altogether
in order to become holy. Paul says, "Away with all that nonsense!" We are living in a real
world; Christ lived in a real world: Christ did not retire from men. And He says all that you
have to do in order to be like Christ is to carry His image with you in your heart. That is
all. To be with Him, to let Him stand before you and command your love, that will infallibly
change you into His image. I do not know that we sufficiently recognise the simplicity of Christian
methods. We do not understand what Paul meant by proclaiming it as the religion of the spirit,
as a religion superior to everything mechanical and external. Think of the deliverance it was
for him who had grown up under a religion which commanded him to go a journey three times a
year, to take the best of his goods and offer them in the Temple, to comply with a multitude
of oppressive observances and ordinances. Think of the emancipation when he found a spiritual
religion. Why, in those times a man must have despaired of becoming a holy man; But now Paul
says you will infallibly become holy if you learn this easy lesson of carrying the Lord Jesus
with you in your heart.

Another recommendation of this method is that it is so obviously grounded on our own nature.
No sooner are we told by Paul that we must act as mirrors of Christ than we recognise that
nature has made us to be mirrors, that we cannot but reflect what is passing before us. You
are walking along the street, and, a little child runs before a carriage; you shrink back as
if you were in danger. You see a man fall from a scaffolding, crushed; your face takes on an
expression of pain, reflecting what is passing in him. You go and spend an evening with a man
much stronger, much purer, much saner, than yourself, and you come away knowing yourself a
stronger and a better man. Why? Because you are a mirror, because in your inmost nature you
have responded to and reflected the good that was in him.

Look into any family, and what do you see? You see the boy, not imitating consciously, but
taking on, his father's looks and attitudes and ways; and as the boy grows up these become
his own looks and attitudes and ways. He has reflected his father from one degree of proficiency
unto another, from one intimacy, from one day's observation of his father to another, until
he is the image of the old man over again.

"Similarly," says Paul, "live with Christ; learn to carry His image with you, learn to adore
Him, learn to love Him, and infallibly, whether you will or not, by this simple method you
will become, Christ over again; you will become conformed, as God means you to become conformed,
to the image of His Son."

This has been tested by the experience of thousands; and it has been found to be a true method.
Every one who spends but two minutes in the morning in the observation of Christ, every one
who will be at the pains to let the image of Christ rise before him and to remember the purity,
the unworldliness, the heavenliness, the godliness of Jesus Christ, that man is the better
for this exercise. And how utterly useless is it to offer any other method of sanctification
to thousands of our fellow-citizens. How can many of our fellow-citizens secrete themselves
for prayer? If you ask them to go and pray as you pray in your comfortable home, if you ask
them to read the Bible before they go out at five or six o'clock in the morning, do you expect
that your word will be followed? Why, the thing is impossible. But ask a man to carry Christ
with him in his mind, that is a thing he can do; and if he does it once, if only once the man
sees Christ before him, realises that this living Person is with him, and remembers the character
of Christ as it is written for us in the Gospels, that man knows that he has made a step in
advance, knows that he is the better for it, knows that he does reflect, for a little, even
though it be but for a little, the very image of the Lord Jesus Christ; and other people know
it also.

Now, if that is so, there are obviously three things that we must do. We must in the first
place, learn to associate with Christ. I say that even one reflection does something, but we
need to reflect Christ constantly, continually, if we are to become like Him. When you pass
away from before a mirror the reflection also .goes. In the case of Moses the reflection stayed
for a little, and that is perhaps a truer figure of what happens to the Christian who sets
Christ before him and reflects him. But very often as soon as Christ is not consciously remembered
you fall back to other remembrances and reflect other things. You go out in the morning with
your associates, and they carry you away; you have not as yet sufficiently impressed upon yourself
the image of Christ. Therefore we must learn to carry Christ with us always, as a constant
Companion. Some one may say that is impossible. No one will say it is impossible who is living
in absence from anyone he loves. What happens when we are living separated from some one we
love? This happens: that his image is continually in our minds. At the most unexpected times
that image rises, and especially, if we are proposing to ourselves to do what that person would
not approve. At once his image rises to rebuke us and to hold us back. So that it is not only
possible to carry with us the image of Christ: it is absolutely certain that we shall carry
that image with us if only we give Him that love and reverence which is due from every human
being. Who has done for us what Christ has done? Who commands our reverence as He does? If
once He gets hold of our affection, it is impossible that He should not live constantly in
our hearts. And if we say that persons deeply immersed in business cannot carry Christ with
them thus, remember what He Himself says: "If any man love Me, he will keep My word; and My
Father will love him, and we will come unto him." So that He is most present with the busiest
and with those who strive as best they can to keep His commandments.

But we must not only associate with Christ and make Him our constant company: we must, in the
second place, set ourselves square with Christ. You know that if you look into a mirror obliquely,
if a mirror is not set square with you, you do not see yourself, but what is at the opposite
angle, something that is pleasant or something that is disagreeable to you; it matters not--you
cannot see yourself. And unless we as mirrors set ourselves perfectly square with Christ, we
do not reflect Him, but perhaps things that are in His sight monstrous. And, in point of fact,
that is what happens with most of us, because it is here that we are chiefly tried. All persons
brought up within the Christian Church pay some attention to Christ. We too well understand
His excellence and we too well understand the advantages of being Christian men not to pay
some attention to Christ. But that will not make us conform to His image. In order to be conformed
to the image of Christ we must be wholly His. Suppose you enter a studio where a sculptor is
working, will he hand you his hammer and chisel to finish the most difficult piece of his work
or to do any part of it? Assuredly not. It is his own idea that he is working out, and none
but his own hand can work it out. So with us who are to be moulded by Christ. Christ cannot
mould us into His image unless we are wholly His. Every stroke that is made upon us by the
chisel and mallet of the world is lost to His ideal. As often as we reflect what is not purely
Christian, so often do we mar the I image of Christ.

Now how is it with us? Need we ask? When we go along the street, what is it that we reflect?
Do we not reflect a thousand things that Christ disapproves? What is it that our heart responds
to when we are engaged in business? Is it to appeals that this world makes to us? Is it the
appeal that a prospect of gain makes to us that we respond to eagerly? That is what is making
us; that is what is moulding and making us the men that we are destined to be. We are moulded
into the character that we are destined to live with for ever and ever, by our likings and
dislikings, by the actual response that we are now giving day by day to the things that we
have to do with in this world. We may loathe the character of the sensualist; no language is
too strong for us when we speak of him: but if we, in point of fact, respond to appeals made
to the flesh rather than appeals made to the spirit, we are becoming sensual. We may loathe
and despise the character of the avaricious worldly man; we may see its littleness, and pettiness,
and greed, and selfishness: but do our own hearts go out in response to any offer of gain more
eagerly than they go out to Christian work or to the interests of Christ's kingdom? Then we
are becoming worldly and avaricious; we are becoming the very kind of men that we despise.

Of course we know this. We Know that we are being made by what we respond to, and the older
we grow we know it the more clearly; we see it written on our own character that we have become
the kind of men that we little thought one day we should become, and we know that we have become
such men by responding to certain things which are not the things of the Spirit. Never was
a truer word said than that he that Soweth to the flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption,
and he only that soweth to the Spirit shall reap life. That is what in other terms Paul here
says. He says, "If you set yourselves square with Christ, you will become like Him; that is
to say, if you find your all in Him, if you can be absolutely frank and honest with Him, if
you can say, 'Mould and fashion me according to Thy will; lead me according to Thy will; make
me in this world what Thou wilt; do with me what Thou wilt: I put myself wholly at Thy disposal;
I do not wish to crane to see past Christ's figure to some better thing beyond; I give myself
wholly and freely to him'--the man that says this, the man that does this, he will certainly
become like to Him. But the man who even when he prays knows that he has desires in his heart
that Christ cannot gratify, the man that never goes out from his own home or never goes into
his own home without knowing that he has responded to things that Christ disapproves--how can
that man hope to be like Him?"

We must then associate with Christ, and we must set ourselves squarely; we must. be absolutely
true in our entire and absolute devotion. Surely no man thinks that this is a hardship; that
his nature and life will be restricted by giving himself wholly to Christ? It is only, as every
Christian will tell you--it is only when you give yourself entirely to Christ that you know
what freedom means; that you know what it is to live in this world afraid of nothing. Superior
to things that before you were afraid of and anxious about, you at length learn what it is
to be a child of God. Let no man think that he lames his nature and makes his life poorer by
becoming entirely the possession of Christ.

But, thirdly, we must set Christ before us and live before Him with unveiled face. "We all
with unveiled face reflecting as a mirror." Throw a napkin over a mirror, and it reflects nothing.
Perfect beauty may stand before it, but the mirror gives no sign. And this is why in a dispensation
like ours, the Christian dispensation, with everything contrived to reflect Christ, to exhibit
Christ, the whole thing set a-going for this purpose of exhibiting Christ, we so little see
Him. How is it that two men can sit at a Communion table together, and the one be lifted to
the seventh heaven and see the King in His beauty, while the other only envies his neighbour
his vision? Why is it that in the same household two persons will pass through identically
the same domestic circumstances, the same events, from year to year, and the one see Christ
everywhere, while the other grows sullen, sour, indifferent? Why is it? Because the one wears
a veil that prevents him from seeing Christ; the other lives with unveiled face. How was it
that the Psalmist, in the changes of the seasons even, in the mountain, in the sea, in everything
that he had to do, found God? How was it that he knew that even though he made his bed in hell
he would find God? Because he had an unveiled face; he was prepared to find God. How is it
that many of us can come into church and be much more taken up with the presence of some friend
than with the presence of Christ? The same reason still: we wear a veil; we do not come with
unveiled face prepared to see Him.

And When we ask ourselves, "What, in point of fact, is the veil that I wear? What is it that
has kept me from responding to the perfect beauty of Christ's character? I know that that character
is perfect; I know that I ought to respond to it; I know that I ought to go out eagerly towards
Christ and strive to become like Him; why do I not do it?" we find that the veil that keeps
us from responding thus to Christ and reflecting Him is not like the mere dimness on a mirror
which the bright and warm presence of Christ Himself would dry off; it is like an incrustation
that has been growing out from our hearts all our life long, and that now is impervious, so
far as we can see, to the image of Christ. How can hearts steeped in worldliness reflect this
absolutely unworldly, this heavenly Person? When we look into our hearts, what do we find in
point of fact? We find a thousand ,things that we know have no right there; that we know to
be wrong. How can such hearts reflect this perfect purity of Christ? Well, we must see to it
that these hearts be cleansed; we must hold ourselves before Christ until from very shame these
passions of ours are subdued, until His purity works its way into our hearts through all obstructions;
and we must keep our hearts, we must keep the mirror free from dust, free from incrustations,
once we have cleansed it.

In some circumstances you might be tempted to say that really it is not so much that there
is a veil on the mirror as that there is no quicksilver at all behind. You meet in life characters
so thin, so shallow, that every good thought seems to go through and out of them at the other
side; they hear with one ear, and it goes out at the other. You can make no impression upon
them. There is nothing to impress, no character there to work upon. They are utterly indifferent
to spiritual things, and never give a thought to their own character. What is to be done with
such persons? God is the great Teacher of us all; God, in His providence, has made many a man
who has begun life as shallow and superficial as man can be, deep enough before He has done
with him.

Two particulars in which the perfectness of this method appears may be pointed out. First of
all, it is perfect in this: that anyone who begins it is bound to go on to the end. The very
nature of the case leads him to go on and on from glory to glory, back and back to Christ,
until the process is, actually completed, and he is like Christ. The reason is this: that the
Christian conscience is never much taken up with attainment made, but always with attainment
that is yet to be made. It is the difference not the likeness that touches the conscience.
A friend has been away in Australia for ten years, and he sends you his likeness, and you take
it out eagerly, and you say, "Yes, the eyes are the very eyes; the brow, the hair are exactly
like," but there is something about the mouth that you do not like, and you thrust it away
in a drawer and never look at it again. Why? Because the one point of unlikeness destroys the
whole to you. Just so when any Christian presents himself before Christ it is not the points
of likeness, supposing there are any, which strike his conscience--it is the remaining points
of difference that inevitably strike him, and so he is urged on and on from one degree of proficiency
to another until the process is completed, because there is no point at which a man has made
a sufficient attainment in the likeness of Christ. There is no point at which Christ draws
a line and says, "You will do well if you reach this height, and you need not strive further."
Why, we should be dissatisfied, we should throw up our allegiance to Christ if He treated us
so. He is our ideal, and it is resemblance to Him that draws us and makes us strive forward;
and so a man is bound, to go on, and on, and on, still drawn on to his ideal, still rebuked
by his shortcomings until he perfectly resembles Christ.

And this character of Christ that is our ideal is not assumed by Him for the nonce. He did
not change His nature when He came to this earth; He did not put on this character to set us
an example. The things that He did, He did because it was His nature to do them. He came to
this world because His love would not let Him stay away from us. It was His nature that brought
Him here, and it is His nature to be what He is, and so his character is to become our nature;
it is to be so wrought in us that we cannot give it up. It is our eternal character, and therefore
any amount of pains is worth spending on the achievement of it.

The second point of perfectness lies here. You know that in painting a likeness or cutting
out a bust one feature often may be almost finished while the rest are scarcely touched, but
in standing before a mirror the whole comes out at once. Now we often in the Christian life
deal with ourselves as if we were painters and sculptors, not as if we were mirrors: we hammer
and chisel away at ourselves to bring out some resemblance to Christ in some particulars, thinking
that we can do it piecemeal; we might as well try to feed up our body piecemeal; we might as
well try to make our eye bright without giving our cheek colour and our hands strength. The
body is a whole, and we must feed the whole and nourish the whole if any one part of it is
to be vigorous.

So it is with character. The character is a whole, and you can only deal with your character
as a whole. What has resulted when we have tried the other process? Sometimes we set ourselves
to subdue a sin or cultivate a grace. Well, candidly say what has come of this. Judging from
my own experience, I would say that this comes of it: that in three or four days you forget
what sin it was that you were trying to subdue. The temptation is away, and the sin is not
there, and you forget all about it. That is the very snare of sin. Or you become a little better
in a point that you were trying to cultivate. In that grace you are a shade improved. But that
only brings out more astoundingly your frightful shortcoming in other particulars. Now, adopting
Paul's method, this happens: Christ acts on our character just as a person acts upon a mirror.
The whole image is reflected at once. How is it that society moulds a man? How can you tell
in what class in society a man has been brought up? Not by one thing, not by his accent, not
by his bearing, not by his conduct, but the whole man. And why? Because a man does not consciously
imitate this or that feature of the society in which he is brought up, does not do it consciously
at all; he is merely reflecting it as a mirror, and society acts on him as a whole, and makes
him the man he is. "Just so," says Paul. "Live with Christ, and He will make you the man that
you are destined to be."

One word in conclusion. I suppose there is no one who at one time or other has not earnestly
desired to be of some use in the world. Perhaps there are few who have not even definitely
desired to be of some use in the kingdom of Christ. As soon as we recognise the uniqueness
of Christ's purpose and the uniqueness of His power in the world, as soon as we recognise that
all good influence and all superlatively dominant influence proceeds from Him, and that really
the hope of our race lies in Jesus Christ--as soon as we realise that, as soon as we see that
with our reason, and not as a thing that we have been taught to believe, as soon as we lay
hold on it for ourselves, we cannot but wish to do something to forward His purposes in the
world. But as soon as we form the wish we say, "What can we do? We have not been born with
great gifts; we have not been born in superior positions; we have not wealth; we are shut off
from the common ways of doing good; we cannot teach in the Sabbath school; we cannot go and
preach; we cannot go and speak to the sick; we cannot speak even to our fellow at the desk.
What can we do?" We can do the best thing of all, as of course all the best things are open
to every man. Love, faith, joy, hope, all these things, all the best things, are open to all
men; and so here it is open to all of us to forward the cause of Christ in the most influential
way possible, if not in the most prominent way. What happens when a person is looking into
a shop window where there is a mirror, and some one comes up behind--some one he knows? He
does not look any longer at the image; he turns to look at the person whose image is reflected.
Or if he sees reflected on the mirror something very striking: he does not content himself
with looking at the image; he turns and looks at the thing itself. So it is always with the
persons that you have to do with. If you become a mirror to Christ your friends will detect
it in a very few days; they will see appearing in you, the mirror, an image which they know
has not been originated in you, and they will turn to look straight at the Person that you
are reflecting. It is in that way that Christianity passes from man to man.

THE TRANSFIGURATION. 28-36.

The public life or our Lord falls into two parts; and the incident here recorded is the turning
point between them. In order that He might leave behind Him when He died a sure foundation
for His Church, it was necessary that His intimate companions should at all events know that
He was the Christ, and that the Christ must enter into glory by suffering death. Only then,
when they understood . this, could He die and leave them on earth behind. Now it is just at
this point in His life that it has become quite clear that the first article of the Christian
creed--that Jesus is the Christ--had been at last definitely accepted by the disciples. Very
solemnly our Lord has put it to them: "Who say ye that I am ?" No doubt it was a trying moment
for Him as for them. What was He to do if it had not now become plain at least to a few steadfast
souls that He was the Christ--the Messenger of God to men? Happily the impulsiveness of Peter
gives Him little space for anxiety; for he, with that generous outburst of affectionate trust
which should ring through every creed, said, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God."
You see the intensified relief which this brought to our Lord, the keen satisfaction He felt
as He heard it distinctly and solemnly uttered as the creed of the Twelve; as He heard what
hitherto He could only have gathered from casual expressions, from wistful awe-struck looks,
from overheard questionings and debatings with one another. You see how at once, He steps on
to a new footing with them, as He cordially, and with intense gratitude, says to Peter, "Blessed
art thou, Simon Barjona." In this Divinely-wrought confession of Peter's, He finds at last
the foundation stone of the earthly building the beginning of that intelligent and hearty reception
of Himself which was to make earth the recipient of all heaven's fulness. But as yet only half
the work is done. Men believe that He is the King, but as yet they have very little idea of
what the kingdom is to consist. They think Him worthy of all glory, but the kind of glory,
and the way to it they are ignorant of. From, that time forth, therefore, began Jesus to show
unto them how He must go unto Jerusalem and suffer many things, even of the men who ought chiefly
to have recognised Him, and to be raised again the third day.

Once before our Lord had been tempted in another way to the throne of the universal dominion
of men; again this temptation is pressed upon Him by the very men who should have helped Him
to resist it; His closest, His warmest, His most enlightened friends, those who stand on quite
a different plane from the world at large, are His tempters. Satan found in them an adequate
mouthpiece. They, who should have cheered and heartened Him to face the terrible prospect,
were hindrances, were an additional burden and anxiety to Him.

Now, it is to this conversation that the incident known as the transfiguration is linked by
all the evangelists who relate it--the first three. It was six days after (or, as Luke says,
eight days after) this conversation that Jesus went up Mount Hermon for the sake of retirement
and prayer. Plainly He was aware that the great crisis of His life had come. The time had come
when He must cease teaching, and face His destiny. He had made upon His disciples an impression
which would be indelible. With deliberation they had accepted Him as the Messiah; the Church
was founded; His work, so far as His teaching went, was accomplished. It remained that He should
die. To consecrate Himself to this hard necessity, He retired to the solitude of Mount Hermon.
We start, then, from the wrong point of view, if we suppose that Jesus climbed Hermon in order
to enjoy spiritual ecstasy, or exhibit His glory to those three men. Ecstasy of this kind must
come unsought; and the way to it lies through conflict, humiliation, self-mastery. It was not
simply to pray that Jesus retired; it was to engage in the great conflict of His life. And
because He felt, Himself so much in need of kindness and support, He took with Him the three
companions He could most depend upon. They were loyal friends; and their very presence was
a strength to Him. So human was Jesus, and now so heavily burdened, that the devotedness of
these three plain men--the sound of their voices, the touch of their hands as they clambered
the hill together, gave Him strength and courage. Let no one be ashamed to lean upon the affection
of his fellow-men. Let us, also, reverently, and with sympathy, accompany our Lord and witness,
and endeavour to understand, the conflict in which He now engaged. It has been suggested that
the transfiguration may best be understood as a temptation. Undoubtedly there must have been
temptation in the experience of Jesus at this crisis. It was for the purpose of finally consecrating
Himself to death, with all its painful accompaniments, that He now retired. But the very difficulty
of this act of consecration consisted just in this: that He might, if He pleased, avoid death.
It was because Peter's words, "This be far from Thee," touched a deep chord in His own spirit,
and strengthened that within Himself which made Him tremble and wish that God's will could
in any other wise be accomplished--it was this which caused Him so sharply and suddenly to
rebuke Peter. Peter's words penetrated to what was lurking near at hand as His normal temptation.
We may very readily underrate the trial and temptation of Christ, and thus have only a formal,
not a real, esteem for His manhood. We always underrate it when we do not fully apprehend His
human nature, and believe that He was tempted in all points as we are. But, on the other hand,
we underrate it if we forget that His position was wholly different from ours. That Jesus had
abundant nerve and courage no reader of the Gospels can, of course, doubt. He was calm in the
midst of a storm which terrified experienced boat-men; in riots that threatened His life, in
the hands of soldiers striving to torment Him and break Him down, in the presence of judges
and enemies, He maintained a dignity which only the highest courage could maintain. That such
a Person should have quailed at the prospect of physical suffering, which thousands of men
and women have voluntarily and calmly faced, is simply impossible to believe. Neither was it
entirely His perception of the spiritual significance of death which made it to Him a far more
painful prospect than to any other. Certainly this clear perception of the meaning of death
did add immensely to its terrors; but if we are even to begin to understand His trial, and
begin is all we can do--we must bear in mind what Peter had just confessed, and what Jesus
Himself knew--that He was the Christ. It was this which made the difference. Socrates could
toss off the poison as unmoved as if it had been a sleeping-draught, because he was dying for
himself alone. Jesus could only with trembling take into His hand the fatal cup, because He
knew that He was standing for all men. If He failed, all failed. Everything hung upon Him.
The general who spends the whole night pacing his tent, debating the chances of battle on the
morrow, is not tormented with the thought of his own private fate, but with the possibilities
of disaster to his men and to his country, if his design or his skill should at any moment
of the battle fail. Jesus was human; and we deny His humanity, and fail to give Him the honour
due to it, if we do not recognise the difficulty which He must always have felt in believing
that His single act could save the world, and the burden of responsibility which must have
weighed upon Him when He realised that it was by the Spirit He maintained in life and in death,
that God meant to bless all men. It was because He knew Himself to be the Christ, and because
every man depended upon Him as the Christ, and because, therefore, the whole blessing God meant
for the world depended upon His maintaining faith in God through the most trying circumstances--it
was because of this that He trembled lest all should end in failure. Public credit is as necessary
for the prosperity of a nation as private credit is for the support and wealth of a family.

We are this day many millions poorer than we should have been had a well arranged government taken
place at the conclusion of the war. All have shared in this loss, but none in so great proportion
as the landholders and farmers.

The public must be served in various departments. Who will serve them without a meet recompense?
Who will go to war and pay the charges of his own warfare? What man will any longer take empty
promises of reward from those, who have no constitutional power to reward or means of fulfilling
them? Promises have done their utmost, more than they ever did in any other age or country. The
delusive bubble has broke, and in breaking has beggared thousands, and left you an unprotected
people; numerous without force, and full of resources but unable to command one of them. For
these purposes there must be a general treasury, with a power to replenish it as often as necessity
requires. And where can this power be more safely vested, than in the common legislature, men chosen
by yourselves from every part of the union, and who have the confidence of their several states;
men who must share in the burdens they impose on others; men who by a seat in Congress are incapable
of holding any office under the states, which might prove a temptation to spoil the people
for increasing their own income?

We find another objection to be “that the executive is blended with and will have an undue
influence over the legislature.” On examination you will find this objection unfounded. The
supreme executive is vested in a President of the United States; every bill that hath passed the
senate and representatives, must be presented to the president, and if he approve it becomes law.
If he disapproves, but makes no return within ten days, it still becomes law. If he returns the
bill with his objections, the senate and representatives consider it a second time, and if
two-thirds of them adhere to the first resolution it becomes law notwithstanding the president’s
dissent. We allow the president hath an influence, tho’ strictly speaking he hath not a legislative
voice; and think such an influence must be salutary. In the president all the executive departments
meet, and he will be a channel of communication between those who make and those who execute the
laws. Many things look fair in theory which in practice are impossible. If lawmakers, in every
instance, before their final decree, had the opinion of those who are to execute them, it would
prevent a thousand absurd ordinances, which are solemnly made, only
to be repealed, and lessen the dignity of legislation in the eyes
of mankind.

The vice-president is not an executive officer while the president is in discharge of his duty,
and when he is called to preside his legislative voice ceases. In no other instance is there
even the shadow of blending or influence between the two departments.

We are further told “that the judicial departments, or those courts of law, to be instituted
by Congress, will be oppressive.” We allow it to be possible, but from whence arises the probability
of this event? State judges may be corrupt, and juries may be prejudiced and ignorant, but
these instances are not common; and why shall we suppose they will
be more frequent under a national appointment and influence, when
the eyes of a whole empire are watching for their detection?

Their courts are not to intermeddle with your internal policy, and will have cognizance only of
those subjects which are placed under the control of a national legislature. It is as necessary
there should be courts of law and executive officers, to carry into effect the laws of the nation,
as that there be courts and officers to execute the laws made by your state assemblies. There
are many reasons why their decisions ought not to be left to courts instituted by particular
states.

A perfect uniformity must be observed thro’ the whole union, or jealousy and unrighteousness
will take place; and for a uniformity one judiciary must pervade the whole. The inhabitants
of one state will not have confidence in judges appointed by the legislature of another state,
in which they have no voice. Judges who owe their appointment and support to one state, will
be unduly influenced, and not reverence the laws of the union. It will at any time be in the
power of the smallest state, by interdicting their own judiciary, to defeat the measures, defraud
the revenue, and annul the most sacred laws of the whole empire. A legislative power, without
a judicial and executive under their own control, is in the nature of things a nullity. Congress
under the old confederation had power to ordain and resolve, but having no judicial or executive
of their own, their most solemn resolves were totally disregarded. The little state of Rhode
Island was purposely left by Heaven to its present madness, for a general conviction in the
other states, that such a system as is now proposed is our only preservation from ruin. What
respect can any one think would be paid to national laws, by judicial
and executive officers who are amenable only to the present assembly
of Rhode Island?

The rebellion of Shays and the present measures of Rhode Island ought to convince us that
a national legislature, judiciary and executive, must be united, or the whole is but a name; and
that we must have these, or soon be hewers of wood and drawers of water for all other people.

In
all these matters and powers given to Congress, their ordinances must be the supreme law of the
land, or they are nothing. They must have authority to enact any laws for executing their own
powers, or those powers will be evaded by the artful and unjust, and the dishonest trader will
defraud the public of its revenue. As we have every reason to think this system was honestly planned,
we ought to hope it may be honestly and justly executed. I am sensible that speculation is always
liable to error. If there be any capital defects in this constitution, it is most probable
that experience alone will discover them. Provision is made for an alteration if, on trial,
it be found necessary.

When your children see the candor and greatness of mind, with which you lay the foundation, they
will be inspired with equity to furnish and adorn the superstructure.

A LANDHOLDER.

The Landholder, VI.

The Connecticut Courant, (Number 1194)

MONDAY, DECEMBER 10, 1787.

He that is first in his own cause seemeth just; but his neighbor cometh and searcheth him.

TO THE LANDHOLDERS AND FARMERS:

The publication of Col. Mason’s(31) reasons for not signing the new Constitution, has extorted
some truths that would otherwise in all probability have remained unknown to us all. His reasons,
like Mr. Gerry’s, are most of them ex post facto, have been revised in New Y——k by R. H. L.(32)
and by him brought into their present artful and insidious form. The factious spirit of R. H.
L., his implacable hatred to General Washington, his well-known intrigues against him in the
late war, his attempts to displace him and give the command of the American army to General
Lee, is so recent in your minds it is not necessary to repeat them. He is supposed to be the
author of most of the scurrility poured out in the New-York papers against the new constitution.

Just
at the close of the Convention, whose proceedings in general were
zealously supported by Mr. Mason, he moved for a clause that no navigation
act should ever be passed but with the consent of two thirds of both
branches;(33) urging that a navigation act might otherwise be passed
excluding foreign bottoms from carrying American produce to market,
and throw a monopoly of the carrying business into the hands of the
eastern states who attend to navigation, and that such an exclusion
of foreigners would raise the freight of the produce of the southern
states, and for these reasons Mr. Mason would have it in the power
of the southern states to prevent any navigation act.

This clause, as unequal and partial in the extreme to the southern states, was rejected; because
it ought to be left on the same footing with other national concerns, and because no state would
have a right to complain of a navigation act which should leave the carrying business equally open
to them all. Those who preferred cultivating their lands would do so; those who chose to navigate
and become carriers would do that. The loss of this question determined Mr. Mason against the signing
the doings of the convention, and is undoubtedly among his reasons as drawn for the southern
states; but for the eastern states this reason would not do.(34) It would convince us that Mr.
Mason preferred the subjects of every foreign power to the subjects
of the United States who live in New-England; even the British who
lately ravaged Virginia—that Virginia, my countrymen, where your relations
lavished their blood—where your sons laid down their lives to secure
to her and us the freedom and independence in which we now rejoice,
and which can only be continued to us by a firm, equal and effective
union.

But do not believe that the people of Virginia are all thus selfish: No, there is a Washington,
a Blair, a Madison and a Lee, (not R. H. L.) and I am persuaded there is a majority of liberal,
just and federal men in Virginia, who, whatever their sentiments may be of the new constitution,
will despise the artful injustice contained in Col. Mason’s reasons as published in the Connecticut
papers.

The President of the United States has no council, etc., says Col. Mason. His proposed council(35)
would have been expensive—they must constantly attend the president, because the president constantly acts.
This council must have been composed of great characters, who could not be kept attending without
great salaries, and if their opinions were binding on the president his responsibility would be
destroyed—if divided, prevent vigor and dispatch—if not binding, they would be no security.
The states who have had such councils have found them useless, and
complain of them as a dead weight.

In others, as in England, the supreme executive advises when and with whom he pleases; if any
information is wanted, the heads of the departments who are always at hand can best give it, and
from the manner of their appointment will be trustworthy. Secrecy, vigor, dispatch and responsibility,
require that the supreme executive should be one person, and unfettered otherwise than by the laws
he is to execute.

There is no Declaration of Rights. Bills of Rights were introduced in England when its kings claimed
all power and jurisdiction, and were considered by them as grants to the people. They are insignificant
since government is considered as originating from the people, and all the power government now
has is a grant from the people. The constitution they establish with powers limited and defined,
becomes now to the legislator and magistrate, what originally a bill of rights was to the people.
To have inserted in this constitution a bill of rights for the states, would suppose them to
derive and hold their rights from the federal government, when the reverse is the case.

There is to be no ex post facto laws. This was moved by Mr. Gerry and supported by Mr. Mason,(36) and
is exceptional only as being unnecessary; for it ought not to be presumed that government will
be so tyrannical, and opposed to the sense of all modern civilians, as to pass such laws: if
they should, they would be void.

The general legislature is restrained from prohibiting the further importation of slaves for
twenty odd years. But every state legislature may restrain its own subjects; but if they should
not, shall we refuse to confederate with them? their consciences are their own, tho’ their wealth
and strength are blended with ours. Mr. Mason has himself about three hundred slaves, and lives
in Virginia, where it is found by prudent management they can breed
and raise slaves faster than they want them for their own use, and
could supply the deficiency in Georgia and South Carolina; and perhaps
Col. Mason may suppose it more humane to breed than import slaves—those
imported having been bred and born free, may not so tamely bear slavery
as those born slaves, and from their infancy inured to it; but his
objections are not on the side of freedom, nor in compassion to the
human race who are slaves, but that such importations render the United
States weaker, more vulnerable, and less capable of defence.

To this I readily agree, and all good men wish the entire abolition
of slavery, as soon as it can take place with safety to the public,
and for the lasting good of the present wretched race of slaves.

    The only possible step that could be
        taken towards it by the convention was to fix a period after which
they should not be imported.

    
        

    There is no declaration of any kind to preserve the liberty of the
press, etc. Nor is liberty of conscience, or of matrimony, or of burial
of the dead; it is enough that congress have no power to prohibit
either, and can have no temptation.

This objection is answered in that the states have all the power originally, and congress have
only what the states grant them.

The judiciary of the United States is so constructed and extended as to absorb and destroy the
judiciaries of the several states; thereby rendering law as tedious, intricate and expensive,
and justice as unattainable by a great part of the community, as in England; and enable the
rich to oppress and ruin the poor. It extends only to objects and cases specified, and wherein the
national peace or rights, or the harmony of the states is concerned, and not to controversies
between citizens of the same state (except where they claim under grants of different states);
and nothing hinders but the supreme federal court may be held in different districts, or in
all the states, and that all the cases, except the few in which it has original and not appellate
jurisdiction, may in the first instance be had in the state courts
and those trials be final except in cases of great magnitude; and
the trials be by jury also in most or all the causes which were wont
to be tried by them, as congress shall provide, whose appointment
is security enough for their attention to the wishes and convenience
of the people.

In chancery courts juries are never used, nor are they proper in admiralty courts, which proceed
not by municipal laws, which they may be supposed to understand, but by the civil law and law
of nations.

Mr. Mason deems the president and senate’s power to make treaties dangerous, because they become
laws of the land. If the president and his proposed council had this power, or the president
alone, as in England and other nations is the case, could the danger be less?—or is the representative
branch suited to the making of treaties, which are often intricate, and require much negotiation
and secrecy? The senate is objected to as having too much power, and bold unfounded assertions
that they will destroy any balance in the government, and accomplish what usurpation they
please upon the rights and liberties of the people; to which it may be answered, they are elective
and rotative, to the mass of the people; the populace can as well balance the senatorial branch there
as in the states, and much better than in England, where the lords are hereditary, and yet the commons
preserve their weight; but the state governments on which the constitution is built will forever
be security enough to the people against aristocratic usurpations:—The danger of the constitution
is not aristocracy or monarchy, but anarchy.

I intreat you, my fellow citizens, to read and examine the new constitution with candor—examine it for
yourselves: you are, most of you, as learned as the objector, and certainly as able to judge
of its virtues or vices as he is. To make the objections the more plausible, they are called
The objections of the Hon. George Mason, etc.—They may possibly be his, but be assured they
were not those made in convention, and being directly against what he there supported in one
instance ought to caution you against giving any credit to the rest; his violent opposition
to the powers given congress to regulate trade, was an open decided
preference of all the world to you. To wait is the test
of many persons; and if they are impatient, they fail in the one point that determines the
whole. Many young persons seem to think life will all be gone before they taste any of its
sweets. They must have everything at once, and cannot postpone any of its enjoyments or advantages.
No quality is more fatal to success and lasting happiness than impatience.

This being a common attitude of mind towards fancied blessings, how does God deal with it?
For a long time He may in compassion withhold the fatal gift. He may in pity disregard our
petulant clamour. And He may in many ways bring home to our minds that the thing we crave is
in several respects unsuitable. We may become conscious under His discipline that without it
we are less entangled with the world and with temptation; that we can live more holily and
more freely as we are, and that to quench the desire we have would be to choose the better
part. God may make it plain to us that it is childish to look upon this one thing as the supreme
and only good. Providential obstacles are thrown in our way, difficulties amounting almost
to impossibilities absolutely prevent us for a while from attaining our object, and give us
time to collect ourselves and take thought. And not only are we prevented from attaining this
one object, but in other respects our life is enriched and gladdened, so that we might be expected
to be content. If we cannot have a king like other nations, we have the best of Judges in abundance.
And experience of this kind will convince the subject of it that a Providence shapes our ends,
even although the lesson it teaches may remain unlearnt.

For man's will is never forced: and therefore if we continue to pin our happiness to this one
object, and refuse to find satisfaction and fruit in life without it, God gives in anger what
we have resolved to obtain. He gives it in its bare earthly form, so that as soon as we receive
it our soul sinks in shame. Instead of expanding our nature and bringing us into a finished
and satisfactory condition, and setting our life in right relations with other men, we find
the new gift to be a curse to us, hampering us, cutting us off in unexpected ways from our
usefulness, thwarting and blighting our life round its whole circumference.

For a man is never very long in discovering the mischief he has done by setting his own wisdom
above God's, by underrating God's goodness and overriding God's will. When Samuel remonstrated
with Israel and warned them that their king would tyrannise over them, all the answer he got
was: "Nay, but we will have a king to rule over us." So it is always; we speedily recognise
the difference between God's wisdom and our own. What seemed neglect on His part is now seen
to be care, and what we murmured at as niggardliness and needless harshness we now admire as
tenderness. Those at least are our second and wiser thoughts, even although at first we may
be tempted with Manoah when he saw his son blind and fettered in the Philistine dungeon, to
exclaim,

  What thing good
  Pray'd for, but often proves our woe, our bane?
  I prayed for children and thought barrenness
  In wedlock a reproach;
  I gain'd a son And such a son
  as all men hail'd me happy.
  Who would be now a father in my stead?
  Oh, wherefore did God grant me my request,
  And as a blessing with such pomp adorn'd
  Why are His gifts desirable, to tempt
  Our earnest prayers, then giv'n with solemn hand
  As graces, draw a scorpion's tail behind?

Such, I say, may be our first thoughts; but when the first bitterness and bewilderment of disappointment
are over, when reason and right feeling begin to dominate, we own that the whole history of
our prayer and its answer has been most humiliating to us, indeed, but most honouring to God.
We see as never before how accurately our character has been understood, how patiently our
evil propensities have been resisted, how truly our life has been guided towards the highest ends.

The obvious lessons are:-

1. Be discreet in your importunity. Two parables are devoted to the inculcation of importunity.
And it is a duty to which our own intolerable cravings drive us. But there is an importunity
which offends God. There is a spiritual instinct which warns us when we are transgressing the
bounds of propriety; a perception whereby Paul discerned, when he had prayed thrice for the
removal of the thorn in his flesh, that it would not be removed. There are things, about which
a heavenly-minded person feels it to be unbecoming to be over-solicitous; and there are things
regarding which it is somehow borne in upon us that we are not to attain them. There are natural
disabilities, physical or mental or social weaknesses and embarrassments, regarding which we
sometimes cannot but cry out to God for relief, and yet as we cry we feel that they will not
be removed, and that we must learn to bear the burden cheerfully.

2. On the other hand, we must not be false in prayer. We must utter to God our real desires
in their actual intensity; while at the same time we must learn to moderate desires which we
see to be unpleasing to God. We must learn to say with truth:

  Not what we wish but what we want
    Thy favouring grace supply;
  The good unasked, in mercy grant,
    The ill, though asked, deny.

Learn why God does not make the coveted blessing accessible to you, and you will learn to pray
freely and wisely. Try to discover whether there is not some peculiar advantage attaching to
your present state--some more wholesome example you can furnish, some more helpful attitude
towards others; some healthier exercise of the manlier graces of Christianity, which could
not be maintained were your request granted.

3. If your life is marred by the gift you have wrung by your importunity from a reluctant God,
be wise and humble in your dealing with that gift. If you have suddenly and painfully learned
that in the ordinary-looking circumstances of your life God is touching you at every point,
and if you clearly see that in giving you the fruit of your desires He is punishing you, there
is one only way by which you can advance to a favourable settlement, and that is by a real
submission to God. Perhaps in no circumstances is a man more tempted to break with God. At
first he cannot reconcile himself to the idea that ruin should be the result of prayer, and
he is inclined to say, If this be the result of waiting on God, the better course is to refuse
His guidance. In his heart he knows he is wrong, but there is an appearance of justice in what
he says, and it is so painful to have the heart broken, to admit we have been foolish and wrong,
and humbly to beseech God to repair the disasters our own self-will has wrought.

SHAME ON ACCOUNT OF GOD'S DISPLEASURE. 14.

The incident recorded in this chapter is of a painful character. Petty jealousies discovered
themselves in the most distinguished family of Israel. Through the robes of the anointed and
sacred High Priest the throbbings of a heart stirred with evil passion were discernible. Aaron
and Miriam could not bear that even their own brother should occupy a Position of exceptional
dignity, and with ignorant pretentiousness aspired to equality with him. It is to the punishment
of this sin that our attention is here called. This punishment fell directly on Miriam, possibly
because the person of the High Priest was sacred, and had he been incapacitated all Israel
would have suffered in their representative; possibly because the sin, as it shows traces of
a peculiarly feminine jealousy, was primarily the sin of Miriam; and partly because, in her
punishment, Aaron suffered a sympathetic shame, as is apparent from his, impassioned appeal
to Moses in her behalf.

The noteworthy feature of the incident and its most impressive lesson are found in the fact
that, although the healing and forgiveness sought for Miriam were not refused, God is represented
as resenting the speedy oblivion of the offence on account of which the leprosy had been sent
and of the Divine displeasure incurred. There was cause to apprehend that the whole matter
might be too quickly wiped out and forgotten, and that the sinners, reinstated in their old
positions, should think too lightly of their offence. This detrimental suddenness God takes
measures to prevent. Had an earthly father manifested his displeasure as emphatically as God
had now shown His, Miriam could not for a time have held up her head. God desires that the
shame which results from a sense of His displeasure should last at least as long. He therefore
enjoins something like a penance; He removes His stroke, but provides for the moral effects
of it being sufficiently impressed on the spirit to be permanent.

Three points are involved in the words:
  1. Our keener sense of man's displeasure than of God's.
  2. The consequent possibility of accepting pardon with too light a heart.
  3. The means of preventing such acceptance of pardon.

1. We are much more sensitive to the displeasure of man than to that of God. Men have several
methods of expressing their opinion of us and their feeling toward us; and these methods are
quite effectual for their purpose. There is an instinctive and exact correspondence between
our feelings and every slightest hint of disapprobation on the part of our acquaintances; and
so readily and completely does the mere carriage of any person convey to us his estimate of
our conduct that explicit denunciation is seldom required. The mode of expressing opinion which
is cited in the text is the most forcible Eastern mode of expressing contempt. When one man
spits in the face of another, no one, and least of all the suffering party, can have the slightest
doubt of the esteem in which the one holds the other. If an insolent enemy were to spit in
the face of a slain foe, the dead man might almost be expected to blush or to rise and avenge
the insult. But comparing His methods with such a method as this, God awards the palm to His
own for explicitness and emphasis. He speaks of the most emphatic and unambiguous of human
methods with a "but," as if it could scarcely be compared with His expressions of displeasure.
"If her father had but spit in her face"--if that were all--but something immensely more expressive
than that has happened to her.

God, therefore, would have us ponder the punishments of sin, and find in them the emphatic
expressions of His judgment of our conduct and of ourselves. He resents our shamelessness,
and desires that we consider His judgments till our callousness is removed. The case stands
thus: God. is long-suffering, slow to anger, not of a fault-finding, everchiding nature, but
most loving and most just; and this God has recorded against us the strongest possible condemnation.
This God, who cannot do what is not most just, and who cannot make mistakes, this unfurious
and holy God, whose opinion of us represents the very truth, has pronounced us to be wicked
and worthless; and we seem scarcely at all impressed by the declaration. God's judgment of
us is not only absolutely true, but it must also take effect; so that what He has pronounced
against us will be seen written in the facts bearing upon and entering into our life. But,
although we know this, we are for the most part as unmoved as if in hearing God's judgment
pronounced against us we had heard but the sighing of the wind or any other inarticulate, unintelligible
sound. There is a climax of ignominy in having excited in the Divine mind feelings of displeasure
against us. One might suppose a man would die of shame, and could not bear to live conscious
of having merited the condemnation and punishment of such a Being; one might suppose that the
breath of God's disapproval would blast every blessing to us, and that so long as we know ourselves
displeasing to Him His sweetest gifts must be bitter to us; but the coldness of a friend gives
us more thought, and the contempt of men as contemptible as ourselves affects us with a more
genuine confusion.

God's demand, then, is reasonable. He would have us feel before Him as much shame as we feel
before men, the same kind of shame--shame with the same blush and burning in it, not shame
of any sublimated, fictitious kind. He desires us individually to take thought, and to say
to ourselves: "Suppose a man had proved against me even a small part of what is proved against
me by God: Suppose some wise, just, and honourable man had said of me and believed such things
as God has said: suppose he had said, and said truly, that I had robbed him, betrayed trust,
and was unworthy of his friendship, would the shame be no more poignant than that which I feel
when God denounces me?" How trifling are the causes which make us blush before our fellows:
a little awkwardness, the slightest accident which makes us appear blundering, some scarcely
perceptible incongruity of dress, an infinitesimal error in manner or in accent--anything is
enough to make us uneasy in the company of those we esteem. It is God's reasonable demand that
for those gross iniquities and bold transgressions of which we are conscious we should manifest
some heartfelt shame--a shame that does not wholly lack the poignancy and agitation of the
confusion we feel in presence of human judgment.

2. The consequent possibility of accepting the pardon of sin with too light a heart. To ask
for pardon Without real shame is to treat sin lightly; and to treat sin lightly is to treat
God lightly. Nothing more effectually deadens the moral sense than: the habit of asking pardon
without a due sense of the evil of sin. We ask God to forgive us our debts, and we do so in
so inconsiderate a spirit that we go straightway and contract heavier debts. The friend who
repays the ten pounds we had lent him and asks for a new loan of twenty, does not commend himself
to our approval. He is no better who accepts pardon as if it cost God nothing.

3. The means of preventing a too light-hearted acceptance of pardon. Under the ceremonial prescriptions
enjoined on Miriam lay some moral efficacy. A person left for a full week without the camp
must, in separation from accustomed companionship, intercourse, and occupations, have been
thrown upon his or her own thoughts. No doubt it is often while engaged in our ordinary occupations
that the strongest light is flashed upon our true spiritual condition. It is while in the company
of other people that we catch hints which seem to interpret to us our past and reveal to us
our present state. But these glimpses and hints often pass without result, because we do not
find leisure to follow them up. There must be some kind of separation from the camp if we are
to know ourselves, some leisure gained for quiet reflection. It is due to God that we be at
some pains to ascertain with precision our actual relation to His will.

The very feeling of being outcast, unworthy to mingle with former associates and friends, must
have been humbling and instructive. Miriam had been the foremost woman in Israel; now she would
gladly have changed places with the least known and be lost among the throng from the eye of
wonder, pity, contempt or cruel triumph. All sin makes us unworthy of fellowship with the people
of God. And the feeling that we are thus unworthy, instead of being lightly and callously dismissed,
should be allowed to penetrate and stir the conscience.

If the leprosy departed from Miriam as soon as Moses prayed, yet the shock to her physical
system, and the revulsion of feeling consequent on being afflicted with so loathsome a disease,
would tell upon her throughout the week. All consequences of sin, which are prolonged after
pardon, have their proper effect and use in begetting shame. We are not to evade what conscience
tells us of the connection between our sin and many of the difficulties of our life. We are
not to turn away from this as a morbid view of providence; still less are we to turn away because
in this light sin seems so real and so hideous. Miriam must have thought, "If this disgusting
condition of my body, this lassitude and nervous trembling, this fear and shame to face my
fellows, be the just consequence of my envy and pride, how abominable must these sins be."
And we are summoned to similar thoughts. If this pursuing evil, this heavy clog that drags
me down, this insuperable difficulty, this disease, or this spiritual and moral weakness be
the fair natural consequence of my sin, if these things are in the natural world what my sin
is in the spiritual, then my sin must be a much greater evil than I was taking it to be.

But especially are we rebuked for all light-heartedness in our estimate of sin by remembering
Him who went without the camp bearing our reproach. It is when we see Christ rejected of men,
and outcast for us and for our sin, that we feel true shame. To find one who so loves me and
enters into my position that He feels more keenly than myself the shame I have incurred; to
find one who so understands God's holiness and is Himself so pure that my sin affects Him with
the profoundest shame--this is what pierces my heart with an altogether new compunction, with
an arrow that cannot be shaken out. And this connection of Christ with our sin is actual. If
Paul felt himself so bound up with his fellow-Christians that he blushed for them when they
erred, and could say with truth, "Who is weak and I am not weak, who is offended and I turn
not?" much more truly may Christ say, Who sins and I am not ashamed? And if He thus enters
into a living sympathy with us, shall not we enter into sympathy with Him, and go without the
camp bearing His reproach, which, indeed, is ours; striving, though it cost us much shame and
self-denial, to enter heartily into His feelings at our sins, and not letting our union to
Him be a mere name or an inoperative tie which effects no real assimilation in spirit between
us and Him.

NAAMAN CURED.

There is no Scripture story better known than that of Naaman, the Syrian. It is memorable not
only because artistically told, but because it is so full of human feeling and rapid incident,
and so fertile in significant ideas. The little maid, whose touch set in motion this drama,
is an instance of the adaptability of the Jew. Nothing seemed less likely than that this captive
girl should carry with her into Syria anything of much value to anyone. Possessions she had
none. Friends she might have, only if she could make them. As a captive in a foreign land she
might reasonably have put aside all hope of obtaining any influence, and might naturally have
sought only to benefit herself. But she was a girl with a heart. She at once took an interest
in her new home, and saw with sorrowful surprise that wealth could not purchase immunity from
participation in the ordinary human distresses, nor guarded gates forbid disease to pass in.
Brooding from day to day over the stories she had heard of Elisha's power, and listening to
her mistress's account of the failure of still another attempted cure, she exclaims with childlike
confidence and earnestness, "Would God my lord were with the prophet that is in Samaria! then
would he recover him of his leprosy." And thus her natural interest in the troubles of other
people, her cheerful and spirited acceptance of her position, and the sense that taught her
to make the most of it, brought her this great opportunity of doing an important service. No
one can lay the blame of his uselessness and lack of good influence on his lack of opportunity,
if he is in contact with men at all, for wherever there are human beings there are sorrows
to be sympathised with, wants to be relieved, characters to be fashioned.

And while this Jewish maid was utilising her captivity, her parents, if alive, would be eating
their hearts out with anxiety and anguish, imagining for their daughter the worst of destinies.
Instead of the horrors which usually follow such a captivity, she is cared for in a comfortable
home. Little did the parents, think that there was any work to be done in Syria, which none
could so well do as their little girl. The Lord had need of her, and knew that when the parents
heard all they would not resent that their daughter had been thus employed. None of us see
much further into the ways of Providence than those parents saw. Now, as then, those who are
bound up in one another are separated, in order that ends even more important than the growth
and gratification of natural affections may be attained.

Significant, also, is the dismay of Joram, King of Israel, when he received the letter bidding
him find healing for Naaman. So little did he believe in Elisha's power that he concluded the
King of Syria sought to pick a quarrel with him by asking him for a favour he knew he could
not grant. But while the king is helplessly tearing his clothes in a passion of despair, Elisha
sends him a message which, at least for the present, gives him some calmness: "Why hast thou
rent thy clothes? Let him come now to me, and he shall know that there is a prophet in Israel."
Elisha is ashamed that the King of Israel should have exhibited such weakness before a foreign
potentate. He feels that the honour of Israel's God is implicated, and boldly takes upon himself
the responsibility of the cure. Bold it certainly was, and tells of a confident faith that
God will be faithful to His servants. The king had no such faith. There was a power resident
in Israel of which he took no account. Like many other governments, this Israelitish monarchy
was unaware of its own resources, because it did not condescend to reckon what was spiritual.
Frequently in civil history you find governments brought face to face with matters for which
they are, with all their resources, incompetent. In modern Europe, and as much in our own country
as in others, everything gives place to politics. Nothing stirs so much excitement. Differences
in religion do not sever men as differences in politics do. We should, therefore, recognise
what is here suggested, and should counter-balance an undue regard for political movements
and political power by the remembrance that the hardest tasks of all are accomplished by quite
another power, and by a power which the politician often overlooks. What have we seen time
after time in our own Parliament, but the civil power rending its garments over evils which
it cannot cure? Are not the remedies which have been proposed for prevalent vices absurdly
incompetent? And it is the Church's shame if she cannot step forward and confidently say, You
cannot deal with such things; hand them over to me. There must always be "distempers of society"
which rot the very life out of a nation, and for which legislation and criminal law are wholly
inadequate. Honest-minded men who will not trifle with alarming abuses, who will not pretend
they have found a remedy, must simply rend their garments in their presence. And it is well
that in our day, as in others, there are men who, trusting in personal effort and Divine aid,
practically say to Government, "leave these things to us." Christian charity and practical
wisdom have, in our day effected a good deal more than the healing of one leprous grandee,
even if as yet the spiritual force that resides in the community is only spasmodically and
partially applied to existing evil.

Elisha's treatment of Naaman was intended to bring him into direct and conscious dependence
on God; or, in other words, to produce humility and faith. Some persons are crushed and mastered
by pain and sickness, and some gain in spiritual worth what they lose in physical strength.
But Naaman's disease had as yet done little to instruct him. He came as a great man, with his
servants, and chariots, and piles of money, to purchase a cure from a skilled man. He did not
see what Elisha plainly saw, that if this blessing came at all, it must come from Israel's
God, and that with Jehovah no man Could barter or be on bargaining terms, but must accept freely
what was freely given. Therefore Elisha refuses even to see him, that Naaman might understand
it was with God he had to do; and by refusing a single penny of payment he compelled the Syrian
to humble himself and accept his cure as a gift.

And probably the incident finds a place in the sacred history because it marked an important
step in the knowledge of God. It was an early instance of the Conquests which the God of Israel
was to make among the heathen, a distinct and legible proof that whoever from among the outlying
nations appealed to Him for help would receive the blessing he sought. But it was more than
this, it emphasized the freeness of all God's gifts. Nothing could be purchased from Jehovah;
everything must be received as a gift. This was a new idea to the heathen, and probably to
many of the Israelites also. Certainly it is an idea that is only dimly apprehended by ourselves.
Our dealing with one another is to so large an extent governed by the idea that nothing can
be had for nothing, that we carry this idea into our dealings with God, and expect only what
we can earn and claim. It is a wholesome pride that prompts us to work at anything rather than
be dependent on other men, but it is a most unwholesome and ignorant pride that forbids us
to acknowledge our dependence on God, and to accept freely what He freely gives. Until we learn
to live in God, to own Him as alone having life in Himself, and to accept from Him life and
all that sustains it, both physical and spiritual, we are not recognising the truth and living
in it. Our good deeds and good feelings, our repentances and righteous intentions and endeavours,
are as much out of place as a means of procuring God's favour and help as Naaman's talents
of silver and pieces of gold. We have God's favour irrespective of our merit, and we must humble
ourselves to accept it as His free gift, which we could not earn and have not earned.

Naaman no sooner saw that Jehovah was a living and true God than he perceived that certain
practical difficulties would result from this belief. Sometimes men do not connect their belief
with their practice; they do not let their left hand know what their right hand is doing. But
Naaman . foresaw that, as hitherto, he would still be expected to enter the temple of the god
Rimmon when his master went to worship. And he wished Elisha's authority for this measure of
conformity.

In our own country men have been severely tested by acts of conformity. And nothing gives the
conscience of the whole people so decided a lift as when men prefer disgrace or death to a
conformity which they believe to be wrong.

Had Naaman been as uncompromising as Daniel, who would not conform even so far as to pray in
a different corner of his room, or as the Christian soldiers who suffered death rather than
throw a pinch of incense on the altar before the Emperor's image, possibly Elisha would have
given him greater commendation than the mere acquiescence pronounced in the words, "Go in peace."

But in exculpation of Naaman it is to be said that he did not hide his new conviction, but
built an altar to Jehovah in Damascus. And especially it is to be remarked that in his case
these acts of conformity were not proposed as a test of his adherence to the religion of the
country; and this makes all the difference. Had Naaman's master commanded him to bow in the
house of Rimmon as a test of his acknowledgment of the Syrian god, Naaman would have refused;
but so long as it was a mere act or courtesy to his master, the formal act of a courtier, from
which no inferences could be drawn, he might reasonably continue it. To receive the communion
kneeling is customary in some churches, and so long as one is allowed to put his own interpretation
on the attitude, no harm can come of it. But at one time this attitude was the test by which
two great and antagonistic parties in England were distinguished from one another; a meaning
was put upon the act which made it impossible to every man who could not accept that meaning. A
Countryman, III.

The New Haven Gazette, (Number 41)

THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 29, 1787.

TO THE PEOPLE OF CONNECTICUT.

The same thing once more—I am a plain man, of few words; for this reason perhaps it is, that when
I have said a thing I love to repeat it. Last week I endeavored to evince, that the only surety
you could have for your liberties must be in the nature of your government; that you could derive
no security from bills of rights, or stipulations, on the subject of a standing army, the liberty of
the press, trial by jury, or on any other subject. Did you ever hear of an absolute monarchy, where
those rights which are proposed by the pigmy politicians of this day, to be secured by stipulation,
were ever preserved? Would it not be mere trifling to make any such stipulations, in any absolute
monarchy?

On the other hand, if your interest and that of your rulers are the same, your liberties are
abundantly secure. Perhaps the most secure when their power is most
complete.

Perhaps a provision that they should never raise troops in time of
peace, might at some period embarrass the public concerns and endanger
the liberties of the people.

It is possible that in the infinite variety of events, it might become
improper strictly to adhere to any one provision that has ever been
proposed to be stipulated.

At all events, the people have always been perfectly safe without any stipulation of the kind,
when the rulers were interested to make them safe; and never otherwise.

No people can be more secure against any oppression in their rulers than you are at present; and
no rulers can have more supreme and unlimited authority than your general assembly have.

When you consult on the subject of adopting the new constitution, you do not enquire whether
the powers therein contained can be safely lodged in any hands whatever. For not only those
very powers, but all other powers, are already in the general assembly.—The enquiry is, whether
Congress is by this new constitution so formed that a part of the power now in the general assembly
would be as well lodged in Congress. Or, as was before said, it depends on how far the members
are under your control; and how far their interest and yours are
the same; to which careful attention must be given.

A Countryman, IV.

The New Haven Gazette, (Number 42)

THURSDAY, DECEMBER 6, 1787.

TO THE PEOPLE OF CONNECTICUT.

If the propriety of trusting your government in the hands of your representatives was now a perfectly
new question, the expediency of the measure might be doubted. A very great portion of the objections
which we daily find made against adopting the new constitution (and which are just as weighty
objections against our present government, or against any government in existence) would doubtless
have their influence; and perhaps would determine you against trusting the powers of sovereignty
out of your own hands.

The best theory, the best philosophy on the subject, would be too
uncertain for you to hazard your freedom upon.

But your freedom,
in that sense of the expression (if it could be called sense), is
already totally gone. Your Legislature is not only supreme in the
usual sense of the word, but they have literally, all the powers of
society. Can you—can you possibly grant anything new? Have you any
power which is not already granted to your General Assembly? You are
indeed called on to say whether a part of the powers now exercised
by the General Assembly, shall not, in future, be exercised by Congress.
And it is clearly much better for your interest, that Congress should
experience those powers than that they should continue in the General
Assembly, provided you can trust Congress as safely as the General
Assembly.

What forms your security under the General Assembly? Nothing
save that the interest of the members is the same as yours. Will it
be the same with Congress? There are essentially only two differences
between the formation of Congress and of your General Assembly. One
is,—that Congress are to govern a much larger tract of country, and
a much greater number of people, consequently your proportion of the
government will be much smaller than at present. The other difference
is—that the members of Congress when elected, hold their places for
two, four and six years, and the members of Assembly only six and
twelve months. To add a little to anyone's
outward comfort is always worth doing; but to impart to another what becomes life and strength
and encouragement perennially within himself is surely better. Frequently the help we chiefly
need is nothing outward and material, but that which one bare human spirit can render to another.
But alas! when thrown back upon our inward resources, we are so conscious of our poverty that
we think sixpence or a shilling is probably of greater value than anything which can come straight
from our spirit.

Of the lame man little is told us which may give us a clue to his state of mind. He was one
of those who had been left unhealed by Christ. Often must Christ have passed him, and yet He
had never spoken nor laid healing hand upon him. Perhaps during the long hours the lame man
sometimes thought of this, and bewailed his own negligence in not using opportunities now for
ever gone. He could only look with envy and self-reproach on those who had once been blind,
or, like himself, lame, and whom he now saw in perfect health. His feelings were akin to the
remorse of those who imagine that their day of grace is gone, and exclaim :

  Thy saints are comforted, I know,
    And love Thy house of prayer;
  I therefore go where others go,
    But find no comfort there.

There is no despair worth calling despair but despair of salvation. But what Christ has not
done, an Apostle may do. The lesser instrument may effect what the more powerful has not effected.
A feebler ministry may in some cases produce results which the abler ministry has not produced.

Another feature of the beggar's state of mind appears in listless, mechanical way in which
he asks an alms. He had not even troubled to look up. Too commonly human prayer is the monotonous
whine of the beggar that scarcely troubles to consider to whom the petition is addressed. Had
this man taken the trouble to scan the appearance of those fishermen he would have seen that
silver or gold could not be expected. But he had fallen into one chant, uttered as soon as
the shadow of the passer-by fell upon him. It is a picture of the unreal and indifferent spirit
in which much prayer is offered. There is no harm in asking for certain benefits every day
of our life, and no harm in using the same words, if we have chosen these words as the fittest. IS
RICE THE RIGHT CROP FOR JAPAN [LXXIX]. Mr. Katsuro Hara, of the College of Literature, Kyoto
University, asks, "Is Japan specially adapted for the production of rice?" and answers: "Southern
Japan is of course not unfit. But rice does not conform to the climate of northern Japan. This
explains the reason why there have been repeated famines. By the choice of this uncertain kind
of crop as the principal foodstuff the Japanese have been obliged to acquiesce in a comparatively
enhanced cost of living. The tardiness of civilisation may be perhaps partly attributed to this
fact. Why did our forefathers prefer rice to other cereals? Was a
choice made in Japan?

If the choice was made in this country the unwisdom of the choice
and of the choosers is now very patent."
All his life he had been training to know faces, to know who would give and who would not give,
who would not give if others were looking, and who would give at the gate of the Temple, dropping
the coin as into an alms box, without any regard to the want of the beggar. One glance at the
frank face of Peter tells him he is about to receive something. That is a man to be trusted.
This is a good beginning. Trust in Peter maybe the first step to trust in Christ. But many
rest at the earliest stage, believing the messenger, but not coming into personal relations
with Christ. Many persons wish to be better than they are, and are prepared to do much and
sacrifice much in order to attain to a satisfactory spiritual state. What is lacking is personal
appeal to Christ. They must recognise, with a conviction wrought in their own mind, that Jesus
Christ is the source of spiritual power, and they must for themselves, appeal directly to Him.

The boldness with which Peter forms or, it might almost be said, forces this personal relation
to Christ in the case of this man is surprising. Without a moment's hesitation or inquiry as
to whether the man's faith is quickened, Peter cries, "In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth,
rise up and walk," taking him by the right hand and lifting him up. Peter could not confer
health upon the man in spite of his state of mind. If the man had so chosen he might have continued
to lie where he was, a cripple. But simultaneously with Peter's faith and authoritative command,
the man's own faith was quickened. He believed that in this name, that is, at the command and
in the strength of Christ, he could get up; and he arose. It was the contagious confidence
of Peter which begat faith in the lame beggar's spirit. And there could not be a more instructive
instance of the suddenness with which a human being can be brought into saving relation to
Christ. When Peter began his sentence the lame man had no faith, yet he boldly said to him,
"In the name of Jesus Christ arise and walk." It is an idea favourable to the interest of mankind
at large, that government is founded in compact.

Several instances may be produced of it, but none is more remarkable than our own. In general,
I have chosen to apply to such facts as are in the reach of my readers.
 He must have that humility which seeks the good of others
regardless of its own reputation. So long as we fear to expose our own feelings, and to show
that we are deeply concerned about the welfare of another person, we shall do little in the
way of inspiring faith. Our mouth is kept shut by the fear of fruitlessly exposing our feelings.
We are not sure how our advances will be received. We have not, the loving humility which braves
risks to self.

We must also ourselves have lively faith if we are to communicate faith to others. It was Peter's
own faith which carried this man's unbelief by storm. In presence of Peter's confidence he
could not but believe. Most men are far more moved by the contagion of others strong feeling
and example than by arguments or verbal appeals. For the diffusion of faith it is a man like
Peter that is wanted, who overleaps the obstacles which other men would stop to examine; a
man like Luther, erring perhaps in fine points of doctrine, but giving impetus and force to
the whole movement in Christ's kingdom, and sweeping along with him a host of weaker and dependent
spirits. If we are not propagating faith in Christ, it is mainly because our our faith is meagre
and timorous. Comprehensive figures of a trustworthy kind establishing the relative importance
of agriculture, commerce and industry are not readily obtained. "This
is a question," writes a Japanese professor of agriculture to me,
"which we should like to study very much." And while this is so, our conduct betrays the weakness
of our faith, and we chill the kindling warmth in other souls instead of fanning it into flame,
and all that proceeds from us is as the frosty wind of an untoward spring-time, that unseasonably
marks every springing thing with death.

Possessed of those qualities, any one may communicate that best of all gifts, faith in Christ.
The joy of Peter, in discovering that he could impart health and brightness to those who were
oppressed by various human ills, is a joy which may be repeated, and was meant to be repeated,
in the experience of every Christian. A moderate duty upon foreign vessels would give an advantage
to our own people, while it would avoid all the disadvantages arising
from a prohibition, and the consequent deficiency of vessels to transport
the produce of the southern states.

 We are to believe that Christ
now has all power in heaven and on earth, and that those who have experienced this power are
expected to be the channel of its communication to others. The faith which strengthens and
elevates our own spirit may be communicated, upon our effort and prayer, to the heart of others.

