Prayer is described as a conflict. We have a similar expression used of the prayers of Epaphras,
in the words "labouring fervently" (Col. iv. 12). The same word "conflict" is associated with
faith, "the good fight of faith" (1 Tim. vi. 12), and with the "good fight" of the Apostle's
entire life (2 Tim. iv. 7). Prayer regarded as a conflict includes the two ideas of toil and
strife.

The toil of prayer shows us the work involved in it. Sometimes we hear the expression, "If
you can do nothing else, you can pray," as though prayer were the easiest of all things. As
a simple fact, it is the hardest. No man knows what prayer means unless he knows what it is
to "labour" in prayer. The strife involved in prayer implies opposition--the opposing force
of one who wishes above all things to check and thwart our prayers. We discern something of
this opposition in the well-known words, "We wrestle" (Eph. vi. 12); and the words of the hymn
are as true as they are familiar--

  "And Satan trembles when he sees
  The weakest saint upon his knees."

The Apostle knew by spiritual experience that to pray was to rouse up against himself a mighty
opposition, and it was this force that made his prayer such a "great conflict." No believer
should be surprised at his prayers "being hindered" (1 Pet. iii. 7). It is evidently one of
Satan's main objects to get the Christian to restrain prayer. The Christian man or the Christian
Church that continues instant in prayer may rest assured of malignant opposition from the hosts
of spiritual wickedness in high places. On the other hand, we may be sure that Satan scarcely
troubles himself about the believer or congregation whose private, family, and public praying
is neglected or thought little of. Prayer is, therefore, a "great conflict." It is not solicitude
only, but a struggle; not merely anxiety, but activity. As Bishop Moule says: "Prayer is never
meant to be indolently easy, however simple and reliant it may be. It is meant to be an infinitely
important transaction between man and God. And therefore very often, when subjects and circumstances
call for it, it has to be viewed as a work involving labour, persistency, conflict, if it would
be prayer indeed" (Colossian Studies, p. 124). The Bishop goes on to quote a familiar incident
which illustrates this great truth: "A visitor knocked betimes one morning at the door of a
good man, a saint of the noblest Puritan type--and that was a fine type indeed. He called as
a friend to consult a friend, sure of his welcome. But he was kept waiting long. At last a
servant came to explain the delay: 'My master has been at prayer, and this morning he has been
long in getting access.'"

The practical question for us is whether this is our idea of prayer, or whether we are merely
playing at prayer, and not regarding it with true seriousness. If we know what it is to have
"great conflict" in prayer, happy are we. If we do not, we may well ask God to search our hearts
and change our minds about prayer.

Prayer is characterised by unselfishness. The conflict of the Apostle was not self-centred.
It was on behalf of others: "Great conflict I have for you, and for them at Laodicea." This
is the essence of prayer--intercession on behalf of others. If our seasons of prayer are largely
taken up with prayers for our own needs, however genuine, we are failing at a crucial point;
but if our time is mainly taken up with prayers for others, we shall soon find that our own
blessings begin to abound. "There is that scattereth and yet increaseth."

Prayer also implies sympathy. The Apostle was praying for people whom he had never seen, and
probably never would see. This is not easy--indeed, is very difficult--but it is a real test
of spirituality. "Out of sight, out of mind." We are tempted to limit our prayers to friends
whom we know, causes in which we are interested, subjects spiritually near and akin to us.
Not so the Apostle, whose heart went out to the whole Church of God in every place where he
knew through friends that little bodies of Christians were to be found. His sympathy was at
once quick, wide, and deep, and it is one of the supreme tests of true spirituality to have
a sympathy possessed of all these three characteristics. Our sympathy may be quick and yet
narrow, or wide but not deep, or even deep and not wide; but to be at once quick, wide, and
deep in sympathy is to be a true follower of Christ.

As we ponder these things--conflict, unselfishness, sympathy--do not our hearts condemn us?
Instead of conflict, how easy-going have been our prayers! Instead of unselfish, how self-centred,
instead of sympathetic, how contracted! Thus the Apostle searches and tests us as we dwell
on his wonderful life of prayer.

2. WHAT PRAYER BRINGS.

What were the objects for which the Apostle prayed so earnestly on behalf of these unknown
Christians? What were the precise gifts that he sought for them from God? This is no unnecessary
question, for the same gifts will surely be suitable to us.

He asked for spiritual strength: "That their hearts might be comforted." St. Paul always went
to the very centre and core of things, and so we find him constantly praying with reference
to the "hearts" of these Colossian Christians. Since, as we have seen, the "heart" in Scripture
is the centre of our moral and spiritual being, if the heart is right, all will be right, for
"out of it are the issues of life." He prays that their "hearts" might be comforted--that is,
in the full sense of the word, encouraged, exhorted, strengthened. "Comfort" includes the three
elements of strength, courage, and consolation. We must be strong, brave, and cheery. This
is the full meaning of the term "Comforter" as applied to the Holy Spirit. He is the One Who
gives strength, courage, and consolation. This, too, is the true meaning of the familiar phrase
of the English Prayer Book, "Comfortable words"--words that minister strength, fortitude, and
cheer. The fact that this thought of "hearts comforted" was often in the mind and on the lips
of the Apostle shows the importance he attached to it (2 Thess. ii. 17; Eph. vi. 22). With
hearts made strong, courageous, and cheerful, Christians can face anything; while with hearts
that remain weak, fearful, and sad the Christian life is a prey to all the temptations of the
Evil One. It is exactly similar with a Church or a congregation of Christians, for one of the
supreme needs in any community is comforted hearts--the centres of life made strong, courageous,
and happy. Then it is that Churches live, grow, extend, and witness for Christ in the demonstration
of the Holy Spirit the "Comforter."

He asked for spiritual unity: "Being knit together in love," or, quite literally, "having been
compacted in love." He prayed that these Christians might be kept together, knit together,
joined together in a spirit of love. Solitary Christians are always weak Christians, for "union
is strength." If Christians are not knit together, the cause of Christ must necessarily suffer,
for through the severances caused by division the enemy will keep thrusting his darts. That
is why the Apostle elsewhere urges them "earnestly to strive to keep the unity of the Spirit"
(Eph. iv. 3). One of the greatest powers that Satan wields to-day is due to the disunion among
the people of God. It is true of the Christian home, congregation, and denomination. The wedge
of discord is one of the enemy's most powerful weapons. On the other hand, where the brethren
dwell together in unity, the Lord commands His blessing. In almost every Epistle the Apostle
emphasises unity, and we can readily understand the reason.

This unity is only possible "in love." It is the love of God to us that unites us to Him, and
it will be the love of God in us that unites us to our brethren. There is no power like love
to bind Christians together. We may not see eye to eye on all aspects of truth; we may not
all use the same methods of worship and service, but if we love one another God dwells in us
and among us, and adds His own seal of blessing to the work done for Him. Let every Christian
be fully assured that in so far as he is striving, praying, and labouring for the union of
God's people in love, he will be doing one of the most powerful and blessed pieces of work
for his Master, and one of the greatest possible pieces of disservice to the kingdom of Satan.
Contrariwise, the Christian man or Christian Church that stands out for separateness and exclusiveness
is one of the best allies of Satan, and one of the most effective workers for the kingdom of
darkness.

He asked for spiritual certitude: "Unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding."
Wealth is a favourite metaphor of St. Paul, and is used to denote the fulness and abundance
of the Christian life as conceived by him. Mark how he piles phrase upon phrase--"understanding,"
"fulness of understanding," and then "wealth of fulness of understanding." To the Apostle,
the mind was one of the essential powers and principles of the Christian life. So far from
thinking according to a modern fashion that the less one uses the mind the better Christian
one is, St. Paul, following his Master, ever emphasised the duty and glory of loving God "with
all the mind." This wealth of the fulness of "understanding" means an abundance of conviction,
both intellectual and moral, that Christianity is what it claims to be, and that the Christian
life is the perfect satisfaction of all the different parts of man's nature. He prays that
they may "rise to the whole wealth of the full exercise of their intelligence" (Moule). Just
as we find elsewhere "the fulness of faith" (Heb. x. 22), "the fulness of hope" (Heb. vi. 11),
and "much fulness" (1 Thess. i. 5), so here the Apostle desires them to enjoy to the full the
intelligent grasping of assurance of Christian truth which was theirs in Christ. A firm conviction
of the understanding is one of the greatest needs, as it is also one of the greatest blessings,
of the Christian life. If a Christian cannot say, "I know," "I am persuaded," he is lacking
in one of the prime essentials of a vigorous experience. Let us ponder, then, this remarkable
phrase, "the whole wealth of the fulness of intelligence," and see in it one of the absolute
necessities of daily experience.

But how does it come? It is the result of the foregoing "comfort" and "love." Hearts made strong
mean minds fully assured. Hearts full of love mean intellects full of knowledge and conviction.
Let no one say that love is blind: on the contrary, it is love that sees and knows. It was
the Apostle of love who was the first with spiritual insight to say, "It is the Lord," on that
memorable early morning on the Lake of Galilee. It is the Christian with a heart strong and
full of love who will have the "wealth of the fulness of intelligence." The same is true of
a Church, for when it is strong and united in love, there will come such an influx of conviction
and certitude that the world will be impressed by the demonstration of the truth of the Christian
Gospel.

He asked for spiritual knowledge: "To the full knowledge of the mystery of God and the Father,
even Christ" (not as A.V.). Here, again, we have a favourite word of these Epistles, "full
knowledge," that is, ripe, mature experience; and it means the experience of all that is summed
up in the one word "Christ." In view of the dangerous errors, then rife and increasing, of
a special knowledge confined only to a few, to an intellectual aristocracy, the Apostle lays
stress upon the possibility of every Christian becoming acquainted in personal experience with
all the knowledge of God that is stored up in Christ. He declares Christ as the Image of God
(ch. i. 15), as the Head of the Church (ch. i. 18), as the One in Whom all fulness dwells (ch.
i. 19), as the Redeemer from sin (ch. i. 20), as the Hope of glory (ch. i. 27), as the One
in Whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge (ch. ii. 3). There is no mistiness
here, no vagueness, no hesitation, no limitation, but a full, free, open opportunity for all
believers to become acquainted with Christ in His Divine fulness. This is the crowning-point
of the Apostle's prayer, for in the full knowledge of Christ everything else is included. This
knowledge, at once intellectual, moral, and spiritual, is the safeguard from all error, the
secret of all progress, and the guarantee of all blessing.

Let this prayer, then, be our constant and careful study. We shall find in it much to rebuke
the shallowness, the selfishness, the dulness, and the sluggishness of our prayers; and we
shall also find in it a model of instruction, and the inspiration of all true petition and
intercession. The Christian who learns from the prayers of the Apostle will learn some of the
deepest secrets of the Christian life.

VII.

WISDOM AND REVELATION.

VII.

WISDOM AND REVELATION.

If prayer for others is a barometer of our own spiritual life, we can realise what St. Paul
felt was necessary for himself by his prayers for others. In Ephesians there are two petitions,
and nothing fuller and deeper is found in any of the Apostle's writings. This Epistle represents
the high-water mark of Christian privilege and possibility.

1. THE FOUNDATION.

We see from verse 15 that his prayer is closely and definitely based on what precedes, and
this introduces us to a feature not hitherto found. Up to now the prayers at the opening have
been recorded almost immediately after the personal greetings. But here a long paragraph intervenes,
and the prayer is not recorded until after fourteen verses full of spiritual teaching have
been given. This section deserves special attention because it is the basis of the prayer.
Let us review it briefly in order to obtain the true perspective of the petition.

The key-thought is in verse 3, where the Apostle praises God for having actually blessed them
"with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ." Then comes a wonderful statement
of the way in which these blessings had become their own. (a) They had been eternally purposed
in God the Father (vers. 3-6a); (b) they had been historically mediated through God the Son
(vers. 6b-12); (c) they had been spiritually applied by God the Spirit (vers. 12-14). And in
connection with each Person of the Sacred Trinity practically the same phrase occurs in this
paragraph, showing that all the blessings were given in order that they might be used for the
Divine glory: "To the praise of the glory of His grace" (ver. 6); "To the praise of His glory"
(ver. 12); "To the praise of His glory" (ver. 14).

Now it is upon this wealth of provision that the Apostle bases his prayer: "On this account."
God had so wonderfully blessed them in Christ by His Spirit, and this fulness of blessing was
so clearly intended to be used to the praise and glory of God that he could pray, as he does
here, assured that the answer would come. God's revelation of Himself is invariably and inevitably
the foundation of our prayers. Because of what He has done and is doing we can be sure of grace.
Because His power has provided "all things that pertain to life and godliness" we can be certain
of power for daily living.

2. THE APPEAL.

The names and titles of God are particularly noteworthy and are always full of spiritual significance,
shedding light on the passages in which they occur. St. Paul prays to "the God of our Lord
Jesus Christ." This title as it stands is unique, though already he has referred to "the God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ" (ver. 3), and will refer again to "the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ" in connection with prayer (ch. iii. 14). "The God of our Lord Jesus Christ" seems
to suggest the highest point and peak of power and grace. God, as the God of Christ, is the
primary source of all blessing.

He is also "the Father of Glory." This, too, is a phrase not found elsewhere. He is the Father
to Whom all glory belongs as its Divine source. In Acts vii. 2 He is "the God of glory," and
in 1 Cor. ii. 8 Christ is "the Lord of glory." In Rom. vi. 4 Christ is said to have been raised
from the dead "by the glory of the Father." Glory is a characteristic quality of God. It is
the manifestation of His splendour and the outshining of His excellence. All radiance, all
brightness, all magnificence come from Him and are intended to be returned to Him in praise.
The glory of God in Romans is threefold: it is God's proof for man's past life (ch. iii. 23);
it is God's prospect for man's future life (ch. v. 2); it is God's principle for man's present
life (ch. xv. 7). And the association of glory with prayer seems to suggest that the praise
of His glory which is to characterise our life can only come from God Himself as the Father
of glory. If our lives are to be lived "to His praise," His must be the power. If our lives
are to manifest His glory, His must be the grace. "Thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory."

3. THE REQUEST.

Now we come to this profound prayer which teaches the inmost secrets of the spiritual life.

(1) A Divine Gift. "May give to you a spirit of wisdom and revelation." He has spoken of the
wealth of blessing stored up in Christ (ver. 3), and of God's grace abounding to us in all
wisdom and prudence (ver. 8). Now he asks for wisdom and illumination to perceive all this
for themselves as a personal experience. The word "spirit" seems to refer to their human faculty,
though of course as indwelt and possessed by the Divine Spirit. But the absence of the definite
article from the word "spirit" seems to suggest a gift rather than a Person. The Holy Spirit
of God enters into our spirit, and the result is wisdom and revelation. These two words refer
to general illumination and specific enlightenment. He desires his readers to enter fully into
the meaning of these great realities to which he has given such full expression (vers. 1-14).

(2) But this Divine gift is only possible by means of a simple yet important condition. It
is "in the full knowledge of Him." The word rendered "knowledge" is characteristic of these
prison epistles, and always means "full knowledge," the mature experience of the spiritual
man. It is invariably connected with God; it refers to the deep, growing, ripening consciousness
which comes from personal fellowship with Him. Philosophy can only say "Know thyself," but
Scripture says, "Know God." This is how wisdom and revelation become ours, and Christian history
and experience testify abundantly to the simple yet remarkable fact of spiritual insight and
moral understanding which are due solely to fellowship with God. Nothing is more striking than
the fact of a deep, spiritual apprehension and appreciation which are independent of intellectual
conception and verbal expression. Believers can have a true spiritual consciousness of God
without the possession of great capacity or attainments. Many whose natural education and intellectual
opportunities have been slight have had this spiritual perception in an uncommon degree, and
it always marks the spiritually ripe Christian. It is not the one whose intellectual knowledge
is critical, scholarly, and profound, but he whose spiritual insight is suffused with grace,
love, and fellowship. This does not mean that natural knowledge or culture is to be despised
or avoided as evil, but that the two kinds of knowledge should be carefully distinguished.
The Christian Church has at least for the last three hundred years set great store by knowledge
and science, but deeper than all this is the spiritual instinct, insight, knowledge, and illumination
which constitute the supreme requirement of the true Christian life. We can see this spiritual
perception in its various stages in several passages of the New Testament. We have seen how
St. John divides believers into three classes (1 John ii. 12-14). But while in his repetition
the Apostle can vary the description of the "children" and the "young men," when he has to
speak the second time of the "fathers" he has nothing new to say, for they cannot be otherwise
or more fully described than as those who "know Him Who is from the beginning."

(3) The immediate consequence of this fellowship is that the eyes of the heart become permanently
enlightened (Greek). Keeping in view the Scripture truth of the "heart" as including the elements
of Mind, Emotion, and Will, the result of fellowship with God is that every feature of the
inner life becomes purified and enlightened. The mind is illuminated to perceive truth, the
emotions are purified to love the good, and the will is equipped to obey the right. It is not
that new objects meet the gaze so much as that a new and deeper perception is given to enable
the heart to see and understand what had hitherto been dark and difficult. This illuminated
heart is one of the choicest blessings of the spiritual life and one of the greatest safeguards
against spiritual error. "Ye have an unction ... and ye know" (1 John ii. 20). "The Son of
God hath come, and hath given us an understanding" (1 John v. 20). Many of the problems affecting
the spiritual life are solved only in this way. Criticism, scholarship, intellectual power
may be brought to bear upon them, but they will not yield to this treatment. The illuminated
heart of the babe in Christ is often enabled to understand secrets which are hid from the wise
and prudent.

(4) The outcome is a permanent spiritual experience. "That ye may know," i.e. possess an immediate,
instinctive, direct knowledge (eidenai). Three great realities are thereupon mentioned as the
objects and substance of our spiritual knowledge.

(a) The first is "What is the hope of His calling." "His calling" is the appeal and offer of
the Gospel with all its Divine meaning and purpose, and "the hope of His calling" is that which
is intended by and included in the offer of God. This "hope" is either that to which God calls
us, or by which He calls; either objective or subjective; either the substance or the feeling.
Hope when regarded as objective, as the substance of our experience, is full of promise, on
which the believer fixes his faith. Hope when regarded as subjective, as the possession of
the soul, is full of inspiration, as it encourages and confirms belief that "He is faithful
that promised." Hope as an objective reality is fixed on Christ, and since God has a purpose
in calling us, we can exercise hope. Hope as a subjective realisation is based on the fact
of experience. God calls us by the Gospel, and therefore hope becomes possible. Hope is the
top-stone of life and follows faith and love (cf. ver. 15). Faith draws the curtain aside;
hope gazes into the future; while love rejoices in the present possession of Christ. Faith
accepts; hope expects. Faith appropriates; hope anticipates. Faith is concerned with the person
who promises; hope with the thing that the person promises. Faith is concerned with the past
and present; hope with the future alone. Hope is invariably fixed on the future and is never
to be regarded as merely a matter of natural temperament. It is specifically connected with
the Lord's Coming, and we are thus reminded that the calling of God covers past, present, and
future. It starts from regeneration and culminates in the resurrection of the body at the Coming
of Christ.

(b) The second is "The riches of the glory of His inheritance in the saints." This may mean
the wealth which God possesses for them or in them; our wealth in Him or His in us. If we take
it in the former sense it will mean that God is the inheritance and we are the heirs; that
the saints now possess imperfectly, and anticipate in its fulness, the inheritance of grace,
the spiritual Canaan which they are to enjoy here and hereafter. If, however, we take it, as
is more likely, in the latter sense, it will mean that we are the inheritance and God is the
Possessor and Heir. We must never forget that the Biblical ideas associated with "heir" and
"inheritance" always refer to possession, and not, as in ordinary phraseology, to succession.
In the Bible the heir does not merely expect, but already enjoys in part that which he will
possess in full hereafter. Adopting, then, the second of these interpretations, the saints
belong to God and are precious in His sight. They are His peculium, or special treasure, like
Israel of old (Deut. iv. 20). They have been formed for Him and are to show forth His praise
(Isa. xliii. 21). He sets store by them, as is suggested by the significant words, "Hast thou
considered My servant Job?" There are several indications in Scripture that God values and
trusts His people; "I know him, that he will command his children and his household after him"
(Gen. xviii. 19). "The Lord taketh pleasure in His people" (Ps. cxlix. 4). "The steps of a
good man are ordered by the Lord: and He (that is, God) delighteth in his way" (Ps. xxxvii.
23). And the "wealth" is a further proof of the value placed on believers by God. Five times
in Ephesians the Apostle uses this metaphor of "riches," showing his thought of those who have
been "bought with a price" (1 Cor. v. 20). Believers are God's riches, wealth, treasure; they
belong to Him in view of that day on which He will enter in full upon His inheritance when
He comes to be glorified and admired in them that believe (2 Thess. i. 10). And we are to see
this, to know it, to realise the spiritual possibilities of each believer and all God's people
together as God's own inheritance.

(c) The third is "the exceeding greatness of His power to us-ward who believe." In this marvellous
association of almost inexpressible thoughts the dominant note is "power" (dúnamis), and the
Apostle prays that the Ephesian Christians may know what this means. Power is a characteristic
word of St. Paul as expressive of Christianity. The Gospel is "the power of God unto salvation"
(Rom. i. 16). By the Resurrection Christ was designated "the Son of God with power" (Rom. i.
4). He is "the power of God" (1 Cor. i. 18). Man needs power, not merely a philosophy or an
ethic, but a dynamic, and it is the peculiar privilege of His Gospel to bring this to us. But
let us try to analyse this power. There are no less than four comparisons stated or illustrations
given. (1) It is exactly the same power that God wrought in Christ at the Resurrection. Nothing
less than this is the standard of the Divine working. We are to possess and experience the
spiritual and moral dynamic exercised by God on Christ when He raised Him from the dead. This
is described as "the exceeding greatness of His power." The same adjective is used of grace
(ch. ii. 7), and of love (ch. iii. 19), and it is intended to express the superabundance of
that power which was put forth in the Resurrection and is now exercised on our behalf. Then
the four words used for power are particularly noteworthy: "power," "energy," "strength," "might."
Each conveys an aspect of this great spiritual force. "Might" is power in possession; "strength"
is power as the result of grasping, or of coming into contact with the source of that power;
and "energy" is a power in expression. (2) Not only so, but the power exercised by God in the
Ascension is also intended to be bestowed on and experienced by us. When we are told that Christ
was set at God's right hand far above all powers, we can understand something of the Divine
might exercised. (3) Still more, it is the same power by means of which God put all things
under the feet of Christ. This, too, is the Divine force and energy for believers. (4) Not
least of all, it was Divine power that gave Christ to be "the Head over all things to the Church,"
and it is exactly this power that is exercised on our behalf. When we contemplate all this
as intended by God for us, we can see something of the vigorous and victorious life He can
and will enable us to live.

As we review this wonderful prayer it is impossible to avoid noticing that the first petition
refers mainly to the past ("His calling"); the second mainly to the future ("His inheritance");
and the third mainly to the present ("His power"), though of course each petition has its bearing
on the other two points of time. Every part of our life is thus adequately supplied and intended
to be abundantly satisfied. Nor may we omit to observe that all through the prayer the emphasis
is on God: His calling; His inheritance; His power. Everything is regarded from the Divine
standpoint, because we are not our own but His. The contemplation of this glory of the Divine
love and grace overwhelms the soul with "wonder, love, and praise."

In the presence of such a prayer, dealing with such profound realities, three thoughts naturally
arise in our minds. (a) How little we know, and how much we might and should know. (b) How
little we are, and how much we might and should be. (c) How little we do, and how much we might
and should do. And yet if we will but remind ourselves of the simple secret of true living,
as here described, we might become and accomplish infinitely more than we have ever experienced
up to the present. "To us-ward who believe." Faith is the simple yet all-sufficient secret.
Trust relies on God and receives from Him. It puts us in contact with the source of blessing,
and in union with Him we shall find spiritual illumination, spiritual insight, spiritual experience,
and spiritual power that shall all be lived and exercised to His praise and glory.

VIII.

STRENGTH AND INDWELLING.

VIII.

STRENGTH AND INDWELLING. 14-19. (MACLAREN).

The second prayer in Ephesians possesses remarkable affinities with the first; indeed, the
two are complementary, and many of the expressions call for close comparison.

1. THE STANDPOINT.

