The Lusitania went down twenty-one minutes after the attack. The Berlin government pleaded
in extenuation of the sinking that the ship was armed, and German agents in New York procured
testimony which was subsequently proven in court to have been perjured, to bolster up the falsehood.
In further justification, the German government adduced the fact that the ship was carrying
ammunition which it said was "destined for the destruction of brave German soldiers." This
contention our government rightly brushed aside as irrelevant.

The essence of the case was stated by our government in its note of June 9 as follows:

     "Whatever be the other facts regarding the Lusitania, the principal
     fact is that a great steamer, primarily and chiefly a conveyance
     for passengers, and carrying more than a thousand souls who had no
     part or lot in the conduct of the war, was sunk without so much as
     a challenge or a warning, and that men, women and children were
     sent to their death in circumstances unparalleled in modern
     warfare."

Three notes were written to Germany regarding the Lusitania sinking. The first dated May 13
advanced the idea that it was impossible to conduct submarine warfare conformably with international
law. In the second dated June 9 occurs the statement that "the government of the United States
is contending for something much greater than mere rights of property or privileges of commerce.
It is contending for nothing less high and sacred than the rights of humanity." In the third
note dated July 21, it is asserted that "the events of the past two months have clearly indicated
that it is possible and practicable to conduct submarine operations within the so-called war
zone in substantial accord with the accepted practices of regulated warfare." The temper of
the American people and the president's notes had succeeded in securing a modification of the
submarine campaign.

It required cool statesmanship to prevent a rushing into war over the Lusitania incident and
events which had preceeded it. There was a well developed movement in favor of it, but the
people were not unanimous on the point. It would have lacked that cooperation necessary for
effectiveness; besides our country was but poorly prepared for engaging in hostilities. It
was our state of unpreparedness continuing for a long time afterwards, which contributed, no
doubt, to German arrogance. They thought we would not fight.

But the United States had become thoroughly awakened and the authorities must have felt that
if the conflict was to be unduly prolonged, we must eventually be drawn into it. This is reflected
in the modified construction which the president and others began to place on the Monroe Doctrine.
The great underlying idea of the doctrine remained vital, but in a message to congress delivered
December 7, 1915, the president said:

"In the day in whose light we now stand there is no claim of guardianship, but a full and honorable
association as of partners between ourselves and our neighbors in the interests of America."
This was a modifying and enlarging of the doctrine, as well as a departure from Washington's
warning against becoming entangled with the affairs of Europe.

The powerful thrusts of the German armies toward the English channel and the Atlantic ocean,
the pitiless submarine policy, and the fact that Germany and Austria had allied with them Bulgaria
and Turkey, began to spread alarm in the non-belligerent nations of the world.

That Germany was playing a Machiavellian policy against the United States soon became evident.
After each submarine outrage would come an apology, frequently a promise of reparation and
an agreement not to repeat the offense, with no intention, however, of keeping faith in any
respect. As a mask for their duplicity, the Germans even sent a message of sympathy for the
loss of American lives through the sinking of the Lusitania; which but intensified the state
of mind in this country.

Less than three weeks after the Lusitania outrage the American steamship Nebraskan was attacked
(May 25) by a submarine. The American steamship Leelanaw was sunk by submarines July 25. The
White Star liner Arabic was sunk by a submarine August 19; sixteen victims, two American.

Our government received August 24 a note from the German ambassador regarding the sinking of
the Arabic.

The Allan liner Hesperian was sunk September 4 by a German submarine; 26 lives lost, one American.

On October 5 the German government sent a communication regretting again and disavowing the
sinking of the Arabic, and stating its willingness to pay indemnities.

Meanwhile depression existed among the Allies and alarm among nations outside the war over
the German conquest of Russian Poland. They captured Lublin, July 31; Warsaw, August 4; Ivangorod,
August 5; Kovno, August 17; Novogeorgievsk, August 19; Brest-Litovsk, August 25, and Vilna,
September 18.

Activities of spies and plottings within the United States began to divide attention with the
war in Europe and the submarine situation. Dr. Constantin Dumba, who was Austro-Hungarian ambassador
to the United States, in a letter to the Austrian minister of foreign affairs, dated August
20, recommended "most warmly" to the favorable consideration of the foreign office "proposals
with respect to the preparation of disturbances in the Bethlehem steel and munitions factory,
as well as in the middle west."

He felt that "we could, if not entirely prevent the production of war material in Bethlehem
and in the middle west, at any rate strongly disorganize it and hold it up for months."

The letter was intrusted to an American newspaper correspondent named Archibald, who was just
setting out for Europe under the protection of an American passport. Archibald's vessel was
held up at Falmouth, England, his papers seized and their contents cabled to the United States.
On September 8 Secretary Lansing instructed our ambassador at Vienna to demand Dr. Dumba's
recall and the demand was soon acceded to by his government.

On December 4 Captain Karl Boy-Ed, naval attache of the German embassy in Washington, was dismissed
by our government for "improper activity in naval affairs." At the same time Captain Franz
von Papen, military attache of the embassy, was dismissed for "improper activity in military
matters." In an intercepted letter to a friend in Germany he referred to our people as "those
idiotic Yankees."

As a fitting wind-up of the year and as showing what the German promise to protect liners amounted
to, the British passenger steamer Persia was sunk in the Mediterranean by a submarine December
30, 1915.

The opening of 1916 found the president struggling with the grave perplexities of the submarine
problem, exchanging notes with the German government, taking fresh hope after each disappointment
and endeavoring by every means to avert the impending strife and find a basis for the preservation
of an honorable peace.

It was now evident to most thinking people that the apparent concessions of the Germans were
granted merely to provide them time to complete a larger program of submarine construction.
This must have been evident to the president; but he appears to have possessed an optimism
that rose above his convictions.

Our government, January 18, put forth a declaration of principles regarding submarine attacks
and inquired whether the governments of the allies would subscribe to such an agreement. This
was one of the president's "forlorn hope" movements to try and bring about an agreement among
the belligerents which would bring the submarine campaign within the restrictions of international
law. Could such an agreement have been effected, it would have been of vast relief to this
country and might have kept us out of the war. The Allies were willing to subscribe to any
reasonable agreement provided there was assurance that it would be maintained. They pointed
out, however, the futility of treating on the basis of promises alone with a nation which not
only had shown a contempt for its ordinary promises, but had repudiated its sacred obligations.

A ray of hope gleamed across our national horizon when Germany, on February 16, sent a note
acknowledging her liability in the Lusitania affair. But the whole matter was soon complicated
again by the "armed ship" issue. Germany had sent a note to the neutral powers that an armed
merchant ship would be treated as a warship and would be sunk on sight. Secretary Lansing made
the statement for this government that by international law commercial ships have a right to
arm themselves for self-defense. It was an additional emphasis on the position that the submarine
campaign as conducted by Germany was simply piracy and had no standing in international law.
President Wilson, in a letter to Senator Stone February 24, said that American citizens had
a right to travel on armed merchant ships, and he refused to advise them against exercising
the right.

March 24 the French steamer Sussex, engaged in passenger traffic across the English channel,
was torpedoed and sunk without warning. About eighty passengers, including American citizens,
were killed or wounded.

Several notes passed between our government and Germany on the sinking of the Sussex and other
vessels. Our ambassador at Berlin was instructed to take energetic action and to insist upon
adequate attention to our demands. The president addressed congress on the matter the following
day.

Germany had not yet completed her program of submarine building and thought it wise to temporize
with the American government for a while longer. May 4 she replied to the ultimatum of April
18, acknowledged the sinking of the Sussex and in the main acceded to all the demands of the
United States. There were certain phases which indicated that Germany wished to use this country
as a medium for securing certain agreements from the Allies. The president accepted the German
conditions generally, but made it clear in his reply that the conditions could not depend upon
any negotiations between this country and other belligerents. The intimation was plain enough
that the United States would not be a catspaw for German aims.

Up to this time in the year 1916 the advantage in arms had been greatly on the side of Germany
and her allies. In January the British had evacuated the entire Gallipoli peninsula and the
campaign in Turkey soon came to grief. Cettinje, the capital of Montenegro, had also fallen
to the Teutonic allies, and that country practically was put out of the war.

The British had made important gains in the German colonies in Africa and had conquered most
of the Kamerun section there. The Russians had entered Persia in February, and April 17 had
captured the important city of Trebizond in Armenia from the Turks. But on April 29 General
Townshend surrendered his entire British force to the Turks at Kut el Amara, after being besieged
for 143 days and finally starved into submission.

Throughout the balance of the year the advantage was greatly on the side of the Germans, for
the latter part of the year saw the beginning of the crushing of Roumania, which had entered
the war August 27 on the side of the Allies. Bucharest, the capital, fell to the Germans December
6; Dobrudja, January 2, and Focsani, January 8 of the ensuing year, 1917. The crushing of Roumania
was accomplished almost entirely by treachery. The Germans knew the plans of all the principal
fortifications; the strength and plans of the Roumanian forces, and every detail calculated
to be of benefit. The country had been honeycombed with their spies prior to and during the
war, very much as Russia had been. It is quite evident that men high in the councils of the
Roumanian government and in full possession of the military secrets of the country were simply
disguised German agents.

Between July and November had occurred the great battles of the Somme during which the Allies
had failed to break the German lines. The Austrians in June had launched a great attack and
made much progress against the Italians in the Trentino. The principal offsets to the German
gains during the last seven months of the year 1916 were the Russian offensive in Volhynia
and Bukovina, and the counter drive of the Italians against the Austrians. The Russians captured
Czernovitz June 17, and by the end of the month had overrun the whole of Bukovina. The Italians
drove out the Austrians between August 6 and September 1, winning August 9 the important city
and fortress of Gorizia.

Submarine incidents important to this government were not lacking during the latter half of
the year. The German submarine U-53 suddenly appeared October 8 in the harbor at Newport, R.I.
The commander delivered letters for the German ambassador and immediately put to sea to begin
ravages on British shipping off the Nantucket coast. Among the five or six vessels sunk was
the steamer Stephano, which carried American passengers. The passengers and crews of all the
vessels were picked up by American destroyers and no lives were lost. The episode, which was
an eight-day wonder, and resulted in a temporary tie-up of shipping in eastern ports, started
numerous rumors and several legal questions, none of which, however, turned out finally to
have been of much importance, as U-53 vanished as suddenly as it had appeared, and its visit
was not succeeded by any like craft. It is not improbable that the purpose of the German government
in sending the boat to our shores was to convey a hint of what we might expect if we should
become involved with Germany. October 28 the British steamer Marina was torpedoed with a loss
of six American lives.

The straining of President Washington's advice and the Monroe Doctrine were again evident throughout
the year. November 29 our government sent a protest to Germany against the deportation of Belgians.

Almost immediately upon the invasion of Belgium the German authorities, in pursuance of their
system of terrorization, shipped to Germany considerable groups of the population. On October
12,1915, a general order was issued by the German military government in Belgium providing
that persons who should "refuse work suitable to their occupation and in the execution of which
the military administration is interested," should be subject to one year's imprisonment or
to deportation to Germany. Numerous sentences, both of men and women, were imposed under that
order.

The wholesale deportation of Belgian workmen to Germany, which began October 3, 1916, proceeded
on different grounds, for, having stripped large sections of the country of machinery and raw
materials, the military authorities now came forward with the plea that it was necessary to
send the labor after it. The number of workmen deported is variously estimated at between one
and three hundred thousand.

"The rage, the terror, the despair" excited by this measure all over Belgium, our minister,
Brand Whitlock, reported, "were beyond anything we had witnessed since the day the Germans
poured into Brussels. I am constantly in receipt of reports from all over Belgium that bear
out the stories of brutality and cruelty. Poland and the occupied parts of France experienced
similar treatment. The outstanding feature of course was the entry of the United States into
the great war--the deciding factor in the struggle. It marked the departure of America from
the traditional policy of political isolation from Europe. History will record that it was
not a voluntary, but a forced, departure, due to the utter disregard by Germany of our rights
on the seas, at home and elsewhere.

The first thirty days of the year found the man at the head of our government still hoping
against hope, still struggling with all the odds against him, still courageously engaged in
efforts for peace. It was a particularly trying time for President Wilson, as a large portion
of his own party and most of the nation was arrayed against him. The people in general felt
that the time for writing notes, for parleying had passed.

On December 12, 1916, Germany, in a formal note, had offered to enter into peace negotiations,
but did not specify any terms. The note referred in boastful language to the victorious German
armies. It was rejected by the Allies as empty and insincere. The president on December 18,
1916, had addressed all the beligerents asking them to indicate precisely the terms on which,
they would make peace. Germany's reply to this note was no more satisfactory than before. The
Allies replied demanding restorations, reparation and indemnities.

On the 22nd of January the president appeared before the senate in his famous "peace without
victory" address, in which he advocated a world league for peace. His views were received sympathetically,
though the Allies pointed out that no peace based on the condition of things before the war
could be durable, and that as matters stood it would be a virtual victory for Germany. It was
the president's last effort to bring peace to the world without resorting to armed force.

The most biased historian is bound to affirm that Woodrow Wilson exhausted every effort not
only to keep the United States honorably at peace, but to bring about a pacific attitude and
understanding among the belligerents. When finally he saw that no argument save that of the
sword would avail, when finally the hour struck, he became the man of the hour courageously
and nobly.

After President Wilson's failure to bring about even a pacific attitude among the warring nations,
no peace appeal from any quarter calculated to receive respectful attention was made, excepting
that issued by Pope Benedict August 15, four months after the United States had declared war.

The president's reply to the Pope forcibly stated the aim of the United States to free the
world from the menace of Prussian militarism controlled by an arrogant and faithless autocracy.
Distinguishing between the German rulers and the people, President Wilson asserted that the
United States would willingly negotiate with a government subject to the popular will. The
note disavowed any intention to dismember countries or to impose unfair economic conditions.

About five weeks prior to the Pope's proposition, the Germans had again put forth a peace feeler.
On July 19, the German reichstag adopted resolutions in favor of peace on the basis of mutual
understanding and lasting reconciliation among the nations. The resolutions sounded well but
they were accompanied by expressions to the effect that Germany in the war was the victim of
aggression and that it approved the acts of its government. They referred to the "men who are
defending the Fatherland," to the necessity of assuring the freedom of the seas, and to the
impossibility of conquering a united German nation. There was no doubt in the mind of any neutral
or any belligerent opposing Germany that the German government was the real aggressor and that
the freedom of the seas had never been restricted except by Germany herself, hence there was
no tendency to accept this as a serious bid for peace. The resolutions figured largely in German
internal politics but were without effect elsewhere.

