II Esdras IV:5

The day is done, and yet we linger here at the window of the private office, alone, in the
early evening. Street sounds come surging up to us--the hoarse Voice of the City--a confused
blur of noise--clanging trolley-cars, rumbling wagons, and familiar cries--all the varied commotion
of the home-going hour when the city's buildings are pouring forth their human tide of laborers
into the clogged arteries.

We lean against the window-frame, looking across and beyond the myriad roofs, and listening.
The world-weariness has touched our temples with gray, and the heaviness of the day's concerns
and tumult presses in, presses in .... presses in ....

Yet as we look into the gentle twilight, the throbbing street below slowly changes to a winding
country road .... the tall buildings fade in the sunset glow until they become only huge elm-trees
overtopping a dusty lane .... the trolley-bells are softened so that they are but the distant
tinkle of the homeward herd on the hills .... and you and I in matchless freedom are once more
trudging the Old Dear Road side by side, answering the call of the wondrous Voice of Boyhood
sounding through the years.

The Garden

It was the spirit of the garden that crept into my boy-heart and left its fragrance, to endure
through the years. What the garden stood for--what it expressed--left a mysterious but certain
impress. Grandmother's touch hallowed it and made it a thing apart, and the rare soul of her
seemed to be reflected in the Lilies of the Valley that bloomed sweetly year by year in the
shady plot under her favorite window in the sitting-room. Because the garden was her special
province, it expressed her own sturdy, kindly nature. Little wonder, then, that we cherished
it; that I loved to roam idly there feeling the enfoldment of that same protection and loving-kindness
which drew me to the shelter of her gingham-aproned lap when the griefs of Boyhood pressed
too hard upon me; and that we walked in it so contentedly in the cool of the evening, after
the Four O'clocks had folded their purple petals for the night.

Grandmother's garden, like all real gardens, wasn't just flowers and fragrance.

There was a brick walk leading from the front gate to the sitting-room entrance--red brick,
all moss-grown, and with the tiny weeds and grasses pushing up between the bricks. In the garden
proper the paths were of earth, bordered and well-defined by inch-wide boards that provided
jolly tight-rope practice until grandmother came anxiously out with her oft-repeated: "Willie
don't walk on those boards; you'll, break them down." And just after the warm spring showers
these earthwalks always held tiny mud-puddles where the rain-bleached worms congregated until
the robins came that way. 

In the afternoon we came upon another grouse track. George followed it to a clump of trees, where
the bird was discovered sitting on a limb. This time his aim was accurate, and the bird fell at
his feet. Quickly he plucked the wings, cut them off and handed me one with the remark: "They
say raw partridge is good when a fellus' weak." It was delicious.

      I ate the wing, warm with the bird's life blood, bones and all, and
George ate the other wing.

I soon found it utterly impossible to keep George's pace, and became so exhausted that I was
forced to take short rests. At length I told George he had better
go ahead and look for the flour; that I should rest, follow his trail
and overtake him later.

Another good place was under the Snowball bush, where the ground was covered with white petals
dropped from the countless blossom-balls that made passers-by stop in admiration.

Still another good digging-ground was in the Lilac corner where the purple and white bushes
exhaled their incomparable perfume. Grandmother forbade digging in the flower-beds--it was
all right to go into the vegetable garden, but the tender flower-roots must not be exposed
to the sun by ruthless boy hands intent only on the quest of bait.

      *      *      *      *      *

Into the lapel of my dress coat She fastened a delicate orchid last night. It must have cost
a pretty penny, at this season--enough, no doubt, to buy the seeds that would reproduce a half-dozen
of my grandmother's gardens. And as we moved away in the limousine She asked me why I was so
silent. She could not know that when she slipped its rare stem into place upon my coat, the
long years dropped away--and I stood again where the Yellow Rose, all thorn-covered, lifted
its sunny top above the picket fence--plucked its choicest blossom, put it almost apologetically
and ashamed into the buttonhole of my jacket--stuffed my hands into my pockets and went whistling
down the street, with the yellow rose-tint and the sunlight and the curls on my child head
all shining in harmony. The first boutonniere of my life--from the bush that became my confidant
through all those wondrous years before they packed my trunk and sent me off to college!

To be sure, I loved the bright-faced Pansies which smiled cheerily up at me from their round
bed--and the dear old Pinks, of a strange fragrance all their own--and the Sweet William, and
even the grewsome Bleeding Heart that drooped so sad and forlorn in its alloted corner. Yet
it is significant that last night's orchid took me straight back over memory's pathway to that
simple yellow rosebush by the fence!

      *      *      *      *      *

Tonight, with the forgotten orchid in my lapel, and all the weight of the great struggle lying
heavy against my heart, I stand where the night-fog veils the scraggly eucalyptus, and the
dense silence blots out all the noises that have intervened between the Then and the Now--and
I can see again the gorgeous Peonies, pink and white, where they toss their shaggy heads, and
gather as of old the flaming Cock's Comb by the little path. I hear the honeybees droning in
the Crab Apple tree by the back gate, and watch the robins crowding the branches of the Mountain
Ash, where the bright red berries cluster. I see the terrible bumble-bee bear down the Poppy
on its slender stem and go buzzing threateningly away, all pollen-covered.

And shining clear and true through the mist I see her who was the Spirit of the Garden. There
she stands, on the broad step beside the bed where the Lilies of the Valley grew, leaning firmly
upon her one crutch, looking out across her garden to each loved group of her flower-friends--smiling
out upon them as she did each day through fifty years--turning at last into the house and taking
with her, in her heart, the glory of the Hollyhocks against the brick wall, the perfume of
the Narcissus in the border, the wing-song of the humming-bird among, the Honey-suckle, and
the warmth of the glad June sunshine.

The River

The river wasn't a big river as I look back at it now, yet it was wide and wandering and deep,
and flowed quietly along through a wonderful Middle West valley, dividing the Little Old Town
geographically and socially. Its shores furnished such a boy playground as never was known
anywhere else in all the world--for it was a gentle river, a kindly playfellow, an understanding
friend; and it seemed fairly to thrill in responsive glee when I plunged, naked and untamed,
beneath the eddying waters of the swimming-hole under the overhanging wild-plum tree.

Its banks, curving in a semi-circle around the village, marked the borders of the whole wide
world. There were other rivers, other villages, other lands somewhere--all with strange, queer
names--existing only in the geographies to worry little children. The real world, and all the
really, truly folks and things, were along the far-stretching banks of this our river. Down
by the flats, where the tiny creek widened to a miniature swamp and emptied its placid waters
into the main stream, the red-wing blackbirds sounded their strange cry among the cat-tails
and the bull-rushes; the frogs croaked in ceaseless and reverberant chorus; the catfish were
ever hungry after dark, and the night was broken by the glare of torches along the little bridge
or in a group of boats where fisher-lads kept close watch upon their corks. Far below The Dam,
where the changeful current had left a wide sand-bar and a great tree-trunk stretched its fallen
length across from the shore to the water's edge, the mud-turtles basked in the sun-shine,
and, at the approach of Boyhood, glided or splashed to the safety of the water.

The banks of the river were a deep and silent jungle wherein all manner of wild beasts and
birds were hunted; its bosom was the vasty deep out upon which our cherished argosies were
sent. And how often their prows were unexpectedly turned by some new current into mid-stream;
sometimes saved by an assortment of missiles breathlessly thrown to the far side, to bring
them, wave-washed, back to us; sometimes, alas, swept mercilessly out to depths where only
the eye and childish grief could follow them over the big dam to certain wreckage in the whirlpools
below, but even then not abandoned until the shore had been patrolled for salvage as far as
courage held out.

Let's go back to the banks of our beloved river, you and I--and get up early in the morning
and run to the riffles near the old cooper-shop and catch a bucket of shiners and chubs, and
then hurry on to Boomer's dam--or 'way upstream above the Island where we used to have the
Sunday-school picnics--or, maybe just stay at the in-town dam near the flour mills and the
saw-mills where old Shoemaker Schmidt used to catch so many big ones--fat, yellow pike and
broad black-bass. We will climb high up on the mist-soaked timbers of the mill-race and settle
ourselves contentedly with the spray moistening our faces and the warm sun browning our hands--and
the heavy pounding of falling waters sounding in our ears so melodiously and so sweetly. Lazily,
drowsily we'll hold a bamboo pole and guide out shiner through the foam-crowned eddies of the
whirlpool, awaiting the flash of a golden side or a lusty tug at the line; and dreamily watch
a long, narrow stream of shavings and sawdust, loosed from the opposite planing-mill, float
away on the current. And here, in the dear dream-days, the conquering of the world will be
a simple matter; for through the mist-prisms that rise from the foaming waters below the dam
only rainbows can be seen--and there is Youth and the Springtime, and the new-born flowers
and mating birds, and The River....

And when the sun is low we'll wind our poles, at the end of a rare and great day--one that
cannot die with the sunset, but that will live so long as Memory is. Tonight we need not trudge
over the fields toward home, in happy weariness, to Her who waited and watched for us at the
window, peering through the gathering dusk until the anxious heart was stilled by the sight
of tired little legs dragging down the street past the postoffice. We'll stay here in the twilight,
and watch the fire-flies light their fitful lamps, and the first stars blinking through the
afterglow; and when the night drops down see the black bats careening weirdly across the moon....
And we'll stretch out again on the wild grass--soothed by the fragrance of the Mayapple and
the violets, and the touch of the night-wind... How still it is ... and The River doesn't seem
to sound so loud when your head's on the ground--and your eyes are closed--and you're listening
to the far, far, far-off lullaby of tumbling waters--and you're a bit tired, Perhaps ... a
bit tired....

      *      *      *      *      *

The Winter Stream

Somehow The River never terrified me.

(It did mother, however!)

Perhaps it brought no fear to me because it flowed so gently and so helpfully through such
a wonderful valley of Peace and Plenty. Even in its austere winter aspect, with its tree-banks
bare of leaves and its snow-and-ice-bound setting, it rejoiced me.

Teams of big horses and wagons and scores of men, worked busily upon its frozen surface, sawing
and cutting and packing ice in the big wooden houses along the banks. 

"Yea, with thine eyes shalt thou behold: and see the reward of the ungodly.

"For thou, Lord, art my hope: thou hast set thine house of defence
very high.

"Because He hath set His love upon me, therefore will I deliver him:
I will set him up, because he hath known my name.

"He shall call upon me, and I will hear him: yea, I am with him in
trouble; I will deliver him and bring him to bonour.

"With long life will I satisfy him: and show him my salvation"

The Psalm made a deep impression upon me. "For he shall give his angels charge over thee: to keep
thee in all thy ways."

How strange it seems, in view of what happened to me, that George should have read that sentence.

We
arose to go on our separate ways, George twenty-five miles down the valley to Grand Lake, and I fifteen
miles up the valley to Hubbard. The snow was falling thick and fast.

      

"You'd better make a cape of your blanket," suggested George.

"Let me fix it for you."

He placed the blanket around my shoulders, and on either side of the
cloth where it came together under my chin made a small hole with
his knife. Through these holes he ran a piece of our old trolling
line, and tied the ends. Then he similarly arranged his own blanket.

I
held out my hand to him.

"Good-bye, George. Take care of yourself."

He
clasped my hand warmly.

"Good-bye, Wallace. Expect help in five days."

Near
the top of a knoll I stopped and looked back. With my afflicted eyes
I could barely make out George ascending another knoll. He also stopped
and looked back. I waved my hand to him, and he waved his hand to
me and shouted something unintelligible. Then he disappeared in the
snow, and as he disappeared a silence came on the world, to remain
unbroken for ten days.

XVIII.

To the Big Bend our canoe glided often, paddling lazily along and going far up-stream to drift
back with the current.

Arms bared to the shoulder, we reached deep beneath the surface to bring up the long-stemmed
water-lilies--the great white blossoms, and the queer little yellow-and-black ones.

Like a blight-eyed sprite the tiny marsh-wren flitted among the rushes, and the musk-rat built
strange reed-castles at the water's edge.

The lace-winged dragon-fly following our boat darted from side to side, or poised in air, or
alighted on the dripping blade of our paddle when it rested for a moment across our knees.

Among the grasses the wind-harps played weird melodies which only Boyhood could interpret.

In this place The River sang its love-songs, and sent forth an answering note to the vast harmonious
blending of blue sky and golden day and incense-heavy air and the glad songs of birds.

And here at this tranquil bend The River seemed to be the self-same river of the old, loved
hymn we sang so often in the Little Church With The White Steeple--that river which "flows
by the throne of God"; fulfilling the promise of the ancient prophet of prophets and bringing
"peace ... like a river, and glory ... like a flowing stream."

Christmas

We always used grandmother's stocking--because it was the biggest one in the family, much larger
than mother's, and somehow it seemed able to stretch more than hers. There was so much room
in the foot, too--a chance for all sorts of packages.

