The Marchioness was laughing so hard that she sat down in a regular "cheese" on the floor;
the father-lover was clapping his hands like mad; the lady swung round on the piano stool and
shook her forefinger at the Boy who suddenly came right side up at last, hand on his heart,
and bowed with great dignity to the little girl on the floor. Then he, too, laughed and cut
another caper just as a solemn-faced butler came in with wraps and furs. But by no means did
he remain solemn long! How could he with the Boy prancing about him, and the Marchioness playing
at "Catch-me-if-you-can" with her father-lover, and the lady slipping and sliding over the
floor to catch the Boy who was always on the other side of the would-be solemn butler? Why,
he actually swung round in a circle by holding on to that butler's dignified coat-tails!

Nor were they the only ones who laughed. Across the way in one of the Orphan Asylum windows,
Sister Angelica and the children laughed too, in spirit joining in the fun, and when the butler
came to the window to draw the shades there were three long "Ah's," both of intense disappointment
and supreme satisfaction.

"Watch out, now," said Flibbertigibbet excitedly on the way down into the basement for supper
and dishwashing, for it was their turn this week, "an' yer'll see me dance yer a minute in
the yard ter-morrow."

"Yer can't dance it alone," replied doubting Freckles; "yer've got to have a boy."

"I don't want one; I'll take you, Freckles, for a boy." Clumsy Freckles blushed with delight
beneath her many beauty-spots at such promise of unwonted graciousness on the part of her chum,
and wondered what had come over Flibbertigibbet lately.

       *       *       *       *       *

A few hours afterwards when they went up to bed, they whispered together again concerning the
dance, and begged Sister Angelica to let them have just one peep from the dormitory window
at their house of delight--a request she was glad to grant. They opened one of the inside blinds
a little way, and exclaimed at the sight. It was snowing. The children oh'ed and ah'ed under
their breath, for a snowstorm at Christmas time in the great city is the child's true joy.
At their opposite neighbor's a faint light was visible in the balcony room; the wet soft flakes
had already ridged the balustrade, powdered the dwarf evergreens, topped the cap of the electric
arc-light and laid upon the concrete a coverlet of purest white.

The long bare dormitory filled with the children--the fatherless and motherless children we
have always with us. Soon each narrow cot held its asylum number; the many heads, golden, brown,
or black, busied all of them with childhood's queer unanchored thoughts, were pillowed in safety
for another night.

And without the snow continued to fall upon the great city. It graced with equal delicacy the
cathedral's marble spires and the forest of pointed firs which made the numberless Christmas
booths that surrounded old Washington Market. It covered impartially, and with as pure a white,
the myriad city roofs that sheltered saint and sinner, whether among the rich or the poor,
among the cherished or castaways. It fell as thickly upon the gravestones in Trinity's ancient
churchyard as upon the freshly turned earth in a corner of the paupers' burying ground; and
it set upon black corruption wherever it was in evidence the seal of a transient stainlessness.

VI

"Really, I am discouraged about that child," said Sister Agatha just after Easter. She was
standing at one of the schoolroom windows that overlooked the yard; she spoke as if thoroughly
vexed.

"What is it now--208 again?" Sister Angelica looked up from the copybook she was correcting.

"Oh, yes, of course; it's always 208."

"Oh, she doesn't mean anything; it's only her high spirits; they must have some vent."

"It's been her ruin being on the stage even for those few weeks, and ever since the Van Ostends
began to make of her and have her over for that Christmas luncheon and the Sunday nights, the
child is neither to have nor to hold. What with her 'make believing' and her 'acting' she upsets
the girls generally. She ought to be set to good steady work; the first chance I get I'll put
her to it. I only wish some one would adopt her--"

"I heard Father Honoré--"

"Look at her now!" exclaimed Sister Agatha interrupting her.

Sister Angelica joined her at the window. They could not only see but hear all that was going
on below. With the garbage house as a stage-setting and background to the performance, Flibbertigibbet
was courtesying low to her audience; the skirt of her scant gingham dress was held in her two
hands up and out to its full extent. The orphans crouched on the pavement in a triple semi-circle
in front of her.

"All this rigmarole comes of the theatre," said Sister Agatha grimly.

"Well, where's the harm? She is only living it all over again and giving the others a little
pleasure at the same time. Dear knows, they have little enough, poor things."

Sister Agatha made no reply; she was listening intently to 208's orders. The little girl had
risen from her low courtesy and was haranguing the assembled hundreds:

"Now watch out, all of yer, an' when I do the minute yer can clap yer hands if yer like it;
an' if yer want some more, yer must clap enough to split yer gloves if yer had any on, an'
then I'll give yer the coon dance; an' then if yer like that, yer can play yer gloves are busted
with clappin' an' stomp yer feet--"

"But we can't," Freckles entered her prosaic protest, "'cause we're squattin'."

"Well, get up then, yer'll have to; an' then if you stomp awful, an' holler 'On-ko--on-ko!'--that's
what they say at the thayertre--I'll give yer somethin' else--"

"Wot?" demanded 206 suspiciously.

"Don't yer wish I'd tell!" said 208, and began the minuet.

It was marvellous how she imitated every graceful movement, every turn and twist and bow, every
courtesy to the imaginary partner--Freckles had failed her entirely in this role--whose imaginary
hand she held clasped high above her head; her clumsy shoes slid over the flagging as if it
had been a waxed floor under dainty slippers. There was an outburst of applause; such an outburst
that had the audience really worn gloves, every seam, even if French and handsewed, must have
cracked under the healthy pressure.

208 beamed and, throwing back her head, suddenly flung herself into the coon dance which, in
its way, was as wild and erratic as the minuet had been stately and methodical. Wilder and
wilder grew her gyrations--head, feet, legs, shoulders, hair, hands, arms, were in seemingly
perpetual motion. The audience grew wildly excited. They jumped up, shouting "On-ko--on-ko!"
and accompanied their shouts with the stamping of feet. A dexterous somersault on the dancer's
part ended the performance; her cheeks were flushed with exercise and excitement, her black
mane was loosened and tossed about her shoulders. The audience lost their heads and even 206
joined in the prolonged roar:

"On-ko, 208--on-ko-o-o-oor! On-ko, Flibbertigibbet--some more--some more!"

"It's perfectly disgraceful," muttered Sister Agatha, and made a movement to leave the window;
but Sister Angelica laid a gently detaining hand on her arm.

"No, Agatha, not that," she said earnestly; "you'll see that they will work all the better
for this fun--Hark!"

There was a sudden and deep silence. 208 was evidently ready with her encore, a surprise to
all but the performer. She shook back the hair from her face, raised her eyes, crossed her
two hands upon her chest, waited a few seconds until a swift passenger train on the track behind
the fence had smothered its roar in the tunnel depths, then began to sing "The Holy City."
Even Sister Agatha felt the tears spring as she listened. A switch engine letting off steam
drowned the last words, and there was no applause. Flibbertigibbet looked about her inquiringly;
but the girls were silent. Such singing appeared to them out of the ordinary--and so unlike
208! It took them a moment to recover from their surprise; they gathered in groups to whisper
together concerning the performance.

Meanwhile Flibbertigibbet was waiting expectantly. Where was the well earned applause? And
she had reserved the best for the last! Ungrateful ones! Her friends in the stone house always
praised her when she did her best,--but these girls--

She stamped her foot, then dashed through the broken ranks, making faces as she ran, and crying
out in disgust and anger:

"Catch me givin' yer any more on-kos, yer stingy things!" and with that she ran into the basement
followed by Freckles who was intent upon appeasing her.

The two sisters, pacing the dim corridor together after chapel that evening, spoke again of
their little wilding.

"I didn't finish what I was going to tell you about 208," said Sister Angelica. "I heard the
Sister Superior tell Father Honoré when he was here the other day that Mr. Van Ostend had been
to see her in regard to the child. It seems he has found a place for her in the country with
some of his relations, as I understand it. He said his interest in her had been roused when
he heard her for the first time on the stage, and that when he found Flibbertigibbet was the
little acquaintance his daughter had made, he determined to further the child's interests so
far as a home is concerned."

"Then there is a prospect of her going," Sister Agatha drew a breath of relief. "Did you hear
what Father Honoré said?"

"Very little; but I noticed he looked pleased, and I heard him say, 'This is working out all
right; I'll step across and see Mr. Van Ostend myself.'--I shall miss her so!"

Sister Agatha made no reply. Together the two sisters continued to pace the dim corridor, silent
each with her thoughts; and, pacing thus, up and down, up and down, the slender, black-robed
figures were soon lost in the increasing darkness and became mere neutral outlines as they
passed the high bare windows and entered their respective rooms.

Even so, a few weeks later when Number 208 left the Orphan Asylum on ----nd Street, they passed
quietly out of the child's actual life and entered the fitfully lighted chambers of her childish
memory wherein, at times, they paced with noiseless footsteps as once in the barren halls of
her orphanage home.

PART SECOND

Home Soil

I

A land of entrancing inner waters, our own marvellous Lake Country of the East, lies just behind
those mountains of Maine that sink their bases in the Atlantic and are fitly termed in Indian
nomenclature Waves-of-the-Sea. Bight and bay indent this mountainous coast, in beauty comparable,
if less sublime yet more enticing, to the Norwegian fjords; within them are set the islands
large and small whereon the sheep, sheltered by cedar coverts, crop the short thick turf that
is nourished by mists from the Atlantic. Above bight and bay and island tower the mountains.
Their broad green flanks catch the earliest eastern and the latest western lights. Their bare
summits are lifted boldly into the infinite blue that is reflected in the waters which lap
their foundations.

Flamsted lies at the outlet of Lake Mesantic, on the gentle northward slope of these Waves-of-the-Sea,
some eighteen miles inland from Penobscot Bay. Until the last decade of the nineteenth century
it was unconnected with the coast by any railroad; but at that time a branch line from Hallsport
on the Bay, encouraged by the opening of a small granite quarry in the Flamsted Hills, made
its terminus at The Corners--a sawmill settlement at the falls of the Rothel, a river that
runs rapidly to the sea after issuing from Lake Mesantic. Then he fumbled in his bag, and taking
out a matchbox and a piece of candle, proceeded to make a light.

The tomb in the daytime, and when wreathed with fresh flowers, had looked grim and gruesome enough,
but now, some days afterwards, when the flowers hung lank and dead, their whites turning to
rust and their greens to browns, when the spider and the beetle had resumed their accustomed
dominance, when the time-discoloured stone, and dust-encrusted mortar, and rusty, dank iron,
and tarnished brass, and clouded silver-plating gave back the feeble glimmer of a candle,
the effect was more miserable and sordid than could have been imagined. It conveyed irresistibly
the idea that life, animal life, was not the only thing which could
pass away.

Van Helsing went about his work systematically. Holding his candle so that he could read the
coffin plates, and so holding it that the sperm dropped in white patches which congealed as
they touched the metal, he made assurance of Lucy's coffin. Another search in his bag, and he took
out a turnscrew.

"What are you going to do?" I asked.
"To open the coffin. You shall yet be convinced."

Straightway he
began taking out the screws, and finally lifted off the lid, showing
the casing of lead beneath. The sight was almost too much for me.
It seemed to be as much an affront to the dead as it would have been
to have stripped off her clothing in her sleep whilst living. I actually
took hold of his hand to stop him.
This event was looked upon by the inhabitants as the Invasion of the New.

The interest of the first faction was centred in Champ-au-Haut and its present possessor, the
widow of Louis Champney, old Judge Champney's only son. That of the second in the Googes, Aurora
and her son Champney, the owners of Googe's Gore and its granite outcrop.

The office room of The Greenbush has been for two generations the acknowledged gathering place
of the representatives of the hostile camps. On a cool evening in June, a few days after the
departure of several New York promoters, who had formed a syndicate to exploit the granite
treasure in The Gore and for that purpose been fully a week in Flamsted, a few of the natives
dropped into the office to talk it over.

When Octavius Buzzby, the factotum at Champ-au-Haut and twin of Augustus Buzzby, landlord of
The Greenbush, entered the former bar-room of the old hostelry, he found the usual Saturday
night frequenters. Among them was Colonel Milton Caukins, tax collector and assistant deputy
sheriff who, never quite at ease in the presence of his long-tongued wife, expanded discursively
so soon as he found himself in the office of The Greenbush. He was in full flow when Octavius
entered.

"Hello, Tave," he cried, extending his hand in easy condescension, "you're well come, for you're
just in time to hear the latest; the deal's on--an A. 1 sure thing this time. Aurora showed
me the papers to-day. We're in for it now--government contracts, state houses, battle monuments,
graveyards; we've got 'em all, and things'll begin to hum in this backwater hole, you bet!"

Octavius looked inquiringly at his brother. Augustus answered by raising his left eyebrow and
placidly closing his right eye as a cautionary signal to lie low and await developments.

It was the Colonel's way to boom everything, and simply because he could not help it. It was
not a matter of principle with him, it was an affair of temperament. He had boomed Flamsted
for the last ten years--its climate, its situation, its scenery, its water power, its lake-shore
lands as prospective sites for mansion summer cottages, and the treasures of its unopened quarries.
So incorrigible an optimist was Milton Caukins that any slight degree of success, which might
attend the promotion of any one of his numerous schemes, caused an elation that amounted to
hilarity. On the other hand, the deadly blight of non-fulfilment, that annually attacked his
most cherished hopes for the future development of his native town, failed in any wise to depress
him, or check the prodigal casting of his optimistic daily bread on the placid social waters
where, as the years multiplied, his enthusiasms scarce made a ripple.

"I see Mis' Googe yisterd'y, an' she said folks hed been down on her so long for sellin' thet
pass'l of paster for the first quarry, thet she might ez well go the hull figger an' git 'em
down on her for the rest of her days by sellin' the rest. By Andrew Jackson! she's got the
grit for a woman--and the good looks too! She can hold her own for a figger with any gal in
this town. I see the syndicaters a-castin' sheeps' eyes her ways the day she took 'em over
The Gore prospectin'; but, by A. J.! they hauled in their lookin's when she turned them great
eyes of her'n their ways.--What's the figger for the hull piece? Does anybody know?"

It was Joel Quimber, the ancient pound-master, who spoke, and the silence that followed proved
that each man present was resenting the fact that he was not in a position to give the information
desired.

"I shall know as soon as they get it recorded, that is, if they don't trade for a dollar and
if they ever do get it recorded." The speaker was Elmer Wiggins, druggist and town clerk for
the last quarter of a century. He was pessimistically inclined, the tendency being fostered
by his dual vocation of selling drugs and registering the deaths they occasionally caused.

Milton Caukins, or the Colonel, as he preferred to be called on account of his youthful service
in the state militia and his present connection with the historical society of The Rangers,
took his cigar from his lips and blew the smoke forcibly towards the ceiling before he spoke.

"She's got enough now to put Champ through college. The first forty acres she sold ten years
ago will do that."

"I ain't so sure of thet." Joel Quimber's tone implied obstinate conviction that his modestly
expressed doubt was a foregone conclusion. "Champ's a devil of a feller when it comes to puttin'
through anything. He's a chip off the old block. He'll put through more 'n his mother can git
out if he gits in any thicker with them big guns--race hosses, steam yachts an' fancy fixin's.
He could sink the hull Gore to the foundations of Old Time in a few of them suppers I've heerd
he gin arter the show. I heerd he gin ten dollars a plate for the last one--some kind of primy-donny,
I heerd. But Champ's game though. I heerd Mr. Van Ostend talkin' 'bout him to one of the syndicaters--mebbe
they're goin' to work him in with them somehow; anyway, I guess Aurory don't begrutch him a
little spendin' money seein' how easy it come out of the old sheep pasters. Who'd 'a' thought
a streak of granite could hev made sech a stir!"

"It's a stir that'll sink this town in the mud." Mr. Wiggins' voice was what might be called
thorough-bass, and was apt to carry more weight with his townspeople than his opinions, which
latter were not always acceptable to Colonel Caukins. "Look at it now! This town has never
been bonded; we're free from debt and a good balance on hand for improvements. Now along comes
three or four hundred immigrants to begin with--trade following the flag, I suppose you call
it, Colonel," (he interpolated this with cutting sarcasm)--"a hodge-podge of Canucks, and Dagos,
and Polacks, and the Lord knows what--a darned set of foreigners, foreign to our laws, our
ways, our religion; and behind 'em a lot of men that would be called windbags if it wasn't
for their money-bags. And between 'em our noses are going to be held right down on the grindstone.
I tell you we'll have to bond this town to support the schooling for these foreign brats, and
there's a baker's dozen of 'em every time; and there'll be tooting and dancing and singing
and playing on Sunday with their foreign gimcranks,--mandolin-banjos and what-all--"

"Good heavens, my dear fellow!" the Colonel broke in with an air of impatience, "can't you
see that it's this very 'stir,' as you term it, that is going to put this town into the front
rank of the competing industrial thousands of America?"

The Colonel, when annoyed at the quantity of cold water thrown upon his redhot enthusiasm,
was apt to increase the warmth of his patronizing address by an endearing term.

"I see farther than the front ranks of your 'competing industrial thousands of America,' Milton
Caukins; I see clear over 'em to the very brink, and I see a struggling wrestling mass of human
beings slipping, sliding to the bottomless pit of national destitution, helped downwards by
just such darned boomers of what you call 'industrial efficiency' as you are, Milton Caukins."
He paused for breath.

Augustus Buzzby, who was ever a man of peace, tried to divert this raging torrent of speech
into other and personal channels.

"I ain't nothin' 'gainst Mis' Googe as a woman, but she played me a mean trick when she sold
that first quarry. It killed my trade as dead as a door nail. You can't hire them highflyers
to put themselves into a town their money's bankin' on to ruin in what you might call a summer-social
way. I found that out 'fore they left this house last week."

"Yes, and she's played a meaner one now." Mr. Wiggins made the assertion with asperity and
looked at the same time directly at Octavius Buzzby. "I know all about their free dispensaries
that'll draw trade away from my very counter and take the bread and butter out of my mouth;
and as for the fees--there won't be a chance for recording a homestead site; there isn't any
counting on such things, for they're a homeless lot, always moving from pillar to post with
free pickings wherever they locate over night, just like the gypsies that came through here
last September."

"It's kinder queer now, whichever way you've a mind to look at it," Joel Quimber remarked meditatively.
His eyes were cast up to the ceiling; his fore-fingers and thumbs formed an acute triangle
over the bridge of his nose; the arms of his chair supported his elbows. "Queer thet it's allus
them upper tens an' emigrants thet keep a-movin' on, fust one place then t'other. Kinder looks
ez if, arter all, there warn't no great real difference when it comes to bein' restless. Take
us home folks now, we're rooted in deep, an' I guess if we was to be uprooted kinder suddin',
p'raps we'd hev more charity for the furriners. There's no tellin'; I ain't no jedge of sech
things, an' I'm an out-an-out American. But mebbe my great-great-great-granther's father could
hev' told ye somethin' wuth tellin'; he an' the Champneys was hounded out of France, an' was
glad 'nough to emigrate, though they called it refugeein' an' pioneerin' in them days."

Augustus Buzzby laid his hand affectionately on the old man's shoulder. "You're a son of the
soil, Joel; I stand corrected. I guess the less any of us true blue Americans say 'bout flinging
stones at furriners the safer 'twill be for all on us."

But Mr. Wiggins continued his diatribe: "There ain't no denying it, the first people in town
are down on the whole thing. Didn't the rector tell me this very day that 'twas like ploughing
up the face of nature for the sake of sowing the seeds of political and social destruction--his
very words--in this place of peace and happy homes? He don't blame Mrs. Champney for feeling
as she does 'bout Aurora Googe. He said it was a shame that just as soon as Mrs. Champney had
begun to sell off her lake shore lands so as her city relatives could build near her, Mrs.
Googe must start up and balk all her plans by selling two hundred acres of old sheep pasture
for the big quarry."

"Humph!" It was the first sound that Octavius Buzzby had uttered since his entrance and general
greeting. Hearing it his brother looked warningly in his direction, for he feared that the
factional difference, which had come to the surface to breathe in his own and Elmer Wiggins'
remarks, might find over-heated expression in the mouth of his twin if once Tave's ire should
be aroused. But his brother gave no heed and, much to Augustus' relief, went off at a tangent.

"I heard old Judge Champney talk on these things a good many times in his lifetime, an' he
was wise, wiser'n any man here." He allowed himself this one thrust at Mr. Wiggins and the
Colonel. "He used to say: 'Tavy, it's all in the natural course of things, and it's got to
strike us here sometime; not in my time, but in my boy's. No man of us can say he owns God's
earth, an' set up barriers an' fences, an' sometimes breastworks, an' holler "hands off" to
every man that peeks over the wall, "this here is mine or that is ours!" because 't isn't in
the natural order of things, and what isn't in the natural order isn't going to be, Tavy.'
That's what the old Judge said to me more'n once."

"He was right, Tavy, he was right," said Quimber eagerly and earnestly. "I can't argify, an'
I can't convince; but I know he was right. I've lived most a generation longer'n any man here,
an' I've seen a thing or two an' marked the way of nater jest like the Jedge. I've stood there
where the Rothel comes down from The Gore in its spring freshet, rarin', tearin' down, bearin'
stones an' rocks along with its current till it strikes the lowlands; then a racin' along,
catchin' up turf an' mud an' sand, an' foamin' yaller an' brown acrost the medders, leavin'
mud a quarter of an inch thick on the lowlands; and then a-rushin' into the lake ez if 't would
turn the bottom upside down--an' jest look what happens! Stid of kickin' up a row all along
the banks it jest ain't nowhere when you look for it! Only the lake riled for a few furlongs
off shore an' kinder humpin' up in the middle. An' arter a day or two ye come back an' look
agin, an' where's the rile? All settled to the bottom, an' the lake as clear as a looking-glass.
An' then ye look at the medders an' ye see thet, barrin' a big boulder or two an' some stuns
thet an ox-team can cart off, an' some gullyin' out long the highroad, they ain't been hurt
a mite. An' then come 'long 'bout the fust of July, an' ye go out an' stan' there and look
for the silt--an' what d' ye see? Why, jest thet ye're knee deep in clover an' timothy thet
hez growed thet high an' lush jest on account of thet very silt!

"Thet's the way 't is with nateral things; an' thet's what the old Jedge meant. This furrin
flood's a-comin'; an' we've got to stan' some scares an' think mebbe The Gore dam'll bust,
an' the boulders lay round too thick for the land, an' the mud'll spile our medders, an' the
lake show rily so's the cattle won't drink--an' we'll find out thet in this great free home
of our'n, thet's lent us for a while, thet there's room 'nough for all, an', in the end--not
in my time, but in your'n--our Land, like the medders, is goin' to be the better for it."

"Well put, well put, Quimber," said the Colonel who had been showing signs of restlessness
under the unusual and protracted eloquence of the old pound-master. "We're making the experiment
that every other nation has had to make some time or other. Take old Rome, now--what was it
started the decay, eh?"

As no one present dared to cope with the decline of so large a subject, the Colonel had the
floor. He looked at each man in turn; then waved the hand that held his cigar airily towards
the ceiling. "Just inbreeding, sir, inbreeding. That's what did it. We Americans, are profiting
by the experience of the centuries and are going to take in fresh blood just as fast as it
can attain to an arterial circulation in the body politic, sir; an arterial circulation, I
say--" the Colonel was apt to roll a fine phrase more than once under his tongue when the sound
thereof pleased him,--"and in the course of nature--I agree perfectly with the late Judge Champney
and our friend, Quimber--there may be, during the process, a surcharge of blood to the head
or stomach of the body politic that will cause a slight attack of governmental vertigo or national
indigestion. But it will pass, gentlemen, it will pass; and I assure you the health of the
Republic will be kept at the normal, with nothing more than passing attacks of racial hysteria
which, however undignified they may appear in the eyes of all right-minded citizens, must ever
remain the transient phenomena of a great nation in the making."

The Colonel, having finished his peroration with another wave of his cigar towards the ceiling,
lowered his feet from their elevated position on the counter, glanced anxiously at the clock,
which indicated a quarter of nine, and remarked casually that, as Mrs. Caukins was indisposed,
he felt under obligations to be at home by half-past nine.

Joel Quimber, whom such outbursts of eloquence on the Colonel's part in the usual town-meeting
left in a generally dazed condition of mind and politics, remarked that he heard the whistle
of the evening train about fifteen minutes ago, and asked if Augustus were expecting any one
up on it.

"No, but the team's gone down to meet it just the same. Maybe there'll be a runner or two;
they pay 'bout as well as the big guns after all; and then there's a chance of one of the syndicaters
coming in on me at any time now.--There's the team."

He went out on the veranda. The men within the office listened with intensified interest, strengthened
by that curiosity which is shown by those in whose lives events do not crowd upon one another
with such overwhelming force, that the susceptibility to fresh impressions is dulled. They
heard the land-lord's cordial greeting, a confusion of sounds incident upon new arrivals; then
Augustus Buzzby came in, carrying bags and travelling shawl, and, following him, a tall man
in the garb of a priest of the Roman Catholic Church. Close at his side was a little girl.
She was far from appearing shy or awkward in the presence of strangers, nodding brightly to
Octavius, who sat nearest the door, and smiling captivatingly upon Joel Quimber, whereupon
he felt immediately in his pockets for a peppermint which, to his disappointment, was not there.

The Colonel sprang to his feet when the guests entered, and quickly doffed his felt hat which
was balancing in a seemingly untenable position on the side of his head. The priest, who removed
his on the threshold, acknowledged the courtesy with a bow and a keen glance which included
all in the room; then he stepped to the desk on the counter to enter his name in the ponderous
leather-backed registry which Augustus opened for him. The little girl stood beside him, watching
his every movement.

The Flamstedites saw before them a man in the prime of life, possibly forty-five. He was fully
six feet in height, noticeably erect, with an erectness that gave something of the martial
to his carriage, spare but muscular, shoulders high and square set, and above them a face deeply
pock-marked, the features large but regular, the forehead broad and bulging rather prominently
above the eyes. The eyes they could not see; but the voice made itself heard, and felt, while
he was writing. The men present unconsciously welcomed it as a personality.

"Can you tell me if Mrs. Louis Champney lives near here?" he said, addressing his host.

"Yes, sir; just about a mile down the street at The Bow."

"Oh, please, yer Riverence, write mine too," said the child who, by standing on tiptoe at the
high counter, had managed to follow every stroke of the pen.

The priest looked at the landlord with a frankly interrogatory smile.

"To be sure, to be sure. Ain't you my guest as long as you're in my home?" Augustus replied
with such whole-souled heartiness that the child beamed upon him and boldly held out her hand
for the pen.

"Let me write it," she said decidedly, as if used to having her way. Colonel Caukins sprang
to place a high three-legged stool for the little registree, and was about to lift her on,
but the child, laughing aloud, managed to seat herself without his assistance, and forthwith
gave her undivided attention to the entering of her name.

Those present loved in after years to recall this scene: the old bar, the three-legged stool,
the little girl perched on top, one foot twisted over the round--so busily intent upon making
a fine signature that a tip of her tongue was visible held tightly against her left cheek--the
coarse straw hat, the clean but cheap blue dress, the heavy shoes that emphasized the delicacy
of her ankles and figure; and above her the leaning priest, smiling gravely with fatherly indulgence
upon this firstling of his flock in Flamsted.

The child looked up for approval when she had finished and shaken, with an air of intense satisfaction,
a considerable quantity of sand over the fresh ink. Evidently the look in the priest's eyes
was reward enough, for, although he spoke no word, the little girl laughed merrily and in the
next moment hopped down rather unexpectedly from her high place and busied herself with taking
a survey of the office and its occupants.

The priest took an envelope from his pocket and handed it to Augustus, saying as he did so:

"This is Mr. Buzzby, I know; and here is a letter from Mr. Van Ostend in regard to this little
girl. Her arrival is premature; but the matron of the institution, where she has been, wished
to take advantage of my coming to Flamsted to place her in my care. Mr. Van Ostend would like
to have her remain here with you for a few days if Mrs. Champney is not prepared to receive
her just now."

There was a general movement of surprise among the men in the office, and all eyes, with a
question-mark visible in them, were turned towards Octavius Buzzby. Upon him, the simple announcement
had the effect of a shock; he felt the need of air, and slipped out to the veranda, but not
before he received another bright smile from the little girl. He waited outside until he saw
Augustus show the newcomers upstairs; then he re-entered the office and went to the register
which was the speculative focus of interest for all the others. Octavius read:

     June 18, 1889--FR. JOHN FRANCIS HONORÉ, NEW YORK. AILEEN ARMAGH,
     ORPHAN ASYLUM, NEW YORK CITY.

The Colonel was in a state of effervescing hilarity. He rubbed his hands energetically, slapped
Octavius on the back, and exclaimed in high feather:

"How's this for the first drops of the deluge, eh, Tave?"

Octavius made no reply. He waited, as usual, for the evening's mail. The carrier handed him
a telegram from New York for Mrs. Champney. It had just come up on the train from Hallsport.
He wondered what connection its coming might have with the unexpected arrival of this orphan child?

II

On his way home Octavius Buzzby found himself wondering, as he had wondered many times before
on occasion, how he could checkmate this latest and most unexpected move on the part of the
mistress of Champ-au-Haut. His mind was perturbed and he realized, while making an effort to
concentrate his attention on ways and means, that he had been giving much of his mental strength
during the last twenty years to the search for ulterior motives on the part of Mrs. Louis Champney,
a woman of sixty now, a Googe by birth (the Googes, through some genealogical necromancy, traced
their descent from Sir Ferdinando Gorges. The name alone, not the blood, had, according to
family tradition, suffered corruption with time), and the widow of Louis Champney, the late
Judge Champney's only son.

The Champneys had a double strain of French blood in their veins, Breton and Flemish; the latter
furnished the collateral branch of the Van Ostends. This intermixture, flowing in the veins
of men and women who were Americans by the birthright of more than two centuries' enjoyment
of our country's institutions, had produced for several generations as fine a strain of brains
and breeding as America can show.

Louis Champney, the last of the line in direct descent, was looked upon from his boyhood up
as the culmination of these centuries' flowering. When, at forty, he died without having fulfilled
in any wise the great expectations of his townspeople and relations, the interest of the community,
as well as of the family, centred in the prospects of Louis Champney Googe, his namesake, and
nephew on his wife's side. Here, again, numerous family interests as well as communal speculations
were disappointed. The Champney estate was left entire to the widow, Almeda Googe Champney,
to dispose of as she might deem fit. Her powers of administratrix were untrammelled save in
one respect: Octavius Buzzby was to remain in his position as factotum on the Champney estate
and adviser for its interests.

It was at this juncture, when Louis Champney died without remembering his nephew-in-law by
so much as a book from his library and the boy was ten years old, that a crisis was discovered
to be imminent in the fortunes of the Googe-Champney families, the many ramifications of which
were intricately interwoven in the communal life of Flamsted. This crisis had not been averted;
for Aurora Googe, the sister-in-law of Mrs. Champney and mother of young Champney, sold a part
of her land in The Gore for the first granite quarry, and in so doing changed for all time
the character and fortunes of the town of Flamsted.

For many years Octavius Buzzby had championed openly and in secret the cause of Aurora Googe
and her only son. To-night, while walking slowly homewards, he was pondering what attitude
of mind he must assume, before he could deal adequately with the momentous event which had
been foreshadowed from the moment he learned from the priest's lips that Mr. Van Ostend was
implicated in the coming of this orphan child. He recalled that little Alice Van Ostend prattled
much about this same child during the week she had spent recently with her father at Champ-au-Haut.

Was the mistress of Champ-au-Haut going to adopt her?

Almeda Champney had never wanted the blessing of a child, and, contrary to her young husband's
wishes--he was her junior by twelve years--she had had her way. Her nature was so absorbingly
tenacious of whatever held her narrow interests, that a child at Champ-au-Haut would have broken,
in a measure, her domination of her weaker-willed husband, because it would have centred in
itself his love and ambition to "keep up the name." That now, eleven years after Louis Champney's
death, she should contemplate the introduction into her perfectly ordered household of a child,
an alien, was a revelation of appalling moment to Octavius. He scouted the idea that she would
enter the house as an assistant. None was needed; and, moreover, those small hands could accomplish
little in the next ten years. She meant to adopt her then! An alien was to inherit the Champney
property! Octavius actually shivered at the thought.

Was it, could it be an act of spite against Aurora Googe? Was it a final answer to any expectations
of her nephew, Champney Googe, her husband's namesake and favorite? Was this little alien waif
to be made a catspaw for her revenge? She was capable of such a thing, was Almeda Champney.
He knew her; none better! Had not her will, thus far in her life, bent everything with which
it had come in contact; crushed whatever had opposed it; broken irrevocably whosoever for a
while had successfully resisted it?

His thin lips drew to a straight line. All his manhood's strength of desire for fair play,
a desire he had been fated to see unfulfilled during the last twenty years, rose in rebellion
to champion the cause of the little newcomer who smiled on him so brightly in the office of
The Greenbush. Nor did he falter in his resolution when he presented himself at the library
door with the telegram in his hand.

"Come in, Octavius; was there any mail?"

"Only a telegram from New York." He handed it to her.

She opened and read it; then laid it on the table. She removed her eyeglasses, for she had
grown far-sighted with advancing years, in order to look at the back of the small man who was
leaving the room. If he had seen the smile that accompanied the action, he might well have
faltered in his resolution to champion any righteous cause on earth.

"Wait a moment, Octavius."

"Now it's coming!" he thought and faced her again; he was bracing himself mentally to meet
the announcement.

"Did you see the junk man at The Corners to-day about those shingle nails?"

In the second of hesitation before replying, he had time inwardly to curse her. She was always
letting him down in this way. It was a trick of hers when, to use his own expression, she had
"something up her sleeve."

"Yes; but he won't take them off our hands."

"Why not?" She spoke sharply as was her way when she suspected any thwarting of her will or desire.

"He says he won't give you your price for they ain't worth it. They ain't particular good for
old iron anyway; most on 'em's rusty and crooked. You know they've been on the old coach house
for good thirty years, and the Judge used to say--"

"What will he give?"

"A quarter of a cent a pound."

"How many pounds are there?"

"Fifty-two."

"Fifty-two--hm-m; he sha'n't have them. They're worth a half a cent a pound if they're worth
anything. You can store them in the workshop till somebody comes along that does want them,
and will pay." He turned again to leave her.

"Just a moment, Octavius." Once more he came back over the threshold.

"Were there any arrivals at The Greenbush to-night?"

"I judged so from the register."

"Did you happen to see a girl there?"

"I saw a child, a little girl, smallish and thin; a priest was with her."

"A priest?" Mrs. Champney looked nonplussed for a moment and put on her glasses to cover her
surprise. "Did you learn her name, the girl's?"

"It was in the register, Aileen Armagh, from an orphan asylum in New York."

"Then she's the one," she said in a musing tone but without the least expression of interest.
She removed her glasses. Octavius took a step backwards. "A moment more, Octavius. I may as
well speak of it now; I am only anticipating by a week or two, at the most, what, in any case,
I should have told you. While Mr. Van Ostend was here, he enlisted my sympathy in this girl
to such an extent that I decided to keep her for a few months on trial before making any permanent
arrangement in regard to her. I want to judge of her capability to assist Ann and Hannah in
the housework; Hannah is getting on in years. What do you think of her? How did she impress
you? Now that I have decided to give her a trial, you may speak freely. You know I am guided
many times by your judgment in such matters."

Octavius Buzzby could have ground his teeth in impotent rage at this speech which, to his accustomed
ears, rang false from beginning to end, yet was cloaked in terms intended to convey a compliment
to himself. But, instead, he smiled the equivocal smile with which many a speech of like tenor
had been greeted, and replied with marked earnestness:

"I wouldn't advise you, Mrs. Champney, to count on much assistance from a slip of a thing like
that. She's small, and don't look more 'n nine, and--"

"She's over twelve," Mrs. Champney spoke decidedly; "and a girl of twelve ought to be able
to help Ann and Hannah in some of their work."

"Well, I ain't no judge of children as there's never been any of late years at Champo." He
knew his speech was barbed. Mrs. Champney carefully adjusted her glasses to the thin bridge
of her straight white nose. "And if there had been, I shouldn't want to say what they could
do or what they couldn't at that age. Take Romanzo, now, he's old enough to work if you watch
him; and now he's here I don't deny but what you had the rights of it 'bout my needing an assistant. Miss
Nancy seed to that, kase I wuz one of ole Miss's best little darkies". The interviewer inquired
as to how so many ginger cakes could have been baked so easily, and he replied that "ole Marse"
had a big rock-oven down at the spring about like what they boil syrup cane juice in today.

The slaves on "Marse Jim's" place were allowed about four holidays a year, and a week at Christmas,
to frolic. The amusements were dancing ("the break-down"), banjo playing, and quill blowing.
Sometimes when the "patarol" was in a good humor, he would take about
twenty-five or thirty "Niggers" and go fishing at night.

This kind of fishing was mostly seining, and usually "they got plenty o' fish".


"A moment more, Octavius," she said blandly, for she knew he was longing to rid her of his
presence; "Mr. Emlie has been here this evening and drawn up the deeds conveying my north shore
property to the New York syndicate. Mr. Van Ostend has conducted all the negotiations at that
end, and I have agreed to the erection of the granite sheds on those particular sites and to
the extension of a railroad for the quarries around the head of the lake to The Corners. The
syndicate are to control all the quarry interests, and Mr. Van Ostend says in a few years they
will assume vast proportions, entailing an outlay of at least three millions. They say there
is to be a large electric plant at The Corners, for the mill company have sold them the entire
water power at the falls.--I hope Aurora is satisfied with what she has accomplished in so
short a time. Champney, I suppose, comes home next month?"

Octavius merely nodded, and withdrew in haste lest his indignation get the upper hand of his
discretion. It behooved him to be discreet at this juncture; he must not injure Aurora Googe's
cause, which he deemed as righteous a one as ever the sun shone upon, by any injudicious word
that might avow his partisanship.

Mrs. Champney smiled again when she saw his precipitous retreat. She had freighted every word
with ill will, and knew how to raise his silent resentment to the boiling point. She rose and
stepped quickly into the hall.

"Tavy," she called after him as he was closing the door into the back passage. He turned to
look at her; she stood in the full light of the hall-lamp. "Just a moment before you go. Did
you happen to hear who the priest is who came with the girl?"

"His name was in the ledger. The Colonel said he was a father--Father Honoré, I can't pronounce
it, from New York."

"Is he stopping at The Greenbush?"

"He's put up there for to-night anyway."

"I think I must see this priest; perhaps he can give me more detailed information about the
girl. That's all."

She went back into the library, closing the door after her. Octavius shut his; then, standing
there in the dimly lighted passageway, he relieved himself by doubling both fists and shaking
them vigorously at the panels of that same door, the while he simulated, first with one foot
then with the other, a lively kick against the baseboard, muttering between his set teeth:

"The devil if it's all, you devilly, divelly, screwy old--"

The door opened suddenly. Simultaneously with its opening Octavius had sufficient presence
of mind to blow out the light. He drew his breath short and fumbled in his pocket for matches.

"Why, Tavy, you here!" (How well she knew that the familiar name "Tavy" was the last turn of
the thumbscrew for this factotum of the Champneys! She never applied it unless she knew he
was thoroughly worsted in the game between them.) "I was coming to find you; I forgot to say
that you may go down to-morrow at nine and bring her up. I want to look her over."

She closed the door. Octavius, without stopping to relight the lamp, hurried up to his room
in the ell, fearful lest he be recalled a fifth time--a test of his powers of mental endurance
to which he dared not submit in his present perturbed state.

Mrs. Champney walked swiftly down the broad main hall, that ran through the house, to the door
opening on the north terrace whence there was an unobstructed view up the three miles' length
of Lake Mesantic to the Flamsted Hills; and just there, through a deep depression in their
midst, the Rothel, a rushing brook, makes its way to the calm waters at their gates. At this
point, where the hills separate like the opening sepals of a gigantic calyx, the rugged might
of Katahdin heaves head and shoulder into the blue.

The irregular margin of the lake is fringed with pines of magnificent growth. Here and there
the shores rise into cliffs, seamed at the top and inset on the face with slim white lady birches,
or jut far into the waters as rocky promontories sparsely wooded with fir and balsam spruce.

Mrs. Champney stepped out upon the terrace. Her accustomed eyes looked upon this incomparable,
native scene that was set in the full beauty of mid-summer's moonlight. She advanced to the
broad stone steps, that descend to the level of the lake, and, folding her arms, her hands
resting lightly upon them, stood immovable, looking northwards to the Flamsted Hills--looking,
but not seeing; for her thoughts were leaping upwards to The Gore and its undeveloped resources;
to Aurora Googe and the part she was playing in this transitional period of Flamsted's life;
to the future years of industrial development and, in consequence, her own increasing revenues
from the quarries. She had stipulated that evening that a clause, which would secure to her
the rights of a first stockholder, should be inserted in the articles of conveyance.

The income of eight thousand from the estate, as willed to her, had increased under her management,
aided by her ability to drive a sharp bargain and the penuriousness which, according to Octavius,
was capable of "making a cent squeal", to twelve thousand. The sale of her north shore lands
would increase it another five thousand. Within a few years, according to Mr. Van Ostend--and
she trusted him--her dividends from her stock would net her several thousands more. She was
calculating, as she stood there gazing northwards, unseeing, into the serene night and the
hill-peace that lay within it, how she could invest this increment for the coming years, and
casting about in her mathematically inclined mind for means to make the most of it in interest
per cent. She felt sure the future would show satisfactory results.--And after?

That did not appeal to her.

She unfolded her arms, and gathering her skirt in both hands went down the steps and took her
stand on the lowest. She was still looking northwards. Her skirt slipped from her left hand
which she raised half mechanically to let a single magnificent jewel, that guarded the plain
circlet of gold on her fourth finger, flash in the moonlight. She held it raised so for a moment,
watching the play of light from the facets. Suddenly she clinched her delicate fist spasmodically;
shook it forcibly upwards towards the supreme strength of those silent hills, which, in comparison
with the human three score and ten, may well be termed "everlasting", and, muttering fiercely
under her breath, "You shall never have a penny of it!", turned, went swiftly up the steps,
and entered the house.

III

Had the mistress of Champ-au-Haut stood on the terrace a few minutes longer, she might have
seen with those far-sighted eyes of hers a dark form passing quickly along the strip of highroad
that showed white between the last houses at The Bow. It was Father Honoré. He walked rapidly
along the highway that, skirting the base of the mountain, follows the large curve of the lake
shore. Rapid as was the pace, the quickened eyes were seeing all about, around, above. In passing
beneath a stretch of towering pines, he caught between their still indefinite foliage the gleam
of the lake waters. He stopped short for a full minute to pommel his resonant chest; to breathe
deep, deep breaths of the night balm. Then he proceeded on his way.

That way led northwards along the lake shore; it skirted the talus that had fallen from the
cliff which rose three hundred feet above him. He heard the sound of a rolling stone gathering
in velocity among the rubble. He halted in order to listen; to trace, if possible, its course.
The dull monotone of its rumbling rattle started a train of thought: perhaps his foot, treading
the highway lightly, had caused the sensitive earth to tremble just sufficiently to jar the
delicately poised stone and send it from its resting place! He went on. Thoughts not to be
uttered crowded to the forefront of consciousness as he neared the cleft in the Flamsted Hills,
whence the Rothel makes known to every wayfarer that it has come direct from the heart of The
Gore, and brought with it the secrets of its granite veins.

The road grew steeper; the man's pace did not slacken, but the straight back was bent at an
angle which showed the priest had been accustomed to mountain climbing. In the leafy half-light,
which is neither dawn nor twilight, but that reverential effulgence which is made by moonlight
sifting finely through midsummer foliage, the Rothel murmured over its rocky bed; once, when
in a deep pool its babble wholly ceased, an owl broke the silence with his "witti-hoo-hoo-hoo".

Still upwards he kept his way and his pace until he emerged into the full moonlight of the
heights. There he halted and looked about him. He was near the apex of The Gore. To the north,
above the foreground of the sea of hilltops, loomed Katahdin. At his right, a pond, some five
acres in extent, lay at the base of cliff-like rocks topped with a few primeval pines. Everywhere
there were barren sheep pastures alternating with acres of stunted fir and hemlock, and in
sheltered nooks, adjacent to these coverts, he could discern something which he judged to be
stone sheepfolds. Just below him, on the opposite side of the road and the Rothel, which was
crossed by a broad bridging of log and plank, stood a long low stone house, to the north of
which a double row of firs had been planted for a windbreak. Behind him, on a rise of ground
a few rods from the highway, was a large double house of brick with deep granite foundations
and white granite window caps. Two shafts of the same stone supported the ample white-painted
entrance porch. Ancestral elms over-leafed the roof on the southern side. One light shone from
an upper window. Beyond the elms, a rough road led still upwards to the heights behind the house.

The priest retraced his steps; turned into this road, for which the landlord of The Greenbush
had given him minute instructions, and followed its rough way for an eighth of a mile; then
a sudden turn around a shoulder of the hill--and the beginning of the famous Flamsted granite
quarries lay before him, gleaming, sparkling in the moonlight--a snow-white, glistening patch
on the barren hilltop. Near it were a few huts of turf and stone for the accommodation of the
quarrymen. This was all. But it was the scene, self-chosen, of this priest's future labors;
and while he looked upon it, thoughts unutterable crowded fast, too fast for the brain already
stimulated by the time and environment. He turned about; retraced his steps at the same rapid
pace; passed again up the highroad to the head of The Gore, then around it, across a barren
pasture, and climbed the cliff-like rock that was crowned by the ancient pines. He stood there
erect, his head thrown back, his forehead to the radiant heavens, his eyes fixed on the pale
twinklings of the seven stars in the northernmost constellation of the Bear--rapt, caught away
in spirit by the intensity of feeling engendered by the hour, the place. Then he knelt, bowing
his head on a lichened rock, and unto his Maker, and the Maker of that humanity he had elected
to serve, he consecrated himself anew.

Ten minutes afterwards, he was coming down The Gore on his way back to The Greenbush. He heard
the agitated ringing of a bell-wether; then the soft huddling rush of a flock of sheep somewhere
in the distance. A sheep dog barked sharply; a hound bayed in answer till the hills north of
The Gore gave back a multiple echo; but the Rothel kept its secrets, and with inarticulate
murmuring made haste to deposit them in the quiet lake waters.

IV

"But, mother--"

There was an intonation in the protest that hinted at some irritation. Champney Googe emptied
his pipe on the grass and knocked it clean against the porch rail before he continued.

"Won't it make a lot of talk? Of course, I can see your side of it; it's hospitable and neighborly
and all that, to give the priest his meals for a while, but,--" he hesitated, and his mother
answered his thought.

"A little talk more or less after all there has been about the quarry won't do any harm, and
I'm used to it." She spoke with some bitterness.

"It has stirred up a hornet's nest about your ears, that's a fact. How does Aunt Meda take
this latest move? Meat-axey as usual? I didn't see her when I went there yesterday; she's in
Hallsport for two days on business, so Tave says."

His mother smiled. "I haven't seen her since the sale was concluded, but I hear she has strengthened
the opposition in consequence. I get my information from Mrs. Caukins."

At the mention of that name Champney laughed out. "Good authority, mother. I must run over
and see her to-night. Well, we don't care, do we? I mean about the feeling. Mother, I just
wish you were a man for one minute."

"Why?"

"Because I'd like to go up to you, man fashion, grip your hand, slap you on the back, and shout
'By Jove, old man, you've made a deal that would turn the sunny side of Wall Street green with
envy!' How did you do it, mother? And without a lawyer! I'll bet Emlie is mad because he didn't
get a chance to put his finger in your pie."

"I was thinking of you, of your future, and how you have been used by Almeda Champney; and
that gave me the confidence, almost the push of a man--and I dealt with them as a man with
men; but I felt unsexed in doing it. I've wondered what they think of me."

"Think of you! I can tell you what one man thinks of you, and that's Mr. Van Ostend. I had
a note from him at the time of the sale asking me to come to his office, an affidavit was necessary,
and I found he had had eyes in his head for the most beautiful woman in the world--"

"Champney!"

"Fact; and, what's more, I got an invitation to his house on the strength of his recognition
of that fact. I dined with him there; his sister is a stunning girl."

"I'm glad such homes are open to you; it is your right and--it compensates."

"For what, mother?"

"Oh, a good many things. How do they live?"

"The Van Ostends?"

"Yes."

Champney Googe hugged his knees and rocked back and forth on the step before he answered. His
merry face seemed to lengthen in feature, to harden in line. His mother left her chair and
sewing to sit down on the step beside him. She looked up inquiringly.

"Just as I mean to live sometime, mother,"--his fresh young voice rang determined and almost
hard; his mother's eyes kindled;--"in a way that expresses Life--as you and I understand it,
and don't live it, mother; as you and I have conceived of it while up here among these sheep
pastures." He glanced inimically for a moment at the barren slopes above them. "I have you
to thank for making me comprehend the difference." He continued the rocking movement for a
while, his hands still clasping his knees. Then he went on:

"As for his home on the Avenue, there isn't its like in the city, and as a storehouse of the
best in art it hasn't its equal in the country; it's just perfect from picture gallery to billiard
room. As for adjuncts, there's a shooting box and a bona fide castle in the Scottish Highlands,
a cottage at Bar Harbor with the accessory of a steam yacht, and a racing stud on a Long Island
farm. As a financier he's great!"

He sat up straight, and freely used his fists, first on one knee then on the other, to emphasize
his words; "His right hand is on one great lever of interstate traffic, his left on the other
of foreign trade, and two continents obey his manipulations. His eye exacts trained efficiency
from thousands; his word is a world event; Wall Street is his automaton. Oh, the power of it
all! I can't wait to get out into the stream, mother! I'm only hugging the shore at present;
that's what has made me kick against this last year in college; it has been lost time, for
I want to get rich quick."

His mother laid her hand on his knee. "No, Champney, it's not lost time; it's one of your assets
as a gentleman."

He looked up at her, his blue eyes smiling into her dark ones.

"I can be a gentleman all right without that asset; you said father didn't go."

"No, but the man for whom you are named went, and he told me once a college education was a
'gentleman's asset.' That expression was his."

"Well, I don't see that the asset did him much good. It didn't seem to discount his liabilities
in other ways. Queer, how Uncle Louis went to seed--I mean, didn't amount to anything along
any business or professional line. Only last spring I met the father of a second-year man who
remembers Uncle Louis well, said he was a classmate of his. He told me he was banner man every
time and no end popular; the others didn't have a show with him." 

Here Charlie did some very special gesticulating to illustrate.

The Negroes were required to go to Church on Sunday. They called it "gwine to meetin'", often leaving
at sun up and walking ten or twelve miles to the meeting house, staying all day and late into
the night.

If "ole Marse" happened to be in a good humor on Sunday, he would
let the Darkies use the "waggins" and mules.

The little "Niggers" never went to meetin' as they were left at home to take care of the house
and "nuss" the babies. There were no Sunday Schools in those days. When the grown folks got back
late in the night, they often "had to do some tall knocking and banging to get in the house--'cause
the chillun were so dead asleep, and layin' all over the floor".

When asked if the slaves wouldn't be awfully tired and sleepy the next morning after they stayed up
so late, he replied that they were "sho tired" but they had better turn out at four o'clock
when ole Marse "blowed the horn!" They [TR: then?] he added with a chuckle, "the field was usually
strowed with Niggers asleep in the cotton rows when they knocked off for dinner".

"No, Miss, the Marster never give us no money (here he laughed), for we didn't need none. There
wasn't nothing to buy, and we had plenty to eat and wear".

"Yes, Mr. Jim and Miss Nancy believed in whuppin' and kep the raw hide hanging by the back
door, but none o' Mr. Jim's Niggers evah got beat till dey bled".

Charlie Tye recalls vividly when the Yankees passed through and graphically related the following
incident. "The Yankees passed through and caught "ole Marse" Jim and made him pull off his boots
and run bare-footed through a cane brake with half a bushel of potatoes
tied around his neck; then they made him put his boots back on and
carried him down to the mill and tied him to the water post.

They were getting ready to break his neck when one of Master's slaves, "ole Peter Smith", asked
them if they intended to kill "Marse Jim", and when they said "Yes",
Peter choked up and said, "Well, please, suh, let me die wid ole Marse!

Well, dem Yankees let ole Marse loose and left! Yes, Missy, dat's de truf 'case I've heered my daddy
tell it many's the time!"

Charlie is not working at all now as he is too old and is supported by the Griffin Relief Association.
For forty-five years he served as janitor in the various public schools of Griffin.

Aunt Georgia appeared to be quite feeble. She was not only willing, but eager to talk of her
experiences, and explained that her slow and rather indistinct articulation
is one of the several bad after effects of her recent stroke of paralysis.

"My

pappy was Blackstone Smith, and he b'longed to Marse Jeb Smith. My mammy was Nancy Chappell,
owned by Mistus Peggie Chappell.

"I stayed wid my mammy on Mistus Chappell's plantation in Oglethorpe County, near old Antioch
Church. W'en I was 'bout five or six years ole my mammy died. Den my pappy done come an' got
me, an' I was to stay wid 'im on Marster Smith's place. Dey was good to me dar, but I warn't satisfied,
an' I cried for Old Mistus.

"I'd jes' go 'roun' snifflin', an' not eatin' nuffin', an' one day w'en us was pickin' peaches,
Marster Smith tole my pappy he better take dat chile back to her old mistus, 'fo' she done git
sick fer sho'.

"Hit was de next day w'en dey ax me did I want to see Old Mistus an' I jes' cry an' say, 'yassum.'
Den Marster say: 'Blackstone, hitch a mule to dat wagon, an' take dat chile right back to her Old
Mistus.' I tell 'em I can walk, but dey made me ride in de wagon,
an' I sho' was glad I was goin' back home.

"I seed Old Mistus 'fo' I got dar, an' jumped out of de wagon an' run to 'er. W'en she seed
me, she jes' grabbed me, an' I thought she was a laughin', but when I seed dat she was cryin',
I tole 'er not to cry, dat I warn't goin' to leave 'er no mo'.

"Mistus sho' was good to me, but she was good to all 'er niggers,
an' dey all loved 'er.

Us allus had plenny of evvything, she made us wear plenny of good
warm clo'es, an' us wo'e flannel petticoats when hit was cole weather.
Chillun don't wear 'nuff clo'es dese days to keep 'em warm, an nuffin'
on deir legs. Hits a wonder dey doan' freeze.

"I diden' stay at de
quarters with de udder niggers. Mistus kep' me in de big 'ouse wid
'er, an' I slep' on a cotton mattress on de floor by de side of 'er
bed. She had a stick dat she used to punch me wid w'en she wannid
somepin' in de night, an' effen I was hard to wake, she sho' could
punch wid dat stick.

"Mistus diden' ever have us niggers whipped
'lessen it jes' had to be done. An' if us chilluns was bad, fussin'
an' fightin', Mistus would git 'er a stick, but us would jes' run
an' hide, an' Mistus would forgit all 'bout it in jes' a little w'ile.

"Marster
was dead, an' us had a overseer, but he was good to us jes' lak' Mistus
was. Hit was a big old plantation, wid lots of niggers. W'en de overseer
would try to larn de chilluns to plow an' dey diden' want to larn,
dey would jes' play 'roun'. The cows were entering
it and coming up to the milking shed. The lane led up from the low-lying lake meadows, knee
deep with timothy and clover, and was fenced on both sides from the apple orchards which arched
and overshadowed its entire length. The sturdy over-reaching boughs hung heavy with myriads
of green balls. Now and then one dropped noiselessly on the thick turf in the lane, and a noble
Holstein mother, ebony banded with ivory white, her swollen cream-colored bag and dark-blotched
teats flushed through and through by the delicate rose of a perfectly healthy skin, lowered
her meek head and, snuffing largely, caught sideways as she passed at the enticing green round.

At the end of this lane there swung into view a tall loose-jointed figure which the low strong
July sunshine threw into bold relief. It was Romanzo Caukins, one of the Colonel's numerous
family, a boy of sixteen who had been bound out recently to the mistress of Champ-au-Haut upon
agreement of bed, board, clothes, three terms of "schooling" yearly, and the addition of thirty
dollars to be paid annually to the Colonel.

The payment of this amount, by express stipulation, was to be made at the end of each year
until Romanzo should come into his majority. By this arrangement, Mrs. Champney assured to
herself the interest on the aforesaid thirty dollars, and congratulated herself on the fact
that such increment might be credited to Milton Caukins as a minus quantity.

Champney leaped the bars and went down the lane to meet him.

"Hello, Roman, how are you?"

The boy's honest blue eyes, that seemed always to be looking forward in a chronic state of
expectancy for the unexpected, beamed with goodness and goodwill. He wiped his hands on his
overalls and clasped Champney's.

"Hullo, Champ, when'd you come?"

"Only yesterday. I didn't see you about when I was here in the afternoon. How do you like your
job?"

The youth made an uncouth but expressive sign towards the milk shed. "Sh--Tave'll hear you.
He and I ain't been just on good terms lately; but 'tain't my fault," he added doggedly.

At that moment a clear childish voice called from somewhere below the lane:

"Romanzo--Romanzo!"

The boy started guiltily. "I've got to go, Champ; she wants me."

Champney seized him with a strong hand by the suspenders. "Here, hold on! Who, you gump?"

"The girl--le' me go." But Champney gripped him fast.

"No, you don't, Roman; let her yell."

"Ro--man--zo-o-o-o!" The range of this peremptory call was two octaves at least.

"By gum--she's up to something, and Tave won't stand any more fooling--le' me go!" He writhed
in the strong grasp.

"I won't either. I haven't been half-back on our team for nothing; so stand still." And Romanzo
stood still, perforce.

Another minute and Aileen came running up the lane. She was wearing the same heavy shoes, the
same dark blue cotton dress, half covered now with a gingham apron--Mrs. Champney had not deemed
it expedient to furnish a wardrobe until the probation period should have decided her for or
against keeping the child. She was bareheaded, her face flushed with the heat and her violent
exercise. She stopped short at a little distance from them so soon as she saw that Romanzo
was not alone. She tossed back her braid and stamped her foot to emphasize her words:

"Why didn't yer come, Romanzo Caukins, when I cried ter yer!"

"'Coz I couldn't; he wouldn't let me." He spoke anxiously, making signs towards the shed. But
Aileen ignored them; ignored, also, the fact that any one was present besides her slave.

Champney answered for himself. He promptly bared his head and advanced to shake hands; but
Aileen jerked hers behind her.

"I'm Mr. Champney Googe, at your service. Who are you?"

The little girl was sizing him up before she accepted the advance; Champney could tell by the
"East-side" look with which she favored him.

"I'm Miss Aileen Armagh, and don't yer forget it!--at your service." She mimicked him so perfectly
that Champney chuckled and Romanzo doubled up in silent glee.

"I sha'n't be apt to, thank you. Come, let's shake hands, Miss Aileen Armagh-and-don't-yer-forget-it,
for we've got to be friends if you're to stay here with my aunt." He held out both hands. But
the little girl kept her own obstinately behind her and backed away from him.

"I can't."

"Why not?"

"'Coz they're all stuck up with spruce gum and Octavius said nothing would take it off but
grease, and--" she turned suddenly upon Romanzo, blazing out upon him in her wrath--"I hollered
ter yer so's yer could get some for me from Hannah, and you was just dirt mean not to answer me."

"Champ wouldn't let me go," said Romanzo sulkily; "besides, I dassn't ask Hannah, not since
I used the harness cloth she gave to clean down Jim."

"Yer 'dassn't!' Fore I'd be a boy and say 'I dassn't!'" There was inexpressible scorn in her
voice. She turned to Champney, her eyes brimming with mischief and flashing a challenge:

"And yer dassn't shake hands with me 'coz mine are all stuck up, so now!"

Champney had not anticipated this pronunciamento, but he accepted the challenge on the instant.
"Dare not! You can't say that to me! Here, give me your hands." Again he held out his shapely
well-kept members, and Aileen with a merry laugh brought her grimy sticky little paws into
view and, without a word, laid them in Champney's palms. He held them close, purposely, that
they might adhere and provide him with some fun; then, breaking into his gay laugh he said:

"Clear out, Roman; Tave 'll be looking for the milk pails. As for you, Miss Aileen Armagh-and-don't-yer-forget-it,
you can't pull away from me now. So, come on, and we'll get Hannah to give us some lard and
then we'll go down to the boat house where it is cool and cleanup. Come on!"

Holding her by both hands he raced her down the long lane, through the vegetable garden, all
chassez, down the middle, swing your partner--Aileen wild with the fun--up the slate-laid kitchen
walk to the kitchen door. His own laughter and the child's, happy, merry, care-free, rang out
peal on peal till Ann and Hannah and Octavius paused in their work to listen, and wished that
such music might have been heard often during their long years of faithful service in childless
Champ-au-Haut.

"I hear you are acquainted with some of the nobility, marchionesses and so forth," said Champney;
the two were sitting in the shadow of the boat house cleaning their fingers with the lard Hannah
had provided. "Where did you make their acquaintance?"

Aileen paused in the act of sliding her greasy hands rapidly over and over in each other, an
occupation which afforded her unmixed delight, to look up at him in amazement. "How did yer
know anything 'bout her?"

"Oh, I heard."

"Did Romanzo Caukins tell yer?" she demanded, as usual on the defensive.

"No, oh no; it was only hearsay. Do tell me about her. We don't have any round here."

Aileen giggled and resumed the rapid rotary motion of her still unwashed hands. "If I tell
yer 'bout her, yer'll tell her I told yer. P'raps sometime, if yer ever go to New York, yer
might see her; and she wouldn't like it."

"How do you know but what I have seen her? I've just come from there."

Aileen looked her surprise again. "That's queer, for I've just landed from New York meself."

"So I understood; does the marchioness live there too?"

She shook her head. "I ain't going to tell yer; but I'll tell yer 'bout some others I know."

"That live in New York?"

"Wot yer giving me?" She laughed merrily; "they live where the Dagos live, in Italy, yer know,
and--"

"Italy? What are they doing over there?"

"--And--just yer wait till I'll tell yer--they live on an island in a be-ee-u-tiful lake, like
this;" she looked approvingly at the liquid mirror that reflected in its rippleless depths
the mountain shadow and sunset gold; "and they live in great marble houses, palaces, yer know,
and flower gardens, and wear nothing but silks and velvet and pearls, ropes,--yer mind?--ropes
of 'em; and the lords and ladies have concerts, yer know, better 'n in the thayertre--"

"What do you know about the theatre?" Champney was genuinely surprised; "I thought you came
from an orphan asylum."

"Yer did, did yer!" There was scorn in her voice. "Wot do I know 'bout the thayertre?--Oh,
but yer green!" She broke into another merry laugh which, together with the patronage of her
words and certain unsavory memories of his own, nettled Champney more than he would have cared
to acknowledge.

"Better 'n the thayertre," she repeated emphatically; "and the lords serenade the ladies--Do
yer know wot a serenade is?" She interrupted herself to ask the question with a strong doubt
in the interrogation.

"I've heard of 'em," said Champney meekly; "but I don't think I've ever seen one."

"I'll tell yer 'bout 'em. The lords have guitars and go out in the moonlight and stand under
the ladies' windys and play, and the ladies make believe they haven't heard; then they look
up all round at the moon and sigh awful,--" she sighed in sympathy,--"and then the lords begin
to sing and tell 'em they love 'em and can't live without a--a token. I'll bet yer don't know
wot that is?"

"No, of course I don't; I'm not a lord, and I don't live in Italy."

"Well, I'll tell yer." Her tone was one of relenting indulgence for his ignorance. "Sometimes
it's a bow that they make out of the ribbon their dresses is trimmed with, and sometimes it's
a flower, a rose, yer know; and the lord sings again--can yer sing?"

Her companion repressed a smile. "I can manage a tune or two at a pinch."

"And the lady comes out on the balcony and leans over--like this, yer know;" she jumped up
and leaned over the rail of the float, keeping her hands well in front of her to save her apron;
"and she listens and keeps looking, and when he sings he's going to die because he loves her
so, she throws the token down to him to let him know he mustn't die 'coz she loves him too;
and he catches it, the rose, yer know, and smells it and then he kisses it and squeezes it
against his heart--" she forgot her greasy hands in the rapture of this imaginative flight,
and pressed them theatrically over her gingham apron beneath which her own little organ was
pulsing quick with the excitement of this telling moment; "--and then the moon shines just
as bright as silver and--and she marries him."

She drew a deep breath. During the recital she had lost herself in the personating of the favorite
characters from her one novel. While she stood there looking out on the lake and the Flamsted
Hills with eyes that were still seeing the gardens and marble terraces of Isola Bella, Champney
Googe had time to fix that picture on his mental retina and, recalling it in after years, knew
that the impression was "more lasting than bronze."

She came rather suddenly to herself when she grew aware of her larded hands pressed against
her clean apron.

"Oh, gracious, but I'll catch it!" she exclaimed ruefully. "Wot'll I do now? She said I'd got
to keep it clean till she got back, and she'll fire me and--and I want to stay awful; it's
just like the story, yer know." She raised her gray eyes appealingly to his, and he saw at
once that her childish fear was real. He comforted her.

"I'll tell you what: we'll go back to Hannah and she'll fix it for you; and if it's spoiled
I'll go down and get some like it in the village and my mother will make you a new one. So,
cheer up, Miss Aileen Armagh and-don't-yer-forget-it! And to-morrow evening, if the moon is
out, we'll have a serenade all by ourselves; what do you say to that?"

"D' yer mane it?" she demanded, half breathless in her earnestness.

He nodded.

Aileen clapped her hands and began to dance; then she stopped suddenly to say: "I ain't going
to dance for yer now; but I will sometime," she added graciously. "I've got to go now and help
Ann. What time are yer coming for the serenade?"

"I'll be here about eight; the moon will be out by then and we must have a moon."

She started away on the run, beckoning to him with her unwashed hands: "Come on, then, till
I show yer my windy. It's the little one over the dining-room. There ain't a balcony, but--see
there! there's the top of the bay windy and I can lean out--why didn't yer tell me yer could
play the guitar?"

"Because I can't."

"A harp, belike?"

"No; guess again."

"Yer no good;--but yer'll come?"

"Shurre; an' more be token it's at eight 'o the clock Oi'll be under yer windy." He gave the
accent with such Celtic gusto that the little girl was captivated.

"Ain't you a corker!" she said admiringly and, waving her hand again to him, ran to the house.
Champney followed more slowly to lay the case before Ann and Hannah.

On his way homeward he found himself wondering if he had ever seen the child before. As she
leaned on the rail and looked out over the lake, a certain grace of attitude, which the coarse
clothing failed to conceal, the rapt expression in the eyes, the timbre of her voice, all awakened
a dim certainty that he had seen her before at some time and place distinctly unusual; but
where? He turned the search-light of concentrated thought upon his comings and goings and doings
during the last year and more. Where had he seen just such a child?

He looked up from the roadway, on which his eyes had been fixed while his absent thought was
making back tracks over the last twelve months, and saw before him the high pastures of The
Gore. In the long afterglow of the July sunset they enamelled the barren heights with a rich,
yellowish green. In a flash it came to him: "The green hill far away without a city wall";
the child singing on the vaudeville stage; the hush in the audience. He smiled to himself.
He was experiencing that satisfaction which is common to all who have run down the quarry of
a long-hunted recollection.

"She's the very one," he said to himself; "I wonder if Aunt Meda knows."

VI

That which proves momentous in our lives is rarely anticipated, seldom calculated. Its factors
are for the most part unknown quantities; if not prime in themselves they are, at least, prime
to each other. It cannot be measured in terms of time, for often it lies between two infinities.
But the momentous decision, event, action, which reacts upon the life of a man or woman and
influences that life so long as it is lived here on earth, is on the surface sufficiently finite
for us to say: It was on such a day I made my decision; to such and such an event I can look
back as the cause of all that has followed. The How thereof remains traceable to our purblind
eyes for a month, a term of years, one generation, possibly two; the Where and When can generally
be defined; but the Why we ask blindly, and are rarely answered satisfactorily.

Had young Googe been told, while he was walking homewards up The Gore, that his life line,
like the antenna of the wireless, was even then the recipient and transmitter of multiple influences
that had been, as it were, latent in the storage batteries of a generation; that what he was
to be in the future was at this very hour in germ for development, he would have scouted the
idea. His young self-sufficiency would have laughed the teller to scorn. He would have maintained
as a man his mastership of his fate and fortunes, and whistled as carelessly as he whistled
now for the puppy, an Irish terrier which he had brought home with him, for training, to come
and meet him.

And the puppy, whose name was Ragamuffin and called Rag for short, came duly, unknowing, like
his young master, to meet his fate. He wriggled broad-side down the walk as a puppy will in
his first joy till, overpowered by his emotions, he rolled over on his back at Champney's feet,
the fringes of his four legs waving madly in air.

"Champney, I'm waiting for you." It was his mother calling from the door. He ran in through
the kitchen, and hurried to make himself presentable for the table and their guest whom he
saw on the front porch.

As he entered the dining-room, his mother introduced him: "Father Honoré, my son, Champney."

The two men shook hands, and Mrs. Googe took her seat. The priest bowed his head momentarily
to make the sign of the cross. Champney Googe shot one keen, amazed look in his direction.
When that head was lifted Champney "opened fire," so he termed it to himself.

"I think I've seen you before, sir." It was hard for him to give the title "Father." "I got
in your way, didn't I, at the theatre one evening over a year ago?"

His mother looked at him in amazement and something of anxiety. Was her son in his prejudice
forgetting himself?

"Indeed, I think it was the other way round, I was in your way, for I remember thinking when
you ran up against me 'that young fellow has been half-back on a football team.'"

Champney laughed. There was no withstanding this man's voice and the veiled humor of his introductory
remarks.

"Did I hit hard? I didn't think for a moment that you would recognize me; but I knew you as
soon as mother introduced us. I see by your face, mother, that you need enlightening. It was
only that I met Father Honoré"--he brought that out with no hesitation--"at the entrance to
one of the New York theatres over a year ago, and in the crowd nearly ran him down. No wonder,
sir, you sized me up by the pressure as a football fiend. That's rich!" His merry laugh reassured
his mother; she turned to Father Honoré.

"I don't know whether all my son's acquaintances are made at the theatre or not, but it is
a coincidence that the other day he happened to mention the fact that the first time he saw
Mr. Van Ostend he saw him there."

"It's my strong impression, Mrs. Googe, that Mr. Googe saw us both at the same place, at the
same time. Mr. Van Ostend spoke to me of your son just a few days before I left New York."

"Did he?" Champney's eager blue eyes sought the priest's. "Do you know him well?"

"As we all know him through his place in the world of affairs. Personally I have met him only
a few times. You may know, perhaps, that he was instrumental in placing little Aileen Armagh,
the orphan child,--you know whom I mean?--at Mrs. Champney's, your aunt, Mrs. Googe tells me."

"I was just going to ask you if you would be willing to tell us something about her," said
Mrs. Googe. "I've not seen her, but from all I hear she is a most unusual child, most interesting--"

"Interesting, mother!" Champney interrupted her rather explosively; "she's unique, the only
and ever Aileen Armagh." He turned again to Father Honoré. "Do tell us about her; I've been
so blockheaded I couldn't put two and two together, but I'm beginning to see daylight at last.
I made her acquaintance this afternoon. That's why I was a little late, mother."

How we tell, even the best of us, with reserves! Father Honoré told of his interest being roused,
as well as his suspicions, by the wording of the poster, and of his determination to see for
himself to what extent the child was being exploited. But of the thought-lever, the "Little
Trout", that raised that interest, he made no mention; nor, indeed, was it necessary.

"You see there is a class of foreigners on the East side that receive commissions for exploiting
precocious children on the stage; they are very clever in evading the law. The children themselves
are helpless. I had looked up a good many cases before this because it was in my line of work,
and in this particular one I found that the child had been orphaned in Ireland almost from
her birth; that an aunt, without relatives, had emigrated with her only a few months before
I saw her on the stage, and the two had lived in an east side tenement with an old Italian.
The child's aunt, a young woman about twenty-eight, developed quick consumption during the
winter and died in the care of the Italian, Nonna Lisa they call her. This woman cared for
the little girl, and began to take her out with her early in March on the avenues and streets
of the upper west side. The old woman is an itinerant musician and plays the guitar with real
feeling--I've heard her--and, by the way, makes a decent little living of her own. She found
that Aileen had a good voice and could sing several Irish songs. She learned the accompaniments,
and the two led, so far as I can discover, a delightful life of vagabondage for several weeks.
It seems the old Italian has a grandson, Luigi, who sings in vaudeville with a travelling troop.
He was in the west and south during the entire time that Aileen was with his grandmother; and
through her letters he learned of the little girl's voice. He spoke of this to his manager,
and he communicated with the manager of a Broadway vaudeville--they are both in the vaudeville
trust--and asked him to engage her, and retain her for the troop when they should start on
their annual autumn tour. But Nonna Lisa was shrewd.--It's wonderful, Mrs. Googe, how quickly
they develop the sixth sense of cautious speculation after landing! She made a contract for
six weeks only, hoping to raise her price in the autumn. So I found that the child was not
being exploited, except legitimately, by the old Italian who was caring for her and guarding
her from all contamination. But, of course, that could not go on, and I had the little girl
placed in the orphan asylum on ----nd Street--" He interrupted himself to say half apologetically:

"I am prolix, I fear, but I am hoping you will be personally interested in this child whose
future life will, I trust, be spent here far away from the metropolitan snares. I am sure she
is worth your interest."

"I know she is," said Champney emphatically; "and the more we know of her the better. You'll
laugh at my experience when you have heard it; but first let us have the whole of yours."

"You know, of course, where Mr. Van Ostend lives?" Champney nodded. "Did you happen to notice
the orphan asylum just opposite on ----nd Street?"

"No; I don't recall any building of that sort."

He smiled. "Probably not; that is not in your line and we men are apt to see only what is in
the line of our working vision. It seems that Mr. Van Ostend has a little girl--"

"I know, that's the Alice I told you of, mother; did you see her when she was here last month?"

"No; I only met Mr. Van Ostend on business. You were saying--?" She addressed Father Honoré.

"His little daughter told him so much about two orphan children, with whom she had managed
to have a kind of across-street-and-window acquaintance, that he proposed to her to have the
children over for Christmas luncheon. The moment he saw Aileen, he recognized in her the child
on the vaudeville stage to whom he had given the flowers--You remember that incident?"

"Don't I though!"

"--Because she had sung his wife's favorite hymn. He was thoroughly interested in the child
after seeing her, so to say, at close range, and took the first opportunity to speak with the
Sister Superior in regard to finding for her a suitable and permanent home. The Sister Superior
referred him to me. As you know, he came to Flamsted recently with this same little daughter;
and the child talked so much and told so many amusing things about Aileen to Mrs. Champney,
that Mr. Van Ostend saw at once this was an opportunity to further his plans, although he confided
to me his surprise that his cousin, Mrs. Champney, should be willing to have so immature a
child, in her house. Directly on getting home, he telephoned to me that he had found a home
for her with a relation of his in Flamsted. You may judge of my surprise and pleasure, for
I had received the appointment to this place and the work among the quarrymen only a month
before. This is how the little girl happened to come up with me. I hear she is making friends."

"She can't help making them, and a good deal more besides; for Romanzo Caukins, our neighbor's
son, and Octavius Buzzby, my aunt's chargé d'affaires, are at the present time her abject slaves,"
said Champney, rising from the table at a signal from his mother. "Let's go out on the porch,
and I'll tell you of the fun I've had with her--poor Roman!" He shook his head and chuckled.

He stepped into the living-room as he passed through the hall and reached for his pipe in a
rack above the mantel. "Do you smoke," he asked half-hesitatingly, but with an excess of courtesy
in his voice as if he were apologizing for asking such a question.

"Sometimes; a pipe, if you please." He held out his hand; Champney handed him a sweetbrier
and a tobacco pouch. "You permit, Madam?" He spoke with old world courtesy. Aurora Googe smiled
permission. She saw with satisfaction her son's puzzled look of inquiry as he noted the connoisseurship
with which Father Honoré handled his after-supper tools.

Mrs. Milton Caukins, their neighbor in the stone house across the bridge over the Rothel, stood
for several minutes at her back door listening to Champney's continued arpeggios and wondered
whose was the deep hearty laugh that answered them. In telling his afternoon's experience Champney,
also, had his reserves: of the coming serenade he said never a word to the priest.

"He's O.K. and a man, mother," was his comment on their guest, as he bade her good night. Aurora
Googe answered him with a smile that betokened content, but she was wise enough not to commit
herself in words. Afterwards she sat long in her room, planning for her son's future. The twenty
thousand she had just received for the undeveloped quarry lands should serve to start him well
in life.

VII

On the following day, mother and son constituted themselves a committee of ways and means as
to the best investment of the money in furtherance of Champney's interests. Her ambition was
gratified in that she saw him anxious to take his place in the world of affairs, to "get on"
and, as he said, make his mark early in the world of finance.

The fact that, during his college course, he had spent the five thousand received from the
sale of the first quarry, plus the interest on the same without accounting for a penny of it,
seemed to his mother perfectly legitimate; for she had sold the land and laid by the amount
paid for it in order to put her son through college. Since he was twelve years old she had
brought him up in the knowledge that it was to be his for that purpose. From the time he came,
through her generosity, into possession of the property, she always replied to those who had
the courage to criticise her course in placing so large a sum at the disposal of a youth:

"My son is a man. I realize I can suggest, but not dictate; moreover I have no desire to."

She drew the line there, and rarely had any one dared to expostulate further with her. When
they ventured it, Aurora Googe turned upon them those dark eyes, in which at such times there
burned a seemingly unquenchable light of self-feeding defiance, and gave them to understand,
with a repelling dignity of manner that bordered hard on haughtiness, that what she and her
son might or might not do was no one's concern but their own. This self-evident truth, when
it struck home to her well-wishers, made her no friends. Nor did she regret this. She had dwelt,
as it were, apart, since her marriage and early widowhood--her husband had died seven months
before Champney was born--on the old Googe estate at The Gore. But she was a good neighbor,
as Mrs. Caukins could testify; paid her taxes promptly, and minded her flocks, the source of
her limited income, until wool-raising in New England became unprofitable. An opportunity was
presented when her boy was ten years old to sell a portion of the barren sheep pastures for
the first quarry. She counted herself fortunate in being able thus to provide for Champney's
four college years.

In all the village, there were only three men, whom Aurora Googe named friend. These men, with
the intimacy born of New England's community of interest, called her to her face by her Christian
name; they were Octavius Buzzby, old Joel Quimber, and Colonel Caukins. There had been one
other, Louis Champney, who during his lifetime promised to do much for her boy when he should
have come of age; but as the promises were never committed to black and white, they were, after
his death, as though they had never been.

"If only Aunt Meda would fork over some of hers!" Champney exclaimed with irritation. They
were sitting on the porch after tea. "All I want is a seat in the Stock Exchange--and the chance
to start in. I believe if I had the money Mr. Van Ostend would help me to that."

"You didn't say anything to him about your plans, did you?"

"Well, no; not exactly. But it isn't every fellow gets a chance to dine at such a man's table,
and I thought the opportunity was too good to be wasted entirely. I let him know in a quiet
way that I, like every other fellow, was looking for a job." Champney laughed aloud at the
shocked look on his mother's face. He knew her independence of thought and action; it brooked
no catering for favors.

"You see, mother, men have to do it, or go under. It's about one chance in ten thousand that
a man gets what he wants, and it's downright criminal to throw away a good opportunity to get
your foot on a round. Run the scaling ladder up or down, it doesn't much matter--there are
hundreds of applicants for every round; and only one man can stand on each--and climb, as I
mean to. You don't get this point of view up here, mother, but you will when you see the development
of these great interests. Then it will be each for himself and the devil gets the hindermost.
Shouldn't I take every legitimate means to forge ahead? You heard what the priest said about
Mr. Van Ostend's mentioning me to him? Let me tell you such men don't waste one breath in mentioning
anything that does not mean a big interest per cent, not one breath. They can't, literally,
afford to; and I'm hoping, only hoping, you know--", he looked up at her from his favorite
seat on the lowest step of the front porch with a keen hard expectancy in his eyes that belied
his words, "--that what he said to Father Honoré means something definite. Anyhow, we'll wait
a while till we see how the syndicate takes hold of this quarry business before we decide on
anything, won't we, mother?"

"I'm willing to wait as long as you like if you will only promise me one thing."

"What's that?" He rose and faced her; she saw that he was slightly on the defensive.

"That you will never, never, in any circumstances, apply to your Aunt Almeda for funds, no
matter how much you may want them. I couldn't bear that!"

She spoke passionately in earnest, with such depth of feeling that she did not realize her
son was not giving her the promise when he said abruptly, the somewhat hard blue eyes looking
straight into hers:

"Mother, why are you so hard on Aunt Meda? She's a stingy old screw, I know, and led Uncle
Louis round by the nose, so everybody says; but why are you so down on her?"

He was insistent, and his insistence was the one trait in his character which his mother had
found hardest to deal with from his babyhood; from it, however, if it should develop happily
into perseverance, she hoped the most. This trait he inherited from his father, Warren Googe,
but in the latter it had deteriorated into obstinacy. She always feared for her self-control
when she met it in her son, and just now she was under the influence of a powerful emotion
that helped her to lose it.

"Because," she made answer, again passionately but the earnestness had given place to anger,
"I am a woman and have borne from her what no woman bears and forgets, or forgives! Are you
any the wiser now?" she demanded. "It is all that I shall tell you; so don't insist."

The two continued to look into each other's eyes, and something, it could hardly be called
inimical, rather an aloofness from the tie of blood, was visible to each in the other's steadfast
gaze. Aurora Googe shivered. Her eyes fell before the younger ones.

"Don't Champney! Don't let's get upon this subject again; I can't bear it."

"But, mother," he protested, "you mentioned it first."

"It was what you said about Almeda's furnishing you with money that started it. Don't say anything
more about it; only promise me, won't you?"

She raised her eyes again to his, but this time in appeal. At forty-one Aurora Googe was still
a very beautiful woman, and her appeal, made gently as if in apology for her former vehemence,
rendered that beauty potent with her son's manhood.

"Let me think it over, mother, before I promise." He answered her as gently. "It's a hard thing
to exact of a man, and I don't hold much with promises. What did Uncle Louis' amount to?"

The blood surged into his mother's face, and tears, rare ones, for she was not a weak woman
neither was she a sentimental one, filled her eyes. Her son came up the steps and kissed her.
They were seldom demonstrative to this extent save in his home-comings and leave-takings. He
changed the subject abruptly.

"I'm going down to the village now. You know I have the serenade on my program, at eight. Afterwards
I'll run down to The Greenbush for the mail and to see my old cronies. I haven't had a chance
yet." He began to whistle for the puppy, but cut himself short, laughing. "I was going to take
Rag, but he won't fit in with the serenade. Keep him tied up while I'm gone, please. Anything
you want from the village, mother?"

"No, not to-night."

"Don't sit up for me; I may be late. Joel is long-winded and the Colonel is booming The Gore
for all it is worth and more too; I want to hear the fun. Good night."

VIII

The afterglow of sunset was long. The dilated moon, rising from the waters of the Bay, shone
pale at first; but as it climbed the shoulder of the mountain Wave-of-the-Sea and its light
fell upon the farther margin of the lake, its clear disk was pure argent.

Champney looked his approval. It was the kind of night he had been hoping for. He walked leisurely
down the road from The Gore for the night was warm. It was already past eight, but he lingered,
purposely, a few minutes longer on the lake shore until the moonlight should widen on the waters.
Then he went on to the grounds.

He entered by the lane and crossed the lawn to an arching rose-laden trellis near the bay window;
beneath it was a wooden bench. He looked up at the window. The blinds were closed. So far as
he could see there was no light in all the great house. Behind the rose trellis was a group
of stately Norway spruce; he could see the sheen of their foliage in the moonlight. He took
his banjo out of its case and sat down on the bench, smiling to himself, for he was thoroughly
enjoying, with that enjoyment of youth, health, and vitality which belongs to twenty-one, this
rustic adventure. He touched the strings lightly with preliminary thrumming. It was a toss-up
between "Annie Rooney" and "Oft in the stilly night." He decided for the latter. Raising his
eyes to the closed blinds, behind which he knew the witch was hiding, he began the accompaniment.
The soft thrum-thrum, vibrating through the melody, found an echo in the whirring wings of
all that ephemeral insect life which is abroad on such a night. The prelude was almost at an
end when he saw the blinds begin to separate. Champney continued to gaze steadily upwards.
A thin bare arm was thrust forth; the blinds opened wide; in the dark window space he saw Aileen,
listening intently and gazing fixedly at the moon as if its every beam were dropping liquid music.

He began to sing. His voice was clear, fine, and high, a useful first tenor for two winters
in the Glee Club. When he finished Aileen deigned to look down upon him, but she made no motion
of recognition. He rose and took his stand directly beneath the window.

"I say, Miss Aileen Armagh-and-don't-yer-forget-it, that isn't playing fair! Where's my token?"

There was a giggle for answer; then, leaning as far out as she dared, both hands stemmed on
the window ledge, the child began to sing. Full, free, joyously light-hearted, she sent forth
the rollicking Irish melody and the merry sentiment that was strung upon it; evidently it had
been adapted to her, for the words had suffered a slight change:

    "Och! laughin' roses are my lips,
    Forget-me-nots my ee,
    It's many a lad they're drivin' mad;
    Shall they not so wi' ye?
    Heigho! the morning dew!
    Heigho! the rose and rue!
    Follow me, my bonny lad,
    For I'll not follow you.

    "Wi' heart in mout', in hope and doubt,
    My lovers come and go:
    My smiles receive, my smiles deceive;
    Shall they not serve you so?

It was a delight to hear her.

"There now, I'll give yer my token. Hold out yer hands!"

Champney, hugging his banjo under one arm, made a cup of his hands. Carefully measuring the
distance, she dropped one rosebud into them.

"Put it on yer heart now," was the next command from above. He obeyed with exaggerated gesture,
to the great delight of the serenadee. "And yer goin' to keep it?"

"Forever and a day." Champney made this assertion with a hyper-sentimental inflection of voice,
and, lifting the flower to his nose, drew in his breath--

"Confound you, you little fiend--" he sneezed rather than spoke.

The sneeze was answered by a peal of laughter from above and a fifteen-year-old's cracked "Haw-haw-haw"
from the region of the Norway spruces. Every succeeding sneeze met with a like response--roars
of laughter on the one hand and peal upon peal on the other. Even the kitchen door began to
give signs of life, for Hannah and Ann made their appearance.

The strong white pepper, which Romanzo managed to procure from Hannah, had been cunningly secreted
by Aileen between the imbricate petals, and then tied, in a manner invisible at night, with
a fine thread of pink silk begged from Ann. It was now acting and re-acting on the lining of
the serenader's olfactory organ in a manner to threaten final decapitation. Champney was still
young enough to resent being made a subject of such practical joking by a little girl; but
he was also sufficiently wise to acknowledge to himself that he had been worsted and, in the
end, to put a good face on it. It is true he would have preferred that Romanzo Caukins had
not been witness to his defeat.

The sneezing and laughter gradually subsided. He sat down again on the bench and taking up
his banjo prepared, with somewhat elaborate effort, to put it into its case. He said nothing.

"Say!" came in a sobered voice from above; "are yer mad with me?"

Ignoring both question and questioner, he took out his handkerchief, wiped his face and forehead
and, returning it to his pocket, heaved a sigh of apparent exhaustion.

"I say, Mr. Champney Googe, are yer mad with me?"

To Champney's delight, he heard an added note of anxiety. He bowed his head lower over the
banjo case and in silence renewed his simulated struggle to slip that instrument into it.

"Champney! Are yer rale mad with me?" There was no mistaking the earnestness of this appeal.
He made no answer, but chuckled inwardly at the audacity of the address.

"Champ!" she stamped her foot to emphasize her demand; "if yer don't tell me yer ain't mad
with me, I'll lave yer for good and all--so now!"

"I don't know that I'm mad with you," he spoke at last in an aggrieved, a subdued tone; "I
simply didn't think you could play me such a mean trick when I was in earnest, dead earnest."

"Did yer mane it?"

"Why, of course I did! You don't suppose a man walks three miles in a hot night to serenade
a girl just to get an ounce of pepper in his nose by way of thanks, do you?"

"I thought yer didn't mane it; Romanzo said yer was laughing at me for telling yer 'bout the
lords and ladies a-making love with their guitars." The voice indicated some dejection of spirits.

"He did, did he! I'll settle with Romanzo later." He heard a soft brushing of branches in the
region of the Norway spruces and knew that the youth was in retreat. "And I'll settle it with
you, too, Miss Aileen Armagh-and-don't-you-forget-it, in a way that'll make you remember the
tag end of your name for one while!"

This threat evidently had its effect.

"Wot yer going to do?"

He heard her draw her breath sharply.

"Come down here and I'll tell you."

"I can't. She might catch me. She told me I'd got to stay in my room after eight, and she's
coming home ter-night. Wot yer going to do?"

Champney laughed outright. "Don't you wish you might know, Aileen Armagh!" He took his banjo
in one hand, lifted his cap with the other and, standing so, bareheaded in the moonlight, sang
with all the simulated passion and pathos of which he was capable one of the few love songs
that belong to the world, "Kathleen Mavoureen"; but he took pains to substitute "Aileen" for
"Kathleen." Even Ann and Hannah, listening from the kitchen porch, began to feel sentimentally
inclined when the clear voice rendered with tender pathos the last lines:

    "Oh! why art thou silent, thou voice of my heart?
    Oh! why art thou silent, Aileen Mavoureen?"

Without so much as another glance at the little figure in the window, he ran across the lawn
and up the lane to the highroad.

IX

On his way to The Greenbush he overtook Joel Quimber, and without warning linked his arm close
in the old man's. At the sudden contact Joel started.

"Uncle Jo, old chap, how are you? This seems like home to see you round."

"Lord bless me, Champ, how you come on a feller! Here, stan' still till I get a good look at
ye;--growed, growed out of all notion. Why, I hain't seen ye for good two year. You warn't
to home last summer?"

"Only for a week; I was off on a yachting cruise most of the time. Mother said you were up
on the Bay then at your grandniece's--pretty girl. I remember you had her down here one Christmas."

The old man made no definite answer, but cackled softly to himself: "Yachting cruise, eh? And
you remember a pretty girl, eh?" He nudged him with a sharpened elbow and whispered mysteriously:
"Devil of a feller, Champ! I've heerd tell, I've heerd tell--chip of the old block, eh?" He
nudged him knowingly again.

"Oh, we're all devils more or less, we men, Uncle Jo; now, honor bright, aren't we?"

"You've hit it, Champ; more or less--more or less. I heerd you was a-goin' it strong: primy
donny suppers an' ortermobillies--"

"Now, Uncle Jo, you know there's no use believing all you hear, but you can't plunge a country
raised boy into a whirlpool like New York for four years and not expect him to strike out and
swim with the rest. You've got to, Uncle Jo, or you're nobody. You'd go under."

"Like 'nough you would, Champ; I can't say, fer I hain't ben thar. Guess twixt you an' me an'
the post, I won't hev ter go thar sence Aurory's sold the land fer the quarries. I hear it
talked thet it'll bring half New York right inter old Flamsted; I dunno, I dunno--you 'member
'bout the new wine in the old bottles, Champ?--highflyers, emigrants, Dagos and Polacks--Come
ter think, Mis' Champney's got one on 'em now. Hev you seen her, Champ?"

Champney's hearty laugh rang out with no uncertain sound. "Seen her! I should say so. She's
worth any 'primy donny', as you call them, that ever drew a good silver dollar out of my pockets.
Oh, it's too good to keep! I must tell you; but you'll keep mum, Uncle Jo?"

"Mum's the word, ef yer say so, Champ." They turned from The Greenbush and arm in arm paced
slowly up the street again. From time to time, for the next ten minutes, Augustus Buzzby and
the Colonel in the tavern office heard from up street such unwonted sounds of hilarity and
so long continued, that Augustus looked apprehensively at the Colonel who was becoming visibly
uneasy lest he fail to place the joke.

When the two appeared at the office door they bore unmistakable signs of having enjoyed themselves
hugely. Augustus Buzzby gave them his warmest welcome and seated Uncle Joel in his deepest
office chair, providing him at the same time with a pipe and some cut leaf. The Colonel was
in his glory. With one arm thrown affectionately around young Googe's neck, he expatiated on
the joy of the community as a whole in again welcoming its own.

"Champney, my dear boy,--you still permit me the freedom of old friendship?--this town is already
looking to you as to its future deliverer; I may say, as to a Moses who will lead us into the
industrial Canaan which is even now, thanks to my friend, your honored mother, beckoning to
us with its promise of abundant plenty. Never, in my wildest dreams, my dear boy, have I thought
to see such a consummation of my long-cherished hopes."

It was always one of Champney's prime youthful joys to urge the Colonel, by judiciously applied
excitants, to a greater flowering of eloquence; so, now, as an inducement he wrung his neighbor's
hand and thanked him warmly for his timely recognition of the new Flamsted about to be.

"Now," he said, "the thing is for all of us to fall into line and forge ahead, Colonel. If
we don't, we'll be left behind; and in these times to lag is to take to the backwoods."

"Right you are, my dear fellow; deterioration can only set in when the members of a community,
like ours, fail to present a solid front to the disintegrating forces of a supine civilization
which--"

"At it again, Milton Caukins!" It was Mr. Wiggins who, entering the office, interrupted the
flow,--"dammed the torrent", he was wont to say. He extended a hand to young Googe. "Glad to
see you, Champney. I hear there is a prospect of your remaining with us. Quimber tells us he
heard something to the effect that a position might be offered you by the syndicate."

"It's the first I've heard of it. How did you hear, Uncle Jo?" He turned upon the old man with
a keen alertness which, taken in connection with the Colonel's oratory, was both disconcerting
and confusing.

"How'd I hear? Le' me see; Champ, what was we just talking 'bout up the street, eh?"

"Oh, never mind that now," he answered impatiently; "let's hear what you heard. I'm the interested
party just now." But the old man looked only the more disturbed and was not to be hurried.

"'Bout that little girl--" he began, but was unceremoniously cut short by Champney.

"Oh, damn the girl, just for once, Uncle Jo. What I want to know is, how you came to hear anything
about me in connection with the quarry syndicate."

The old man persisted: "I'm a-tryin' to get a-holt of that man's name that got her up here--"

"Van Ostend," Champney suggested; "is that the name you want?"

"That's him, Van Ostend; that's the one. He an' the rest was hevin' a meetin' right here in
this office 'fore they went to the train, an' I was settin' outside the winder an' heerd one
on 'em say: 'Thet Mis' Googe's a stunner; what's her son like, does any one know?' An' I heerd
Mr. Van Ostend say: 'She's very unusual; if her son has half her executive ability'--them's
his very words--'we might work him in with us. It would be good business policy to interest,
through him, the land itself in its own output, so to speak, besides being something of a courtesy
to Mis' Googe. I've met him twice.' Then they fell to discussin' the lay of The Gore and the
water power at The Corners."

"Bully for you, Uncle Jo!" Champney slapped the rounded shoulders with such appreciative heartiness
that the old man's pipe threatened to be shaken from between his toothless gums. "You have
heard the very thing I've been hoping for. Tave never let on that he knew anything about it."

"He didn't, only what I told him." Old Quimber cackled weakly. "I guess Tave's got his hands
too full at Champo to remember what's told him; what with the little girl an' Romanzo--no offence,
Colonel." He looked apologetically at the Colonel who waved his hand with an airiness that
disposed at once of the idea of any feeling on his part in regard to family revelations. "I
heerd tell thet the little girl hed turned his head an' Tave couldn't git nothin' in the way
of work out of him."

"In that case I must look into the matter." The Colonel spoke with stern gravity. "Both Mrs.
Caukins and I would deplore any undue influence that might be brought to bear upon any son
of ours at so critical a period of his career."

Mr. Wiggins laughed; but the laugh was only a disguised sneer. "Perhaps you'll come to your
senses, Colonel, when you've got an immigrant for a daughter-in-law. Own up, now, you didn't
think your 'competing industrial thousands' might be increased by some half-Irish grandchildren,
now did you?"

Champney listened for the Colonel's answer with a suspended hope that he might give Elmer Wiggins
"one," as he said to himself. He still owed the latter gentleman a grudge because in the past
he had been, as it were, the fountain head of all in his youthful misery in supplying ample
portions of the never-to-be-forgotten oil of the castor bean and dried senna leaves. He felt
at the present time, moreover, that he was inimical to his mother and her interests. And Milton
Caukins was his friend and hers, past, present, and future; of this he was sure.

The Colonel took time to light his cigar before replying; then, waving it towards the ceiling,
he said pleasantly:

"My young friend here, Champney, to whom we are looking to restore the pristine vigor of a
fast vanishing line of noble ancestors, is both a Googe and a Champney. His ancestors counted
themselves honored in making alliances with foreigners--immigrants to our all-welcoming shores;
'a rose', Mr. Wiggins, 'by any other name'; I need not quote." His chest swelled; he interrupted
himself to puff vigorously at his cigar before continuing: "My son, sir, is on the spindle
side of the house a Googe, and a Googe, sir, has the blood of the Champneys and the Lord knows
of how many noble immigrants" (the last word was emphasized by a fleeting glance of withering
scorn at the small-headed Wiggins) "in his veins which, fortunately, cannot be said of you,
sir. If, at any time in the distant future, my son should see fit to ally himself with a scion
of the noble and long-suffering Hibernian race, I assure you"--his voice was increasing in
dimensions--"both Mrs. Caukins and myself would feel honored, sir, yes, honored in the breach!"

After this wholly unexpected ending to his peroration, he lowered his feet from their accustomed
rest on the counter of the former bar and, ignoring Mr. Wiggins, remarked to Augustus that
it was time for the mail. Augustus, glad to welcome any diversion of the Colonel's and Mr.
Wiggins's asperities, said the train was on time and the mail would be there in a few minutes.

"Tave's gone down to meet Mis' Champney," he added turning to Champney. "She's been in Hallsport
for two days. I presume you ain't seen her."

"Not yet. If you can give me my mail first I can drive up to Champ-au-Haut with her to-night.
There's the mail-wagon."

"To be sure, to be sure, Champney; and you might take out Mis' Champney's; Tave can't leave
the hosses."

"All right." He went out on the veranda to see if the Champ-au-Haut carriage was in sight.
A moment later, when it drove up, he was at the door to open it.

"Here I am, Aunt Meda. Will this hold two and all those bundles?"

"Why, Champney, you here? Come in." She made room for him on the ample seat; he sprang in,
and bent to kiss her before sitting down beside her.

"Now, I call this luck. This is as good as a confessional, small and dark, and 'fess I've got
to, Aunt Meda, or there'll be trouble for somebody at Campo."

Had the space not been so "small and dark" he might have seen the face of the woman beside
him quiver painfully at the sound of his cheery young voice and, when he kissed her, flush
to her temples.

"What devilry now, Champney?"

"It's a girl, of course, Aunt Meda--your girl," he added laughing.

"So you've found her out, have you, you young rogue? Well, what do you think of her?"

"I think you'll have a whole vaudeville show at Champ-au-Haut for the rest of your days--and
gratis."

"I've been coming to that conclusion myself," said Mrs. Champney, smiling in turn at the recollection
of some of her experiences during the past three weeks. "She amuses me, and I've concluded
to keep her. I'm going to have her with me a good part of the time. I've seen enough since
she has been with me to convince me that my people will amount to nothing so long as she is
with them." There was an edge to her words the sharpness of which was felt by Octavius on the
front seat.

"I can't blame them; I couldn't. Why Tave here is threatened already with a quick decline--sheer
worry of mind, isn't it Tave?" Octavius nodded shortly; "And as for Romanzo there's no telling
where he will end; even Ann and Hannah are infected."

"What do you mean, Champney?" She was laughing now.

"Just wait till I run in and get the mail for us both, and I'll tell you; it's my confession."

He sprang out, ran up the steps and disappeared for a moment. He reappeared thrusting some
letters into his pocket. Evidently he had not looked at them. He handed the other letters and
papers to Octavius, and so soon as the carriage was on the way to The Bow he regaled his aunt
with his evening's experience under the bay window.

"Serves you right," was her only comment; but her laugh told him she enjoyed the episode. He
went into the house upon her invitation and sat with her till nearly eleven, giving an account
of himself--at least all the account he cared to give which was intrinsically different from
that which he gave his mother. Mrs. Champney was what he had once described to his mother as
"a worldly woman with the rind on," and when he was with her, he involuntarily showed that
side of his nature which was best calculated to make an impression on the "rind." He grew more
worldly himself, and she rejoiced in what she saw.

X

While walking homewards up The Gore, he was wondering why his mother had shown such strength
of feeling when he expressed the wish that his aunt would help him financially to further his
plans. He knew the two women never had but little intercourse; but with him it was different.
He was a man, the living representative of two families, and who had a better right than he
to some of his Aunt Meda's money? A right of blood, although on the Champney side distant and
collateral. He knew that the community as a whole, especially now that his mother had become
a factor in its new industrial life, was looking to him, as once they had looked to his Uncle
Louis, to "make good" with his inheritance of race. To this end his mother had equipped him
with his university training. Why shouldn't his aunt be willing to help him? She liked him,
that is, she liked to talk with him. Sometimes, it is true, it occurred to him that his room
was better than his company; this was especially noticeable in his young days when he was much
with his aunt's husband whom he called "Uncle Louis." Since his death he had never ceased to
visit her at Champ-au-Haut--too much was at stake, for he was the rightful heir to her property
at least, if not Louis Champney's. She, as well as his father, had inherited twenty thousand
from the estate in The Gore. His father, so he was told, had squandered his patrimony some
two years before his death. His aunt, on the contrary, had already doubled hers; and with skilful
manipulation forty thousand in these days might be quadrupled easily. It was wise, whatever
might happen, to keep on the right side of Aunt Meda; and as for giving that promise to his
mother he neither could nor would. His mind was made up on this point when he reached The Gore.
He told himself he dared not. Who could say what unmet necessity might handicap him at some
critical time?--this was his justification.

In the midst of his wonderings, he suddenly remembered the evening's mail. He took it out and
struck a match to look at the hand-writing. Among several letters from New York, he recognized
one as having Mr. Van Ostend's address on the reverse of the envelope. He tore it open; struck
another match and, the letter being type-written, hastily read it through with the aid of a
third and fourth pocket-lucifer; read it in a tumult of expectancy, and finished it with an
intense and irritating sense of disappointment. He vehemently voiced his vexation: "Oh, damn
it all!"

He did not take the trouble to return the letter to its cover, but kept flirting it in his
hand as he strode indignantly up the hill, his arms swinging like a young windmill's. When
he came in sight of the house, he looked up at his mother's bedroom window. Her light was still
burning; despite his admonition she was waiting for him as usual. He must tell her before he slept.

"Champney!" she called, when she heard him in the hall.

"Yes, mother; may I come up?"

"Of course." She opened wide her bedroom door and stood there, waiting for him, the lamp in
her hand. Her beauty was enhanced by the loose-flowing cotton wrapper of pale pink. Her dark
heavy hair was braided for the night and coiled again and again, crown fashion, on her head.

"Aunt Meda never could hold a candle to mother!" was Champney Googe's thought on entering.
The two sat down for the usual before-turning-in-chat.

He was so full of his subject that it overflowed at once in abrupt speech.

"Mother, I've had a letter from Mr. Van Ostend--"

"Oh, Champney!" There was the joy of anticipation in her voice.

"Now, mother, don't--don't expect anything," he pleaded, "for you'll be no end cut up over
the whole thing. Now, listen." He read the letter; the tone of his voice indicated both disgust
and indignation.

"Now, look at that!" He burst forth eruptively when he had finished. "Here we've been banking
on an offer for some position in the syndicate, at least, something that would help clear the
road to Wall Street where I should be able to strike out for myself without being dependent
on any one--I didn't mince matters that day of the dinner when I told him what I wanted, either!
And here I get an offer to go to Europe for five years and study banking systems and the Lord
knows what in London, Paris, and Berlin, and act as a sort of super in his branch offices.
Great Scott! Does he think a man is going to waste five years of his life in Europe at a time
when twenty-four hours here at home might make a man! He's a donkey if he thinks that, and
I'd have given him credit for more common sense--"

"Now, Champney, stop right where you are. Don't boil over so." She repressed a smile. "Let's
talk business and look at matters as they stand."

"I can't;" he said doggedly; "I can't talk business without a business basis, and this here,"--he
shook the letter much as Rag shook a slipper,--"it's just slop! What am I going to do over
there, I'd like to know?" he demanded fiercely; whereupon his mother took the letter from his
hand and, without heeding his grumbling, read it carefully twice.

"Now, look here, Champney," she said firmly; "you must use some reason. I admit this isn't
what you wanted or I expected, but it's something; many would think it everything. Didn't you
tell me only yesterday that in these times a man is fortunate to get his foot on any round
of the ladder--"

"Well, if I did, I didn't mean the rung of a banking house fire-escape over in Europe." He
interrupted her, speaking sulkily. Then of a sudden he laughed out. "Go on, mother, I'm a chump."
His mother smiled and continued the broken sentence:

"--And that ten thousand fail where one succeeds in getting even a foothold--to climb, as you
want to?"

"But how can I climb? That's the point. Why, I shall be twenty-six in five years--if I live,"
he added lugubriously.

His mother laughed outright. The splendid specimen of health, vitality, and strength before
her was in too marked contrast to his words.

"Well, I don't care," he muttered, but joining heartily in her laugh; "I've heard of fellows
like me going into a decline just out of pure homesickness over there."

"I don't think you will be homesick for Flamsted; I saw no traces of that malady while you
were in New York. On the contrary, I thought you accepted every opportunity to stay away."

"New York is different," he replied, a little shamefaced in the presence of the truth he had
just heard. "But, mother, you would be alone here."

"I'm used to it, Champney;" she spoke as it were perfunctorily; "and I am ambitious to see
you succeed as you wish to. I want to see you in a position which will fulfil both your hopes
and mine; but neither you nor I can choose the means, not yet; we haven't the money. For my
part, I think you should accept this offer; it's one in ten thousand. Work your way up during
these five years into Mr. Van Ostend's confidence, and I am sure, sure, that by that time he
will have something for you that will satisfy even your young ambition. I think, moreover,
it is a necessity for you to accept this, Champney."

"You do; why?"

"Well, for a good many reasons. I doubt, in the first place, if these quarries can get under
full running headway for the next seven years, and even if you had been offered some position
of trust in connection with them, you haven't had an opportunity to prove yourself worthy of
it in a business way. I doubt, too, if the salary would be any larger; it is certainly a fair
one for the work he offers." She consulted the letter. "Twelve hundred for the first year,
and for every succeeding year an additional five hundred. What more could you expect, inexperienced
as you are? Many men have to give their services gratis for a while to obtain entrance into
such offices and have their names, even, connected with such a financier. This opportunity
is a business asset. I feel convinced, moreover, that you need just this discipline."

"Why?"

"For some other good reasons. For one, you would be brought into daily contact with men, experienced
men, of various nationalities--"

"You can be that in New York. There isn't a city in the world where you can gain such a cosmopolitan
experience." He was still protesting, still insisting. His mother made no reply, nor did she
notice the interruption.

"--Learn their ways, their point of view. All this would be of infinite help if, later on,
you should come into a position of great responsibility in connection with the quarry syndicate.--It
does seem so strange that hundreds will make their livelihood from our barren pastures!" She
spoke almost to herself, and for a moment they were silent.

"And look at this invitation to cross in his yacht with his family! Champney, you know perfectly
well nothing could be more courteous or thoughtful; it saves your passage money, and it shows
plainly his interest in you personally."

"I know; that part isn't half bad." He spoke with interest and less reluctance. "I saw the
yacht last spring lying in North River; she's a perfect floating palace they say. Of course,
I appreciate the invitation; but supposing--only supposing, you know,"--this as a warning not
to take too much for granted,--"I should accept. How could I live on twelve hundred a year?
He spends twice that on a cook. How does he think a fellow is going to dress and live on that?
'T was a tight squeeze in college on thirteen hundred."

His mother knew his way so well, that she recognized in this insistent piling of one obstacle
upon another the budding impulse to yield. She was willing to press the matter further.

"Oh, clothes are cheaper abroad and living is not nearly so dear. You could be quite the gentleman
on your second year's salary, and, of course, I can help out with the interest on the twenty
thousand. You forget this."

"By George, I did, mother! You're a trump; but I don't want you to think I want to cut any
figure over there; I don't care enough about 'em. But I want enough to have a ripping good
time to compensate for staying away so long."

"You need not stay five consecutive years away from home. Look here, Champney; you have read
this letter with your eyes but not with your wits. Your boiling condition was not conducive
to clear-headedness."

"Oh, I say mother! Don't rap a fellow too hard when he's down."

"You're not down; you're up,"--she held her ground with him right sturdily,--"up on the second
round already, my son; only you don't know it. Here it is in black and white that you can come
home for six weeks after two years, and the fifth year is shortened by three months if all
goes well. What more do you want?"

"That's something, anyway."

"Now, I want you to think this over."

"I wish I could run down to New York for a day or two; it would help a lot. I could look round
and possibly find an opening in the direction I want. I want to do this before deciding."

"Champney, I shall lose patience with you soon. You know you, can't run down to New York for
even a day. Mr. Van Ostend states the fact baldly: 'Your decision I must have by telegraph,
at the latest, by Thursday noon.' That's day after to-morrow. 'We sail on Saturday.' Mr. Van
Ostend is not a man to waste a breath, as you have said."

Champney had no answer ready. He evaded the question. "I'll tell you to-morrow, mother. It's
late; you mustn't sit up any longer." He looked at his watch. "One o'clock. Good night."

"Good night, Champney. Leave your door into the hall wide open; it's so close."

She put out her light and sat down by the window. The night was breathless; not a leaf of the
elm trees quivered. She heard the Rothel picking its way down the rocky channel of The Gore.
She gave herself up to thought, far-reaching both into the past and the future. Soon, mingled
with the murmur of the brook, she heard her son's quiet measured breathing. She rose, walked
noiselessly down the hall and stood at his bedroom door, to gaze--mother-like, to worship.
The moonlight just touched the pillow. He lay with his head on his arm; the full white chest
was partly bared; the spare length of the muscular body was outlined beneath the sheet. Her
eyes filled with tears. She turned from the door, and, noiselessly as she had come, went back
to her room and her couch.

       *       *       *       *       *

How little the pending decision weighed on his mind was proven by his long untroubled sleep;
but directly after a late breakfast he told his mother he was going out to prospect a little
in The Gore; and she, understanding, questioned him no further. He whistled to Rag and turned
into the side road that led to the first quarry. There was no work going on there. This small
ownership of forty acres was merged in the syndicate which had so recently acquired the two
hundred acres from the Googe estate. He made his way over the hill and around to the head of
The Gore. He wanted to climb the cliff-like rocks and think it out under the pines, landmarks
of his early boyhood. He picked his way among the boulders and masses of sheep laurel; he was
thinking not of the quarries but of himself; he did not even inquire of himself how the sale
of the quarries might be about to affect his future.

Champney Googe was self-centred. The motives for all his actions in a short and uneventful
life were the spokes to his particular hub of self; the tire, that bound them and held them
to him, he considered merely the necessary periphery of constant contact with people and things
by which his own little wheel of fortune might be made to roll the more easily. He was following
some such line of thought while turning Mr. Van Ostend's plan over and over in his mind, viewing
it from all sides. It was not what he wanted, but it might lead to that. His eyes were on the
rough ground beneath him, his thoughts busy with the pending decision, when he was taken out
of himself by hearing an unexpected voice in his vicinity.

"Good morning, Mr. Googe. Am I poaching on your preserve?"

Champney recognized the voice at once. It was Father Honoré's hailing him from beneath the
pines. He was sitting with his back against one; a violin lay on its cover beside him; on his
lap was a drawing-board with rule and compass pencil. Champney realized on the instant, and
with a feeling of pleasure, that the priest's presence was no intrusion even at this juncture.

"No, indeed, for it is no longer my preserve," he answered cheerily, and added, with a touch
of earnestness that was something of a surprise to himself, "and it wouldn't be if it were
still mine."

"Thank you, Mr. Googe; I appreciate that. You must find it hard to see a stranger like myself
preëmpting your special claim, as I fancy this one is."

"It used to be when I was a youngster; but, to tell the truth, I haven't cared for it much
of late years. The city life spoils a man for this. I love that rush and hustle and rubbing-elbows
with the world in general, getting knocked about--and knocking." He laughed merrily, significantly,
and Father Honoré, catching his meaning at once, laughed too. "But I'm not telling you any
news; of course, you've had it all."

"Yes, all and a surfeit. I was glad to get away to this hill-quiet."

Champney sat down on the thick rusty-red matting of pine needles and turned to him, a question
in his eyes. Father Honoré smiled. "What is it?" he said.

"May I ask if it was your own choice coming up here to us?"

"Yes, my deliberate choice. I had to work for it, though. The superior of my order was against
my coming. It took moral suasion to get the appointment."

"I don't suppose they wanted to lose a valuable man from the city," said Champney bluntly.

"The question of value is not, happily, a question of environment. I simply felt I could do
my best work here in the best way."

"And you didn't consider yourself at all?" Champney put the question, which voiced his thought,
squarely.

"Oh, I'm human," he answered smiling at the questioner; "don't make any mistake on that point;
and I don't suppose many of us can eliminate self wholly in a matter of choice. I did want
to work here because I believe I can do the best work, but I also welcomed the opportunity
to get away from the city--it weighs on me, weighs on me," he added, but it sounded as if he
were merely thinking aloud.

Champney failed to comprehend him. Father Honoré, raising his eyes, caught the look on the
young man's face and interpreted it. He said quietly:

"But then you're twenty-one and I'm forty-five; that accounts for it."

For a moment, but a moment only, Champney was tempted to speak out to this man, stranger as
he was. Mr. Van Ostend evidently had confidence in him; why shouldn't he? Perhaps he might
help him to decide, and for the best. But even as the thought flashed into consciousness, he
was aware of its futility. He was sure the man would repeat only what his mother had said.
He did not care to hear that twice. And what was this man to him that he should ask his opinion,
appeal to him for advice in directing this step in his career? He changed the subject abruptly.

"I think you said you had met Mr. Van Ostend?"

"Yes, twice in connection with the orphan child, as I told you, and once I dined with him.
He has a charming family: his sister and his little daughter. Have you met them?"

"Only once. He has just written me and asked me to join them on his yacht for a trip to Europe."
Champney felt he was coasting on the edge, and enjoyed the sport.

"And of course you're going? I can't imagine a more delightful host." Father Honoré spoke with
enthusiasm.

But Champney failed to respond in like manner. The priest took note of it.

"I haven't made up my mind;" he spoke slowly; then, smiling merrily into the other's face,
"and I came up here to try to make it up."

"And I was here so you couldn't do it, of course!" Father Honoré exclaimed so ruefully that
Champney's hearty laugh rang out. "No, no; I didn't mean for you to take it in that way. I'm
glad I found you here--I liked what you said about the 'value'."

Father Honoré looked mystified for a moment; his brow contracted in the effort to recall at
the moment what he had said about "value", and in what connection; but instead of any further
question as to Champney's rather incoherent meaning, he handed him the drawing-board.

"This is the plan for my shack, Mr. Googe. I have written to Mr. Van Ostend to ask if the company
would have any objection to my putting it here near these pines. I understand the quarries
are to be opened up as far as the cliff, and sometime, in the future, my house will be neighbor
to the workers. I suppose then I shall have to 'move on'. I'm going to build it myself."

"All yourself?"

"Why not? I'm a fairly good mason; I've learned that trade, and there is plenty of material,
good material, all about." He looked over upon the rock-strewn slopes. "I'm going to use some
of the granite waste too." He put his violin into its case and held out his hand for the board.
"I'm going now, Mr. Googe; I shall be interested to know your decision as soon as you yourself
know about it."

"I'll let you know by to-morrow. I've nearly a day of grace. You play? You are a musician?"
he asked, as Father Honoré rose and tucked the violin and drawing-board under his arm.

"My matins," the priest answered, smiling down into the curiously eager face that with the
fresh unlined beauty of young manhood was upturned to his. "Good morning." He lifted his hat
and walked rapidly away without waiting for any further word from Champney.

"Sure-footed as a mountain goat!" Champney said to himself as he watched him cross the rough
hilltop. "I'd like to know where he gets it all!"

He stretched out under the pines, his hands clasped under his head, and fell to thinking of
his own affairs, into the as yet undecided course of which the memory of the priest's words,
"The question of value is not, happily, a question of environment" fell with the force of gravity.

"I might as well go it blind," he spoke aloud to himself: "it's all a matter of luck into which
ring you shy your hat; I suppose it's the 'value', after all, that does it in the end. Besides--"

He did not finish that thought aloud; but he suddenly sat bolt upright, a fist pressed hard
on each knee. His face hardened into determination. "By George, what an ass I've been! If I
can't do it in one way I can in another.--Hoop! Hooray!"

He turned a somersault then and there; came right side up; cuffed the dazed puppy goodnaturedly
and bade him "Come on", which behest the little fellow obeyed to the best of his ability among
the rough ways of the sheep walks.

He did not stop at the house, but walked straight down to Flamsted, Rag lagging at his heels.
He sent a telegram to New York. Then he went homewards in the broiling sun, carrying the exhausted
puppy under his arm. His mother met him on the porch.

"I've just telegraphed Mr. Van Ostend, mother, that I'll be in New York Friday, ready to sail
on Saturday."

"My dear boy!" That was all she said then; but she laid her hand on his shoulder when they
went in to dinner, and Champney knew she was satisfied.

Two days later, Champney Googe, having bade good-bye to his neighbors, the Caukinses large
and small, to Octavius, Ann and Hannah,--Aileen was gone on an errand when he called last at
Champ-au-Haut but he left his remembrance to her with the latter--to his aunt, to Joel Quimber
and Augustus, to Father Honoré and a host of village well-wishers who, in their joyful anticipation
of his future and his fortunes, laid aside all factional differences, said, at last, farewell
to Flamsted, to The Corners, The Bow, and his home among the future quarries in The Gore.

PART THIRD

In the Stream

I

Mrs. Milton Caukins had her trials, but they were of a kind some people would call "blessed
torments." The middle-aged mother of eight children, six boys, of whom Romanzo was the eldest,
and twin girls, Elvira Caukins might with justice lay claim to a superabundance of a certain
kind of trial. Every Sunday morning proved the crux of her experience, and Mrs. Caukins' nerves
were correspondingly shaken. To use her own words, she "was all of a tremble" by the time she
was dressed for church.

On such occasions she was apt to speak her mind, preferably to the Colonel; but lacking his
presence, to her family severally and collectively, to 'Lias, the hired man, or aloud to herself
when busy about her work. She had been known, on occasion, to acquaint even the collie with
her state of mind, and had assured the head of the family afterwards that there was more sense
of understanding of a woman's trials in one wag of a dog's tail than in most men's head-pieces.

"Mr. Caukins!" she called up the stairway. She never addressed her husband in the publicity
of domestic life without this prefix; to her children she spoke of him as "your pa"; to all
others as "the Colonel."

"Yes, Elvira."

The Colonel's voice was leisurely, but muffled owing to the extra heavy lather he was laying
about his mouth for the Sunday morning shave. His wife's voice shrilled again up the staircase:

"It's going on nine o'clock and the boys are nowheres near ready; I haven't dressed the twins
yet, and the boys are trying to shampoo each other--they've got your bottle of bay rum, and
not a single shoe have they greased. I wish you'd hurry up and come down; for if there's one
thing you know I hate it's to go into church after the beginning of the first lesson with those
boys squeaking and scrunching up the aisle behind me. It makes me nervous and upsets me so
I can't find the place in my prayer book half the time."

"I'll be down shortly." The tone was intended to be conciliatory, but it irritated Mrs. Caukins
beyond measure.

"I know all about your 'shortlies,' Mr. Caukins; they're as long as the rector's sermon this
very Whit-sunday--the one day in the whole year when the children can't keep still any more
than cows in fly time. Did you get their peppermints last night?"

"'Gad, my dear, I forgot them! But really--", his voice was degenerating into a mumble owing
to the pressure of circumstances, "--matters of such--er--supreme importance--came--er--to
my knowledge last evening that--that--"

"That what?"

"--That--that--mm--mm--" there followed the peculiar noise attendant upon a general clearing
up of much lathered cuticle, "--I forgot them."

"What matters were they? You didn't say anything about 'supreme importance' last night, Mr.
Caukins."

"I'll tell you later, Elvira; just at present I--"

"Was it anything about the quarries?"

"Mm--"

"What was it?"

"I heard young Googe was expected next week."

"Well, I declare! I could have told you that much myself if you'd been at home in any decent
season. It seems pretty poor planning to have to run down three miles to The Greenbush every
Saturday evening to find out what you could know by just stepping across the bridge to Aurora's.
She told me yesterday. Was that all?"

"N--no--"

"For mercy's sake, Mr. Caukins, don't keep me waiting here any longer! It's almost church time."

"I wasn't aware that I was detaining you, Elvira." The Colonel's protest was mild but dignified.
There were sounds above of renewed activity.

"Dulcie," said Mrs. Caukins, turning to a little girl who was standing beside her, listening
with erected ears to her mother's questions and father's answers, "go up stairs into mother's
room and see if Doosie's getting ready, there's a good girl."

"Doosie is with me, Elvira; I would let well enough alone for the present, if I were you,"
said the Colonel admonishingly. His wife wisely took the hint. "Come up, Dulcie," he called,
"father's ready." Dulcie hopped up stairs.

"You haven't said what matters of importance kept you last night." Mrs. Caukins returned to
her muttons with redoubled energy.

"Champney came home unexpectedly last evening, and the syndicate has offered him a position,
a big one, in New York--treasurer of the Flamsted Quarries Company; and our Romanzo's got a
chance too--"

"You don't say! What is it?" Mrs. Caukins started up stairs whence came sounds of an obstreperous
bootjack.

"Paymaster, here in town; I'll explain in more propitious circumstances. Has 'Lias harnessed
yet, Elvira?"

Without deigning to answer, Mrs. Caukins freed her mind.

"Well, Mr. Caukins, I must say you grow more and more like that old ram of 'Lias's that has
learned to butt backwards just for the sake of going contrary to nature. I believe you'd rather
tell a piece of news backwards than forwards any day! Why didn't you begin by telling me about
Romanzo? If your own child that's your flesh and blood and bone isn't of most interest to you,
I'd like to know what is!"

The Colonel's reply was partly inaudible owing to a sudden outbreak of altercation among the
boys in the room below. Mrs. Caukins, who had just reached the landing, turned in her tracks
and hurried to the rescue.

The Colonel smiled at the rosy, freshly-shaved face reflected in the mirror of the old-fashioned
dressing-case, and, at the same time, caught the reflection of another image--that of his hired
man, 'Lias, who was crossing the yard. He went to the window and leaned out, stemming his hands
on the sill.

"There seems to be the usual Sunday morning row going on below, 'Lias. I fear the boys are
shampooing each other's heads with the backs of their brushes from the sounds."

'Lias smiled, and nodded understandingly.

"Just look in and lend a hand in case Mrs. Caukins should be outnumbered, will you? I'm engaged
at present." And deeply engaged he was to the twins' unspeakable delight. Whistling softly
an air from "Il Trovatore," he rubbed some orange-flower water on his chin and cheeks; then
taking a fresh handkerchief, dabbed several drops on the two little noses that waited upon
him weekly in expectation of this fragrant boon. He was rewarded by a few satisfactory kisses.

"Now run away and help mother--coach leaves at nine forty-five pre-cisely. I forgot the peppermints,
but--" he slapped his trousers' pockets significantly.

The twins shouted with delight and rushed away to impart the news to the boys.

"I wish you would tell me the secret of your boys' conduct in church, Colonel Caukins; it's
exemplary. I don't understand it, for boys will be boys," said the rector one Sunday several
years before when all the boys were young. He had taken note of their want of restlessness
throughout the sermon.

The Colonel's mouth twitched; he answered promptly, but avoided his wife's eyes.

"All in the method, I assure you. We Americans have spent a generation in experimenting with
the inductive, the subjective method in education, and the result is, to all intents and purposes,
a dismal failure. The future will prove the value of the objective, the deductive--which is
mine," he added with a sententious emphasis that left the puzzled rector no wiser than before.

"Whatever the method, Colonel, you have a fine family; there is no mistake about that," he
said heartily.

The Colonel beamed and responded at once:

"'Blessed is the man that hath his quiver full'--"

At this point Mrs. Caukins surreptitiously poked the admonitory end of her sunshade between
the Colonel's shoulder blades, and the Colonel, comprehending, desisted from further quotation
of scripture. It was not his strong point. Once he had been known to quote, not only unblushingly
but triumphantly, during a touch-and-go discussion of the labor question in the town hall:--"The
ass, gentlemen, is worthy of his hire"; and in so doing had covered Mrs. Caukins with confusion
and made a transient enemy of every wage-earner in the audience.

But his boys behaved--that was the point. What boys wouldn't when their heart's desire was
conveyed to them at the beginning of the sermon by a secret-service-under-the-pew process wholly
delightful to the young human male? Who wouldn't be quiet for the sake of the peppermints,
a keen three-bladed knife, or a few gelatine fishes that squirmed on his warm moist palm in
as lively a manner as if just landed on the lake shore? Their father had been a boy, and at
fifty had a boy's heart within him--this was the secret of his success.

Mrs. Caukins appeared at last, radiant in the consciousness of a new chip hat and silk blouse.
Dulcie and Doosie in white lawn did their pains-taking mother credit in every respect. The
Colonel gallantly presented his wife with a small bunch of early roses--an attention which
called up a fine bit of color into her still pretty face. 'Lias helped her into the three-seated
wagon, then lifted in the twins; the boys piled in afterwards; the Colonel took the reins.
Mrs. Caukins waved her sunshade vigorously at 'Lias and gave a long sigh of relief and satisfaction.

"Well, we're off at last! I declare I miss Maggie every hour in the day. I don't know what
I should have done all these years without that girl!"

The mention of "Maggie" emphasizes one of the many changes in Flamsted during the six years
of Champney Googe's absence. Mrs. Caukins, urged by her favorite, Aileen, and advised by Mrs.
Googe and Father Honoré, had imported Margaret O'Dowd, the "Freckles" of the asylum, as mother's
helper six months after Aileen's arrival in Flamsted. For nearly six years Maggie loyally seconded
Mrs. Caukins in the care of her children and her household. Slow, but sure and dependable,
strong and willing, she made herself invaluable in the stone house among the sheep pastures;
her stunted affections revived and flourished apace in that household of well-cared-for children
to whom both parents were devoted. It cost her a heartache to leave them; but six months ago
burly Jim McCann, one of the best workmen in the sheds--although of unruly spirit and a source
of perennial trouble among the men--began to make such determined love to the mother's helper
that the Caukinses found themselves facing inevitable loss. Maggie had been married three months;
and already McCann had quarrelled with the foreman, and, in a huff, despite his wife's tears
and prayers, sought of his own accord work in another and far distant quarry.

"Maggie told me she'd never leave off teasing Jim to bring her back," said the fifth eldest
Caukins.--"Oh, look!" he cried as they rumbled over the bridge; "there's Mrs. Googe and Champney
on the porch waving to us!"

The Colonel took off his hat with a flourish; the boys swung theirs; Mrs. Caukins waved her
sunshade to mother and son.

"I declare, I'd like to stop just a minute," she said regretfully, for the Colonel continued
to drive straight on. "I'm so glad for Aurora's sake that he's come home; I only hope our Romanzo
will do as well."

"It would be an intrusion at such a time, Elvira. The effusions of even the best-intentioned
friends are injudicious at the inopportune moment of domestic reunion."

Mrs. Caukins subsided on that point. She was always depressed by the Colonel's grandiloquence,
which he usually reserved for The Greenbush and the town-meeting, without being able to account
for it.

"He'll see a good many changes here; it's another Flamsted we're living in," she remarked later
on when they passed the first stone-cutters' shed on the opposite shore of the lake; and the
family proceeded to comment all the way to church on the various changes along the route.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was in truth another Flamsted, the industrial Flamsted which the Colonel predicted six years
before on that memorable evening in the office of The Greenbush.

To watch the transformation of a quiet back-country New England village into the life-centre
of a great and far-reaching industry, is in itself a liberal education, not only in economics,
but in inherited characteristics of the human race. Those first drops of "the deluge," the
French priest and the Irish orphan, were followed by an influx of foreigners of many nationalities:
Scotch, Irish, Italians, Poles, Swedes, Canadian French; and with these were associated a few
American-born.

Their life-problem, the earning of wages for the sustenance of themselves and their families,
was one they had in common. Its solution was centred for one and all in their work among the
granite quarries of The Gore and in the stone-cutters' sheds on the north shore of Lake Mesantic.
These two things the hundreds belonging to a half-dozen nationalities possessed in common--these,
and their common humanity together with the laws to which it is subject. But aside from this,
their speech, habits, customs, religions, food, and pastimes were polyglot; on this account
the lines of racial demarkation were apt, at times, to be drawn all too sharply. Yet this very
fact of differentiation provided hundreds of others--farmers, shopkeepers, jobbers, machinists,
mechanics, blacksmiths, small restaurant-keepers, pool and billiard room owners--with ample
sources of livelihood.

This internal change in the community of Flamsted corresponded to the external. During those
six years the very face of nature underwent transformation. The hills in the apex of The Gore
were shaved clean of the thin layer of turf, and acres of granite laid bare to the drill. Monster
derricks, flat stone-cars, dummy engines, electric motors, were everywhere in evidence. Two
glittering steel tracks wound downwards through old watercourses to the level of the lake,
and to the huge stone-cutting sheds that stretched their gray length along the northern shore.
Here the quarried stones, tons in weight, were unloaded by the great electric travelling crane
which picks up one after the other with automatic perfection of silence and accuracy, and deposits
them wherever needed by the workmen.

A colony of substantial three-room houses, two large boarding-houses, a power house and, farther
up beyond the pines, a stone house and a long low building, partly of wood, partly of granite
waste cemented, circled the edges of the quarry.

The usual tale of workmen in the fat years was five hundred quarrymen and three hundred stone-cutters.
This population of working-men, swelled to three thousand by the addition of their families,
increased or diminished according as the years and seasons proved fat or lean. A ticker on
Wall Street was sufficient to give to the great industry abnormal life and activity, and draw
to the town a surplus working population. A feeling of unrest and depression, long-continued
in metropolitan financial circles, was responded to with sensitive pulse on these far-away
hills of Maine and resulted in migratory flights, by tens and twenties, of Irish and Poles,
of Swedes, Italians, French Canucks, and American-born to more favorable conditions. "Here
one day and gone the next"; even the union did not make for stability of tenure.

In this ceaseless tidal ebb and flow of industrials, the original population of Flamsted managed
at times to come to the surface to breathe; to look about them; to speculate as to "what next?"
for the changes were rapid and curiosity was fed almost to satiety. A fruitful source of speculation
was Champney Googe's long absence from home, already six years, and his prospects when he should
have returned. Speculation was also rife when Aurora Googe crossed the ocean to spend a summer
with her son; at one time rumors were afloat that Champney's prospective marriage with a relation
of the Van Ostends was near at hand, and this was said to be the cause of his mother's rather
sudden departure. But on her return, Mrs. Googe set all speculation in this direction at rest
by denying the rumor most emphatically, and adding the information for every one's benefit
that she had gone over to be with Champney because he did not wish to come home at the time
his contract with Mr. Van Ostend permitted.

Once during the past year, the village wise heads foregathered in the office of The Greenbush
to discuss the very latest:--the coming to Flamsted of seven Sisters, Daughters of the Mystic
Rose, who, foreseeing the suppression of their home institution in France, had come to prepare
a refuge for their order on the shores of America and found another home and school among the
quarrymen in this distant hill-country of the new Maine--an echo of the old France of their
ancestors. This was looked upon as an undreamed-of innovation exceeding all others that had
come to their knowledge; it remained for old Joel Quimber to enter the lists as champion of
the newcomers, their cause, and their school which, with Father Honoré's aid, they at once
established among the barren hills of The Gore.

"Hounded out er France, poor souls, just like my own great-great-great-granther's father!"
he said, referring to the subject again on that last Saturday evening when the frequenters
of The Greenbush were to be stirred shortly by the news they considered best of all: Champney
Googe's unexpected arrival. "I was up thar yisterd'y an' it beats all how snug they're fixed!
The schoolroom's ez neat as a pin, an' pitchers on the walls wuth a day's journey to see. They're
havin' a room built onto the farther end--a kind of er relief hospital, so Father Honoré told
me--ter help out when the quarrymen git a jammed foot er finger, so's they needn't be took
home to muss up their little cabins an' worrit their wives an' little 'uns. I heerd Aileen
hed ben goin' up thar purty reg'lar lately for French an' sich; guess Mis' Champney's done
'bout the right thing by her, eh, Tave?"

Octavius nodded. "And Aileen's done the right thing by Mrs. Champney. 'T isn't every young
girl that would stick to it as Aileen's done the last six years--not in the circumstances."

"You're right, Tave. I heerd not long ago thet she was a-goin' on the stage when she'd worked
out her freedom, and by A. J. she's got the voice for it! But I'd hate ter see her thar. She's
made a lot er sunshine in this place, and I guess from all I hear there's them thet would stan'
out purty stiff agin it; they say Luigi Poggi an' Romanzo Caukins purty near fit over her t'
other night."

"You needn't believe all you hear, Joel, but you can believe me when I tell you there'll be
no going on the stage for Aileen--not if I know it, or Father Honoré either."

He spoke so emphatically that his brother Augustus looked at him in surprise.

"What's up, Tave?" he inquired.

"I mean Aileen's got a level head and isn't going to leave just as things are beginning to
get interesting. She's stood it six year and she can stand it six more if she makes up her
mind to it, and I'd ought to know, seeing as I've lived with her ever since she come to Flamsted."

"To be sure, Tave, to be sure; nobody knows better'n you, 'bout Aileen, an' I guess she's come
to look on you, from all I hear, as her special piece of property." His brother spoke appeasingly.

Octavius smiled. "Well, I don't deny but she lays claim to me most of the time; it's 'Octavius'
here and 'Octavius' there all day long. Sometimes Mrs. Champney ruffs up about it, but Aileen
has a way of smoothing her down, generally laughs her out of it. Is that the Colonel?" He listened
to a step on the veranda. "Don't let on 'bout anything 'twixt Romanzo and Aileen before the
Colonel, Joel."

"You don't hev ter say thet to me," said old Quimber resentfully; "anybody can see through
a barn door when thar's a hole in it. All on us know Mis' Champney's a-breakin'; they do say
she's hed a shock, leastwise I heerd so, an' Aileen'll look out for A No. 1. I ain't lived
to be most eighty in Flamsted for nothin', an' I've seen an' heerd more'n I've ever told, Tave;
more'n even you know 'bout some things. You don't remember the time old Square Googe took Aurory
inter his home to bring up an' Judge Champney said he was sorry he'd got ahead of him for he
wanted to adopt her for a daughter himself; them's his words; I heerd him. An' I can tell more'n--"

"Shut up, Quimber," said Octavius shortly; and Joel Quimber "shut up," but, winking knowingly
at Augustus Buzzby, continued to chuckle to himself till the Colonel entered who, beginning
to expatiate upon the subject of Champney Googe's prospects when he should have returned to
the home-welcome awaiting him, was happily interrupted by the announcement of that young man's
unexpected arrival on the evening train.

II

Champney Googe was beginning to realize, as he stood on the porch with his mother and waved
to his old neighbors, the Caukinses, the changed conditions he was about to face. He was also
realizing that he must change to meet these conditions. On his way up from the train Saturday
evening, he noted the power house at The Corners and the substantial line of comfortable cottages
that extended for a mile along the highroad to the entrance of the village. He found Main Street
brilliant with electric lights and lined nearly its entire length with shops, large and small,
which were thronged with week-end purchasers. An Italian fruit store near The Greenbush bore
the proprietor's name, Luigi Poggi; as he drove past he saw an old Italian woman bargaining
with smiles and lively gestures over the open counter. Farther on, from an improvised wooden
booth, the raucous voice of the phonograph was jarring the night air and entertaining a motley
group gathered in front of it. Across the street a flaunting poster announced "Moving Picture
Show for a Nickel." Vehicles of all descriptions, from a Maine "jigger" to a "top buggy," were
stationary along the village thoroughfare, their various steeds hitched to every available
stone post. In front of the rectory some Italian children were dancing to the jingle of a tambourine.

On nearing The Bow the confusion ceased; the polyglot sounds were distinguishable only as a
murmur. In passing Champ-au-Haut, he looked up at the house; here and there a light shone behind
drawn shades. Six years had passed since he was last there; six years--and time had not dulled
the sensation of that white pepper in his nostrils! He smiled to himself. He must see Aileen
before he left, for from time to time he had heard good reports of her from his mother with
whom she had become a favorite. He thought she must be mighty plucky to stand Aunt Meda all
this time! He gathered from various sources that Mrs. Champney was growing peculiar as she
approached three score and ten. Her rare letters to him, however, were kind enough. But he
was sure Aileen's anomalous place in the household at Champ-au-Haut--neither servant nor child
of the house, never adopted, but only maintained--could have been no sinecure. Anyway, he knew
she had kept the devotion of her two admirers, Romanzo Caukins and Octavius Buzzby. From a
hint in his aunt's last letter, he drew the conclusion that Aileen and Romanzo would make a
match of it before long, when Romanzo should be established. At any rate, Aileen had wit enough,
he was sure, to know on which side her bread was buttered, and from all he heard by the way
of letters, Romanzo Caukins was not to be sneezed at as a prospective husband--a steady-going,
solid sort of a chap who, he was told, had a chance now like himself in the quarry business.
He must credit Aunt Meda with this one bit of generosity, at least; Mr. Van Ostend told him
she had applied to him for some working position for Romanzo in the Flamsted office, and not
in vain; he was about to be put in as pay-master.

As he drove slowly up the highroad towards The Gore, he saw the stone-cutters' sheds stretching
dim and gray in the moonlight along the farther shore. A standing train of loaded flat-cars
gleamed in the electric light like a long high-piled drift of new-fallen snow. Here and there,
on approaching The Gore, an arc-light darkened the hills round about and sent its blinding
glare into the traveller's eyes. At last, his home was in sight--his home!--he wondered that
he did not experience a greater thrill of home-coming--and behind and above it the many electric
lights in and around the quarries produced hazy white reflections concentrated in luminous
spots on the clear sky.

His mother met him on the porch. Her greeting was such that it caused him to feel, and for
the first time, that where she was, there, henceforth, his true home must ever be.

       *       *       *       *       *

"It will be hard work adjusting myself at first, mother," he said, turning to her after watching
the wagonload of Caukinses out of sight, "harder than I had any idea of. A foreign business
training may broaden a man in some ways, but it leaves his muscles flabby for real home work
here in America. You make your fight over there with gloves, and here only bare knuckles are
of any use; but I'm ready for it!" He smiled and squared his shoulders as to an imaginary load.

"You don't regret it, do you, Champney?"

"Yes and no, mother. I don't regret it because I have gained a certain knowledge of men and
things available only to one who has lived over there; but I do regret that, because of the
time so spent, I am, at twenty-seven, still hugging the shore--just as I was when I left college.
After all these years I'm not 'in it' yet; but I shall be soon," he added; the hard determined
ring of steadfast purpose was in his voice. He sat down on the lower step: his mother brought
forward her chair.

"Champney," she spoke half hesitatingly; she did not find it easy to question the man before
her as she used to question the youth of twenty-one, "would you mind telling me if there ever
was any truth in the rumor that somehow got afloat over here three years ago that you were
going to marry Ruth Van Ostend? Of course, I denied it when I got home, for I knew you would
have told me if there had been anything to it."

Champney clasped his hands about his knee and nursed it, smiling to himself, before he answered:

"I suppose I may as well make a clean breast of the whole affair, which is little enough, mother,
even if I didn't cover myself with glory and come out with colors flying. You see I was young
and, for all my four years in college, pretty green when it came to the real life of those
people--"

"You mean the Van Ostends?"

"Yes, their kind. It's one thing to accept their favors, and it's quite another to make them
think you are doing them one. So I sailed in to make Ruth Van Ostend interested in me as far
as possible, circumstances permitting--and you'll admit that a yachting trip is about as favorable
as they make it. You know she's three years older than I, and I think it flattered and amused
her to accept my devotion for a while, but then--"

"But, Champney, did you love her?"

"Well, to be honest, mother, I hadn't got that far myself--don't know that I ever should have;
any way, I wanted to get her to the point before I went through any self-catechism on that score."

"But, Champney!" She spoke with whole-hearted protest.

He nodded up at her understandingly. "I know the 'but', mother; but that's how it stood with
me. You know they were in Paris the next spring and, of course, I saw a good deal of them--and
of many others who were dancing attendance on the heiress to the same tune that I was. But
I caught on soon, and saw all the innings were with one special man; and, well--I didn't make
a fool of myself, that's all. As you know, she was married the autumn after your return, three
years ago."

"You're sure you really didn't mind, Champney?"

He laughed out at that. "Mind! Well, rather! You see it knocked one of my little plans higher
than a kite--a plan I made the very day I decided to accept Mr. Van Ostend's offer. Of course
I minded."

"What plan?"

"Wonder if I'd better tell you, mother? I'd like to stand well in your good graces--"

"Oh, Champney!"

"Fact, I would. Well, here goes then: I decided--I was lying up under the pines, you know that
day I didn't want to accept his offer?"--she nodded confirmatorily--"that if I couldn't have
an opportunity to get rich quick in one way, I would in another; and, in accepting the offer,
I made up my mind to try for the sister and her millions; if successful, I intended to take
by that means a short cut to matrimony and fortune."

"Oh, Champney!"

"Young and fresh and--hardened, wasn't it, mother?"

"You were so young, so ignorant, so unused to that sort of living; you had no realization of
the difficulties of life--of love--."

She began speaking as if in apology for his weakness, but ended with the murmured words "life--love",
in a voice so tense with pain that it sounded as if the major dominant of youth and ignorance
suddenly suffered transcription into a haunting minor.

Her son looked up at her in surprise.

"Why, mother, don't take it so hard; I assure you I didn't. It brought me down to bed rock,
for I was making a conceited ass of myself that's all, in thinking I could have roses for fodder
instead of thistles--and just for the asking! It did me no end of good. I shall never rush
in again where even angels fear to tread except softly--I mean the male wingless kind--worth
a couple of millions; she has seven in her own right.--But we're the best of friends."

He spoke without bitterness. His mother felt, however, at the moment, that she would have preferred
to hear a note of keen disappointment in his explanation rather than this tone of lightest
persiflage.

"I don't see how--" she began, but checked herself. A slight flush mounted in her cheeks.

"See how what, mother? Please don't leave me dangling; I'm willing to take all you can give.
I deserve it."

"I wasn't going to blame you, Champney. I'm the last one to do that--Life teaches each in her
own way. I was only thinking I didn't see how any girl could resist loving you, dear."

"Oh, ho! Don't you, mother mine! Well, commend me to a doting--"

"I'm not doting, Champney," she protested, laughing; "I know your faults better than you know
them yourself."

"A doting mother, I say, to brace up a man fallen through his pride. Do you mean to say"--,
he sprang to his feet, faced her, his hands thrust deep in his pockets, his face alive with
the fun of the moment,--"do you mean to say that if you were a girl I should prove irresistible
to you? Come now, mother, tell me, honor bright."

She raised her eyes to his. The flush faded suddenly in her cheeks, leaving them unnaturally
white; her eyes filled with tears.

"I should worship you," she said under her breath, and dropped her head into her hands. He
sprang up the steps to her side.

"Why, mother, mother, don't speak so. I'm not worthy of it--it shames me. Here, look up," he
took her bowed head tenderly between his hands and raised it, "look into my face; read it well--interpret,
and you will cease to idealize, mother."

She wiped her eyes, half-smiling through her tears. "I'm not idealizing, Champney, and I didn't
know I could be so weak; I think--I think the telegram and your coming so unexpectedly--"

"I know, mother," he spoke soothingly, "it was too much; you've been too long alone. I'm glad
I'm at home at last and can run up here almost any time." He patted her shoulder softly, and
whistled for Rag. "Come, put on your shade hat and we'll go up to the quarries. I want to see
them; do you realize they are the largest in the country? It's wonderful what a change they've
made here! After all, it takes America to forge ahead, for we've got the opportunities and
the money to back them--and what more is needed to make us great?" He spoke lightly, expecting
no answer.

She brought her hat and the two went up the side road under the elms to the quarry.

Ay, what more is needed to make us great? That is the question. There comes a time when a man,
whose ears are not wholly deafened by the roar of a trafficking commercialism, asks this question
of himself in the hope that some answer may be vouchsafed to him. If it come at all, it comes
like the "still small voice" after the whirlwind; and the man who asks that question in the
expectation of a response, must first have suffered, repented, struggled, fought, at times
succumbed to fateful overwhelming circumstance, before his soul can be attuned so finely that
the "still small voice" becomes audible. Youth and that question are not synchronous.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I've not been so much alone as you imagine, Champney," said his mother. They were picking
their way over the granite slopes and around to Father Honoré's house. "Aileen and Father Honoré
and all the Caukinses and, during this last year, those sweet women of the sisterhood have
brought so much life into my life up here among these old sheep pastures that I've not had
the chance to feel the loneliness I otherwise should. And then there is that never-to-be-forgotten
summer with you over the ocean--I feed constantly on the remembrance of all that delight."

"I'm glad you had it, mother."

"Besides, this great industry is so many-sided that it keeps me interested in every new development
in spite of myself."

"By the way, mother, you wrote me that you had invested most of that twenty thousand from the
quarry lands in bank stock, didn't you?"

"Yes; Mr. Emlie is president now; he is considered safe. The deposits have quadrupled these
last two years, and the dividends have been satisfactory."

"Yes, I know Emlie's safe enough, but you don't want to tie up your money so that you can't
convert it at once into cash if advisable. You know I shall be on the inside track now and
in a position to use a little of it at a time judiciously in order to increase it for you.
I'd like to double it for you as Aunt Meda has doubled her inheritance from grandfather--Who's
that?"

He stopped short and, shading his eyes with his hat, nodded in the direction of the sisterhood
house that stood perhaps an eighth of a mile beyond the pines. His mother, following his look,
saw the figure of a girl dodge around the corner of the house. Before she could answer, Rag,
the Irish terrier, who had been nosing disconsolately about on the barren rock, suddenly lost
his head. With one short suppressed yelp, he laid his heels low to the slippery granite shelves
and scuttled, scurried, scrambled, tore across the intervening quarry hollow like a bundle
of brown tow driven before a hurricane.

Mrs. Googe laughed. "No need to ask 'who' when you see Rag go mad like that! It's Aileen; Rag
has been devoted to her ever since you've been gone. I wonder why she isn't at church?"

The girl disappeared in the house. Again and again Champney whistled for his dog but Rag failed
to put in an appearance.

"He'll need to be re-trained. It isn't well, even for a dog, to be under such petticoat government
as that; it spoils him. Only I'm afraid I sha'n't be at home long enough to make him hear to
reason."

"Aileen has him in good training. She knows the dog adores her and makes the most of it. Oh,
I forgot to tell you I sent word to Father Honoré this morning to come over to tea to-night.
I knew you would like to see him, and he has been anticipating your return."

"Has he? What for I wonder. By the way, where did he take his meals after he left you?"

"Over in the boarding-house with the men. He stayed with me only three months, until his house
was built. He has an old French Canadian for housekeeper now."

"He's greatly beloved, I hear."

"The Gore wouldn't be The Gore without him," Mrs. Googe spoke earnestly. "The Colonel"--she
laughed as she always did when about to quote her rhetorical neighbor--"speaks of him to everyone
as 'the heart of the quarry that responds to the throb of the universal human,' and so far
as I know no one has ever taken exception to it, for it's true."

"I remember--he was an all round fine man. I shall be glad to see him again. He must find some
pretty tough customers up here to deal with, and the Colonel's office is no longer the soft
snap it was for fifteen years, I'll bet."

"No, that's true; but, on the whole, there is less trouble than you would expect among so many
nationalities. Isn't it queer?--Father Honoré says that most of the serious trouble comes from
disputes between the Hungarians and Poles about religious questions. They are apt to settle
it with fists or something worse. But he and the Colonel have managed well between them; they
have settled matters with very few arrests."

"I can't imagine the Colonel in that rôle." Champney laughed. "What does he do with all his
rhetorical trumpery at such times? I've never seen him under fire--in fact, he never had been
when I left."

"I know he doesn't like it. He told me he shouldn't fill the office after another year. You
know he was obliged to do it to make both ends meet; but since the opening of the quarries
he has really prospered and has a market right here in town for all the mutton he can raise.
I'm so glad Romanzo's got a chance."

They rambled on, crossing the apex of The Gore and getting a good view of the great extent
of the opened quarries. Their talk drifted from one thing to another, Champney questioning
about this one and that, until, as they turned homewards, he declared he had picked up the
many dropped stitches so fast, that he should feel no longer a stranger in his native place
when he should make his first appearance in the town the next day. He wanted to renew acquaintance
with all the people at Champ-au-Haut and the old habitués of The Greenbush.

III

He walked down to Champ-au-Haut the next afternoon. Here and there on the mountain side and
along the highroad he noticed the massed pink and white clusters of the sheep laurel. Every
singing bird was in full voice; thrush and vireo, robin, meadow lark, song-sparrow and catbird
were singing as birds sing but once in the whole year; when the mating season is at its height
and the long migratory flight northwards is forgotten in the supreme instinctive joy of the
ever-new miracle of procreation.

When he came to The Bow he went directly to the paddock gate. He was hoping to find Octavius
somewhere about. He wanted to interview him before seeing any one else, in regard to Rag who
had not returned. The recalcitrant terrier must be punished in a way he could not forget; but
Champney was not minded to administer this well-deserved chastisement in the presence of the
dog's protectress. He feared to make a poor first impression.

He stopped a moment at the gate to look down the lane--what a beautiful estate it was! He wondered
if his aunt intended leaving anything of it to the girl she had kept with her all these years.
Somehow he had received the impression, whether from Mr. Van Ostend or his sister he could
not recall, that she once said she did not mean to adopt her. His mother never mentioned the
matter to him; indeed, she shunned all mention, when possible, of Champ-au-Haut and its owner.

In his mind's eye he could still see this child as he saw her on the stage at the Vaudeville,
clad first in rags, then in white; as he saw her again dressed in the coarse blue cotton gown
of orphan asylum order, sitting in the shade of the boat house on that hot afternoon in July,
and rubbing her greasy hands in glee; as he saw her for the third time leaning from the bedroom
window and listening to his improvised serenade. Well, he had a bone to pick with her about
his dog; that would make things lively for a while and serve for an introduction. He reached
over to unlatch the gate. At that moment he heard Octavius' voice in violent protest. It came
from behind a group of apple trees down the lane in the direction of the milking shed.

"Now don't go for to trying any such experiment as that, Aileen; you'll fret the cow besides
mussing your clean dress."

"I don't care; it'll wash. Now, please, do let me, Tave, just this once."

"I tell you the cow won't give down her milk if you take hold of her. She'll get all in a fever
having a girl fooling round her." There followed the rattle of pails and a stool.

"Now, look here, Octavius Buzzby, who knows best about a cow, you or I?"

"Well, seeing as I've made it my business to look after cows ever since I was fifteen year
old, you can't expect me to give in to you and say you do."

Her merry laugh rang out. Champney longed to echo it, but thought best to lie low for a while
and enjoy the fun so unexpectedly provided.

"Tavy, dear, that only goes to prove you are a mere man; a dear one to be sure--but then! Don't
you flatter yourself for one moment that you, or any other man, really know any creature of
the feminine gender from a woman to a cow. You simply can't, Tavy, because you aren't feminine.
Can you comprehend that? Can you say on your honor as a man that you have ever been able to
tell for certain what Mrs. Champney, or Hannah, or I, for instance, or this cow, or the cat,
or Bellona, when she hasn't been ridden enough, or the old white hen you've been trying to
force to sit the last two weeks, is going to do next? Now, honor bright, have you?"

Octavius was grumbling some reply inaudible to Champney.

"No, of course you haven't; and what's more you never will. Not that it's your fault, Tavy,
dear, it's only your misfortune." Exasperating patronage was audible in her voice. Champney
noted that a trace of the rich Irish brogue was left. "Here, give me that pail."

"I tell you, Aileen, you can't do it; you've never learned to milk."

"Oh, haven't I? Look here, Tave, now no more nonsense; Romanzo taught me how two years ago--but
we both took care you shouldn't know anything about it. Give me that pail." This demand was
peremptory.

Evidently Octavius was weakening, for Champney heard again the rattle of the pails and the
stool; then a swish of starched petticoat and a cooing "There, there, Bess."

He opened the gate noiselessly and closing it behind him walked down the lane. The golden light
of the June sunset was barred, where it lay upon the brilliant green of the young grass, with
the long shadows of the apple-tree trunks. He looked between the thick foliage of the low-hanging
branches to the milking shed. The two were there. Octavius was looking on dubiously; Aileen
was coaxing the giant Holstein mother to stand aside at a more convenient angle for milking.

"Hold her tail, Tave," was the next command.

She seated herself on the stool and laid her cheek against the warm, shining black flank; her
hands manipulated the rosy teats; then she began to sing:

    "O what are you seeking my pretty colleen,
    So sadly, tell me now!"--
      "O'er mountain and plain
      I'm searching in vain
    Kind sir, for my Kerry cow."

The milk, now drumming steadily into the pail, served for a running accompaniment to the next
verses.

    "Is she black as the night with a star of white
    Above her bonny brow?
      And as clever to clear
      The dykes as a deer?"--
    "That's just my own Kerry cow."

    "Then cast your eye into that field of wheat
    She's there as large as life."--
      "My bitter disgrace!
      Howe'er shall I face
    The farmer and his wife?"

What a voice! And what a picture she made leaning caressingly against the charmed and patient
Bess! She was so slight, yet round and supple--strong, too, with the strength of perfect health!
The thick fluffed black hair was rolled away from her face and gathered into a low knot in
the nape of her neck. Her dress cut low at the throat enhanced the white purity of her face
and the slim round grace of her neck which showed to advantage against the ebony flank of the
mother of many milky ways. Her lips were red and full; the nose was a saucy stub; the eyes
he could not see; they were downcast, intent upon her filling pail and the rising creamy foam;
but he knew them to be an Irish blue-gray.

    "Since the farmer's unwed you've no cause to dread
    From his wife, you must allow.
      And for kisses three--
      'Tis myself is he--
    The farmer will free your cow."

The song ceased; the singer was giving her undivided attention to her self-imposed task. Octavius
took a stool and began work with another cow. Champney, nothing loath to prolong the pleasure
of looking at the improvised milkmaid, waited before making his presence known until she should
have finished.

And watching her, he could but wonder at the ways of Chance that had cast this little piece
of foreign flotsam upon the shores of America, only to sweep it inland to this village in Maine.
He could not help comparing her with Alice Van Ostend--what a contrast! What an abyss between
the circumstances of the two lives! Yet this one was decidedly charming, more so than the other;
for he was at once aware that Aileen was already in possession of her womanhood's dower of
command over all poor mortals of the opposite sex--her manner with Octavius showed him that;
and Alice when he saw her last, now nearly six months ago, would have given any one the impression
of something still unfledged--a tall, slim, overgrown girl of sixteen, and somewhat spoiled.
This was indeed only natural, for her immediate world of father, aunt, and relations had circled
ever since her birth in the orbit of her charming wilfulness. Champney acknowledged to himself
that he had done her bidding a little too frequently ever since the first yachting trip, when
as a little girl she attached herself to him, or rather him to her as a part of her special
goods and chattels. At that time their common ground for conversation was Aileen; the child
was never tired of his rehearsing for her delight the serenade scene. But in another year she
lost this interest, for many others took its place; nor was it ever renewed.

The Van Ostends, together with Ruth and her husband, had been living the last three winters
in Paris, Mr. Van Ostend crossing and recrossing as his business interests demanded or permitted.
Champney was much with them, for their home was always open to him who proved an ever welcome
guest. He acknowledged to himself, while participating in the intimacy of their home life,
that if the child's partiality to his companionship, so undisguisedly expressed on every occasion,
should, in the transition periods of girlhood and young womanhood, deepen into a real attachment,
he would cultivate it with a view to asking her in marriage of her father when the time should
show itself ripe. In his first youthful arrogance of self-assertion he had miscalculated with
Ruth Van Ostend. He would make provision that this "undeveloped affair"--so he termed it--with
her niece should not miscarry for want of caution. He intended while waiting for Alice to grow
up--a feat which her aunt was always deploring as an impossibility except in a physical sense--to
make himself necessary in this young life. Thus far he had been successful; her weekly girlish
letters conclusively proved it.

While waiting for the milk to cease its vigorous flow, he was conscious of reviewing his attitude
towards the "undeveloped affair" in some such train of thought, and finding in it nothing to
condemn, rather to commend, in fact; for not for the fractional part of a second did he allow
a thought of it to divert his mind from the constant end in view: the making for himself a
recognized place of power in the financial world of affairs. He knew that Mr. Van Ostend was
aware of this steadfast pursuit of a purpose. He knew, moreover, that the fact that the great
financier was taking him into his New York office as treasurer of the Flamsted Quarries, was
a tacit recognition not only of his six years' apprenticeship in some of the largest banking
houses in Europe, but of his ability to acquire that special power which was his goal. In the
near future he would handle and practically control millions both in receipt and disbursement.
Many of the contracts, already signed, were to be filled within the next three years--the sound
of the milking suddenly ceased.

"My, how my wrists ache! See, Tave, the pail is almost full; there must be twelve or fourteen
quarts in all."

She began to rub her wrists vigorously. Octavius muttered: "I told you so. You might have known
you couldn't milk steady like that without getting all tuckered out."

Champney stepped forward quickly. "Right you are, Tave, every time. How are you, dear old chap?"
He held out his hand.

"Champ--Champney--why--" he stammered rather than spoke.

"It's I, Tave; the same old sixpence. Have I changed so much?"

"Changed? I should say so! I thought--I thought--" he was wringing Champney's hand; some strange
emotion worked in his features--"I thought for a second it was Mr. Louis come to life." He
turned to Aileen who had sprung from her stool. "Aileen, this is Mr. Champney Googe; you've
forgotten him, I dare say, in all these years."

The rich red mantled her cheeks; the gray eyes smiled up frankly into his; she held out her
hand. "Oh, no, I've not forgotten Mr. Champney Googe; how could I?"

"Indeed, I think it is the other way round; if I remember rightly you gave me the opportunity
of never forgetting you." He held her hand just a trifle longer than was necessary. The girl
smiled and withdrew it.

"Milky hands are not so sticky as spruce gum ones, Mr. Googe, but they are apt to be quite
as unpleasant."

Champney was annoyed without in the least knowing why. He was wondering if he should address
her as "Aileen" or "Miss Armagh," when Octavius spoke:

"Aileen, just go on ahead up to the house and tell Mrs. Champney Mr. Googe is here." Aileen
went at once, and Octavius explained.

"You see, Champney--Mr. Googe--"

"Have I changed so much, Tave, that you can't use the old name?"

"You've changed a sight; it don't come easy to call you Champ, any more than it did to call
Mr. Louis by his Christian name. You look a Champney every inch of you, and you act like one."
He spoke emphatically; his small keen eyes dwelt admiringly on the face and figure of the tall
man before him. "I thought 't was better to send Aileen on ahead, for Mrs. Champney's broken
a good deal since you saw her; she can't stand much excitement--and you're the living image."
He called for the boy who had taken Romanzo's place. "I'll go up as far as the house with you.
How long are you going to stay?"

"It depends upon how long it takes me to investigate these quarries, learn the ropes. A week
or two possibly. I am to be treasurer of the Company with my office in New York."

"So I heard, so I heard. I'm glad it's come at last--no thanks to her," he added, nodding in
the direction of the house.

"Do you still hold a grudge, Tave?"

"Yes, and always shall. Right's right and wrong's wrong, and there ain't a carpenter in this
world that can dovetail the two. You and your mother have been cheated out of your rights in
what should be yours, and it's ten to one if you ever get a penny of it."

Champney smiled at the little man's indignation. "All the more reason to congratulate me on
my job, Tave."

"Well, I do; only it don't set well, this other business. She ain't helped you any to it?"
He asked half hesitatingly.

"Not a red cent, Tave. I don't owe her anything. Possibly she will leave some of it to this
same Miss Aileen Armagh. Stranger things have happened." Octavius shook his head.

"Don't you believe it, Champney. She likes Aileen and well she may, but she don't like her
well enough to give her a slice off of this estate; and what's more she don't like any living
soul well enough to part with a dollar of it on their account."

"Is there any one Aunt Meda ever did love, Tave? From all I remember to have heard, when I
was a boy, she was always bound up pretty thoroughly in herself."

"Did she ever love any one? Well she did; that was her husband, Louis Champney, who loved you
as his own son. And it's my belief that's the reason you don't get your rights. She was jealous
as the devil of every word he spoke to you."

"You're telling me news--and late in the day."

"Late is better than never, and I'd always meant to tell you when you come to man's estate--but
you've been away so long, I've thought sometimes you was never coming home; but I hoped you
would for your mother's sake, and for all our sakes."

"I'm going to do what I can, but you mustn't depend too much on me, Tave. I'm glad I'm at home
for mother's sake although I always felt she had a good right hand in you, Tave; you've always
been a good friend to her, she tells me."

Octavius Buzzby swallowed hard once, twice; but he gave him no reply. Champney wondered to
see his face work again with some emotion he failed to explain satisfactorily to himself.

"There's Mrs. Champney on the terrace; I won't go any farther. Come in when you can, won't you?"

"I shall be pretty apt to run in for a chat almost anytime on my way to the village." He waved
his hand in greeting to his aunt and sprang up the steps leading to the terrace.

He bent to kiss her and was shocked by the change in her that was only too apparent: the delicate
features were sharpened; the temples sunken; her abundant light brown hair was streaked heavily
with white; the hands had grown old, shrunken, the veins prominent.

"Kiss me again, Champney," she said in a low voice, closing her eyes when he bent again to
fulfil her request. When she opened them he noticed that the lids were trembling and the corners
of her mouth twitched. But she rallied in a moment and said sharply:

"Now, don't say you're sorry--I know all about how I look; but I'm better and expect to outlive
a good many well ones yet."

She told Aileen to bring another chair. Champney hastened to forestall her; his aunt shook
her finger at him.

"Don't begin by spoiling her," she said. Then she bade her make ready the little round tea-table
on the terrace and serve tea.

"What do you think of her?" she asked him after Aileen had entered the house. She spoke with
a directness of speech that warned Champney the question was a cloak to some other thought
on her part.

"That she does you credit, Aunt Meda. I don't know that I can pay you or her a greater compliment."

"Very well said. You've learned all that over there--and a good deal more besides. There have
been no folderols in her education. I've made her practical. Come, draw up your chair nearer
and tell me something of the Van Ostends and that little Alice who was the means of Aileen's
coming to me. I hear she is growing to be a beauty."

"Beauty--well, I shouldn't say she was that, not yet; but 'little.' She is fully five feet
six inches with the prospect of an additional inch."

"I didn't realize it. When are they coming home?"

"Early in the autumn. Alice says she is going to come out next winter, not leak out as the
other girls in her set have done; and what Alice wants she generally manages to have."

"Let me see--she must be sixteen; why that's too young!"

"Seventeen next month. She's very good fun though."

"Like her?" She looked towards the house where Aileen was visible with a tea-tray.

"Well, no; at least, not along her lines I should say. She seems to have Tave pretty well under
her thumb."

Mrs. Champney smiled. "Octavius thought he couldn't get used to it at first, but he's reconciled
now; he had to be.--Call her Aileen, Champney; you mustn't let her get the upper hand of you
by making her think she's a woman grown," she added in a low tone, for the girl was approaching
them, slowly on account of the loaded tray she was carrying.

Champney left his seat and taking the tea-things from her placed them on the table. Aileen
busied herself with setting all in order and twirling the tea-ball in each cup of boiling water,
as if she had been used to this ultra method of making tea all her life.

"By the way, Aileen--"

He checked himself, for such a look of amazement was in the quickly lifted gray eyes, such
a surprised arch was visible in the dark brows, that he realized his mistake in hearing to
his aunt's request. He felt he must make himself whole, and if possible without further delay.

"Oh, I see that it must still be Miss Aileen Armagh-and-don't-you-forget-it!" he exclaimed,
laughing to cover his confusion.

She laughed in turn; she could not help it at the memories this title called to mind. "Well,
it's best to be particular with strangers, isn't it?" Down went the eyes to search in the bottom
of a teacup.

"I fancied we were not wholly that; I told Aunt Meda about our escapade six years ago; surely,
that affair ought to establish a common ground for our continued acquaintance. But, if that's
not sufficient, I can find another nearer at hand--where's my dog?"

This brought her to terms.

"Oh, I can't do anything with Rag, Mr. Googe; I'm so sorry. He's over in the coach house this
very minute, and Tave was going to take him home to-night. Just think! That seven-year-old
dog has to be carried home, old as he is!"

"If it's come to that, I'll take him home under my arm to-night--that is, if he won't follow;
I'll try that first."

"But you're not going to punish him!--and simply because he likes me. That wouldn't be fair!"

She made her protest indignantly. Champney looked at his aunt with an amused smile. She nodded
understandingly.

"Oh, no; not simply because he likes you, but because he is untrue to me, his master."

"But that isn't fair!" she exclaimed again, her cheeks flushing rose red; "you've been away
so long that the dog has forgotten."

"Oh, no, he hasn't; or if he has I must jog his memory. He's Irish, and the supreme characteristic
of that breed is fidelity."

"Well, so am I Irish," she retorted pouting; she began to make him a second cup of tea by twirling
the silver tea-ball in the shallow cup until the hot water flew over the edge; "but I shouldn't
consider it necessary to be faithful to any one who had forgotten and left me for six years."

"You wouldn't?" Champney's eyes challenged hers, but either she did not understand their message
or she was too much in earnest to heed it.

"No I wouldn't; what for? I like Rag and he likes me, and we have been faithful to each other;
it would be downright hypocrisy on his part to like you after all these years."

"How about you?" Champney grew bold because he knew his aunt was enjoying the girl's entanglement
as much as he was. She was amused at his daring and Aileen's earnestness. "Didn't you tell
me in Tave's presence only just now that you couldn't forget me? How is that for fidelity?
And why excuse Rag on account of a six years' absence?"

"Well, of course, he's your dog," she said loftily, so evading the question and ignoring the
laugh at her expense.

"Yes, he's my dog if he is a backslider, and that settles it." He turned to his aunt. "I'll
run in again to-morrow, Aunt Meda, I mustn't wear my welcome out in the first two days of my
return."

"Yes, do come in when you can. I suppose you will be here a month or two?"

"No; only a week or two at most; but I shall run up often; the business will require it." He
looked at Aileen. "Will you be so kind as to come over with me to the coach house, Miss Armagh,
and hand my property over to me? Good-bye, Aunt Meda."

Aileen rose. "I'll be back in a few minutes, Mrs. Champney, or will you go in now?"

"There's no dew, and the air is so fresh I'll sit here till you come."

The two went down the terrace steps side by side. Mrs. Champney watched them out of sight;
there was a kindling light in her faded eyes.

"Now, we'll see," said Champney, as they neared the coach house and saw in the window the bundle
of brown tow with black nose flattened on the pane and eyes filled with longing under the tangled
topknot. The stub of a tail was marking time to the canine heartbeats. Champney opened the
door; the dog scurried out and sprang yelping for joy upon Aileen.

"Rag, come here!" The dog's day of judgment was in that masculine command. The little terrier
nosed Aileen's hand, hesitated, then pressed more closely to her side. The girl laughed out
in merry triumph. Champney noted that she showed both sets of her strong white teeth when she
laughed.

"Rag, dear old boy!" She parted with caressing fingers the skein of tow on the frowsled head.

"Come on, Rag." Champney whistled and started up the driveway. The terrier fawned on Aileen,
slavered, snorted, sniffed, then crept almost on his belly, tail stiff, along the ground after
Champney who turned and laid his hand on him. The dog crouched in the road. He gently pulled
the stumps of ears--"Now come!"

He went whistling up the road, and the terrier, recognizing his master, trotted in a lively
manner after him.

Champney turned at the gate and lifted his hat. "How about fidelity now, Miss Armagh?" He wanted
to tease in payment for that amazed look she gave him for taking a liberty with her Christian name.

"Well, of course, he's your dog," she called merrily after him, "but I wouldn't have done it
if I'd been Rag!"

Champney found himself wondering on the homeward way if she really meant what she said.

IV

It was a careless question, carelessly put, and yet--Aileen Armagh, before she returned to
the house, was also asking herself if she meant what she said, asking it with an unwonted timidity
of feeling she could not explain. On coming in sight of the terrace, she saw that Mrs. Champney
was still there. She hesitated a moment, then crossed the lawn to the boat house. She wanted
to sit there a while in the shade, to think things out with herself if possible. What did this
mean--this strange feeling of timidity?

The course of her life was not wholly smooth. It was inevitable that two natures like hers
and Mrs. Champney's should clash at times, and the impact was apt to be none of the softest.
Twice, Aileen, making a confidant of Octavius, threatened to run away, for the check rein was
held too tightly, and the young life became restive under it. When the child first came to
Champ-au-Haut, its mistress recognized at once that in her mischief, her wilfulness, her emphatic
assertion of her right of way, there was nothing vicious, and to Octavius Buzzby's amazement,
she dealt with her, on the whole, leniently.

"She amuses me," she would say when closing an eye to some of Aileen's escapades that gave
a genuine shock to Octavius in the region of his local prejudices.

There had been, indeed, no "folderols" in her education. Sewing, cooking, housework she was
taught root and branch in the time not spent at school, both grammar and high. During the last
year Mrs. Champney permitted her to learn French and embroidery in a systematic manner at the
school established by the gentle Frenchwomen in The Gore; but she steadily refused to permit
the girl to cultivate her voice through the medium of proper instruction. This denial of the
girl's strongest desire was always a common subject of dissension and irritation; however,
after Aileen was seventeen a battle royal of words between the two was a rare occurrence.

At the same time she never objected to Aileen's exercising her talent in her own way. Father
Honoré encouraged her to sing to the accompaniment of his violin, knowing well that the instrument
would do its share in correcting faults. She sang, too, with Luigi Poggi, her "knothole boy"
of the asylum days; and, as seven years before, Nonna Lisa often accompanied with her guitar.
The old Italian, who had managed to keep in touch with her one-time protégée, and her grandson
Luigi, made their appearance in the village one summer after Aileen had been two years in Flamsted.
Luigi, now that his vaudeville days were over, was in search of work at the quarries; his grandmother
was to keep house for him till he should be able to establish himself in trade--the goal of
so many of his thrifty countrymen.

These two Italians were typical of thousands of their nationality who come to our shores; whom
our national life, through naturalization and community of interests, is able in a marvellously
short time to assimilate--and for the public good. Intelligent, business-like, keen at a bargain,
but honest and graciously gentle and friendly in manner, Luigi Poggi soon established himself
in the affections of Flamsted--in no one's more solidly than in Elmer Wiggins', strange to
say, who capitulated to the "foreigner's" progressive business methods--and after three years
of hard and satisfactory work at the quarries and in the sheds, by living frugally and saving
thriftily he was able to open the first Italian fruit stall in the quarry town. The business
was flourishing and already threatened to overrun its quarters. Luigi was in a fair way to
become fruit capitalist; his first presidential vote had been cast, and he felt prepared to
enjoy to the full his new Americanhood.

But with his young manhood and the fulfilment of its young aspirations, came other desires,
other incentives for making his business a success and himself a respected and honored citizen
of these United States. Luigi Poggi was ready to give into Aileen's keeping--whenever she might
choose to indicate by a word or look that she was willing to accept the gift--his warm Italian
heart that knew no subterfuge in love, but gave generously, joyfully, in the knowledge that
there would be ever more and more to bestow. He had not as yet spoken, save with his dark eyes,
his loving earnestness of voice, and the readiness with which, ever since his appearance in
Flamsted he ran and fetched and carried for her.

Aileen enjoyed this devotion. The legitimate pleasure of knowing she is loved--even when no
response can be given--is a girl's normal emotional nourishment. Through it the narrows in
her nature widen and the shallows deepen to the dimensions that enable the woman's heart to
give, at last, even as she has received,--ay, even more than she can ever hope to receive.
This novitiate was now Aileen's.

As a foil, against which Luigi's silent devotion showed to the best advantage, Romanzo Caukins'
dogged persistence in telling her on an average of once in two months that he loved her and
was waiting for a satisfactory answer, served its end. For six years, while Romanzo remained
at Champ-au-Haut, the girl teased, cajoled, tormented, amused, and worried the Colonel's eldest.
Of late, since his twenty-first birthday, he had turned the tables on her, and was teasing
and worrying her with his love-blind persistence. That she had given him a decided answer more
than once made no impression on his determined spirit. In her despair Aileen went to Octavius;
but he gave her cold comfort.

"What'd I tell you two years ago, Aileen? Didn't I say you couldn't play with even a slow-match
like Roman, if you didn't want a fire later on? And you wouldn't hear a word to me."

"But I didn't know, Tave! How could I think that just because a boy tags round after you from
morning till night for the sake of being amused, that when he gets to be twenty-one he is going
to keep on tagging round after you for the rest of his days? I never saw such a leech! He simply
won't accept the fact once for all that I won't have him; but he's got to--so now!"

Octavius smiled at the sudden little flurry; he was used to them.

"I take it Roman doesn't think you know your own mind."

"He doesn't! Well, he'll find out I do, then. Oh, dear, why couldn't he just go on being Romanzo
Caukins with no nonsense about him, and not make such a goose of himself! Anyway, I'm thankful
he's gone; it got so I couldn't so much as tell him to harness up for Mrs. Champney, that he
didn't consider it a sign of 'yielding' on my part!" She laughed out. "Oh, Tavy dear, what
should I do without you!--Now if I could make an impression on you, it might be worth while,"
she added mischievously.

Octavius would have failed to be the man he was had he not felt flattered; he smiled on her
indulgently. "Well, I shouldn't tag round after you much if I was thirty year younger; 't ain't
my way. But there's one thing, Aileen, I want to say to you, and if you've got any common sense
you'll heed me this time: I want you to be mighty careful how you manage with Luigi. You've
got no slow-match to play with this time, let me tell you; you've got a regular sleeping volcano
like some of them he was born near; and it won't do, I warn you. He ain't Romanzo Caukins--Roman's
home made; but t'other is a foreigner; they're different."

"Oh, don't preach, Octavius." She always called him by his unabbreviated name when she was
irritated. "I like well enough to sing with Luigi, and go rowing with him, and play tennis,
and have the good times, but it's nonsense for you to think he means anything serious. Why,
he never spoke a word of love to me in his life!"

"Humph!--that silent kind's the worst; you don't give him a chance."

"And I don't mean to--does that satisfy you?" she demanded. "If it doesn't, I'll tell you something--but
it's a secret; you won't tell?"

"Not if you don't want me to; I ain't that kind."

"I know you're not, Tave; that's why I'm going to tell you. Here, let me whisper--"; she bent
to his ear; he was seated on a stool in the coach house mending a strap; "--I've waited all
this time for that prince to come, and do you suppose for one moment I'd look at any one else?"

"Now that ain't fair to fool me like that, Aileen!"

Octavius was really vexed, but he spoke the last words to empty air, for the girl caught up
her skirt and ran like a deer up the lane. She showed me in the doctor's letter that all I wrote
down was true. It seems to have made a new man of me. It was the doubt as to the reality of the whole
thing that knocked me over. I felt impotent, and in the dark, and
distrustful.

But, now that I know, I am not afraid, even of the Count. He has succeeded after all, then,
in his design in getting to London, and it was he I saw. He has got younger, and how? Van
Helsing is the man to unmask him and hunt him out, if he is anything like what Mina says. We
sat late, and talked it over. Mina is dressing, and I shall call at the hotel in a few minutes
and bring him over.

He was, I think, surprised to see me. When I came into the room where he was, and introduced
myself, he took me by the shoulder, and turned my face round to the light, and said, after a sharp scrutiny,

"But
Madam Mina told me you were ill, that you had had a shock."

It was so funny to hear my wife called 'Madam Mina' by this kindly, strong-faced old man. I
smiled, and said, "I was ill, I have had a shock, but you have cured me already."

"And how?"

"By your letter to Mina last night. I was in doubt, and then everything took a hue of unreality,
and I did not know what to trust, even the evidence of my own senses.

Not knowing what to trust, I did not know what to do, and so had only to keep on working in what
had hitherto been the groove of my life. The groove ceased to avail me, and I mistrusted myself.
Doctor, you don't know what it is to doubt everything, even yourself. No, you don't, you couldn't
with eyebrows like yours."

He seemed pleased, and laughed as he said, "So! You are a physiognomist. I learn more here with each
hour. I am with so much pleasure coming to you to breakfast, and, oh, sir, you will pardon
praise from an old man, but you are blessed in your wife."

I would listen to him go on praising Mina for a day, so I simply nodded and stood silent.

"She is one of God's women, fashioned by His own hand to show us men and other women that there
is a heaven where we can enter, and that its light can be here on
earth.

So true, so sweet, so noble, so little an egoist, and that, let me
tell you, is much in this age, so sceptical and selfish. And you,
sir . . . I have read all the letters to poor Miss Lucy, and some
of them speak of you, so I know you since some days from the knowing
of others, but I have seen your true self since last night. You will
give me your hand, will you not? And let us be friends for all our
lives."

We shook hands, and he was so earnest and so kind that it
made me quite choky.

"And now," he said, "may I ask you for some
more help? I have a great task to do, and at the beginning it is to
know. You can help me here. Can you tell me what went before your
going to Transylvania? Later on I may ask more help, and of a different
kind, but at first this will do."

"Look here, Sir," I said, "does
what you have to do concern the Count?"

"It does," he said solemnly.

Her distress was so unfeigned that Octavius, not being a woman, comforted her by telling her
he was a great botcher. Inwardly he cursed himself for an A No. 1 fool. Aileen never danced
the "coon" again, but thereafter gave herself such grown-up and stand-off airs in Romanzo's
presence, that the youth proceeded in all earnest to lose both head and heart to the girl's
gracious blossoming womanhood. Octavius, observing this, groaned in spirit, and henceforth
held his tongue when he heard the girl carolling her Irish love songs in the presence of the
ingenuous Caukins.

After this, the girl's exuberance of spirits and the sustaining inner life of the imagination
helped her wonderfully during the three following years of patient waiting on a confirmed invalid.
Of late, Mrs. Champney had come to depend more and more on the girl's strong youth; to demand
more and more from her abundant vitality and lively spirits; and Aileen, although recognizing
the anomalous position she held in the Champ-au-Haut household--neither servant nor child,
neither companion nor friend--gave of herself; gave as her Irish inheritance prompted her to
give: ungrudgingly, faithfully, without reward save the knowledge of a duty performed towards
the woman who, in taking her into her household and maintaining her there, had placed her in
a position to make friends--such friends!

       *       *       *       *       *

When the soil is turned over carefully, enriched and prepared perfectly for the seed; when
rain is abundant, sunshine plenteous and mother-earth's spring quickening is instinctive, is
it to be wondered at that the rootlet delves, the plantlet lifts itself, the bud forms quickly,
and unexpectedly spreads its petal-star to the sunlight which enhances its beauty and fructifies
its work of reproduction? The natural laws, in this case, work to their prescribed end along
lines of favoring circumstance--and Love is but the working out of the greatest of all Nature's
laws. When conditions are adverse, there is only too often struggle, strife, wretchedness.
The result is a dwarfing of the product, a lowering of the vital power, a recession from the
type. But, on the contrary, when all conditions combine to further the working of this law,
we have the rapid and perfect flowering, followed by the beneficent maturity of fruit and seed.
Thus Life, the ever-new, becomes immortal.

Small wonder that Aileen Armagh, trying to explain that queer feeling of timidity, should suddenly
press her hand hard over her heart! It was throbbing almost to the point of suffocating her,
so possessed was it by the joy of a sudden and wonderful presence of love.

The knowledge brought with it a sense of bewildering unreality. She knew now that her day dreams
had a substantial basis. She knew now that she had not meant what she said.

For years, ever since the night of the serenade, her vivid imagination had been dwelling on
Champney Googe's home-coming; for years he was the central figure in her day dreams, and every
dream was made half a reality to her by means of the praises in his behalf which she heard
sounded by each man, woman, and child in the ever-increasing circle of her friends. It was
always with old Joel Quimber: "When Champ gits back, we'll hev what ye might call the head
of a fam'ly agin." Octavius Buzzby spent hours in telling her of the boy's comings and goings
and doings at Champ-au-Haut, and the love Louis Champney bore him. Romanzo Caukins set him
on the pedestal of his boyish enthusiasm. The Colonel himself was not less enthusiastic than
his first born; he never failed to assure Aileen when she was a guest in his house--an event
that became a weekly matter as she grew older--that her lot had fallen in pleasant places;
that to his friend, Mrs. Googe, and her son, Champney, she was indebted for the new industrial
life which brought with it such advantages to one and all in Flamsted.

To Aurora Googe, the mother of her imaginative ideal, Aileen, attracted from the first by her
beauty and motherly kindness towards an orphan waif, gave a child's demonstrative love, afterwards
a girl's adoration. In all this devotion she was abetted by Elvira Caukins to whom Aurora Googe
had always been an ideal of womanhood. Moreover, Aileen came to know during these years of
Champney Googe's absence that his mother worshipped in reality where she herself worshipped
in imagination.

Thus the ground was made ready for the seed. Small wonder that the flowering of love in this
warm Irish heart was immediate, when Champney Googe, on the second day after his home-coming,
questioned her with that careless challenge in his eyes:

"You wouldn't?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The sun set before she left the boat house. She ran up the steps to the terrace and, not finding
Mrs. Champney there, sought her in the house. She found her in the library, seated in her easy
chair which she had turned to face the portrait of her husband, over the fireplace.

"Why didn't you call me to help you in, Mrs. Champney? I blame myself for not coming sooner."

"I really feel stronger and thought I might as well try it; there is always a first time--and
you were with Champney, weren't you?"

"I? Why no--what made you think that?" Mrs. Champney noticed the slight hesitation before the
question was put so indifferently, and the quick red that mounted in the girl's cheeks. "Mr.
Googe went off half an hour ago with Rag tagging on behind."

"Then he conquered as usual."

"I don't know whether I should call it 'conquering' or not; Rag didn't want to go, that was
plain enough to see."

"What made him go then?"

Aileen laughed out. "That's just what I'd like to know myself."

"What do you think of him?"

"Who?--Rag or Mr. Googe?"

She was always herself with Mrs. Champney, and her daring spirit of mischief rarely gave offence
to the mistress of Champ-au-Haut. But by the tone of voice in which she answered, Aileen knew
that, without intention, she had irritated her.

"You know perfectly well whom I mean--my nephew, Mr. Googe."

Aileen was silent for a moment. Her young secret was her own to guard from all eyes, and especially
from all unfriendly ones. She was standing on the hearth, in front of Mrs. Champney. Turning
her head slightly she looked up at the portrait of the man above her--looked upon almost the
very lineaments of him whom at that very moment her young heart was adoring: the fine features,
the blue eyes, the level brows, the firm curving lips, the abundant brown hair. It was as if
Champney Googe himself were smiling down upon her. As she continued to look, the lovely light
in the girl's face--a light reflected from no sunset fires over the Flamsted Hills, but from
the sunrise of girlhood's first love--betrayed her to the faded watchful eyes beside her.

"He looks just like your husband;" she spoke slowly; her voice seemed to linger on the last
word; "when Tave saw him he said he thought it was Mr. Champney come to life, and I think--"

Mrs. Champney interrupted her. "Octavius Buzzby is a fool." Sudden anger hardened her voice;
a slight flush came into her wasted cheeks. "Tell Hannah I want my supper now, let Ann bring
it in here to me. I don't need you; I'm tired."

Aileen turned without another word--she knew too well that tone of voice and what it portended;
she was thankful to hear it rarely now--and left the room to do as she was bidden.

"Little fool!" Almeda Champney muttered between set teeth when the door closed upon the girl.
She placed both hands on the arms of her chair to raise herself; walked feebly to the hearth
where a moment before Aileen had stood, and raising her eyes to the smiling ones looking down
into hers, confessed her woman's weakness in bitter words that mingled with a half-sob:

"And I, too, was a fool--all women are with such as you."

V

Although Mrs. Champney remained the only one who read Aileen Armagh's secret, yet even she
asked herself as the summer sped if she read aright.

During the three weeks in which her nephew was making himself familiar with all the inner and
outer workings of the business at The Gore and in the sheds, she came to anticipate his daily
coming to Champ-au-Haut, for he brought with him the ozone of success. His laugh was so unaffectedly
hearty; his interest in the future of Flamsted and of himself as a factor in its prosperity
so unfeigned; his enjoyment of his own importance so infectious, his account of the people
and things he had seen during his absence from home so entertaining that, in his presence,
his aunt breathed a new atmosphere, the life-giving qualities of which were felt as beneficial
to every member of the household at The Bow.

Mrs. Champney took note that he never asked for Aileen. If the girl were there when he ran
in for afternoon tea on the terrace or an hour's chat in the evening,--sometimes it happened
that the day saw him three times at Champ-au-Haut--her presence to all appearance afforded
him only an opportunity to tease her goodnaturedly; he delighted in her repartee. Mrs. Champney,
keenly observant, failed to detect in the girl's frank joyousness the least self-consciousness;
she was just her own merry self with him, and the "give and take" between them afforded Mrs.
Champney a fund of amusement.

On the evening of his departure for New York, she was witness to their merry leave-taking.
Afterwards she summoned Octavius to the library.

"You may bring all the mail for the house hereafter to me, Octavius; now that I am feeling
so much stronger, I shall gradually resume my customary duties in the household. You need not
give any of the mail to Aileen to distribute--I'll do it after to-night."

"What the devil is she up to now!" Octavius said to himself as he left the room.

But no letter from New York came for Aileen. Mrs. Champney tried another tack: the next time
her nephew came to Flamsted, later on in the autumn, she asked him to write her in detail concerning
his intimacy with her cousins, the Van Ostends, and of their courtesies to him. Champney, nothing
loath--always keeping in mind the fact that it was well to keep on the right side of Aunt Meda--wrote
her all she desired to know. What he wrote was retailed faithfully to Aileen; but the frequent
dinners at the Van Ostends', and the prospective coming-out reception and ball to be given
for Alice and scheduled for the late winter, called forth from the eagerly listening girl only
ejaculations of delight and pleasant reminiscence of the first time she had seen the little
girl dressed for a party. If, inwardly she asked herself the question why Alice Van Ostend
had dropped all her childish interest in her whom she had been the means of sending to Flamsted,
why she no longer inquired for her, her common sense was apt to answer the question satisfactorily.
Aileen Armagh was keen-eyed and quick-witted, possessing, without actual experience in the
so-called other world of society, a wonderful intuition as to the relative value of people
and circumstances in this ordinary world which already, during her short life, had presented
various interesting phases for her inspection; consequently she recognized the abyss of circumstance
between her and the heiress of Henry Van Ostend. But, with an intensity proportioned to her
open-minded recognition of the first material differences, her innate womanliness and pride
refused to acknowledge any abyss as to their respective personalities. Hence she kept silence
in regard to certain things; laughed and made merry over the letters filled with the Van Ostends'
doings--and held on her own way, sure of her own status with herself.

Aileen kept her secret, and all the more closely because she was realizing that Champney Googe
was far from indifferent to her. At first, the knowledge of the miracle of love, that was wrought
so suddenly as she thought, sufficed to fill her heart with continual joy. But, shortly, that
was modified by the awakening longing that Champney should return her love. She felt she charmed
him; she knew that he timed his coming and going that he might encounter her in the house or
about the grounds, whenever and wherever he could--sometimes alone in her boat on the long
arm of the lake, that makes up to the west and is known as "lily-pad reach"; and afterwards,
during the autumn, in the quarry woods above The Gore where with her satellites, Dulcie and
Doosie Caukins, she went to pick checkerberries.

Mrs. Champney was baffled; she determined to await developments, taking refuge from her defeat
in the old saying "Love and a cough can't be hidden." Still, she could but wonder when four
months of the late spring and early summer passed, and Champney made no further appearance
in Flamsted. This hiatus was noticeable, and she would have found it inexplicable, had not
Mr. Van Ostend written her a letter which satisfied her in regard to many things of which she
had previously been in doubt; it decided her once for all to speak to Aileen and warn her against
any passing infatuation for her nephew. For this she determined to bide her time, especially
as Champney's unusual length of absence from Flamsted seemed to have no effect on the girl's
joyous spirits. In July, however, she had again an opportunity to see the two together at Champ-au-Haut.
Champney was in Flamsted on business for two days only, and so far as she knew there was no
opportunity for Aileen to see her nephew more than once and in her presence. She managed matters
in such a way that Aileen's services were in continual demand during Champney's two days' stay
in his native town.

But after that visit in July, the singing voice was heard ringing joyfully at all times of
the day in the house and about the grounds of The Bow. Sometimes the breeze brought it to Octavius
from across the lake waters--Luigi's was no longer with it--and he pitied the girl sincerely
because the desire of her heart, the cultivation of such a voice, was denied her. Mrs. Champney,
also, heard the clear voice, which, in this the girl's twentieth year, was increasing in volume
and sweetness, carolling the many songs in Irish, English, French and Italian. She marvelled
at the light-heartedness and, at the same time, wondered if, now that Romanzo Caukins could
no longer hope, Aileen would show enough common sense to accept Luigi Poggi in due time, and
through him make for herself an established place in Flamsted. Not that she was yet ready to
part with her--far from it. She was too useful a member of the Champ-au-Haut household. Still,
if it were to be Poggi in the end, she felt she could control matters to the benefit of all
concerned, herself primarily. She was pleasing herself with the idea of such prospective control
of Aileen's matrimonial interests one afternoon, just after Champney's flying visit in July,
when she rose from her chair beneath the awning and, to try her strength, made her way slowly
along the terrace to the library windows; they were French casements and one of them had swung
outwards noiselessly in the breeze. She was about to step through, when she saw Aileen standing
on the hearth before the portrait of Louis Champney. She was gazing up at it, her face illumined
by the same lovely light that, a year before, had betrayed her secret to the faded but observant
eyes of Louis Champney's widow.

This was enough; the mistress of Champ-au-Haut was again on her guard--and well she might be,
for Aileen Armagh was in possession of the knowledge that Champney Googe loved her. In joyful
anticipation she was waiting for the word which, spoken by him when he should be again in Flamsted,
was to make her future both fair and blest.

VI

In entering on his business life in New York, Champney Googe, like many another man, failed
to take into account the "minus quantities" in his personal equation. These he possessed in
common with other men because he, too, was human: passions in common, ambitions in common,
weaknesses in common, and last, but not least, the pursuance of a common end--the accumulation
of riches.

The sum of these minus quantities added to the total of temperamental characteristics and inherited
traits left, unfortunately, in balancing the personal equation a minus quantity. Not that he
had any realization of such a result--what man has? On the contrary, he firmly believed that
his inherited obstinate perseverance, his buoyant temperament, his fortunate business connection
with the great financier, his position as the meeting-point of the hitherto divided family
interests in Flamsted, his intimacy with the Van Ostends--the distant tie of blood confirming
this at all points--plus his college education and cosmopolitan business training in the financial
capitals of Europe, were potent factors in finding the value of x--this representing to him
an, as yet, unknown quantity of accumulated wealth.

He had not yet asked himself how large a sum he wished to amass, but he said to himself almost
daily, "I have shown my power along certain lines to-day," these lines converging in his consciousness
always to monetary increment.

He worked with a will. His energy was tireless. He learned constantly and much from other men
powerful in the world of affairs--of their methods of speculation, some legitimate, others
quite the contrary; of their manipulation of stocks, weak and strong; of their strengthening
the market when the strengthening was necessary to fill a threatened deficit in their treasury
and of their weakening a line of investment to prevent over-loading and consequent depletion
of the same. He was thoroughly interested in all he heard and saw of the development of mines
and industries for the benefit of certain banking cliques and land syndicates. If now and then
a mine proved to have no bottom and the small investor's insignificant sums dropped out of
sight in this bottomless pit, that did not concern him--it was all in the game, and the game
was an enticing one to be played to the end. The two facts that nothing is certain at all times,
and that everything is uncertain at some time, added the excitement of chance to his business
interest.

At times, for instance when walking up the Avenue on a bracing October day, he felt as if he
owned all in sight--a condition of mind which those who know from experience the powerful electro-magnetic
current generated by the rushing life of the New York metropolis can well understand. He struck
out into the stream with the rest, and with overweening confidence in himself--in himself as
master of circumstances which he intended to control in his own interests, in himself as the
pivotal point of Flamsted affairs. The rapidity of the current acted as a continual stimulus
to exertion. Like all bold swimmers, he knew in a general way that the channel might prove
tortuous, the current threaten at times to overpower him; but, carried rapidly out into mid-stream
with that gigantic propulsive force that is the resultant of the diverse onward-pressure of
the metropolitan millions, he suddenly found himself one day in that mid-stream without its
ever having occurred to him that he might not be able to breast it. Even had he thought enough
about the matter to admit that certain untoward conditions might have to be met, he would have
failed to realize that the shore towards which he was struggling might prove in the end a quicksand.

Another thing: he failed to take into account the influence of any cross current, until he
was made to realize the necessity of stemming his strength against it. This influence was Aileen
Armagh.

Whenever in walking up lower Broadway from the office he found himself passing Grace Church,
he realized that, despite every effort of will, he was obliged to relive in thought the experience
of that night seven years ago at the Vaudeville. Then for the first time he saw the little
match girl crouching on the steps of the stage reproduction of this same marble church. The
child's singing of her last song had induced in him then--wholly unawares, wholly unaccountably--a
sudden mental nausea and a physical disgust at the course of his young life, the result being
that the woman "who lay in wait for him at the corner" by appointment, watched that night in
vain for his coming.

In reliving this experience, there was always present in his thought the Aileen Armagh as he
knew her now--pure, loyal, high-spirited, helpful, womanly in all her household ways, entertaining
in her originality, endowed with the gift of song. She was charming; this was patent to all
who knew her. It was a pleasure to dwell on this thought of her, and, dwelling upon it too
often at off-times in his business life, the desire grew irresistible to be with her again;
to chat with her; to see the blue-gray eyes lifted to his; to find in them something he found
in no others. At such times a telegram sped over the wires, to Aurora Googe, and her heart
was rejoiced by a two days' visit from her son.

Champney Googe knew perfectly well that this cross current of influence was diametrically opposed
to his own course of life as he had marked it out for himself; knew that this was a species
of self-gratification in which he had no business to indulge; he knew, moreover, that from
the moment he should make an earnest effort to win Alice Van Ostend and her accompanying millions,
this self-gratification must cease. He told himself this over and over again; meanwhile he
made excuse--a talk with the manager of the quarries, a new order of weekly payments to introduce
and regulate with Romanzo Caukins, the satisfactory pay-master in the Flamsted office, a week-end
with his mother, the consideration of contracts and the erection of a new shed on the lake
shore--to visit Flamsted several times during the autumn, winter, and early spring.

At last, however, he called a halt.

Alice Van Ostend, young, immature, amusing in her girlish abandon to the delight of at last
"coming out", was, nevertheless, rapidly growing up, a condition of affairs that Champney was
forced rather unwillingly to admit just before her first large ball. As usual he made himself
useful to Alice, who looked upon him as a part of her goods and chattels. It was in the selection
of the favors for the german to be given in the stone house on the occasion of the coming-out
reception for its heiress, that his eyes were suddenly opened to the value of time, so to say;
for Alice was beginning to patronize him. By this sign he recognized that she was putting the
ten years' difference in their ages at something like a generation. It was not pleasing to
contemplate, because the winning of Alice Van Ostend was, to use his own expression, in a line
coincident with his own life lines. Till now he believed he was the favored one; but certain
signs of the times began to be provocative of distrust in this direction.

He asked boldly for the first dance, for the cotillon, and the privilege of giving her the
flowers she was to wear that night. He assumed these favors to be within his rights; she was
by no means of his way of thinking. It developed during their scrapping--Champney had often
to scrap with Alice to keep on a level with her immaturity--that there was another rival for
the cotillon, another, a younger man, who desired to give her the special flowers for this
special affair. The final division of the young lady's favors was not wholly reassuring to
Mr. Googe. As a result of this awakening, he decided to remain in New York without farther
visits to Flamsted until the Van Ostends should have left the city for the summer.

But in the course of the spring and summer he found it one thing to call a halt and quite another
to make one. The cross current of influence, which had its source in Flamsted, was proving,
against his will and judgment, too strong for him. He knew this and deplored it, for it threatened
to carry him away from the shore towards which he was pushing, unawares that this apparently
firm ground of attainment might prove treacherous in the end.

"Every man has his weakness, and she's mine," he told himself more than once; yet in making
this statement he was half aware that the word "weakness" was in no sense applicable to Aileen.
It remained for the development of his growing passion for her to show him that he was wholly
in the wrong--she was his strength, but he failed to realize this.

Champney Googe was not a man to mince matters with himself. He told himself that he was not
infatuated; infatuation was a thing to which he had yielded but few times in his selfish life.
He was ready to acknowledge that his interest in Aileen Armagh was something deeper, more lasting;
something that, had he been willing to look the whole matter squarely in the face instead of
glancing askance at its profile, he would have seen to be perilously like real love--that love
which first binds through passionate attachment, then holds through congenial companionship
to bless a man's life to its close.

"She suits me--suits me to a T;" such was his admission in what he called his weak moments.
Then he called himself a fool; he cursed himself for yielding to the influence of her charming
personality in so far as to encourage what he perceived to be on her part a deep and absorbing
love for him. In yielding to his weakness, he knew he was deviating from the life lines he
had laid with such forethought for his following. A rich marriage was the natural corollary
of his determination to advance his own interests in his chosen career. This marriage he still
intended to make, if possible with Alice Van Ostend; and the fact that young Ben Falkenburg,
an old playmate of Alice's, just graduated from college, the "other man" of the cotillon favors,
was the first invited guest for the prospective cruise on Mr. Van Ostend's yacht, did not dovetail
with his intentions. It angered him to think of being thwarted at this point.

"Why must such a girl cross my path just as I was getting on my feet with Alice?" he asked
himself, manlike illogically impatient with Aileen when he should have lost patience with himself.
But in the next moment he found himself dwelling in thought on the lovely light in the eyes
raised so frankly to his, on the promises of loyalty those same eyes would hold for him if
only he were to speak the one word which she was waiting to hear--which she had a right to
hear after his last visit in July to Flamsted.

If he had not kissed her that once! With a girl like Aileen there could be no trifling--what then?

He cursed himself for his heedless folly, yet--he knew well enough that he would not have denied
himself that moment of bliss when the girl in response to his whispered words of love gave
him her first kiss, and with it the unspoken pledge of her loving heart.

"I'm making another ass of myself!" he spoke aloud and continued to chew the end of a cold cigar.

The New York office was deserted in these last days of August except for two clerks who had
just left to take an early train to the beach for a breath of air. The treasurer of the Flamsted
Quarries Company was sitting idle at his desk. It was an off-time in business and he had leisure
to assure himself that he was without doubt the quadruped alluded to above--"An ass that this
time is in danger of choosing thistles for fodder when he can get something better."

Only the day before he had concluded on his own account a deal, that cost him much thought
and required an extra amount of a certain kind of courage, with a Wall Street firm. Now that
this was off his hands and there was nothing to do between Friday and Monday, when he was to
start for Bar Harbor to join the Van Ostends and a large party of invited guests for a three
weeks' cruise on the Labrador coast, he had plenty of time to convince himself that he possessed
certain asinine qualities which did not redound to his credit as a man of sense. In his idle
moments the thought of Aileen had a curious way of coming to the surface of consciousness.
It came now. He whirled suddenly to face his desk squarely; tossed aside the cold cigar in
disgust; touched the electric button to summon the office boy.

"I'll put an end to it--it's got to be done sometime or other--just as well now." He wrote
a note to the head clerk to say that he was leaving two days earlier for his vacation than
he intended; left his address for the next four days in case anything should turn up that might
demand his presence before starting on the cruise; sent the office boy off with a telegram
to his mother that she might expect him Saturday morning for two days in Flamsted; went to
his apartment, packed grip and steamer trunk for the yacht, and left on the night express for
the Maine coast.

VII

"I just saw Mr. Googe driving down from The Gore, Aileen, so he's in town again."

Octavius was passing the open library window where Aileen was sitting at her work, and stopped
to tell her the news.

"Is he?"

The tone was indifferent, but had she not risen quickly to shake some threads of embroidery
linen into the scrap-basket beneath the library table, Octavius might have seen the quick blood
mount into her cheeks, the red lips quiver. It was welcome news for which she had been waiting
already six weeks.

Octavius spoke again but in a low voice:

"You might mention it to Mrs. Champney when she comes down; it don't set well, you know, if
she ain't told everything that's going on." He passed on without waiting for an answer.

The girl took her seat again by the window. Her work lay in her lap; her hands were folded
above it; her face was turned to the Flamsted Hills. "Would he come soon? When and where could
she see him again, and alone?" Her thoughts were busy with conjecture.

Octavius recrossing the terrace called out to her:

"You going up to Mrs. Caukins' later on this afternoon?"

"Yes; Mrs. Champney said she didn't need me."

"I'll take you up."

"Thank you, Tave, not to-day. I'm going to row up as far as the upper shed. I promised the
twins to meet them there; they want to see the new travelling crane at work. We'll go up afterwards
to The Gore together."

"It's pretty hot, but I guess you're all three seasoned by this time."

"Through and through, Tave; and I'm not coming home till after supper--it's lovely then--there's
Mrs. Champney coming!"

She heard her step in the upper hall and ran upstairs to assist her in coming down.

"Will you go out on the terrace now?" she asked her on entering the library.

"I'll wait a while; it's too warm at this hour."

Aileen drew Mrs. Champney's arm chair to the other casement window. She resumed her seat and work.

"How are you getting on with the napkins?" the mistress of Champ-au-Haut inquired after a quarter
of an hour's silence in which she was busied with some letters.

"Fine--see?" She held up a corner for her inspection. "This is the tenth; I shall soon be ready
for the big table cloth."

"Bring them to me."

Aileen obeyed, and showed her the monogram, A C, wrought by her own deft fingers in the finest
linen.

"There's no one like a Frenchwoman to teach embroidery; you've done them credit." Aileen dropped
a mock courtesy. "Which one taught you?"

"Sister Ste. Croix."

"Is she the little wrinkled one?"

"Yes, but I've fallen in love with every wrinkle, she's a perfect dear--"

"I didn't imply she wasn't." Mrs. Champney was apt to snap out at Aileen when, according to
her idea, she was "gushing" too much. The girl had ceased to mind this; she was used to it,
especially during her three years of attendance on this invalid. "Who designed this monogram?"

"She did; she can draw beautifully."

Mrs. Champney put on her glasses to examine in detail the exquisite lettering, A C.

Aileen leaned above her, smiling to herself. How many loving thoughts were wrought into those
same initials! How many times, while her fingers were busy fashioning them, she had planned
to make just such for her very own! How often, as she wrought, she had laid her lips to the
A C, murmuring to herself over and over again, "Aileen--Champney, Champney--Aileen," so filling
and satisfying with the sound of this pleasing combination her every loving anticipation!

She was only waiting for the "word", schooling herself in these last six weeks to wait patiently
for it--the "word" which should make these special letters her legitimate own!

The singing thoughts that ring in the consciousness of a girl who gives for the first time
her whole heart to her lover; the chanted prayers to her Maker, that rise with every muted
throb of the young wife's heart which is beating for two in anticipation of her first motherhood--who
shall dare enumerate them?

The varied loving thoughts in this girl's quick brain, which was fed by her young pulsing heart--a
heart single in its loyalty to one during all the years since her orphan childhood, were intensified
and illumined by the inherent quickening power of a vivid imagination, and inwrought with these
two letters that stood, at present, for their owner, Almeda Champney. Aileen's smile grew wonderfully
tender, almost tremulous as she continued to lean above her work. Mrs. Champney looking up
suddenly caught it and, in part, interpreted it. It angered her both unreasonably and unaccountably.
This girl must be taught her place. She aspiring to Champney Googe! She handed her back the work.

"Ann said just now she heard Octavius telling you that my nephew, Champney Googe, is in town--when
did he come?"

"I don't know--Tave didn't say."

"I wonder Alice Van Ostend didn't mention that he was coming here before going on the yachting
cruise they've planned. I had a letter from her yesterday--I know you'd like to hear it."

"Of course I should! It's the first one she has written you, isn't it?--Where is it?" She spoke
with her usual animated interest.

"I have it here."

She took up one of several letters in her lap, opened it, turned it over, adjusted her glasses
and began to read a paragraph here and there. Aileen listened eagerly.

"I suppose I may as well read it all--Alice wouldn't mind you," said Mrs. Champney, and proceeded
to give the full contents. It was filled with anticipations of the yachting cruise, of a later
visit to Flamsted, of Champney and her friends. Champney's name occurred many times,--Alice's
attitude towards the possessor of it seemed to be that of private ownership,--but everything
was written with the frankness of an accepted publicity of the fact that Mr. Googe was one
of her social appendages. Aileen was amused at the whole tone of the rather lengthy epistle;
it gave her no uneasiness.

Mrs. Champney laid aside her glasses; she wanted to note the effect of the reading on the girl.

"You can see for yourself from this how matters stand between these two; it needn't be spoken
of in Flamsted outside the family, but it's just as well for you to know of it--don't you think
so?"

Aileen parried; she enjoyed a little bout with Champney Googe's aunt.

"Of course, it's plain enough to see that they're the best of friends--"

"Friends!" Mrs. Champney interrupted her; there was a scornful note in her voice which insensibly
sharpened; "you haven't your usual common sense, Aileen, if you can't read between these lines
well enough to see that Miss Van Ostend and my nephew are as good as engaged."

Aileen smiled, but made no reply.

"What are you laughing at?" The tone was peremptory and denoted extreme irritation. Aileen
put down her work and looked across to her interrogator.

"I was only smiling at my thoughts."

"Will you be so good as to state what they are? They may prove decidedly interesting to me--at
this juncture," she added emphatically.

Aileen's look of amusement changed swiftly to one of surprise.

"To be honest, I was thinking that what she writes about Mr. Googe doesn't sound much like
love, that was all--"

"That was all!" Mrs. Champney echoed sarcastically; "well, what more do you need to convince
you of facts I should like to know?"

Aileen laughed outright at this. "Oh, Mrs. Champney, what's the use of being a girl, if you
can't know what other girls mean?"

"Please explain yourself."

"Won't you please read that part again where she mentions the people invited for the cruise."

Mrs. Champney found the paragraph and re-read it aloud.

"Falkenburg--that's the name--Ben Falkenburg."

"How did you ever hear of this Ben Falkenburg?"

"Oh, I heard of him years ago!" The mischief was in her voice and Mrs. Champney recognized it.

"Where?"

"When I was in New York--in the asylum; he's the one that danced the minuet with the Marchioness;
I told you about it years ago."

"How do you know he was the boy?"

"Because Alice told me his name then, and showed me the valentine and May-basket he sent her--just
read the postscript again; if you want to crack a letter for its kernel, you'll generally find
it in a postscript, that is with girls of Alice's age."

She spoke as if there were years of seniority on her part. Mrs. Champney turned to the postscript
again.

"I see nothing in this--you're romancing again, Aileen; you'd better put it aside; it will
get you into trouble sometime."

"Oh, never fear for me, Mrs. Champney; I'll take care of all the romancing as well as the romances--but
can't you see by those few words that it's Mr. Ben Falkenburg who is going to make the yachting
trip for Miss Van Ostend, and not your nephew?"

"No, I can't," Mrs. Champney answered shortly, "and neither could you if your eyes weren't
blinded by your infatuation for him."

Aileen rolled up her work deliberately. If the time had come for open war to be declared between
the two on Champney Googe's account, it was best to fight the decisive battle now, before seeing
him again. She rose and stood by the window.

"What do you mean, Mrs. Champney?" Her temper was rising quickly as it always did when Mrs.
Champney went too far. She had spoken but once of her nephew in a personal way to Aileen since
she asked that question a year ago, "What do you think of him?"

"I mean what I say." Her voice took on an added shrillness. "Your infatuation for my nephew
has been patent for a year now--and it's time you should be brought to your senses; I can't
suppose you're fool enough to think he'll marry you."

Aileen set her lips close. After all, it was not best to answer this woman as she deserved
to be answered. She controlled the increasing anger so far as to be able to smile frankly and
answer lightly:

"You've no need to worry, Mrs. Champney; your nephew has never asked me to be his wife."

"His wife!" she echoed scornfully; "I should say not; and let me tell you for your own benefit--sometime
you'll thank me for it--and mark my words, Aileen Armagh, he never will ask you to be his wife,
and the sooner you accept this unvarnished truth the better it will be for you. I suppose you
think because you've led Romanzo Caukins and young Poggi a chase, you can do the same with
Champney Googe--but you'll find out your mistake; such men aren't led--they lead. He is going
to marry Alice Van Ostend."

"Do you know this for a fact, Mrs. Champney?" She turned upon her sharply. She was, at last,
at bay; her eyes were dark with anger; her lips and cheeks white.

"It's like you to fly off at a tangent, Aileen, and doubt a person's word simply because it
happens to contain an unpleasant truth for you--here is the proof," she held up a letter; "it's
from my cousin, Henry Van Ostend; he has written it out in black and white that my nephew has
already asked for his daughter's hand. Now disabuse your mind of any notion you may have in
regard to Champney Googe--I hope you won't disgrace yourself by crying for the moon after this."

The girl's eyes fairly blazed upon her.

"Mrs. Champney, after this I'll thank you to keep your advice and your family affairs to yourself--I
didn't ask for either. And you've no need to tell me I'm only Aileen Armagh--for I know it
perfectly well. I'm only an orphan you took into your home seven years ago and have kept, so
far, for her service. But if I am only this, I am old enough to do and act as I please--and
now you may mark my words: it's not I who will disgrace you and yours--not I, remember that!"
Her anger threatened to choke her; but her voice although husky remained low, never rising
above its level inflection. "And let me tell you another thing: I'm as good any day as Alice
Van Ostend, and I should despise myself if I thought myself less; and if it's the millions
that make the difference in the number of your friends--may God keep me poor till I die!" She
spoke with passionate earnestness.

Mrs. Champney smiled to herself; she felt her purpose was accomplished.

"Are you going up to Mrs. Caukins'?" she asked in a matter-of-fact voice that struck like cold
iron on the girl's burning intensity of feeling.

"Yes, I'm going."

"Well, be back by seven."

The girl made no reply. She left the library at once, closing the door behind her with a force
that made the hall ring. Mrs. Champney smiled again, and proceeded to re-read Alice Van Ostend's
letter.

Aileen went out through the kitchen and across the vegetable garden to the boat house. She
cast loose one of the boats in the float, took her seat and rowed out into the lake--rowed
with a strength and swiftness that accurately gauged her condition of mind. She rounded the
peninsula of The Bow and headed her boat, not to the sheds on the north shore, but towards
the west, to "lily-pad reach". To get away from that woman's presence, to be alone with herself--that
was all she craved at the moment. The oars caught among the lily-pads; this gave her an excuse
for pulling and wrenching at them. Her anger was still at white heat--not a particle of color
as yet tinged her cheeks--and the physical exertion necessary to overcome such an obstacle
as the long tough stems she felt to be a relief.

"It isn't true--it isn't true," she said over and over again to herself. She kept tugging and
pulling till by sheer strength she forced the boat into the shallow water among the tall arrowhead
along the margin of the shore.

She stepped out on the landing stones, drew up the boat, then made her way across the meadow
to the shade of the tall spreading willows. Here she threw herself down, pressing her face
into the cool lush grass, and relived in thought that early morning hour she had spent alone
with him, only a few weeks ago, on the misty lake among the opening water lilies.

She had been awakened that morning in mid-July by hearing him singing softly beneath her open
window that same song which seven years ago made such an unaccountable impression on her child's
heart. He had often in jest threatened to repeat the episode of the serenade, but she never
realized that beneath the jest there was any deeper meaning. Now she was aware of that meaning
in her every fibre, physical and spiritual.

    "Aileen Mavoureen, the gray dawn is breaking--"

And hearing that, realizing that the voice was calling for her alone in all the world, she
rose; dressed herself quickly; beckoned joyously to him from the window; noiselessly made her
way down the back stairs; softly unbolted the kitchen porch door--

He was there with hands outstretched for hers; she placed them in his, and again, in remembrance
of their fun and frolic seven years before, he raced with her down the slate-laid garden walk,
across the lawn to the boat house where his own boat lay moored.

It was four o'clock on that warm midsummer morning. The mists lay light but impenetrable on
the surface of the lake. The lilies were still closed.

They spoke but little.

"I knew no one could hear me--they all sleep on the other side, don't they?"

"Yes, all except the boy, and he sleeps like a log--Tave has to wake him every morning; alarm
clocks are no good."

"Have you ever seen the lilies open, Aileen?"

"No, never; I've never been out early in the morning, but I've often seen them go to sleep
under the starlight."

"We will row round then till they open--it's worth seeing."

The sun rose in the low-lying mists; it transfused them with crimson. It mounted above them;
shot them through and through with gold and violet--then dispersed them without warning, and
showed to the girl's charmed eyes and senses the gleaming blue of the lake waters blotched
with the dull green of the lily-pads, and among them the lilies expanding the fragrant white
of their corollas to its beneficent light and warmth....

       *       *       *       *       *

When she left the boat his kiss was on her lips, his words of love ringing in her ears. One
more of her day dreams was realized: she had given to the man she loved with all her heart
her first kiss--and with it, on her part, the unspoken pledge of herself.

A movement somewhere about the house, the lowing of the cattle, the morning breeze stirring
in the trees--something startled them. They drew apart, smiling into each other's eyes. She
placed her finger on her lips.

"Hush!" she whispered. She was off on a run across the lawn, turning once to wave her hand
to him.--And now this!

How could this then that she had just been told be true?

Her whole being revolted at the thought that he was tampering with what to her was the holiest
in her young life--her love for him. In the past six weeks it never once occurred to her that
he could prove unworthy of such trust as hers; no man would dare to be untrue to her--to her,
Aileen Armagh, who never in all her wilfulness and love of romance had given man or boy occasion
to use either her name or her lightly! How dared he do this thing? Did he not know with whom
he had to deal? Because she was only Aileen Armagh, and at service with his relation, did he
think her less the true woman?

Suspicion was foreign to her open nature; doubt, distrust had no place in her young life; but
like a serpent in the girl's Eden the words of the mistress of Champ-au-Haut, "He never will
ask you to be his wife," dropped poison in her ears.

She sat up on the grass, thrust back her hair from her forehead--

"Let him dare to hint even that what he said was love for me was not what--what--"

She buried her face in her hands.

"Aileen--Aileen--where are you?"

That voice, breaking in upon her wretched thought of him, brought her to her feet.

VIII

"Mother, don't you think Aunt Meda might open her purse and do something for Aileen Armagh
now that the girl has been faithful to her interests so long?"

He had remained at home since his arrival in the morning, and was now about to drive down into
the town.

His mother looked up from her sewing in surprise.

"What put that into your mind? I was thinking the same thing myself not a week ago; she has
such a wonderful voice."

"It seems unjust to keep her from utilizing it for herself so far as an income is concerned
and to deprive others of the pleasure of hearing her voice after it is trained. But, of course,
she can't do it herself."

"I only wish I could do it for her." His mother spoke with great earnestness. "But even if
I could help, there would be no use offering so long as she remains with Almeda."

"Perhaps not; anyway, I'm going down there now, and I shall do what I can to sound Aunt Meda
on this point."

"Good luck!" she called after him. He turned, lifted his hat, and smiled back at her.

       *       *       *       *       *

He found Mrs. Champney alone on the terrace; she was sitting under the ample awning that protected
her from the sun but was open on all sides for air.

"All alone, Aunt Meda?" he inquired cheerfully, taking a seat beside her.

"Yes; when did you come?"

"This morning."

"Isn't it rather unexpected?" She glanced sideways rather sharply at him.

"My coming here is; I'm really on my way to Bar Harbor. The Van Ostends are off on Tuesday
with a large party and I promised to go with them."

"So Alice wrote me the other day. It's the first letter I have had from her. She says she is
coming here on her way home in October, that she's 'just crazy' to see Flamsted Quarries--but
I can read between the lines even if my eyes are old." She smiled significantly.

Champney felt that an answering smile was the safe thing in the circumstances. He wondered
how much Aunt Meda knew from the Van Ostends. That she was astute in business matters was no
guaranty that she would prove far-sighted in matrimonial affairs.

"I've known Alice so long that she's gotten into the habit of taking me for granted--not that
I object," he added with a glance in the direction of the boat house. Mrs. Champney, whom nothing
escaped, noticed it.

"I should hope not," she said emphatically. "I may as well tell you, Champney, that Mr. Van
Ostend has not hesitated to write me of your continued attentions to Alice and your frankness
with him in regard to the outcome of this. So far as I see, his only objection could be on
account of her extreme youth--I congratulate you." She spoke with great apparent sincerity.

"Thank you, Aunt Meda," he said quietly; "your congratulations are premature, and the subject
so far as Alice and I are concerned is taboo for three years--at Mr. Van Ostend's special request."

"Quite right--a girl doesn't know her own mind before she is twenty-five."

"Faith, I know one who knows her own mind on all subjects at twenty!"--he laughed heartily
as if at some amusing remembrance--"and that's Aileen; by the way, where is she, Aunt Meda?"

"She was going up to Mrs. Caukins'. I suppose she is there now--why?"

"Because I want to talk about her, and I don't want her to come in on us suddenly."

"What about Aileen?" She spoke indifferently.

"About her voice; you've never been willing, I understand, to have it cultivated?"

"What if I haven't?"

"That's just the 'what', Aunt Meda," he said pleasantly but earnestly; "I've heard her singing
a good many times, and I've never heard her that I didn't wish some one would be generous enough
to such talent to pay for cultivating it."

"Do you know why I haven't been willing?"

"No, I don't--and I'd like to know."

"Because, if I had, she would have been on the stage before now--and where could I get another?
I don't intend to impoverish myself for her sake--not after what I've done for her." She spoke
emphatically. "What was your idea in asking me about her?"

"I thought it was a pity that such a talent should be left to go to seed. I wish you could
look at it from my standpoint and give her the wherewithal to go to Europe for three or four
years in order to cultivate it--she can take care of herself well enough."

"And you really advise this?" She asked almost incredulously.

"Why not? You must have seen my interest in the girl. I can't think of a better way of showing
it than to induce you to put her in the way of earning her livelihood by her talent."

Mrs. Champney made no direct reply. After a moment's silence she asked abruptly:

"Have you ever said anything to her about this?"

"Never a word."

"Don't then; I don't want her to get any more new-fangled notions into her head."

"Just as you say; but I wish you would think about it--it seems almost a matter of justice."
He rose to go.

"Where are you going now?"

"Over to the shed office; I want to see the foreman about the last contract. I'll borrow the
boat, if you don't mind, and row up--I have plenty of time." He looked at his watch. "Can I
do anything for you before I go?" he asked gently, adjusting an awning curtain to shut the
rays of the sun from her face.

"Yes; I wish you would telephone up to Mrs. Caukins and tell her to tell Aileen to be at home
before six; I need her to-night."

"Certainly."

He went into the house and telephoned. He did not think it necessary to return and report Mrs.
Caukins' reply that Aileen "hadn't come up yet." He went directly to the boat house, wondering
in the mean time where she was.

One of the two boats was already gone; doubtless she had taken it--where could she be?

He stepped into the boat, and pulled slowly out into the lake, keeping in the lee of the rocky
peninsula of The Bow. He was fairly well satisfied with his effort in Aileen's behalf and with
himself because he had taken a first step in the right direction. Neither his mother nor Aunt
Meda could say now that he was not disinterested; if Father Honoré came over, as was his custom,
to chat with him on the porch for an hour or two in the evening, he would broach the subject
again to him who was the girl's best friend. If she could go to Europe there would be less danger--

Danger?--Yes; he was willing to admit it, less danger for them both; three years of absence
would help materially in this matter in which he felt himself too deeply involved. Then, in
the very face of this acknowledgment, he could not help a thought that whitened his cheek as
it formulated itself instantaneously in his consciousness: if she were three years in Europe,
there would be opportunity for him to see her sometime.

He knew the thought could not be uttered in the girl's pure presence; yet, with many others,
he held that a woman, if she loves a man absorbingly, passionately, is capable of any sacrifice--would
she? Hardly; she was so high-spirited, so pure in thought--yet she loved him, and after all
love was the great Subduer. But no--it could never be; this was his decision. He rowed out
into the lake.

Why must a man's action prove so often the slave of his thought!

He was passing the arm of Mesantic that leads to "lily-pad reach". He turned to look up the
glinting curve. Was she there?--should he seek her?

He backed water on the instant. The boat responded like a live thing, quivered, came to a partial
rest--stopped, undulating on the surface roughened by the powerful leverage of the oars. Champney
sat motionless, the dripping blades suspended over the water. He knew that in all probability
the girl was there in "lily-pad reach". Should he seek her? Should he go?--Should he?

The hands that held the steady oars quivered suddenly, then gripped them as in a vise; the
man's face flushed; he bent to the right oar, the craft whirled half way on her keel; the other
oar fell--swiftly and powerfully the boat shot ahead up "lily-pad reach".

Reason, discretion, judgment razed in an instant from the table of consciousness; desire rampant,
the desire of possession to which intellect, training, environment, even that goodward-turning
which men under various aspects term religion, succumb in a moment like the present one in
which Champney Googe was bending all his strength to the oars that he might be the sooner with
the girl he loved.

He did not ask himself what next? He gave no thought to aught but reaching the willows as soon
as he could. His eye was on the glinting curve before him; he rounded it swiftly--her boat
was there tied to the stake among the arrowhead; his own dragged through the lily-pads beside
it; he sprang out, ran up the bank--

"Aileen--Aileen--where are you?" he called eagerly, impatiently, and sought about him to find her.

Aileen Armagh heard that call, and doubt, suspicion, anger dropped away from her. Instead,
trust, devotion, anticipation clothed her thought of him; he was coming to speak the "word"
that was to make her future fair and plain--the one "word" that should set him forever in her
heart, enthrone him in her life. That word was not "love", but the sacrament of love; the word
of four letters which a woman writes large with legitimate loving pride in the face of the
world. She sprang to her feet and waited for him; the willows drooped on either side of her--so
he saw her again.

He took her in his arms. "Aileen--Aileen," he said over and over again between the kisses that
fell upon her hair, forehead, lips.

She yielded herself to his embrace, passionately given and returned with all a girl's loving
ardor and joy in the loved man's presence. Between the kisses she waited for the "word."

It was not forthcoming.

She drew away from him slightly and looked straight into his eyes that were devouring her face
and form. The unerring instinct of a pure nature warned her against that look. He caught her
to him--but she stemmed both hands against his breast to repulse him.

"Let me go, Champney," she said faintly.

"Why should I let you go? Aileen, my Aileen, why should I ever let you go?" A kiss closed the
lips that were about to reply--a kiss so long and passionate that the girl felt her strength
leaving her in the close embrace.

"He will speak the 'word' now surely," she told herself. Between their heart-throbs she listened
for it.

The "word" was not spoken.

Again she stemmed her hands against him, pressing them hard against his shoulders. "Let me
go, Champney." She spoke with spirit.

The act of repulsion, the ring in her voice half angered him; at the same time it added fuel
to desire.

"I will not let you go--you love me--tell me so--"

He waited for no reply but caught her close; the girl struggled in his arms. It was dawning
on her undaunted spirit that this, which she was experiencing with Champney Googe, the man
she loved with all her heart, was not love. Of a sudden, all that brave spirit rose in arms
to ward off from herself any spoken humiliation to her womanhood, ay more, to prevent the man
she loved from deepening his humiliation of himself in her presence.

"Let me go" she said, but despite her effort for control her voice trembled.

"You know I love you--why do you repel me so?"

"Let me go," she said again; this time her voice was firm, the tone peremptory; but she made
no further struggle to free herself from his arms.--"Oh, what are you doing!"

"I am making the attempt to find out if you love me as I love you--"

"You have no right to kiss me so--" 

But yet we see around us every day the growth of new beliefs, which
think themselves new, and which are yet but the old, which pretend
to be young, like the fine ladies at the opera.

I suppose now you do not believe in corporeal transference.

No? Nor in materialization. No? Nor in astral bodies.

No? Nor in the reading of thought.

No? Nor in hypnotism . . ."

"Yes," I said. "Charcot has proved that pretty well."

He smiled as he went on, "Then you are satisfied as to it. Yes?

He paid no heed to her warning, but caught her to him again. "Tell me now you don't love me,
Aileen," he whispered, laying his cheek to hers.

"I tell you I do not love you," she said aloud; her voice was clear and firm.

He drew back then to look at her in amazement; turned away for a moment as if half dazed; then,
holding her to his side with his left arm he laid his ear hard over her heart. What was it
that paled the man's flushed cheeks?

The girl's heart was beating slowly, calmly, even faintly. He caught her wrist, pressing his
fingers on her pulse--there was not the suspicion of a flutter. He let her go then. She stood
before him; her eyes were raised fearlessly to his.

"I'm going to row back now--no, don't speak--not a word--"

She turned and walked slowly down to the boat; cast it off; poled it with one oar out of the
tall arrowhead and the thick fringe of lily-pads; took her seat; fitted the oars to the rowlocks,
dipped them, and proceeded to row steadily down the reach towards The Bow.

Champney Googe stood where she had left him till he watched her out of sight around the curve;
then he went over to the willows and sat down. It took time for him to recover from his debauch
of feeling. He made himself few thoughts at first; but as time passed and the shadows lengthened
on the reach, he came slowly to himself. The night fell; the man still sat there, but the thoughts
were now crowding fast, uncomfortably fast. He dropped his head into his hands, so covering
his face in the dark for very shame that he had so outraged his manhood. He knew now that she
knew he had not intended to speak that "word" between them; but no finer feeling told him that
she had saved him from himself.

In that hour he saw himself as he was--unworthy of a good woman's love.

He saw other things as well; these he hoped to make good in the near future, but this--but this!

He rowed back under cover of the dark to Champ-au-Haut. Octavius, who was wondering at his
non-appearance with the boat, met him with a lantern at the float.

"Here's a telegram just come up; the operator gave it to me for you. I told him you was out
in the boat and would be here 'fore you went up home."

"All right, Tave." He opened it; read it by the light of the lantern.

"I've got to go back to New York--it's a matter of business. It's all up with my vacation and
the yachting cruise now,"--he looked at his watch,--"seven; I can get the eight-thirty accommodation
to Hallsport, and that will give me time to catch the Eastern express."

"Hold on a minute and I'll get your trap from the stable--it's all ready for you."

"No, I'll get it myself--good-bye, Tave, I'm off."

"Good-bye, Champney."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Champ's worried about something," he said to himself; he was making fast the boat. "I never
see him look like that--I hope he hasn't got hooked in with any of those Wall Street sharks."

In a few minutes he heard the carriage wheels on the gravel in the driveway. He stopped on
his way to the stable to listen.

"He's driving like Jehu," he muttered. He was still listening; he heard the frequent snorting
of the horse, the rapid click of hoofs on the highroad--but he did not hear what was filling
the driver's ears at that moment: the roar of an unseen cataract.

Champney Googe was realizing for the first time that he was in mid-stream; that he might not
be able to breast the current; that the eddying water about him was in fact the whirlpool;
that the rush of what he had deemed mere harmless rapids was the prelude to the thunderous
fall of a cataract ahead.

IX

For several weeks after her nephew's visit, Mrs. Champney occupied many of her enforced leisure
half-hours in trying to put two and two together in their logical combination of four; but
thus far she had failed. She learned through Octavius that Champney had returned to New York
on Saturday evening; that in consequence he was obliged to give up the cruise with the Van
Ostends; from Champney himself she had no word. Her conclusion was that there had been no chance
for him to see Aileen during the twelve hours he was in town, for the girl came home as requested
shortly before six, but with a headache, and the excuse for it that she had rowed too far in
the sun on the way up to the sheds.

"My nephew told me he was going to row up to the sheds, too--did you happen to meet him there?"
she inquired. She was studying the profile of the girl's flushed and sunburned face. Aileen
had just said good night and was about to leave Mrs. Champney's room. She turned quickly to
face her. She spoke with sharp emphasis:

"I did not meet your nephew at the sheds, Mrs. Champney, nor did I see him there--and I'll
thank you, after what you said to me this morning, to draw no more conclusions in regard to
your nephew's seeing or meeting me at the sheds or anywhere else--it's not worth your while;
for I've no desire either to see or meet him again. Perhaps this will satisfy you." She left
the room at once without giving Mrs. Champney time to reply.

A self-satisfied smile drew apart Mrs. Champney's thin lips; evidently the girl's lesson was
a final and salutary one. She would know her place after this. She determined not to touch
on this subject again with Aileen; she might run the risk of going too far, and she desired
to keep her with her as long as possible. But she noticed that the singing voice was heard
less and less frequently about the house and grounds. Octavius also noticed it, and missed it.

"Aileen, you don't sing as much as you did a while ago--what's the matter?" he asked her one
day in October when she joined him to go up street after supper on an errand.

"Matter?--I've sung out for one while; I'm taking a rest-cure with my voice, Tave."

"It ain't the kind of rest-cure that'll agree with you, nor I guess any of us at Champo. There
ain't no trouble with her that's bothering you?" He pointed with a backward jerk of his thumb
to the house.

"No."

"She's acted mad ever since I told her Champney had to go back that night and tend to business;
guess she'd set her heart on his making a match on that yachting cruise--well, 't would be
all in the family, seeing there's Champney blood in the Van Ostends, good blood too,--there's
no better," he added emphatically.

"Oh, Tave, you're always blowing the Champneys' horn--"

"And why shouldn't I?"--he was decidedly nettled. "The Champneys are my folks, my townspeople,
the founders of this town, and their interests have always been mine--why shouldn't I speak
up for 'em, I'd like to know? You won't find no better blood in the United States than the
Champneys'."

Aileen made no reply; she was looking up the street to Poggi's fruit stall, where beneath a
street light she saw a crowd of men from the quarries.

"Romanzo said there was some trouble in the sheds--do you know what it is?" she asked.

"No, I can't get at the rights of it; they didn't get paid off last week, so Romanzo told me
last night, but he said Champney telegraphed he'd fix it all right in another week. He says
dollars are scarce just at this time--crops moving, you know, and market dull."

She laughed a little scornfully. "You seem to think Mr. Googe can fix everything all right, Tave."

"Champney's no fool; he's 'bout as interested in this home work as anybody, and if he says
it'll be all right, you may bet your life it will be--There's Jo Quimber coming; p'raps he's
heard something and can tell us."

"What's that crowd up to, Uncle Jo?" said Aileen, linking her arm in the old man's and making
him right about face to walk on with them.

"Talkin' a strike. I heerd 'em usin' Champ's name mighty free, Tave, just now--guess he'd better
come home an' calm 'em down some, or there'll be music in the air thet this town never danced
to yet. By A. J., it riles me clear through to hear 'em!"

"You can't blame them for wanting their pay, Uncle Jo." There was a challenge in the girl's
voice which Uncle Jo immediately accepted.

"So ye've j'ined the majority in this town, hev ye, Aileen? I don't say ez I'm blamin' anybody
fer wantin' his pay; I'm jest sayin' it don't set well on me the way they go at it to get it.
How's the quickest way to git up a war, eh? Jest keep talkin' it up--talkin' it up, an' it's
sure to come. They don't give a man like Champ a chance--talkin' behind his back and usin'
a good old Flamsted name ez ef 't wuz a mop rag!" Joel's indignation got the better of his
discretion; his voice was so loud that it began to attract the attention of some men who were
leaving Poggi's; the crowd was rapidly dispersing.

"Sh--Joel! they'll hear you. You've been standing up for everything foreign that's come into
this town for the last seven years--what's come over you that you're going back on all your
preaching?"

"I ain't goin' back on nothin'," the old man replied testily; "but a man's a man, I don't keer
whether he's a Polack or a 'Merican--I don't keer nothin' 'bout thet; but ef he's a man he
knows he'd oughter stop backbitin' and hittin' out behind another man's back--he'd oughter
come out inter the open an' say, 'You ain't done the right thing by me, now let's both hev
it out', instead of growlin' and grumblin' an' spittin' out such all-fired nonsense 'bout the
syndicaters and Champ--what's Champ got to do with it, anyway? He can't make money for 'em."

The crowds were surging past them; the men were talking together; their confused speech precluded
the possibility of understanding what was said.

"He's no better than other men, Uncle Jo," the girl remarked after the men had passed. She
laughed as she spoke, but the laugh was not a pleasant one; it roused Octavius.

"Now, look here, Aileen, you stop right where you are--"

She interrupted him, and her voice was again both merry and pleasant, for they were directly
opposite Luigi's shop: "I'm going to, Tave; I'm going to stop right here; Mrs. Champney sent
me down on purpose to get some of those late peaches Luigi keeps; she said she craved them,
and I'm going in this very minute to get them--"

She waved her hand to both and entered the shop.

Old Quimber caught Octavius by the arm to detain him a moment before he himself retraced his
steps up street.

"What d'ye think, Tave?--they goin' to make a match on't, she an' Poggi? I see 'm together
a sight."

"You can't tell 'bout Aileen any more'n a weather-cock. She might go farther and fare worse."

"Thet's so, Tave; Poggi's a man, an' a credit to our town. I guess from all I hear Romanzo's
'bout give it up, ain't he?"

"Romanzo never had a show with Aileen," Octavius said decidedly; "he ain't her kind."

"Guess you're right, Tave--By A. J. there they go now!" He nudged Octavius with his elbow.
Octavius, who had passed the shop and was standing on the sidewalk with old Quimber, saw the
two leave it and walk slowly in the direction of The Bow. We was glad to see days when we never had
to work 'cause then we could sleep. It seem like the niggers had
to git up soon's they lay down.

Marster was good to us but the overseer was mean.

He wan't no po' white trash; he was up-to-date but he like to beat
on niggers." He bade Quimber
good night and walked on to The Greenbush. The Colonel found him more taciturn than usual that
evening....

"I can't, Luigi,--I can't marry you," she answered almost irritably. The two were nearing the
entrance to Champo; the Italian was pleading his cause. "I can't--so don't say anything more
about it."

"But, Aileen, I will wait--I can wait; I've waited so long already. I believe I began to love
you through that knothole, you remember?"

"I haven't forgotten;" she half smiled at the remembrance; "but that seems so long ago, and
things have changed so--I've changed, Luigi."

The tone of her voice was hard. Luigi looked at her in surprise.

"What has changed you, Aileen? Tell me--can't you trust me?"

"Luigi!"--she faced him suddenly, looking straight up into his handsome face that turned white
as he became aware that what she was about to say was final--"I'd give anything if I could
say to you what you want me to--you deserve all my love, if I could only give it to you, for
you are faithful and true, and mean what you say--it would be the best thing for me, I know;
but I can't, Luigi; I've nothing to give, and it would be living a lie to you from morning
till night to give you less than you deserve. I only blame myself that I'm not enough like
other girls to know a good man when I see him, and take his love with a thankful heart that
it's mine--but it's no use--don't blame me for being myself--" Her lips trembled; she bit the
lower one white in her effort to steady it.

For a moment Luigi made no reply. Suddenly he leaned towards her--she drew away from him quickly--and
said between his teeth, all the long-smouldering fire of southern passion, passion that is
founded on jealousy, glowing in his eyes:

"Tell me, Aileen Armagh, is there another man you love?--tell me--"

Rag who had been with her all the afternoon moved with a quick threatening motion to her side
and a warning gurr--rrrr for the one who should dare to touch her.

"No." She spoke defiantly. Luigi straightened himself. Rag sprang upon her fawning and caressing;
she shoved him aside roughly, for the dog was at that moment but the scapegoat for his master;
Rag cowered at her feet.

"Ah--" It was a long-drawn breath of relief. Luigi Poggi's eyes softened; the fire in them
ceased to leap and blaze; something like hope brightened them.

"I could bear anything but that--I was afraid--" He hesitated.

"Afraid of what?" She caught up his words sharply, and began to walk rapidly up the driveway.

He answered slowly: "I was afraid you were in love with Mr. Googe--I saw you once out rowing
with him--early one morning--"

"I in love with Mr. Googe!" she echoed scornfully, "you needn't ever be afraid of that; I--I
hate him!"

Luigi stared at her in amazement. He scarce could keep pace with her rapid walk that was almost
a run. Her cheeks were aflame; her eyes filled with tears. All her pent up wretchedness of
the last two months, all her outraged love, her womanhood's humiliation, a sense of life's
bitter injustice and of her impotence to avenge the wrong put upon her affections, found vent
in these three words. And Luigi, seeing Aileen Armagh changed into something that an hour before
he would not have believed possible, was gripped by a sudden fear,--he must know the truth
for his own peace of mind,--and, under its influence, he laid his hand on her arm and brought
her to a standstill.

Rag snarled another warning; Aileen thrust him aside with her foot.

"What has he done to you to make you hate him so?"

Because he spoke slowly, Aileen thought he was speaking calmly. Had she not been carried away
by her own strength of feeling, she would have known that she might not risk the answer she
gave him.

"Done to me?--nothing; what could he do?--but I hate him--I never want to see his face again!"

She was beside herself with anger and shame. It was the tone of Luigi's voice that brought
her to her senses; in a flash she recalled Octavius Buzzby's warning about playing with "volcanic
fires." It was too late, however, to recall her words.

"Luigi, I've said too much; you don't understand--now let's drop it." She drew away her arm
from beneath his hand, and resumed her rapid walk up the driveway, Rag trotting after her.

"And you mean what you say--you never want to see him again?" He spoke again slowly.

"Never," she said firmly.

Luigi made no reply. They were nearing the house. She turned to him when they reached the steps.

"Luigi,"--she put out her hand and he took it in both his,--"forget what I've said about another
and forgive me for what I've had to say to yourself--we've always been such good friends, that
now--"

She was ready with the smile that captivated him, but it was a tremulous one for she smiled
through tears; she was thinking of the contrast.

"And always will be, Aileen, when we both know for good and all that we can be nothing more
to each other," he answered gently.

She was grateful to him; but she turned away and went up the steps without saying good-bye.

X

"'Gad, I wish I was well out of it!"

For the first time within the memory of Elmer Wiggins and Lawyer Emlie, who heard the Colonel's
ejaculation, his words and tone proclaimed the fact that he was not in his seemingly unfailing
good spirits. He was standing with the two at the door of the drug shop and watching the crowds
of men gathered in groups along the main street.

It was Saturday afternoon and the men were idle, a weekly occurrence the Colonel had learned
to dread since his incumbency as deputy sheriff and, in consequence of his office, felt responsible
for the peace of the community at large until Monday morning.

Something unusual was in the air, and the three men were at once aware of it. The uneasiness,
that had prevailed in the sheds and at The Gore during the past month, was evidently coming
to a crisis now that the men's pay was two weeks overdue.

Emlie looked grave on replying, after a pause in which the three were busy taking note of the
constantly increasing crowd in front of the town hall:

"I don't blame you, Colonel; there'll be the deuce to pay if the men don't get paid off by
Monday noon. They've been uneasy now so long about the piece work settlement, that this last
delay is going to be the match that fires the train--and no slow match either from the looks;
I don't understand this delay. When did Romanzo send his last message?"

"About an hour ago, but he hasn't had any answer yet," replied the Colonel, shading his eyes
with his hat to look up street at the town hall crowd. "He has been telephoning and telegraphing
off and on for the last two weeks; but he can't get any satisfaction--corporations, you know,
don't materialize just for the rappings."

"What does Champney say?" inquired Mr. Wiggins.

"State of the market," said the Colonel laconically.

The men did not look at one another, for each was feeling a certain degree of indignation,
of humiliation and disappointment that one of their own, Champney Googe, should go back on
Flamsted to the extent of allowing the "market" to place the great quarry interests, through
non-payment of the workers, in jeopardy.

"Has Romanzo heard direct from him to-day?" asked Emlie.

"No; the office replied he was out of the city for Saturday and Sunday; didn't give his address
but asked if we could keep the men quiet till the middle of next week when the funds would
be forwarded."

"I wired our New York exchange yesterday," said Emlie, "but they can't give us any information--answered
things had gone to pot pretty generally with certain securities, but Flamsted was all right,--not
tied up in any of them. Of course, they know the standing of the syndicate. There'll have to
be some new arrangement for a large reserve fund right here on home soil, or we'll be kept
in hot water half the time. I don't believe in having the hands that work in one place, and
the purse that holds their pay in another; it gets too ticklish at such times when the market
drops and a plank or two at the bottom falls out."

"Neither do I;" Mr. Wiggins spoke emphatically. "The Quarries Company's liabilities run up
into the millions on account of the contracts they have signed and the work they have undertaken,
and there ought to be a million of available assets to discount panics like this one that looks
pretty threatening to us away off here in Maine. Our bank ought to have the benefit of some
of the money." 

For example, when a school-book is illustrated, how much more easily we understand the subject
we are studying through the help we get from pictures of objects or places that we have not
seen, and yet wish to know about. Pictures of natural scenery bring all countries before our
eyes in such a way that by looking at them, while reading books of
travel, we may know a great deal more about lands we have never seen,
and may never be able to visit.



"Something's up," said Emlie, startled at the sight of the gathering hundreds.

"Then there's my place," said the Colonel--the other two thought they heard him sigh--and started
up the street.

Emlie turned to Mr. Wiggins.

"It's rough on the Colonel; he's a man of peace if ever there was one, and likes to stand well
with one and all. This rough and tumble business of sheriff goes against the grain; his time
is up next month; he'll be glad enough to be out of it. I'll step over to the office for the
paper, I see they've just come--the men have got them already from the stand--"

Elmer Wiggins caught his arm.

"Look!" he cried under his breath, pointing to the crowd and a man who was mounting the tail
of an express wagon that had halted on the outskirts of the throng. "That's one of the quarrymen--he's
ring-leader every time--he's going to read 'em something--hark!"

They could hear the man haranguing the ever-increasing crowd; he was waving a newspaper. They
could not hear what he was saying, but in the pauses of his speechifying the hoarse murmur
of approval grew louder and louder. The cart-tail orator pointed to the headlines; there was
a sudden deep silence, so deep that the soft scurrying of a mass of fallen elm leaves in the
gutter seemed for a moment to fill all the air. Then the man began to read. They saw the Colonel
on the outside of the crowd; saw him suddenly turn and make with all haste for the post-office;
saw him reappear reading the paper.

The two hurried across the street to him.

"What's the matter?" Emlie demanded.

The Colonel spoke no word. He held the sheet out to them and with shaking forefinger pointed
to the headlines:

     BIG EMBEZZLEMENT BY FLAMSTED QUARRIES CO. OFFICIAL

     GUILTY MAN A FUGITIVE FROM JUSTICE

     SEARCH WARRANTS OUT

     DETECTIVES ON TRAIL

     "New York--Special Despatch: L. Champney Googe, the treasurer of
     the Flamsted Quarries Co.--" etc., etc.

The men looked at one another. There was a moment of sickening silence; not so much as a leaf
whirled in the gutter; it was broken by a great cheer from the assembled hundreds of workmen
farther up the street, followed by a conglomerate of hootings, cat-calls, yells and falsetto
hoorays from the fringe of small boys. The faces of the three men in front of the post-office
grew white at their unspoken thought. Each waited for the other.

"His mother--" said Emlie at last.

Elmer Wiggins' lips trembled. "You must tell her, Colonel--she mustn't hear it this way--"

"My God, how can I!" The Colonel's voice broke, but only for a second, then he braced himself
to his martyrdom. "You're right; she mustn't hear it from any one but me--telephone up at once,
will you, Elmer, that I'm coming up to see her on an important matter?--Emlie, you'll drive
me up in your trap--we can get there before the men have a chance to get home--keep a watch
on the doings here in the town, Elmer, and telephone me if there's any trouble--there's Romanzo
coming now, I suppose he's got word from the office--if you happen to see Father Honoré, tell
him where I am, he will help--"

He stepped into the trap that had been hitched in front of the drug store, and Emlie took the
reins. Elmer Wiggins reached up his hand to the Colonel, who gripped it hard.

"Yes, Elmer," he said in answer to the other's mute question, "this is one of the days when
a man, who is a man, may wish he'd never been born--"

They were off, past the surging crowds who were now thronging the entire street, past The Bow,
and over the bridge on their way to The Gore.

XI

"Run on ahead, girlies," said Aileen to the twins who were with her for their annual checkerberry
picnic, "I'll be down in a few minutes."

They were on the edge of the quarry woods which sheltered the Colonel's outlying sheep pastures
and protected from the north wind the two sheepfolds that were used for the autumn and early
spring. Dulcie and Doosie, obedient to Aileen's request, raced hand in hand across the short-turfed
pastures, balancing their baskets of red berries.

The late afternoon sunshine of the last of October shone clear and warm upon the fading close-cropped
herbage that covered the long slopes. The sheep were gathering by flocks at the folds. The
collie, busy and important, was at work with 'Lias rounding up the stragglers. Aileen's eyes
were blinded to the transient quiet beauty of this scene, for she was alive to but one point
in the landscape--the red brick house with granite trimmings far away across the Rothel, and
the man leaving the carriage which had just stopped at the front porch. She could not distinguish
who it was, and this fact fostered conjecture--Could it be Champney Googe who had come home
to help settle the trouble in the sheds?

How she hated him!--yet her heart gave a sudden sick throb of expectation. How she hated herself
for her weakness!

"You look tired to death, Aileen," was Mrs. Caukins' greeting a few minutes afterwards, "come
in and rest yourself before supper. Luigi was here just now and I've sent Dulcie over with
him to Aurora's to get the Colonel; I saw him go in there fifteen minutes ago, and he's no
notion of time, not even meal-time, when he's talking business with her. I know it's business,
because Mr. Emlie drove up with him; he's waiting for him to come out. Romanzo has just telephoned
that he can't get home for supper, but he'll be up in time to see you home."

Mrs. Caukins was diplomatic; she looked upon herself as a committee of one on ways and means
to further her son's interest so far as Aileen Armagh was concerned; but that young lady was
always ready with a check to her mate.

"Thank you, Mrs. Caukins, but I'll not trouble him; Tave is coming up to drive me home about
eight; he knows checkerberry picking isn't easy work."

Mrs. Caukins was looking out of the window and did not reply.

"I declare," she exclaimed, "if there isn't Octavius this very minute driving up in a rush
to Aurora's too--and Father Honoré's with him!--Why, what--"

Without waiting to finish her thought, she hurried to the door to call out to Dulcie, who was
coming back over the bridge towards the house, running as fast as she could:

"What's the matter, Dulcie?"

"Oh, mother--mother--" the child panted, running up the road, "father wants you to come over
to Mrs. Googe's right off, as quick as you can--he says not to stop for anything--"

The words were scarcely out of her mouth before Mrs. Caukins, without heeding Aileen, was hurrying
down the road. The little girl, wholly out of breath, threw herself down exhausted on the grass
before the door. Aileen and Doosie ran out to her.

"What is it, Dulcie--can't you tell me?" said Aileen.

Between quickened breaths the child told what she knew.

"Luigi stopped to speak to Mr. Emlie--and Mr. Emlie said something dreadful for Flamsted--had
happened--and Luigi looked all of a sudden so queer and pale,"--she sat up, and in the excitement
and importance of imparting such news forgot her over-exertion,--"and Mr. Emlie said father
was telling Mrs. Googe--and he was afraid it would kill her--and then father came to the door
looking just like Luigi, all queer and pale, and Mr. Emlie says, 'How is she?' and father shook
his head and said, 'It's her death blow,' then I squeezed Luigi's hand to make him look at
me, and I asked him what it was Mrs. Googe's was sick of, for I must go and tell mother--and
he looked at Mr. Emlie and he nodded and said, 'It's town talk already--it's in the papers.'
And then Luigi told me that Mr. Champney Googe had been stealing, Aileen!--and if he got caught
he'd have to go to prison--then father sent me over home for mother and told me to run, and
I've run so--Oh, Aileen!"

It was a frightened cry, and her twin echoed it. While Aileen Armagh was listening with shortened
breaths to the little girl, she felt as if she were experiencing the concentrated emotions
of a lifetime; as a result, the revulsion of feeling was so powerful that it affected her physically;
her young healthy nerves, capable at other times of almost any tension, suddenly played her
false. The effect upon her of what she heard was a severe nervous shock. She had never fainted
in her life, nor had she known the meaning of an hysterical mood; she neither fainted nor screamed
now, but began to struggle horribly for breath, for the shocked heart began beating as it would,
sending the blood in irregular spurts through the already over-charged arteries. In speaking
of art we often contrast the useful or mechanical arts with the Fine
Arts; by these terms we denote the difference between the arts which
are used in making such things as are necessary and useful in civilized
life, and the arts by which ornamental and beautiful things are made.

The fine arts are Architecture, Sculpture, Painting, Poetry, and Music,
and though we could live if none of these existed, yet life would
be far from the pleasant experience that it is often made to be through
the enjoyment of these arts.

In speaking of Painting, just here I wish to include the more general
idea of pictures of various sorts, and it seems to me that while picture-making
belongs to the fine or beautiful arts, it is now made a very useful
art in many ways.

 I'm all right, 'Lias; go back to your work, I'll just help
myself to a cup of hot water from the tea-kettle and then I'll go home with Tave--I see him
coming for me--I didn't expect him now."

"But, Aileen, won't you stay to supper?" said the twins at one and the same time; "we always
have you to celebrate our checkerberry picnic."

"Dear knows, I've celebrated the checkerberries enough already," she said laughing,--but 'Lias
noticed that her lips were still colorless,--"and I think, dearies, that it's no time for us
to be celebrating any more to-day when poor Mrs. Googe is in such trouble."

"What's up?" said 'Lias.

The twins' eagerness to impart their knowledge of recent events to 'Lias was such that the
sorrow of parting was greatly mitigated; moreover, Aileen left them with a promise to come
up again soon.

"I'm ready, Tave," she said as he drew up at the door. 'Lias helped her in.

"Come again soon, Aileen--you've promised," the twins shouted after her.

She turned and waved her hand to them. "I'll come," she called back in answer.

They drove in silence over the Rothel, past the brick house where Emlie's trap was still standing,
but now hitched. Octavius Buzzby's face was gray; his features were drawn.

"Did you hear, Aileen?" he said, after they had driven on a while and begun to meet the quarrymen
returning from Flamsted, many of whom were talking excitedly and gesticulating freely.

"Yes--Dulcie told me something. I don't know how true it is," she answered quietly.

"It's true," he said grimly, "and it'll kill his mother."

"I don't know about that;" she spoke almost indifferently; "you can stand a good deal when
it comes to the point."

Octavius turned almost fiercely upon her.

"What do you know about it?" he demanded. "You're neither wife nor mother, but you might show
a little more feeling, being a woman. Do you realize what this thing means to us--to Flamsted--to
the family?"

"Tave," she turned her gray eyes full upon him, the pupils were unnaturally enlarged, "I don't
suppose I do know what it means to all of you--but it makes me sick to talk about it--please
don't--I can't bear it--take me home as quick as you can."

She grew whiter still.

"Ain't you well, Aileen?" he asked in real anxiety, repenting of his hard word to her.

"Not very, Tave; the truth is I ate too many checkerberries and had an attack of indigestion--I
shall be all right soon--and they sent over for Mrs. Caukins just at that time, and when Dulcie
came back she told me--it's awful--but it's different with you; he belongs to you all here
and you've always loved him."

"Loved him!"--Octavius Buzzby's voice shook with suppressed emotion--"I should say loved him;
he's been dear to me as my own--I thank God Louis Champney isn't living to go through this
disgrace!"

He drew up in the road to let a gang of workmen separate--he had been driving the mare at full
speed. Both he and Aileen caught fragments of what they were saying.

"It's damned hard on his mother--"

"They say there's a woman in the case--"

"Generally is with them highflyers--"

"I'll bet he'll make for the old country, if he can get clear he'll--"

"Europe's full of 'em--reg'lar cesspool they say--"

"Any reward offered?"

"The Company'll have to fork over or there'll be the biggest strike in Flamsted that the stone-cutting
business has seen yet--"

"The papers don't say what the shortage is--"

"What's Van Ostend's daughter's name, anybody know?--they say he was sweet on her--"

"She's a good haul," a man laughed hoarsely, insultingly, "but she didn't bite, an' lucky for
her she didn't."

"You're 'bout right--them high rollers don't want to raise nothing but game cocks--no prison
birds, eh?"

The men passed on, twenty or more. Octavius Buzzby, and the one who in the last hour had left
her girlhood behind her, drove homewards in silence. Her eyes were lowered; her white cheeks
burned again, but with shame at what she was obliged to hear.

XII

The strike was averted; the men were paid in full on the Wednesday following that Saturday
the events of which brought for a time Flamsted, its families, and its great industry into
the garish light of undesirable publicity. In the sheds and the quarries the routine work went
on as usual, but speculation was rife as to the outcome of the search for the missing treasurer.
A considerable amount of money was put up by the sporting element among the workmen, that the
capture would take place within three weeks. Meanwhile, the daily papers furnished pabulum
for the general curiosity and kept the interest as to the outcome on the increase. Some reports
had it that Champney Googe was already in Europe; others that he had been seen in one of the
Central American capitals. Among those who knew him best, it was feared he was already in hiding
in his native State; but beyond their immediate circle no suspicion of this got abroad.

Among the native Flamstedites, who had known and loved Champney from a child, there was at
first a feeling of consternation mingled with shame of the disgrace to his native town. They
felt that Champney had played false to his two names, and through the honored names of Googe
and Champney he had brought disgrace upon all connections, whether by ties of blood or marriage.
To him they had looked to be a leader in the new Flamsted that was taking its place in the
world's work. For a few days it seemed as if the keystone of the arch of their ambition and
pride had fallen and general ruin threatened. Then, after the first week passed without news
as to his whereabouts, there was bewilderment, followed on the second Monday by despair deepened
by a suspense that was becoming almost unbearable.

It was a matter of surprise to many to find the work in sheds and quarries proceeding with
its accustomed regularity; to find that to the new comers in Flamsted the affair was an impersonal
one, that Champney Googe held no place among the workmen; that his absconding meant to them
simply another one of the "high rollers" fleeing from his deserts. Little by little, during
that first week, the truth found its way home to each man and woman personally interested in
this erring son of Flamsted's old families, that a man is but one working unit among millions,
and that unit counts in a community only when its work is constructive in the communal good.

At a meeting of the bank directors the telling fact was disclosed that all of Mrs. Googe's
funds--the purchase money of the quarry lands--had been withdrawn nine months previous; but
this, they ascertained later, had been done with her full consent and knowledge.

Romanzo was summoned with the Company's books to the New York office. The Colonel seemed to
his friends to have aged ten years in seven days. He wore the look of a man haunted by the
premonition of some impending catastrophe. But he confided his trouble to no one, not even
to his wife. Aurora Googe's friends suffered with her and for her; they began, at last, to
fear for her reason if some definite word should not soon be forthcoming.

The tension in the Champ-au-Haut household became almost intolerable as the days passed without
any satisfaction as to the fugitive's whereabouts. After the first shock, and some unpleasant
recrimination on the part of Mrs. Champney, this tension showed itself by silently ignoring
the recent family event. Mrs. Champney found plausible excuse in the state of her health to
see no one. Octavius Buzzby attended to his daily duties with the face of a man who has come
through a severe sickness; Hannah complained that "he didn't eat enough to keep a cat alive."
His lack of appetite was an accompaniment to sleepless, thought-racked nights.

Aileen Armagh said nothing--what could she say?--but sickened at her own thoughts. She made
excuse to be on the street, at the station, in The Gore at the Caukinses', with Joel Quimber
and Elmer Wiggins, as well as among the quarrymen's families, whose children she taught in
an afternoon singing class, in the hope of hearing some enlightening word; of learning something
definite in regard to the probabilities of escape; of getting some inkling of the whole truth.
She gathered a little here, a little there; she put two and two together, and from what she
heard as a matter of speculation, and from what she knew to be true through Mrs. Caukins via
Romanzo in New York, she found that Champney Googe had sacrificed his honor, his mother, his
friends, and the good name of his native town for the unlawful love of gain. She was obliged
to accept this fact, and its acceptance completed the work of destruction that the revelation
of Champney Googe's unfaith, through the declaration of a passion that led to no legitimate
consummation in marriage, had wrought in her young buoyant spirit. She was broken beneath the
sudden cumulative and overwhelming knowledge of evil; her youth found no abiding-place either
for heart or soul. To Father Honoré she could not go--not yet!

       *       *       *       *       *

On the afternoon of Monday week, a telegram came for the Colonel. He opened it in the post
office. Octavius coming in at the same time for his first mail noticed at once the change in
his face--he looked stricken.

"What is it, Colonel?" he asked anxiously, joining him.

For answer Milton Caukins held out the telegram. It was from the State authorities; its purport
that the Colonel was to form a posse and be prepared to aid, to the extent of his powers, the
New York detectives who were coming on the early evening train. The fugitive from justice had
left New York and been traced to Hallsport.

"I've had a premonition of this--it's the last stroke, Tave--here, in his home--among us--and
his mother!--and, in duty bound, I, of all others, must be the man to finish the ugly job--"

Octavius Buzzby's face worked strangely. "It's tough for you, Colonel, but I guess a Maine
man knows his whole duty--only, for God's sake, don't ask me!" It was a groan rather than an
ejaculation. The two continued to talk in a low tone.

"I shall call for volunteers and then get them sworn in--it means stiff work for to-night.
We'll keep this from Aurora, Tave; she mustn't know this."

"Yes, if we can. Are you going to ask any of our own folks to volunteer, Milton?" In times
of great stress and sorrow his townspeople called the Colonel by his Christian name.

"No; I'm going to ask some of the men who don't know him well--some of the foreigners; Poggi's
one. He'll know some others up in The Gore. And I don't believe, Tave, there's one of our own
would volunteer, do you?"

"No, I don't. We can't go that far; it would be like cutting our own throats."

"You're right, Tave--that's the way I feel; but"--he squared his shoulders--"it's got to be
done and the sooner it's over the better for us all--but, Tave, I hope to God he'll keep out
of our way!"

"Amen," said Octavius Buzzby.

The two stood together in the office a moment longer in gloomy silence, then they went out
into the street.

"Well, I must get to work," said the Colonel finally, "the time's scant. I'll telephone my
wife first. We can't keep this to ourselves long; everybody, from the quarrymen to the station
master, will be keen on the scent."

"I'm glad no reward was offered," said Octavius.

"So am I." The Colonel spoke emphatically. "The roughscuff won't volunteer without that, and
I shall be reasonably certain of some good men--God! and I'm saying this of Champney Googe--it
makes me sick; who'd have thought it--who'd have thought it--"

He shook his head, and stepped into the telephone booth. Octavius waited for him.

"I've warned Mrs. Caukins," he said when he came out, "and told her how things stand; that
I'd try to get Poggi, and that I sha'n't be at home to-night. She says tell Aileen to tell
Mrs. Champney she will esteem it a great favor if she will let her come up to-night; she has
one of her nervous headaches and doesn't want to be alone with the children and 'Lias. You
could take her up, couldn't you?"

"I guess she can come, and I'll take her up 'fore supper; I don't want to be gone after dark,"
he added with meaning emphasis.

"I understand, Tave; I'm going over to Poggi's now."

The two parted with a hand-clasp that spoke more than any words.

XIII

About four, Octavius drove Aileen up to the Colonel's. He said nothing to her of the coming
crucial night, but Aileen had her thoughts. The Colonel's absence from home, but not from town,
coupled with yesterday's New York despatch which said that there was no trace of the guilty
man in New York, and affirmed on good authority that the statement that he had not left the
country was true, convinced her that something unforeseen was expected in the immediate vicinity
of Flamsted. But he would never attempt to come here!--She shivered at the thought. Octavius,
noticing this movement, remarked that he thought there was going to be a black frost. Aileen
maintained that the rising wind and the want of a moon would keep it off.

Although Octavius was inclined to take exception to the feminine statement that the moon, or
the want of it, had an effect on frost, nevertheless this apparently innocent remark on Aileen's
part recalled to him the fact that the night was moonless--he wondered if the Colonel had thought
of this--and he hoped with all his soul that it would prove to be starless as well. "Champney
knows the Maine woods--knows 'em from the Bay to the head of Moosehead as well as an Oldtown
Indian, yes and beyond." So he comforted himself in thought.

Mrs. Caukins met them with effusion.

"I declare, Aileen, I don't know what I should have done if you couldn't have come up; I'm
all of a-tremble now and I've got such a nervous headache from all I've been through, and all
I've got to, that I can't see straight out of my eyes.--Won't you stop to supper, Tave?"

"I can't to-night, Elvira, I--"

"I'd no business to ask you, I know," she said, interrupting him; "I might have known you'd
want to be on hand for any new developments. I don't know how we're going to live through it
up here; you don't feel it so much down in the town--I don't believe I could go through it
without Aileen up here with me, for the twins aren't old enough to depend on or to be told
everything; they're no company at such times, and of course I sha'n't tell them, they wouldn't
sleep a wink; I miss my boys dreadfully--"

"Tell them what? What do you mean by 'to-night'?" Aileen demanded, a sudden sharpness in her voice.

"Why, don't you know?"--She turned to Octavius, "Haven't you told her?"

Her appeal fell on departing and intentionally deaf ears; for Octavius, upon hearing Aileen's
sudden and amazed question, abruptly bade them good-night, spoke to the mare and was off at
a rapid pace before Mrs. Caukins comprehended that the telling of the latest development was
left to her.

She set about it quickly enough, and what with her nervousness, her sympathy for that mother
across the Rothel, her anxiety for the Colonel, her fear of the trial to which his powers of
endurance were about to be put, and the description of his silent suffering during the last
week, she failed to notice that Aileen said nothing. The girl busied herself with setting the
table and preparing tea, Mrs. Caukins, meanwhile, rocking comfortably in her chair and easing
her heart of its heavy burden by continual drippings of talk after the main flow of her tale
was exhausted.

Presently, just after sunset, the twins came rushing in. Evidently they were full of secrets--they
were always a close corporation of two--and their inane giggles and breathless suppression
of what they were obviously longing to impart to their mother and Aileen, told on Mrs. Caukins'
already much worn nerves.

"I wish you wouldn't stay out so long after sundown, children, you worry me to death. I don't
say but the quarries are safe enough, but I do say you never can tell who's round after dusk,
and growing girls like you belong at home."

She spoke fretfully. The twins exchanged meaning glances that were lost on their mother, who
was used to their ways, but not on Aileen.

"Where have you been all this time, Dulcie?" she asked rather indifferently. Her short teaching
experience had shown her that the only way to gain children's confidence is not to display
too great a curiosity in regard to their comings and goings, their doings and undoings. "Tave
and I didn't see you anywhere when we drove up."

The twins looked at each other and screwed their lips into a violently repressive contortion.

"We've been over to the sheepfolds with 'Lias."

"Why, 'Lias has been out in the barn for the last half hour--what were you doing over there,
I'd like to know?" Their mother spoke sharply, for untruth she would not tolerate.

"We did stay with 'Lias till he got through, then we played ranchmen and made believe round
up the cattle the way the boys wrote us they do." Two of their brothers were in the West trying
their fortune on a ranch and incidentally "dovetailing into the home business," as the Colonel
defined their united efforts along the line of mutton raising.

"Well, I never!" their mother ejaculated; "I suppose now you'll be making believe you're everything
the other boys are going to be."

The little girls giggled and nodded emphatically.

"Well, Aileen," she said as she took her seat at the table, "times have changed since I was
a girl, and that isn't so very long ago. Then we used to content ourselves with sewing, and
housework, and reading all the books in the Sunday school library, and making our own clothes,
and enjoying ourselves as much as anybody nowadays for all I see, what with our picnics and
excursions down the Bay and the clam bakes and winter lecture course and the young folks 'Circle'
and two or three dances to help out--and now here are my girls that can't be satisfied to sit
down and hem good crash towels for their mother, but must turn themselves into boys, and play
ranchmen and baseball and hockey on the ice, and Wild West shows with the dogs and the pony--and
even riding him a-straddle--and want to go to college just because their two brothers are going,
and, for all I know, join a fraternity and have secrets from their own mother and a football
team!" She paused long enough to help the twins bountifully.

"Sometimes I think it's their being brought up with so many boys, and then again I'm convinced
it's the times, for all girls seem to have caught the male fever. What with divided skirts,
and no petticoats, and racing and running and tumbling in basket ball, and rowing races, and
entering for prize championships in golf and the dear knows what, it'll be lucky if a mother
of the next generation can tell whether she's borned girls or boys by the time her children
are ten years old. The land knows it's hard enough for a married woman to try to keep up with
one man in a few things, but when it comes to a lot of old maids and unmarried girls trying
to catch up all the time with the men in everything, and catch on too, I must say I, for one,
draw the line."

Aileen could not help smiling at this diatribe on "the times." The twins laughed outright;
they were used to their mother by this time, and patronized her in a loving way.

"We weren't there all the time," Doosie said meaningly, and Dulcie added her little word, which
she intended should tantalize her mother and Aileen to the extent that many pertinent questions
should be forthcoming, and the news they were burning to impart would, to all appearance, be
dragged out of them--a process in which the twins revelled.

"We met Luigi on the road near the bridge."

"What do you suppose Luigi's doing up here at this time, I'd like to know," said Mrs. Caukins,
turning to Aileen and ignoring the children.

"He come up on an errand to see some of the quarrymen," piped up both the girls at the same time.

"Oh, is that all?" said their mother indifferently; then, much to the twins' chagrin, she suddenly
changed the subject. "I want you to take the glass of wine jell on the second shelf in the
pantry over to Mrs. Googe's after you finish your supper--you can leave it with the girl and
tell her not to say anything to Mrs. Googe about it, but just put some in a saucer and give
it to her with her supper. "My pappy left de old Smith plantation, soon atter he got 'is freedom,
an' went to Augusta, Georgia whar he died in jes' 'bout two years.

"I waked up one mornin' an' heered Mistus makin' a funny fuss. She was tryin' to git up an' pullin'
at her gown. I was plum skeert an' I runned atter some of de udder folkses. Dey come a runnin' but
she never did speak no mo', an' diden' live but jes' a few hours longer. De white folkses made me
go to 'er funeral.
 You could always count on their being somewheres anyway, even if 't
was on the top of freight cars at The Corners or at the bottom of the pond diving for pebbles
that they brought up between their lips and run the risk of choking besides drowning; and they
did think the same thoughts for at least twenty-four hours on a stretch, when they were set
on having things--but when it come to my having two girls, and I forty at the time, I give
it up! They don't know their own minds from one six minutes to the next.--Why don't you want
to go?" she demanded, coming at last to the point. Aileen was listening in amused silence.

"'Coz we got scared--awful scared," said Dulcie under her breath.

"Scared most to death," Doosie added solemnly.

Both Mrs. Caukins and Aileen saw at once that the children were in earnest.

"You look scared!" said Mrs. Caukins with withering scorn; "you've eaten a good supper if you
were 'scared' as you say.--What scared you?"

The twins looked down into their plates, the generally cleared-up appearance of which seemed
fully to warrant their mother's sarcasm.

"Luigi told us not to tell," said Dulcie in a low voice.

"Luigi told you not to tell!" echoed their mother. "I'd like to know what right Luigi Poggi
has to tell my children not to tell their mother anything and everything!" She spoke with waxing
excitement; every motherly pin-feather was erect.

"He was 'fraid it would scare you," ventured Doosie.

"Scare me! He must have a pretty poor opinion of a woman that can raise six boys of her own
and then be 'scared' at what two snips of girls can tell her. You'll tell me now, this very
minute, what scared you--this all comes of your being away from the house so far and so late--and
I won't have it."

"We saw a bear--"

"A big one--"

"He was crawling on all fours--"

"Back of the sheepfold wall--"

"He scrooched down as if he was nosing for something--"

"Just where the trees are so thick you can't see into the woods--"

"And we jumped over the wall and right down into the sheep, and they made an awful fuss they
were so scared too, huddling and rushing round to get out--"

"Then we found the gate--"

"But I heard him--" Dulcie's eyes were very big and bright with remembered terror.

"And then we climbed over the gate--'Lias had locked it--and run home lickety-split and most
run into Luigi at the bridge--"

"'Coz we come down the road after we got through the last pasture--"

"Oh, he was so big!" Doosie shuddered as her imagination began to work more vigorously with
the recital--"bigger'n a man--"

"What nonsense."

The twins had been telling all this at the same time, and their mother's common sense and downright
exclamation brought them to a full stop. They looked crestfallen.

"You needn't tell me there's a bear between here and Moosehead--I know better. Did you tell
Luigi all this?" she questioned sharply.

The two nodded affirmatively.

"And he told you not to tell me?"

Another nod.

"Did he say anything more?"

"He said he'd go up and see."

"Hm--m--"

Mrs. Caukins turned a rather white face to Aileen; the two, looking into each other's eyes,
read there a common fear.

"Perhaps you'll take the jelly over for me, Aileen; I'll just step to the back door and holler
to 'Lias to bring in the collie and the hound--'t isn't always safe to let the dogs out after
dark if there should happen to be anything stirring in the quarry woods."

"I'll go," said Aileen. She went into the pantry to get the glass of jelly.

"We'll go with you, we won't mind a bit with you or Luigi," chorussed the twins.

"You don't go one step," said their mother, entering at that moment from the kitchen, and followed
by the two dogs; "you'll stay right where you are, and what's more, you'll both go to bed early
to make you remember that I mean what I say about your being out so long another time after
sundown--no good comes of it," she muttered.

The twins knew by the tone of her voice that there was no further appeal to be made.

"You can wash up the dishes while Aileen's gone; my head is so bad.--Don't be gone too long,
Aileen," she said, going to the door with her.

"I sha'n't stay unless I can do something--but I'll stop a little while with Ellen, poor girl;
she must be tired of all this excitement, sitting there alone so much as she has this last week."

"Of course, but Aurora won't see you; it's as much as ever I can do to get a look at her, and
as to speaking a word of comfort, it's out of the question.--Why!" she exclaimed, looking out
into the dusk that was settling into night, "they never light the quarries so early, not with
all the arc-lights, I wonder--Oh, Aileen!" she cried, as the meaning of the great illumination
in The Gore dawned upon her.

The girl did not answer. She ran down the road to the bridge with every nerve in her strained
to its utmost.

XIV

She hurried over to the brick house across the Rothel; rapped at the kitchen door and, upon
the girl's opening it, gave the jelly to her with Mrs. Caukins' message. She assured Ellen,
who begged her to come in, that she would run over if possible a little later in the evening.
A low whine and prolonged snuffing made themselves audible while the two talked together in
low tones at the door. They seemed to proceed from the vicinity of the dining-room door.

"Where's Rag?" said Aileen, listening intently to the muffled sounds.

"I shut him up in the dining-room closet when I see you come up the walk; he goes just wild
to get with you any chance he can, and Mrs. Googe told me she wanted to keep him round the
house nights."

"Then be careful he doesn't get out to-night--supposing you chain him up just for once."

"Oh, I couldn't do that; Mrs. Googe wouldn't let me; but I'll see he doesn't follow you. I
do wish you would come in--it's so lonesome," she said again wistfully.

"I can't now, Ellen; but if I can get away after eight, I may run over and sit with you a while.
I'm staying with Mrs. Caukins because the Colonel is away to-night."

"So I heard; 'Lias told me just now on his way down to the village. He said he wouldn't be
gone long, for the Colonel wasn't to home.--I wonder what they've turned on all the lights
for?" she said, craning her neck to look farther up the road.

Aileen made no reply. She cautioned her again to keep Rag at home. A series of muffled but
agonized yelps followed her down the walk.

She stood still in the road and looked about her. Everywhere the great quarry arc-lights were
sending their searching rays out upon the quarries and their approaches.

"What shall I do--oh, what shall I do!" was her hopeless unuttered cry.

It seemed to Aileen Armagh, standing there in the road at the entrance to the bridge, as if
a powerful X-ray were being directed at that moment upon her whole life so far as she remembered
it; and not only upon that, but upon her heart and soul--her thoughts, desires, her secret
agony; as if the ray, in penetrating her body and soul, were laying bare her secret to the
night:--she still loved him.

"Oh, what shall I do--what shall I do!" was the continual inner cry.

Life was showing itself to her in this experience, as seen through the lens of a quickened
imagination, in all its hideousness. Never had she experienced such a sense of loneliness.
Never had she realized so forcibly that she was without father and mother, without kin in a
foreign country, without a true home and abiding-place. Never had it been brought home to her
with such keen pain that she was, in truth, a waif in this great world; that the one solid
support for her in this world, her affections, had been ruthlessly cut away from under her
by the hand of the man she had loved with all the freshness and joy of her young loving heart.
He had been all the more to her because she was alone; the day dreams all the brighter because
she believed he was the one to realize them for her--and now!

She walked on slowly.

"What shall I do--what shall I do!" was her inward cry, repeated at intervals. She crossed
the bridge. All was chaotic in her thoughts. She had supposed, during the last two months,
that all her love was turned to hate,--she hoped it was, for it would help her to bear,--that
all her feeling for him, whom she knew she ought to despise, was dead. Why, then, if it were
dead, she asked herself now, had she spoken so vehemently to Luigi? And Luigi--where was he--what
was he doing?

What was it produced that nervous shock when she learned the last truth from Dulcie Caukins?
Was it her shame at his dishonor? No--she knew by the light of the X-ray piercing her soul
that the thought of his imprisonment meant absence from her; after all that had occurred, she
was obliged to confess that she was still longing for his presence. She hated herself for this
confession.--Where was he now?

She looked up the road towards the quarry woods--Thank God, those, at least, were dark! Oh,
if she but dared to go! dared to penetrate them; to call to him that the hours of his freedom
were numbered; to help--someway, somehow! A sudden thought, over-powering in its intimation
of possibilities, stopped her short in the road just a little way beyond the Colonel's; but
before she could formulate it sufficiently to follow it up with action, before she had time
to realize the sensation of returning courage, she was aware of the sound of running feet on
the road above her. I 'member how I used to run to de spring wid a little tin bucket w'en she wannid
a fresh drink of water.

"Mos' of de slaves stayed with Mistus atter freedom come, 'cause
dey all loved her, an' dey diden' have no place to go.

She braced herself to the shock--he was rapidly nearing her--a powerful ray from an arc-light
shot across his path--fell full upon his hatless head--

"You!--Luigi!" she cried and darted forward to meet him.

He thrust out his arm to brush her aside, never slackening his pace; but she caught at it,
and, clasping it with both hands, hung upon it her full weight, letting him drag her on with
him a few feet.

"Stop, Luigi Poggi!--Stop, I tell you, or I'll scream for help--stop, I say!"

He was obliged to slacken his speed in order not to hurt her. He tried to shake her off, untwist
her hands; she clung to him like a leech. Then he stopped short, panting. She could see the
sweat dropping from his forehead; his teeth began to chatter. She still held his arm tightly
with both hands.

"Let me go--" he said, catching his breath spasmodically.

"Not till you tell me where you've been--what you've been doing--tell me."

"Doing--" He brought out the word with difficulty.

"Yes, doing, don't you hear?" She shook his arm violently in her anxious terror.

"I don't know--" the words were a long groan.

"Where have you been then?--quick, tell me--"

He began to shake with a hard nervous chill.

"With him--over in the quarry woods--I tried to take him--he fought me--" The chill shook him
till he could scarcely stand.

She dropped his arm; drew away from him as if touching were contamination; then her eyes, dilating
with a still greater horror, fixed themselves on the bosom of his shirt--there was a stain--

"Have you killed him--" she whispered hoarsely.

The answer came through the clattering teeth:

"I--I don't know--you said--you said you--never wanted to see him again--"

Luigi found himself speaking the last words to the empty air; he was alone, in the middle of
the road, in the full glare of an electric light. He was conscious of a desire to escape from
it, to escape detection--to rid himself of his over-powering misery in the quietest way possible.
He gathered himself together; his limbs steadied; the shivering grew less; he went on down
the road at a quick walk. Already the quarrymen were coming out in force to see what might
be up. He must avoid them at all hazards.

       *       *       *       *       *

One thought was the motive power which sent Aileen running up the road towards the pastures,
by crossing which she could reach in a few minutes the quarry woods: "I must know if he is
dead; if he is not dead, I must try to save him from a living death."

This thought alone sent her speeding over the darkened slopes. She was light of foot, but sometimes
she stumbled; she was up and on again--the sheepfold her goal. The quarry woods stood out dark
against the clear sky; there seemed to be more light on these uplands than below in The Gore;
she saw the sheepfold like a square blot on the pasture slope. She reached it--should she call
aloud--call his name? How find him?

She listened intently; the wind had died down; the sheep were huddling and moving restlessly
within the fold; this movement seemed unusual. She climbed the rough stone wall; the sheep
were massed in one corner, heads to the wall, tails to the bare centre of the fold; they kept
crowding closer and more close.

In that bared space of hoof-trampled earth she saw him lying.

She leaped down, the frightened sheep riding one another in their frantic efforts to get away
from the invaders of their peace. She knelt by him; lifted his head on her knee; her hands
touched his sleeve, she drew back from something warm and wet.

"Champney--O Champney, what has he done to you!" she moaned in hopeless terror; "what shall I do--"

"Is it you--Aileen?--help me up--"

With her aid he raised himself to a sitting posture.

"It must have been the loss of blood--I felt faint suddenly." He spoke clearly. "Can you help me?"

"Yes, oh, yes--only tell me how."

"If you could bind this up--have you anything--"

"Yes, oh, yes--"

He used his left hand entirely; it was the right arm that had received the full blow of some
sharp instrument. "Just tear away the shirt--that's right--"

She did as he bade her. She took her handkerchief and bound the arm tightly above the wound,
twisting it with one of her shell hairpins. She slipped off her white petticoat, stripped it,
and under his directions bandaged the arm firmly.

He spoke to her then as if she were a personality and not an instrument.

"Aileen, it's all up with me if I am found here--if I don't get out of this--tell my mother
I was trying to see her--to get some funds, I have nothing. I depended on my knowledge of this
country to escape--put them off the track--they're after me now--aren't they?"

"Yes--"

"I thought so; I should have got across to the house if the quarry lights hadn't been turned
on so suddenly--I knew they'd got word when I saw that--still, I might have made the run, but
that man throttled me--I must go--"

He got on his feet. At that moment they both started violently at the sound of something worrying
at the gate; there was a rattle at the bars, a scramble, a frightened bleating among the sheep,
a joyous bark--and Rag flung himself first upon Aileen then on Champney.

He caught the dog by the throat, choking him into silence, and handed him to Aileen.

"For God's sake, keep the dog away--don't let him come--keep him quiet, or I'm lost--" he dropped
over the wall and disappeared in the woods.

Here and there across the pastures a lantern shot its unsteady rays. The posse had begun their
night's work.

The dog struggled frantically to free himself from Aileen's arms; again and again she choked
him that he might not bark and betray his master. The terrified sheep bleated loud and long,
trampling one another in vain efforts to get through or over the wall.

