Unquestionably the handkerchief was hers; if proof other than the assurance of his heart were
requisite, he had it in the initial delicately embroidered in one corner: a D, for Dorothy!...
He looked again, to make sure; then hastily folded up the treasure-trove and slipped it into
a breast pocket of his coat.

No; I am not sure that it was not the left-hand pocket.

Quivering with excitement he bent again over the book and studied it intently. After all, he
had not been wrong! He could assert now, without fear of refutation, that Stryker had lied.

Some one had wielded an industrious pencil on the page. It was, taken as a whole, fruitful
of clues. Its very heading was illuminating:

LONDON to VLISSINGEN (FLUSHING) AND BREDA;

which happened to be the quickest and most direct route between London and Antwerp. Beneath
it, in the second column from the right, the pencil had put a check-mark against:

QUEENSBOROUGH ... DEP ... 11A10.

And now he saw it clearly--dolt that he had been not to have divined it ere this! The Alethea
had run in to Queensborough, landing her passengers there, that they might make connection
with the eleven-ten morning boat for Flushing,--the very side-wheel steamer, doubtless, which
he had noticed beating out in the teeth of the gale just after the brigantine had picked him
up. Had he not received the passing impression that the Alethea, when first he caught sight
of her, might have been coming out of the Medway, on whose eastern shore is situate Queensborough
Pier? Had not Mrs. Hallam, going upon he knew not what information or belief, been bound for
Queensborough, with design there to intercept the fugitives?

Kirkwood chuckled to recall how, all unwittingly, he had been the means of diverting from her
chosen course that acute and resourceful lady; then again turned his attention to the tables.

A third check had been placed against the train for Amsterdam scheduled to leave Antwerp at
6:32 p. m. Momentarily his heart misgave him, when he saw this, in fear lest Calendar and Dorothy
should have gone on from Antwerp the previous evening; but then he rallied, discovering that
the boat-train from Flushing did not arrive at Antwerp till after ten at night; and there was
no later train thence for Amsterdam. Were the latter truly their purposed destination, they
would have stayed overnight and be leaving that very evening on the 6:32. On the other hand,
why should they wait for the latest train, rather than proceed by the first available in the
morning? Why but because Calendar and Mulready were to wait for Stryker to join them on the
Alethea?

Very well, then; if the wind held and Stryker knew his business, there would be another passenger
on that train, in addition to the Calendar party.

Making mental note of the fact that the boat-train for Flushing and London was scheduled to
leave Antwerp daily at 8:21 p. m., Kirkwood rustled the leaves to find out whether or not other
tours had been planned, found evidences of none, and carefully restored the guide to the locker,
lest inadvertently the captain should pick it up and see what Kirkwood had seen.

An hour later he went on deck. The skies had blown clear and the brigantine was well in land-bound
waters and still footing a rattling pace. The river-banks had narrowed until, beyond the dikes
to right and left, the country-side stretched wide and flat, a plain of living green embroidered
with winding roads and quaint Old-World hamlets whose red roofs shone like dull fire between
the dark green foliage of dwarfed firs.

Down with the Scheldt's gray shimmering flood were drifting little companies of barges, sturdy
and snug both fore and aft, tough tanned sails burning in the afternoon sunlight. A long string
of canal-boats, potted plants flowering saucily in their neatly curtained windows, proprietors
expansively smoking on deck, in the bosoms of their very large families, was being mothered
up-stream by two funny, clucking tugs. Behind the brigantine a travel-worn Atlantic liner was
scolding itself hoarse about the right of way. Outward bound, empty cattle boats, rough and
rusty, were swaggering down to the sea, with the careless, independent thumbs-in-armholes air
of so many navvies off the job.

And then lifting suddenly above the level far-off sky-line, there appeared a very miracle of
beauty; the delicate tracery of the great Cathedral's spire of frozen lace, glowing like a
thing of spun gold, set against the sapphire velvet of the horizon.

Antwerp was in sight.

A troublesome care stirring in his mind, Kirkwood looked round the deck; but Stryker was very
busy, entirely too preoccupied with the handling of his ship to be interrupted with impunity.
Besides, there was plenty of time.

More slowly now, the wind falling, the brigantine crept up the river, her crew alert with sheets
and halyards as the devious windings of the stream rendered it necessary to trim the canvas
at varying angles to catch the wind.

Slowly, too, in the shadow of that Mechlin spire, the horizon grew rough and elevated, taking
shape in the serrated profile of a thousand gables and a hundred towers and cross-crowned steeples.

Once or twice, more and more annoyed as the time of their association seemed to grow more brief,
Kirkwood approached the captain; but Stryker continued to be exhaustively absorbed in the performance
of his duties.

Up past the dockyards, where spidery masts stood in dense groves about painted funnels, and
men swarmed over huge wharves like ants over a crust of bread; up and round the final, great
sweeping bend of the river, the Alethea made her sober way, ever with greater slowness; until
at length, in the rose glow of a flawless evening, her windlass began to clank like a mad thing
and her anchor bit the riverbed, near the left bank, between old Forts Isabelle and Tete de
Flandre, frowned upon from the right by the grim pile of the age-old Steen castle.

And again Kirkwood sought Stryker, his carking query ready on his lips. But the captain impatiently
waved him aside.

"Don't you bother me now, me lud juke! Wyte until I gets done with the custom hofficer."

Kirkwood acceded, perforce; and bided his time with what tolerance he could muster.

A pluttering customs launch bustled up to the Alethea's side, discharged a fussy inspector
on the brigantine's deck, and panted impatiently until he, the examination concluded without
delay, was again aboard.

Stryker, smirking benignly and massaging his lips with the back of his hand, followed the official
on deck, nodded to Kirkwood an intimation that he was prepared to accord him an audience, and
strolled forward to the waist. The American, mastering his resentment, meekly followed; one
can not well afford to be haughty when one is asking favors.

Advancing to the rail, the captain whistled in one of the river-boats; then, while the waterman
waited, faced his passenger.

"Now, yer r'yal 'ighness, wot can I do for you afore you goes ashore?"

"I think you must have forgotten," said Kirkwood quietly. "I hate to trouble you, but--there's
that matter of four pounds."

Stryker's face was expressive only of mystified vacuity. "Four quid? I dunno as I know just
wot you means."

"You agreed to advance me four pounds on those things of mine...."

"Ow-w!" Illumination overspread the hollow-jowled countenance. Stryker smiled cheerfully. "Garn
with you!" he chuckled. "You will 'ave yer little joke, won't you now? I declare I never see
a loony with such affecsh'nit, pl'yful wyes!"

Kirkwood's eyes narrowed. "Stryker," he said steadily, "give me the four pounds and let's have
no more nonsense; or else hand over my things at once."

"Daffy," Stryker told vacancy, with conviction. "Lor' luv me if I sees 'ow he ever 'ad sense
enough to escype. W'y, yer majesty!" and he bowed, ironic. "I 'ave given you yer quid."

"Just about as much as I gave you that pearl pin," retorted Kirkwood hotly. "What the devil
do you mean--"

"W'y, yer ludship, four pounds jus pyes yer passyge; I thought you understood."

"My passage! But I can come across by steamer for thirty shillings, first-class--"

"Aw, but them steamers! Tricky, they is, and unsyfe ... No, yer gryce, the W. Stryker Packet
Line Lim'ted, London to Antwerp, charges four pounds per passyge and no reduction for return fare."

Stunned by his effrontery, Kirkwood stared in silence.

"Any complynts," continued the captain, looking over Kirkwood's head, "must be lyde afore the
Board of Directors in writin' not more'n thirty dyes arfter--"

"You damned scoundrel!" interpolated Kirkwood thoughtfully.

Stryker's mouth closed with a snap; his features froze in a cast of wrath; cold rage glinted
in his small blue eyes. "W'y," he bellowed, "you bloomin' loonatic, d'ye think you can sye
that to Bill Stryker on 'is own wessel!"

He hesitated a moment, then launched a heavy fist at Kirkwood's face. Unsurprised, the young
man side-stepped, caught the hard, bony wrist as the captain lurched by, following his wasted
blow, and with a dexterous twist laid him flat on his back, with a sounding thump upon the
deck. And as the infuriated scamp rose--which he did with a bound that placed him on his feet
and in defensive posture; as though the deck had been a spring-board--Kirkwood leaped back,
seized a capstan-bar, and faced him with a challenge.

"Stand clear, Stryker!" he warned the man tensely, himself livid with rage. "If you move a
step closer I swear I'll knock the head off your shoulders! Not another inch, you contemptible
whelp, or I'll brain you!... That's better," he continued as the captain, caving, dropped his
fists and moved uneasily back. "Now give that boatman money for taking me ashore. Yes, I'm
going--and if we ever meet again, take the other side of the way, Stryker!"

Without response, a grim smile wreathing his thin, hard lips, Stryker thrust one hand into
his pocket, and withdrawing a coin, tossed it to the waiting waterman. Whereupon Kirkwood backed
warily to the rail, abandoned the capstan-bar and dropped over the side.

Nodding to the boatman, "The Steen landing--quickly," he said in French.

Stryker, recovering, advanced to the rail and waved him a derisive bon voyage.

"By-by, yer hexcellency. I 'opes it may soon be my pleasure to meet you again. You've been
a real privilege to know; I've henjoyed yer comp'ny somethin' immense. Don't know as I ever
met such a rippin', Ay Number One, all-round, entertynin' ass, afore!"

He fumbled nervously about his clothing, brought to light a rag of cotton, much the worse for
service, and ostentatiously wiped from the corner of each eye tears of grief at parting. Then,
as the boat swung toward the farther shore, Kirkwood's back was to the brigantine, and he was
little tempted to turn and invite fresh shafts of ridicule.

Rapidly, as he was ferried across the busy Scheldt, the white blaze of his passion cooled;
but the biting irony of his estate ate, corrosive, into his soul. Hollow-eyed he glared vacantly
into space, pale lips unmoving, his features wasted with despair.

They came to the landing-stage and swung broad-side on. Mechanically the American got up and
disembarked. As heedless of time and place he moved up the Quai to the gangway and so gained
the esplanade; where pausing he thrust a trembling hand into his trouser pocket.

The hand reappeared, displaying in its outspread palm three big, round, brown, British pennies.
Staring down at them, Kirkwood's lips moved.

"Bed rock!" he whispered huskily.

XIII

A PRIMER OF PROGRESSIVE CRIME

Without warning or presage the still evening air was smitten and made softly musical by the
pealing of a distant chime, calling vespers to its brothers in Antwerp's hundred belfries;
and one by one, far and near, the responses broke out, until it seemed as if the world must
be vibrant with silver and brazen melody; until at the last the great bells in the Cathedral
spire stirred and grumbled drowsily, then woke to such ringing resonance as dwarfed all the
rest and made it seem as nothing.

Like the beating of a mighty heart heard through the rushing clamor of the pulses, a single
deep-throated bell boomed solemnly six heavy, rumbling strokes.

Six o'clock! Kirkwood roused out of his dour brooding. The Amsterdam express would leave at
6:32, and he knew not from what station.

Striding swiftly across the promenade, he entered a small tobacco shop and made inquiry of
the proprietress. His command of French was tolerable; he experienced no difficulty in comprehending
the good woman's instructions.

Trains for Amsterdam, she said, left from the Gare Centrale, a mile or so across the city.
M'sieur had plenty of time, and to spare. There was the tram line, if m'sieur did not care
to take a fiacre. If he would go by way of the Vielle Bourse he would discover the tram cars
of the Rue Kipdorp. M'sieur was most welcome....

Monsieur departed with the more haste since he was unable to repay this courtesy with the most
trifling purchase; such slight matters annoyed Kirkwood intensely. Perhaps it was well for
him that he had the long walk to help him work off the fit of nervous exasperation into which
he was plunged every time his thoughts harked back to that jovial black-guard, Stryker....
He was quite calm when, after a brisk walk of some fifteen minutes, he reached the station.

A public clock reassured him with the information that he had the quarter of an hour's leeway;
it was only seventeen minutes past eighteen o'clock (Belgian railway time, always confusing).
Inquiring his way to the Amsterdam train, which was already waiting at the platform, he paced
its length, peering brazenly in at the coach windows, now warm with hope, now shivering with
disappointment, realizing as he could not but realize that, all else aside, his only chance
of rehabilitation lay in meeting Calendar. But in none of the coaches or carriages did he discover
any one even remotely resembling the fat adventurer, his daughter, or Mulready.

Satisfied that they had not yet boarded the train, he stood aside, tortured with forebodings,
while anxiously scrutinizing each individual of the throng of intending travelers.... Perhaps
they had been delayed--by the Alethea's lateness in making port very likely; perhaps they purposed
taking not this but a later train; perhaps they had already left the city by an earlier, or
had returned to England.

On time, the bell clanged its warning; the guards bawled theirs; doors were hastily opened
and slammed; the trucks began to groan, couplings jolting as the engine chafed in constraint.
The train and Kirkwood moved simultaneously out of opposite ends of the station, the one to
rattle and hammer round the eastern boundaries of the city and straighten out at top speed
on the northern route for the Belgian line, the other to stroll moodily away, idle hands in
empty pockets, bound aimlessly anywhere--it didn't matter!

Nothing whatever mattered in the smallest degree. Ere now the outlook had been dark; but this
he felt to be the absolute nadir of his misfortunes. Presently--after a while--as soon as he
could bring himself to it--he would ask the way and go to the American Consulate. But just
now, low as the tide of chance had ebbed, leaving him stranded on the flats of vagabondage,
low as showed the measure of his self-esteem, he could not tolerate the prospect of begging
for assistance--help which would in all likelihood be refused, since his story was quite too
preposterous to gain credence in official ears that daily are filled with the lamentations
of those whose motives do not bear investigation. And if he chose to eliminate the strange
chain of events which had landed him in Antwerp, to base his plea solely on the fact that he
was a victim of the San Francisco disaster ... he himself was able to smile, if sourly, anticipating
the incredulous consular smile with which he would be shown the door.

No; that he would reserve as a last resort. True, he had already come to the Jumping-off Place;
to the Court of the Last Resort alone could he now appeal. But ... not yet; after a while he
could make his petition, after he had made a familiar of the thought that he must armor himself
with callous indifference to rebuff, to say naught of the waves of burning shame that would
overwhelm him when he came to the point of asking charity.

He found himself, neither knowing nor caring how he had won thither, in the Place Verte, the
vast venerable pile of the Cathedral rising on his right, hotels and quaint Old-World dwellings
with peaked roofs and gables and dormer windows, inclosing the other sides of the square. The
chimes (he could hear none but those of the Cathedral) were heralding the hour of seven. Listless
and preoccupied in contemplation of his wretched case he wandered purposelessly half round
the square, then dropped into a bench on its outskirts.

It was some time later that he noticed, with a casual, indifferent eye, a porter running out
of the Hotel de Flandre, directly opposite, and calling a fiacre in to the carriage block.

As languidly he watched a woman, very becomingly dressed, follow the porter down to the curb.

The fiacre swung in, and the woman dismissed the porter before entering the vehicle; a proceeding
so unusual that it fixed the onlooker's interest. He sat rigid with attention; the woman seemed
to be giving explicit and lengthy directions to the driver, who nodded and gesticulated his
comprehension.

The woman was Mrs. Hallam.

The first blush of recognition passed, leaving Kirkwood without any amazement. It was an easy
matter to account for her being where she was. Thrown off the scent by Kirkwood at Sheerness,
the previous morning, she had missed the day boat, the same which had ferried over those whom
she pursued. Returning from Sheerness to Queensborough, however, she had taken the night boat
for Flushing and Antwerp,--and not without her plan, who was not a woman to waste her strength
aimlessly; Kirkwood believed that she had had from the first a very definite campaign in view.
In that campaign Queensborough Pier had been the first strategic move; the journey to Antwerp,
apparently, the second; and the American was impressed that he was witnessing the inception
of the third decided step.... The conclusion of this process of reasoning was inevitable: Madam
would bear watching.

Thus was a magical transformation brought about. Instantaneously lassitude and vain repinings
were replaced by hopefulness and energy. In a twinkling the young man was on his feet, every
nerve a-thrill with excitement.

Mrs. Hallam, blissfully ignorant of this surveillance over her movements, took her place in
the fiacre. The driver clucked to his horse, cracked his whip, and started off at a slow trot:
a pace which Kirkwood imitated, keeping himself at a discreet distance to the rear of the cab,
but prepared to break into a run whenever it should prove necessary.

Such exertion, however, was not required of him. Evidently Mrs. Hallam was in no great haste
to reach her destination; the speed of the fiacre remained extremely moderate; Kirkwood found
a long, brisk stride fast enough to keep it well in sight.

Round the green square, under the beautiful walls of Notre Dame d'Anvers, through Grande Place
and past the Hotel de Ville, the cab proceeded, dogged by what might plausibly be asserted
the most persistent and infatuated soul that ever crossed the water; and so on into the Quai
Van Dyck, turning to the left at the old Steen dungeon and, slowing to a walk, moving soberly
up the drive.

Beyond the lip of the embankment, the Scheldt flowed, its broad shining surface oily, smooth
and dark, a mirror for the incandescent glory of the skies. Over on the western bank old Tete
de Flandre lifted up its grim curtains and bastions, sable against the crimson, rampart and
parapet edged with fire. Busy little side-wheeled ferry steamers spanked the waters noisily
and smudged the sunset with dark drifting trails of smoke; and ever and anon a rowboat would
slip out of shadow to glide languidly with the current. Otherwise the life of the river was
gone; and at their moorings the ships swung in great quietness, riding lights glimmering like
low wan stars.

In the company of the latter the young man marked down the Alethea; a sight which made him
unconsciously clench both fists and teeth, reminding him of that rare wag, Stryker....

To his way of thinking the behavior of the fiacre was quite unaccountable. Hardly had the horse
paced off the length of two blocks on the Quai ere it was guided to the edge of the promenade
and brought to a stop. And the driver twisted the reins round his whip, thrust the latter in
its socket, turned sidewise on the box, and began to smoke and swing his heels, surveying the
panorama of river and sunset with complacency--a cabby, one would venture, without a care in
the world and serene in the assurance of a generous pour-boire when he lost his fare. But as
for the latter, she made no move; the door of the cab remained closed,--like its occupant's
mind, a mystery to the watcher.

Twilight shadows lengthened, darkling, over the land; street-lights flashed up in long, radiant
ranks. Across the promenade hotels and shops were lighted up; people began to gather round
the tables beneath the awnings of an open-air cafe. In the distance, somewhere, a band swung
into the dreamy rhythm of a haunting waltz. Scattered couples moved slowly, arm in arm, along
the riverside walk, drinking in the fragrance of the night. Overhead stars popped out in brilliance
and dropped their reflections to swim lazily on spellbound waters.... And still the fiacre
lingered in inaction, still the driver lorded it aloft, in care-free abandon.

In the course of time this inertia, where he had looked for action, this dull suspense when
he had forecast interesting developments, wore upon the watcher's nerves and made him at once
impatient and suspicious. Now that he had begun to doubt, he conceived it as quite possible
that Mrs. Hallam (who was capable of anything) should have stolen out of the cab by the other
and, to him, invisible door. To resolve the matter, finally, he took advantage of the darkness,
turned up his coat collar, hunched up his shoulders, hid his hands in pockets, pulled the visor
of his cap well forward over his eyes, and slouched past the fiacre.

Mrs. Hallam sat within. He could see her profile clearly silhouetted against the light; she
was bending forward and staring fixedly out of the window, across the driveway. Mentally he
calculated the direction of her gaze, then, moved away and followed it with his own eyes; and
found himself staring at the facade of a third-rate hotel. Above its roof the gilded letters
of a sign, catching the illumination from below, spelled out the title of "Hotel du Commerce."

Mrs. Hallam was interested in the Hotel du Commerce?

