The scene which had just taken place on deck had so absorbed the attention of the entire crew
that now for the first time they took note of the change.  There was the same long swell on
the sea, but the beautiful blue green waters had taken on a dull leaden hue.  The sky was threatening;
instead of being azure, as it had been for weeks, it was of a peculiar grayish color, although
not a cloud was visible.  In the west the sun surrounded by a dark halo was going down.  First
a dark bank of clouds appeared above the horizon; then quickly, like a giant's hand with outstretched
fingers to grasp the ship which lay motionless on the waters, it spread until it covered the
sun.  With greatest anxiety the sailors watched the signs of the approaching hurricane, making
what preparations they could by furling the sails, locking the hatchways, and fastening every
rope securely.

"We're going to have a hurricane, I fear, Captain.  Just see how the quicksilver has dropped
in the barometer, and we are right upon this accursed island with its coral reefs.  God have
mercy on us or we are lost," said Gray.

White with fear he looked at the barometer, then at the sky.  Already the rumblings of the
storm could be heard, and in the distance sheets of foam like a mist were being driven before
the wind.

"It will be here in a moment.  The first shock will strike us on the side.--If we only don't
capsize," said the Captain.

"I cannot turn the ship against the wind so long as it is lying still like this.  We must let
the waves wash over us--there!"

While Gray was speaking the storm broke and went howling through the rigging, filling the only
sail which was unfurled.  The mast creaked; the ship groaned in all its joints, as it tipped
on its side until the ends of the yards touched the water, and for one awful moment it seemed
as if it could not right itself.  Then yielding to the rudder it swung round to the west, and
offered the point of the bow to the storm.  Only the fact that it was very strongly built saved
it from destruction.

"Keep to the south as much as you can," called the Captain.

"The first danger is over," said Gray breathless, "but what now?  How am I to steer a ship
that won't and can't be steered in such a storm as this.  I wish Green were here in my place."

"Keep to the south as much as you can.  Every inch that we get away from the Soloman Islands
is so much away from sure destruction.  If we can only avoid those coral reefs we shall be
safe.--Oh, that I was ever fool enough to listen to Redfox and steer for those accursed islands."
These last words the Captain muttered under his breath, as he realized how quickly God's punishment
was overtaking him.

"To the south, Captain, so long as mast and sails remain and the good ship yields to the rudder;
but do let Green come and take my place.  I am not capable of steering in such a storm as this."

The Captain left Gray and went immediately to the room where the helmsman was chained.  The
thrashing of the vessel, and the noise of the waves dashing over its decks told that a frightful
storm was raging, and of the dangers of the coral reefs he knew only too well. Consequently
he said when the Captain came in, "It is no time now to talk of grievances and discipline,
you need my help.  I give you my word that when the ship is saved, if saved it can be, I will
put on my chains again."

"I hope it will not be necessary.  You will see that there is some misunderstanding.--What
was that awful crash?  Death is upon us," cried the Captain, interrupting himself.

"One of the masts has broken and gone over board!" cried Green.  "Come quickly or we'll go
to the bottom.  Bring the two boys into the cabin and let them pray.  If God will not spare
these two innocent children there is no hope for the rest of us.  We can only repent and prepare
for the end."

A moment later Green was on deck.  The mizzen-mast had broken off, but still hung to the side
of the vessel with all its tackling.

"Cut the ropes and clear the ship; then try one of the jib-sails, otherwise there will be no
such thing as steering," he said.

The sailors obeyed quickly.  They were approaching nearer and nearer to the reefs, over which
the breakers washed with a thundering noise.

"If only the jib-sail will stand the pressure on it, perhaps we can avoid the reefs.  I reckon
they are not a half mile away; the ship yields a little," said Green.

The Captain again came on board, but avoided the helmsman.  To Gray he said, "Put out the flying-jib
so as to be prepared in case the jib does not hold, and get ready to cast the anchor."  The
sailors took their places at the capstan and made ready to lower the anchor.  Meantime the
night had settled down quickly, for in the tropics night follows the going down of the sun
without any twilight.  There was a rainbow but thick banks of clouds driven along by the storm
hid it.  The darkness was so intense that you could not see the top of the mast, and even on
the deck it was impossible to distinguish objects only a step or two away.  Now and again a
flash of lightning showed the foaming breakers washing over the reefs and the dark outlines
of the island beyond them. Anxiously every eye was turned towards the point of danger.

"We're not two knots away from those accursed islands," said Gray.

"The storm is rising.  The sails will be in shreds in a moment.  Such waves I have never seen
before," answered Gray.

The ship danced like a nutshell on the raging waters.  The bowsprit raised itself high in the
air, while the stern was buried in the trough of the sea.  All clung to the ropes or whatever
object presented itself expecting to be washed overboard, as the boat shook and creaked in
its agony.

Hanging for dear life to the railing near the wheel the Captain looked upon the uproar of the
elements, and must have admitted to himself that the helmsman's words of accusation were only
too well founded.  A frightful cry shook his soul.  "Cain, where is thy brother Abel?  What
hast thou done with thy brother's child?  What judgment will be pronounced on thee?"  Now he
did not seek to put the guilt on his corrupter, his bad angel, but admitted that he was guilty,
and despair almost broke his heart.  "There is no forgiveness, miserable sinner," whispered
the arch enemy.  "Thou art a murderer, thy brother's murderer!"  Then came back a happier thought,
a picture of his innocent youth.  He saw himself before the miraculous image of the Blessed
Virgin, which he then so often visited.  There were the lights of many candles, and her motherly
eyes looking down upon him, and at the foot of the image written on a little tablet these words:
"Mother of mercy, refuge of sinners: pray for us."  Like a friendly star in the night of awful
darkness came this bright picture, and in his agony he cried to heaven: "O Lord, give me time
to repent and atone for my sins."

The vessel swept on.  The wind tore the sails to shreds.  The sailors cast the anchor.  With
a thud it went into the sea, and for a moment held the vessel.

"Cut the masts," thundered the Captain.  The sailors obeyed orders, but with the first stroke
of the ax, above the roaring of winds and waves came the awful human cry: "The anchor is lost!
We're drifting!"

"God have mercy on our souls," cried Green crossing himself, and the Captain fell on his knees,
moaning, "Mercy, mercy, O Lord, have mercy on us!"

A dazzling streak of lightning showed the white outlines of the reef and the next moment a
wave mountain high washed the vessel upon it.

CHAPTER XI.

Stranded.

When the ship stranded on the reef all on board were thrown from their feet, and the anguishing
cries of the shipwrecked mingled with the creaking of the vessel and the roaring of the waves.
The two boys found themselves in utter darkness in a corner of the cabin.  Willy, the first
to recover himself sufficiently to speak, said:

"Oh, Peppo, are you alive?"

"I thought the ship was sinking and that we were drowning.  Oh, if we had only all repented
and atoned," groaned Peppo.

"Hear your people calling," said Willy.

"They are not baptized and will go to hell.  Shall we not try to baptize them?  Come, quickly,
let us try.  If I could only find the door--here it is.  Come, come."

Willy wished to make the effort with his little friend acting as interpreter and preacher,
but scarcely had he and Peppo groped their way out of the cabin before they found themselves
caught in a crowd of human beings, who screaming and howling at the top of their lungs, were
making their way from the steerage into which the water was streaming. The prow of the ship
had struck the reef and was high above the water while great waves washed over the stern. 
All were crowding up the narrow gangway and soon with three hundred Chinaman on deck there
was not an inch of space not covered with water which was unoccupied.  In their fear of death
they climbed what was left of the rigging and hung there like monkeys calling upon Buddha and
all the heathen gods for help and giving utterance to wild, maniacal shrieks.  The boys would
have been pushed overboard in this panic had it not been that they fell in with the Captain
and helmsman who protected them as best they could.

"Tell your people," cried Green to Peppo, "that there is no need of this frightful, insane
howling.  We are so securely lodged that we cannot possibly sink, and the wreck will hold together
until morning. Five minutes ago when I saw that we were going to strike the reef, I wouldn't
have given a pipeful of tobacco for all our lives."  And the Captain said to Willy in a more
friendly manner than he had ever spoken: "You prayed well, my little man."

"Will the first officer also be good to me?" asked Willy, happy to receive a kind word.

"Hello, Redfox," cried Green, "we quite forgot you in this mad scramble," and the helmsman
went to him and helped him along the deck. "We are all in the same fix, and as Christians who
pray 'Our Father' we should forgive and be brothers.  Here is my hand."  The first officer
refused the proffered hand, turning his back on the honest helmsman.

The night with its raging storm wore away; towards morning the moon showing itself in a rift
in the clouds lighted the scene.  Scarcely two ships' lengths away the sea thundered on the
beach; farther out the waves, mountain-high, rolled in endless succession; to the right and
left extended the reef like a wall, several meters above the water, except in one place it
sank down so abruptly that even at low tide it was under water.

"Truly it is a marvel that we struck this reef just in this particular place, instead of there
where it breaks off so abruptly," said the Captain, "yet we are not in a fortunate position.
We have been saved from sudden death, but in its place we shall have a lingering and perhaps
more agonizing one.  The ship is a total loss.  The provisions in the stern are under water,
and the nearest port is a thousand miles away."--Today the great island of Bougainville, on
the east coast of which the "St. George" stranded, belongs to Germany, and now it is not so
difficult for those who meet with misfortunes at sea to reach a German harbor, but at the time
of my story the nearest ports were those of Australia and New Caledonia.--"How are three hundred
Chinamen to live here for an indefinite length of time?"

The full light of day revealed the fact that the reef which was of great length was only a
few feet wide and separated from the main land by an inlet of water.  The first thing that
the Captain did was to order the Chinamen to take what was left of the sails and build themselves
tents; then he gave his attention to the question of the water supply.

"We must cross to the main land and get some drinking water," he said, "for we have only one
cask left."

"Just enough to last the big boat on its trip to Australia," whispered Redfox to the Captain.
"You and I and Gray, and a couple of the strongest of the young fellows will attempt the journey.
Let Green and the boys stay here with the Chinamen until we bring help.  Our plans will come
out all right after all.  The half million for which the ship is insured will be ours--and
we shall be able to take it with a clear conscience, too."

"No, Redfox, enough of your machinations.  I have resolved to turn over a new leaf, and to
do good hereafter, that is, if there is any good left in me.  We must fix up these people the
best that we can with the wreckage of the ship, build a fort for them yonder on that little
brook, and give them arms and provisions, then we will cast lots as to who is to go in the
open boat to the nearest Australian port."

The Captain went on then with preparations for crossing to the island for drinking water and
edible fruits.  Unfortunately the powder and firearms were all under water, so that the men
had to make the dangerous landing armed only with clubs and knives.  The Captain led the party,
taking with him four sailors, a dozen or more Chinamen, and small Peppo to act as interpreter.
Willy would have gone gladly, but his uncle would not hear to his risking his life unnecessarily.

"I'll pray for you, uncle," said the boy, "that it won't go with you as--as--"

"As certain people had planned it for you and others," the uncle finished the sentence of the
faltering child.  "Yes, pray that the old saying that 'He who digs a grave for another, himself
falls therein,' may not be fulfilled."  Turning to Redfox, he asked: "Don't you want to go
with me?"

The latter muttered something under his breath and slipped away.  The Captain gave the signal
and soon they were on the opposite shore.  A group of natives came down to greet them, seemingly
in friendly fashion, offered them fruit, and helped to roll the casks up on the beach; then
all of a sudden with unearthly shrieks they fell upon them with their clubs.  With difficulty
the Captain and two sailors managed to get into the boat and across the inlet, to where their
companions, pale with fear, stood shuddering to think of the awful fate of their comrades.

"Poor, poor Peppo," wailed Willy, "can't we help him?  Will he be eaten up by the cannibals?"

Immediately there appeared on the shore whole troops of cannibals, and more poured out of the
woods.  Swinging their clubs and giving frightful war cries they challenged the intruders to
do battle with them.

"Quickly, boatswain," said the Captain, "order the Chinaman to make a raft from the beams of
the boat, and to arm themselves as best they can.  We must force a landing and get some drinking
water or we are lost.  It we only had half a dozen guns and some ammunition.--Just listen to
the cries of these men whom they are putting to death," said the Captain, turning his eyes
away from the sickening sight. [1]

By means of signs the boatswain tried to incite the Chinamen to action. They understood perfectly
well what was wanted but remained passive, for Lihoa reminded them of the warning of the God
of the Golden Fish not to engage in any strife.

"Leave the cowards to their fate," said Gray.  "We'll take the single cask of water, the salted
meat and hardtack which we fished out of the sea and get out of here tonight secretly."

The sailors to a man agreed to this plan, but as the boat would hold only six persons the thing
could not be managed.  The Captain offered to remain, and asked who was willing to stay with
him.  The helmsman was the only one to signify his willingness to stay; the rest preferred
to settle the matter by drawing lots.  According to this Redfox and Gray were to remain, so
the Captain appointed Green to direct the boat to Australia.

"Green, you are the only man equal to the task, and I give my nephew into your keeping.  The
boy's life must be saved.  The dangers which threaten you on this perilous trip are scarcely
less than those which we face here.  Perhaps on some neighboring island you can get drinking-water,
perhaps you will fall in with some ship which will come to our rescue.  If we are here a month,
yes, a week, even, without drinking-water, what then?  But as God wills.  For my part I will
willingly offer my life as a sacrifice in atonement for the past.  May the best of fortune
favor you, and may you save the life of my nephew. The insurance on this boat all goes to him;
and if you rescue him, send him to Father Somazzo in Hongkong.  If you cannot save us, come
back and see that our bones receive decent Christian burial."

Thus spoke the Captain.  The helmsman, who would willingly have stayed behind on the dreary
reef, made ready for the trip and at midnight set sail with the ebb of the tide.

[1] NOTE.--What is told here and in the following chapter concerning the cannibals happened
at the time that the "St. Paul" was wrecked on the Island of Rossel in July, 1858.  Compare
this account with the one found in Jos. Spillmann's story, called "Over the South Sea."

CHAPTER XII.

At Last.

Night had settled down.  The Chinamen lay under their tents and listened to what Lihoa spoke:
"So far we have avoided discord; from the sea we have been saved, and now surely the God of
the Golden Fish will not let us perish from thirst.  Within a few days it must rain; drinking-water
will come to us from the heavens.  Tonight, I understand, that the helmsman is to set sail
for Australia in a small boat, and take the boy with him.  That will never do.  As you know
the Captain and Redbeard are the helmsman's enemies and have conspired against his life.  He
will not come back to save them--he would be a fool if he did--but he loves the boy.  Our only
salvation lies in keeping the boy here with us; in holding him as a whiplash over the helmsman.
Otherwise we are lost."

All nodded assent to Lihoa's words, but as they had no way of telling the Captain what they
wanted, they decided that when the time came for the boat to sail they would forcibly detain
Willy.  Just here little Peppo, whom they thought dead, appeared in their midst.  He and one
sailor had escaped and swum across the little inlet.  The cannibals had not killed them when
they did their companions for some reason or other but had bound them with cords and left them
on the shore.  These cords they had managed to unfasten, and, protected by the darkness, had
got away.  While the sailor was telling his companions of his awful experience Lihoa told Peppo
what to say to the Captain, and to add force to the words, the Chinamen in a body attended
the small interpreter on his mission.  Great was the noise and excitement following his announcement,
but how could a handful of men oppose three hundred Chinaman?  Willy was ready to stay behind.

"Tommy," he said to the helmsman, "leave me here with Peppo and my uncle.  In the boat I'd
only be in the way.  I'll pray that you may return soon.  Good luck to you.  Be brave of heart,
Tommy, and may your holy guardian angel watch over you."

Those embarking promised faithfully to come back or to send help as soon as possible, and parted
with tears in their eyes.  Tommy kissed Willy and said: "God knows that if I do not put my
faith in your guardian angel there is little hope of ever seeing you again on this earth. 
Once more good-bye until we meet again.  Pray for us all, little one."

Thereupon he sprang into the boat, and they were off.  The moon was full and in its light they
could be seen as they passed through the opening in the reef.  Again they called farewell and
waved their handkerchiefs.  The crew raised the sail and in a few moments the stiff breeze
had carried the little boat beyond the tongue of land and out of sight.  With hearts too full
for utterance the men sat and wondered what the future would bring.  If by chance the boat
fell in with a merchant vessel--not a likely thing, as few vessels frequented this route--help
might come soon, otherwise under the most favorable of circumstances they must wait for months
for Green to go to Australia and come back.

In the crow's nest of the mast which was still standing they kept a constant watch in the hope
of sighting a vessel and signalling of their distress.  Day after day went by with no sign
of help.  Mercilessly the tropical sun burned down on the dreary sandbar.  Scurvy broke out.
The small amount of rations which they had, water-soaked biscuits and salted meats, increased
their thirst, and to add to their distress the cannibals on the opposite shore mockingly showed
them bunches of luscious bananas and other tropical fruits.

"Don't look there any more, Willy," said Peppo.  "Those dreadful cannibals are only just showing
us the fruit to tantalize us, and if we go after it we shall be murdered and eaten up the way
I've told you about."

"But, Peppo, I think the thirst is just as bad as being killed," complained Willy, "I'd just
as soon be killed as die of thirst."

"That's just what my people were saying today," answered Peppo.  "Lihoa told them that they
were to be patient a little longer, that the rain would surely come for he had seen unfailing
signs.  We will bear the thirst with patience for a little time yet.  You know why I want them
to hold out.  I want to convert them.  My poor countrymen!"

"Peppo! how came you to think of that?" said Willy, looking at his friend with open eyes.

"I don't know.  Just a little while ago when I was praying the thought came to me, and I firmly
believe that God saved me from the cannibals for this purpose.  I have been talking to Lihoa
and the others about the belief in Jesus Christ and baptism, and many of them said that if
our God would save them now in their hour of peril, they would be baptized.  The most of them
are looking for help from one of their gods who rides on a Golden Fish.  They expect he will
be forced to rescue them from this miserable reef through the offerings of one of their priests."

"A God that rides on a Golden Fish?  I'd like to see him," said Willy. "You are right about
advising them to be baptized.  We may all perish here before Tommy gets back with help.  And
if we do, the Chinese with the holy grace of baptism will go to heaven.  If we are all saved,
then they will take back with them to Hongkong a greater treasure than all the gold of the
Goldland to the south.  That would be such a fine thing for yon, Peppo!  Do you not remember
what Father Somazzo said about the saving of a soul--that one precious soul was worth more
to God than all the gold and jewels in the world.  What a happy boy you will be, if you save
not one but three hundred souls?  Oh, if I only understood Chinese and could help you explain
our faith!"

"You can help by offering this awful desire for water to God as a sacrifice.  Father Somazzo
used to tell us to offer up many unpleasant little things as sacrifices to God for the conversion
of the heathens and promised us our reward for so doing."

