I tell you, fellows, a mother is a wonderful gift to a boy, for her prayers alone. Long before
you learned to say, "Now I lay me down to sleep," she was praying that you would be a great
and good man some day. Those prayers of mothers have kept many a boy from going wrong. One
night in a great city where I had gone to find work I had fallen in with some young fellows
who "knew the ropes," and being far from home and lonesome I was glad to accept their companionship.
They invited me to join them in an "evening lark" to which no loyal Christian would lend himself,
and though I was a nominal Christian I was tempted sorely. I regarded myself as "my own man,"
having just turned twenty-one.

But just as I wavered between right and wrong, my mother's face flashed before me. It was only
for an instant, but it was enough. I heard her voice, heard it in prayer. That night a thousand
miles away she was praying for me, and saved me from what might have been a fatal step. I firmly
believe, fellows, but for my mother's prayers that night and many nights, before and since,
I should not now be enjoying the privilege of talking about the great things of life and the
Kingdom to you.

Treasure that dear mother, if you have one, fellows; she is God's peculiar gift.

Well, James and John had such a mother, and she did the most natural and motherly kind of a
thing. She wanted her boys to go away up high; they must even stand in the highest places,
on the right and left hand of the King in His glory. Like all mothers, she was ambitious for
her boys.

Then Jesus in His wonderful way explained that the road to true greatness was not that which
the world was following, in which those in power and authority were overbearing masters to
their inferiors; but it is a path of service to mankind, a path already blazed by Himself.
Last night in the local evening paper I saw these headlines: CHATTANOOGA DOCTOR ATTAINS EMINENCE.
The article stated that a very remarkable invention for the removal of foreign particles from
the lungs or bronchial tubes, such as might be accidentally swallowed, had been successfully
demonstrated before a national medical society, and had been written up in the American Medical
Journal; it was said that the discovery had brought great honour to the doctor in the world
of medicine.

That was the recognition, but what had preceded? Days and nights at bedsides of suffering;
days and nights in the laboratory; days and nights of study to relieve pain; hours of weariness
unknown to the world, but borne on by the thought of doing a service to humanity. And do you
suppose the final publicity is what rewards this doctor? Hardly. A reporter on his local city
paper sought an interview, after the far-away medical journal had published the first news,
but the doctor, in his service overalls in the midst of treating his patients, declined the
interview, saying it would involve a technical description which the general public would hardly
be interested in. Then it was "Good-morning," and the doctor returned to his work.

True greatness does not care to make one dash to fame, then loaf in its glory.

The thing our great Commander wants us to be earnest about is doing our best, wherever the
place of service. He will look after the reward. He is even more ambitious for us than our
mothers are.

     Read Matthew 20:20-28.

XXV

"PAW, I WANTA BE SOMEBODY!"

Say, fellows, away back in the mountains of western North Carolina, far up on the mountainside,
at the head of a cove, there lived a fifteen-year-old boy. He had sisters and brothers and
parents, but they dwelt in a little tumble-down shack and were wretchedly poor. Jake was the
oldest of the children, and he had to work hard in the little patch of corn on the steep mountainside,
which barely yielded a crop.

Down the path a mile or so there was a little log schoolhouse where a lady teacher gave some
of the mountain children lessons in "readin', ritin', and 'rithmetic." Jake had passed and
repassed that schoolhouse many times and wished that he might "go thar and larn," but Jake
was too important a hand on "the farm" to "waste enny time at sich"--so thought his parents,
neither of whom could read or write. "An' Jake was pow'ful handy 'bout fixin' things, like
tools en sich."

One day, when "the crop" was pretty well "laid by," Jake came to the shack and, throwing his
hoe into the corner, said: "Paw, I wanta be Somebody!" Then Jake went on to say he had been
thinking that now the corn was in shape to go ahead and make what it would, he "might put in
some time ev'y day at the schoolhouse a-larnin' how to read and write."

"But y'ain't got nothin' to buy books," was suggested.

"I'll see 'bout that 'ar," said Jake.

Next morning when the teacher arrived, Jake was waiting at the schoolhouse door.

"Teacher," said he, "I ain't got no money to buy books, but I kin git up the wood ev'y day
for the stove, 'n I kin sweep out the schoolhouse 'n keep it clean--cain't ye loan me a book
'n let me come 'n larn?"

Jake's terms were accepted. No boy was ever prouder of a university scholarship than Jake was
of that chance to "larn" in the little mountain schoolhouse. Jake went after "larnin'" as a
boy goes for pie at the picnic dinner.

A few months later, the school was visited by the superintendent of one of the large North
Carolina mountain mission schools. When the teacher told him about Jake, he offered him an
opportunity to enter the mission school and succeeded in persuading his parents to let him
go. Jake was put to work taking care of the farm machinery in the agricultural department of
the mission, but with ample time to pursue his studies in the schoolroom.

It was noticed that he had special aptitude for fixing the farm implements and adjusting the
parts--even making some of the missing parts at the old blacksmith forge. The superintendent
was so impressed with this that as soon as Jake's education had made pretty fair progress,
he secured him a position in the dynamo room of a large manufacturing plant in a near-by town.
Jake had accepted Jesus Christ as his Saviour and Master while at the mission school, owned
his Bible, read it faithfully every day, and was a consistent young Christian.

It was a triumph for Jake, when he got a discarded dynamo out of its corner and saved the purchase
of a new machine. His employers soon saw that he was entitled to even a better chance than
they could give him, and after they had some correspondence with a great electrical manufacturing
firm in New England, Jake one day bade farewell to his "Tarheel" friends and took a north-bound
train.

At the great electrical plant, his career was continuously upward.

It takes five figures to name his salary. Every Sunday morning you will see Jake and his family
get into their big car and motor into the city, where Jake teaches a large and enthusiastic
class of young men.

The mountain boy has realized his wish: he is Somebody!

No fellow can do a finer thing than make his life count as a force in Christianizing the nation--to
make it stand out a shining light, pointing the world to Christ. And one effective way to do
that is to apply himself, with a Christ-loving heart, to the opportunity that comes to his
hands to build himself up in a Christian way and in a business way. For good business and Christian
integrity are twin screw propellers.

The fellow that gets the good job, the fellow that suddenly finds himself in a position of
power and privileged service to his world about him is the fellow who is found faithful to
the smaller work or the smaller opportunity that lies next to his hand.

Oh, fellows, it is the only life!

     Read Matthew 25:14-30.

XXVI

"LET DOWN YOUR FEET!"

Say, fellows, something happened two summers ago at a well-known resort in the mountains, which
even at this late day it quickens my pulse to recall. I was one of the very few eyewitnesses
of the "tragedy," and it nearly put me to bed with nervous prostration. It was about twilight
one evening when I passed near the lake on my way to our cottage for supper.

The gay throng of swimmers had apparently all dispersed to the hotels and cottages for the
evening meal and preparation for the concert in the auditorium. That lake was a very popular
place in the afternoon; there were accommodations for all grades of swimmers--from the expert
divers who used the platform, spring-board, and tall diving ladder on the deep side, to the
smallest children, who paddled and waded in the shallow water under the watchful care of their
nurses on the other side. The lake was not over a hundred yards wide at the widest.

I was just noting how deserted and quiet was the place which only a few moments before had
been fairly alive with a happy throng of sport lovers, little and big, when I saw coming toward
the platform from the bath house a tall, thin man in his bathing suit. He looked so pale and
weak and thin that I wondered if he could possibly be thinking of going into that cold water
at that time of evening and alone!

I had not long to be in doubt about it, for straight out on the platform he went and then on
the spring-board! He lifted his arms above his head and pointed his hands together as a man
going to dive. The man looked so weak and thin that I felt positive he would not be able to
swim in that water, so chilled by the mountain springs that fed it. I wondered if he knew how
cold it was and how weak he was.

Should I run the risk of "butting in," and warn him? Suppose I did not and he should begin
to sink, could I jump in that fifteen-foot water with my clothes on and save him? These thoughts
flashed rapidly through my mind, but in the twinkling of an eye he was off the spring-board,
head downward into the water.

I held my breath and waited for him to rise. It seemed he had gone to the bottom and stuck
there; the water became actually smooth again, and almost still, where he had disappeared.
I thought he would never come up. My heart jumped into my throat.

Then he came up--very near where he had gone down--and faintly struck out swimming. I thought
of course he would at once make for the piers of the platform; surely a fellow swimming as
weakly as that, all alone, and in water cold and deep, would not risk himself far from shore.
But, to my amazement, he was apparently starting for the other side!

It was then I discovered I was not the only witness. On the other side of the lake, down close
to the water's edge, and watching with evident anxiety, was a lady. It was easy to see by her
movements that she had a strong personal interest in the swimmer's actions, and that she was
very anxiously watching him. She had evidently come down to keep him company, or as a precaution,
while he took his solitary evening swim.

These things, which were taken in at a glance, coupled with the fact that the swimmer was plainly
growing weaker and making very poor progress, confirmed all my apprehensions, and I was just
thinking I must quickly take measures for his relief when I saw coming out of the bath house
on a dead run, two husky young fellows in bathing suits, making for the spring-board.

At the same time the lady shouted: "Father! Father! can you make it?"

The swimmer gurgled something which sounded like, "No."

He had gotten about half-way across and was merely struggling to keep his head above water.
The two huskies went off the spring-board so close one behind the other that it looked foolhardy,
and struck out rapidly for the drowning man, but he had gone down his second time already.

It was a race between life and death. I said: "They will never reach him in time." The lady
screamed. Then a new voice broke upon the still evening air. A boy over on the walkway by the
dam shouted at the top of his lungs: "Mister! Let down your feet!" The struggling man heard
it; he did let down his feet, rose up about waist deep in the water and walked out!

Fellows, as I walked on up the hill toward supper, trying to work my heart back down where
it belonged, I did some tall thinking. Had I ever "drowned" in shallow water? Sure, I had.
The great big things God has planned for you and me to do seem impossible because we do not
take into account that they are to be done through God's power and not our own.

We summon the nerve to tackle the task, but, forgetting Him, like Peter trying to walk on the
water, we sink. We foolishly try to do the thing in our own strength, when there at our hand
is the great power of Almighty God just waiting to flow through us and accomplish it gloriously.

Oh, fellows, if you would just let down your feet on the mighty power of God, you would walk
out of all your difficulty. Here is a great overpowering temptation getting the best of you--and
you, drowning in shallow water.

Let down your feet! Here is an inspiring challenge out of God's Word, to put forth your hand
and heart and mind and help win the world for Him. You are tempted to say: "Who am I?" Let
down your feet, and you'll see who you are. You are a child of God, through whom He is willing
to do mighty works.

And you will rise upon your feet, you poor, weak fellow, and you will hold aloft the Banner
of the Cross, and you will achieve for God in a way that will set all the bells of heaven ringing.

     Read Matthew 28:16-20.

XXVII

AN "UNASSISTED TRIPLE PLAY"

Say, fellows, when that "Indian," Wambganss, put three men out with one unassisted play in
the world's series and retired the Brooklyn Dodgers with bases full, twenty thousand frantic
Cleveland fans rose as one man and sent up a yell that sounded like the roar of Niagara. It
comes but once in a generation for a lone baseball player to make an "unassisted triple play"
in a world's series, and doubtless that night the Cleveland second baseman was the most envied
baseball player in the world. For one man to do, alone, what thousands of onlookers could not
do, was enough to turn all fandom topsy-turvy in a delirium of amazement.

There is something in you and me, fellows, that leaps to its feet and screeches with delight
when we see any one rise to the demands of a crisis and do the fine thing. Now, I want you
to turn to a place in the Bible where is described a finer thing than could happen in any world's
series. It has always seemed to me to be about the most wonderful event that ever happened.
It is John's account of one of the most wonderful miracles that Jesus performed.

More than five thousand hungry people lingered on the hillsides near the lake shore, and there
was nothing for them to eat. Jesus was testing His men that day to see how far they had recognized
His divine power. He turned to Philip and said: "Where shall we get food for them?" Philip
did not know it was a test question; neither did he realize that Jesus could turn every blade
of grass to a loaf of bread if He chose to do so. Therefore, Philip replied: "I do not know,
Lord; it looks as if they will have to go home hungry."

Now Andrew was casting about to see what he might discover to help out the situation, and his
eye fell upon a boy standing near by with a rather familiar shaped bundle in the folds of his
tunic. Andrew sniffed, and saw the tails of two dried fish sticking through. Andrew had a long
nose for fish. He knew what it was: the boy had brought a lunch with him.

"How many barley cakes have you, son?" inquired Andrew. "Five," answered the boy. "Wait a minute,"
said Andrew. Something had flashed into his mind. It was a big moment for Andrew; he was on
the verge of doing a fine thing, himself, and he stepped quickly to where Jesus stood.

"Master!" he said, his eyes snapping with the very thought of what might happen--"Master, there's
a lad here with five barley cakes and two small fishes--" and (oh, the tragedy of it!) then
he must have caught Philip's hard-boiled eye. He must have thought, "Now, Philip is saying
I'm a fool for suggesting such a thing--and I guess I am"; for he quickly added "--but what
are they among so many?"

Jesus calmly turned His eyes on Andrew, as though He said: "Almost!--Andrew--almost did your
faith win a victory; make the men sit down on the grass, and bring the lad's lunch to me."

Now, fellows, I can imagine Andrew going back to that boy and saying, "Son, the Master has
need of this food you have brought; shall I take it to Him?" And this boy's first thought,
naturally, was: "Then, what will I do? I'm a long way from home; I'm hungry, and I was just
fixing to eat it myself--but--"

The boy had been listening to Jesus as He talked to the crowd. He had seen those wonderful
eyes melting with compassion. His own eyes had feasted upon that majestic countenance, and
his ears had tingled, and his boyish heart thrilled with the marvellous words which fell from
the Master's lips. "Surely," he had thought, "this must be the Messiah, for no other could
speak like Him, nor work these marvellous cures." So quickly he brushed aside his self-interest,
and held out the little bundle of fishes and bread.

Now, fellows, watch--What?--a triple play at a world series and twenty thousand fans leaping
and yelling like mad? Bless you, no. Something happened right then which will be remembered
a millennium after baseball has been forgotten. Jesus took the boy's lunch and fed five thousand
hungry men, besides women and children, until they could eat no more.

I have many times tried to picture in my imagination that glad and astonished boy. His eyes
must have nearly popped out when he saw what was going on, the Master giving out the bread
and fishes--and the bread and fishes never giving out!

And the big news to-day, fellows, is that you and I can make a play like that. No matter what
it is you've got in your hand, let Jesus use it. He can do more with it than we can. No matter
whether it is much or little, give it to Him. In fact, that's the way to save it and make the
most of it. He said so (Luke 9:24) Himself; give it to Him. It matters not so much what it
is in your hand; the thing that matters is what you do with it. Give it to Him. You may not
hear the bleachers roar over your gift, but, listen, fellows, when a life is surrendered to
Christ the battlements of heaven ring with a shout that encircles God's throne, and the score
is for Eternity!

Fellows, let's play the REAL GAME.

     Read John 6:5-14.

XXVIII

FORGIVING

Say, fellows, I want you to take a look at Simon Peter to-day. He is as interesting as a fast
game of volley ball. And he did get some hot ones handed to him. Impulsive fellow that he was,
he was always getting his foot into it. Peter was a plunger; he wanted to do things, and do
them right now. Loyal soul--he would fight for his friend at the drop of a hat; but he was
subject to fits of depression, and at such times his heart would fail him, or he would lose
his grip on himself and do something to regret sorely afterward.

Now, fellows, Jesus loved Peter with a mighty love, and He spent much time helping him to gain
self-control and learn to be a steady, thoroughgoing, dependable Christian. Many times Jesus
had to call him down sharply. Once He even called Peter "Satan" (see Mark 8:33). It really
was Satan to whom Jesus spoke--Satan operating in Peter, as he operates in you and me sometimes
when we are weak enough to permit it; but it must have been an awful jolt to Peter to get that
from his Master.

Peter gradually improved. He was making an honest effort to be the man he ought to be; but
there one thing which gave him more trouble than anything else. He got to the point where he
could close his jaws tight and keep from calling down the fellow who made him mad, but he couldn't
keep from surging inside. He would surge when he went to bed, and he would be still surging
when he got up--all inside. After a while he got to where he could forgive, but when the offense
was repeated it was "all off," and Peter would find himself surging again. Now the second surging
was just as uncomfortable and made him feel as mean as the first, so Peter began to wonder
just what would be the limit, according to Jesus' idea, to which a man must forgive and then
surge and feel good over it. You see, Peter was trying to train by the rules of Jesus, so it
was quite the proper thing for him to ask Jesus about it when in doubt. A good sport is always
ready to listen to the Coach.

Jesus was teaching the Golden Rule, the law of kindness and of good-will. He had just been
showing how to make peace with one who has done you an injury, when Peter spoke up and asked
the question which brought forth one of Jesus' most remarkable parables. Peter said: "Lord,
how oft shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? until seven times?"

Seven times! Think of that. It was going some, wasn't it? Doubtless Peter thought so. Perhaps
he said to himself: "Well, for once I have proposed something which will show the Lord that
I have learned to be a longsuffering Peter. Just imagine it: Forgave him Sunday; he repeated
the offense Monday, and I forgave him again; also the same on Tuesday. He deliberately did
that dirty trick again on Wednesday, and I still stood my ground on the forgiving program.
Thursday and Friday the rascal repeated the offense, and I forgave, and did it again on Saturday;
that was seven times, and lo! when Sunday came the ungrateful wretch was at it again, and I'm
done. Seven times! It was a wonderful test of my control, and I shall present it to the Lord--"

And what did Jesus say? Why, Peter must have staggered under that answer, for it revealed to
him far more than the "four hundred and ninety times" program. In the light of that parable
in Matthew 18:21-35, it revealed to Peter that God had already forgiven so much that was sinful
in him that he might just as well settle down to a program of forgiving his brother every day
for the balance of his life, if he did not want to forfeit the forgiveness of God. No more
surging for Peter.

And that is what the lesson means for you and for me to-day. A missionary once said, "We cannot
outgive God." It is quite as true that we cannot out-forgive God. And, moreover, we dare not
harbour unforgiveness in our hearts against any fellow-being, for when we do it we are dangerously
close to the edge of a fearful precipice, where one slip would put us--with the Tormentors.

Let's all shake hands--hard!

     Read Matthew 18:21-35.

XXIX

PARADOX

Say, fellows, do you know what a paradox is? It is something which seems to contradict itself.
I saw a man hold in his hand something worth one hundred dollars. I would have been willing
to give him one hundred dollars for it. He destroyed it right before my eyes; yet his action
caused nobody any loss. Now there is a paradox, and it seems quite puzzling, doesn't it? It
looks quite impossible, you may say. But the explanation is very simple. What the man held
in his hand was his own check on the bank. He had made a slight scratch on it which did not
affect its value, only its neatness, and he preferred to tear it to pieces and rewrite it.

Here now in the eleventh chapter of Matthew, our Lord in His impressive way is teaching in
a paradox, and you may mark it well, for it indicates a specially important proposition. It
seems queer that in coming in answer to that invitation you should have a yoke to put on.

But your first wrong impression is that the Lord is sorry for folks who work. Not at all; work
is a blessed privilege. Pity the poor idler, not the worker. Be sorry for him who is by any
cause debarred from working, not for the red-blooded fellow who is feeling the thrill of accomplishing
something. Our Lord is sorry for those who are "heavy laden" while they work--laden with worry,
with anxiety, with fears and forebodings--yes, even with a guilty conscience.

Then the yoke. Who would think of a yoke in connection with rest? I suppose you fellows have
seen oxen wearing yokes. They do not look very restful, do they? Yet Jesus clearly says His
yoke is "easy"! Well, let's see.

For a moment, think of life as a great game. In many respects it is just that. It takes skill
and wit and patience and determination to win the ordinary game; also the willingness to take
a lot of punishment at times. There are three things about the game of life which are like
all other games: (1) We must either win or lose; (2) there is uncertainty; and (3) we all want
to win. But there are also three things true of the life game which are not true about other games.

The first of these three dissimilarities is that in the life game you have got to play whether
you will or no. You can beg off from a game of tennis, or baseball, or dominoes; but the life
game you have got to play, willing or unwilling, sick or well, fit or not fit. There's no choice;
you've got to play--you are already playing.

Second, you must play against an adversary who is not only more skillful, more speedy, more
enduring, but is invisible, and whom, humanly speaking, it is absolutely impossible to beat.
Such a game! Such an adversary!

But the third dissimilarity is the most remarkable of all, and it is the shot which carries
the big news to-day,--there is a rule by which you can certainly win. Can you say that about
any other game? In other games, your rival can apply the rule as well as you, but in the game
of life the rule is only available for you, and it is an absolutely sure winner.

Losing your life for Jesus--which simply means investing it for Him. Whatever you do, do that
thing in His name and in a way worthy of Him. Your life, you know, is simply made up of the
events of the twenty-four hours of each day. Invest each event with Jesus. That means your
play as well as work. It means clean play and good hard playing to win, but in the way Christ
would approve, honest, fair, chivalrous--and it is true sport, I tell you. That is a part of
what it means, wearing Jesus' yoke, simply doing the thing as Jesus would do it.

     Read Matthew 11:28-30.

XXX

FRAUD

Say, fellows, the greatest circus man who ever lived said the American people like to be humbugged,
and proceeding on that theory, P.T. Barnum got together more animals and performers and freaks
under canvas than had ever been seen before. He made a tremendous fortune. There is something
in human nature which makes us an easy mark for any pretentious thing that comes down the pike
with banners flying. The bigger the claim and the larger the figures, the more readily we fall
for it, but simple things must be proved.

When we are told there are 290,680,493,115 stars we accept it without question, but if there
is a sign saying "FRESH PAINT" we touch the paint with our fingers to see if it is really so.

Fellows, there is a big sign posted all over the country, carrying in large letters the two
words, "It satisfies." It is the expensive advertising propaganda of cigarette manufacturers,
and the "satisfaction" they are offering you is that brief and fleeting sensation of being
doped, so that "stern realities are changed to pleasant seemings." It matters not to them that
your health and morals and money and life pay the cost, just so they sell their product. They
tell you cigarettes "satisfy." It is a preposterous fake. They do not satisfy--they produce
further craving--and they know that that craving grows, until the habit is formed and their
"satisfied" victim becomes a hopeless slave--known as a cigarette fiend. There is only one
drawback for the cigarette manufacturer, his consumer is too short lived; the cigarette devitalizes,
pauperizes, and destroys. Like the shock troops of the German army, they must be continually
recruited--recruited in numbers which almost stagger the imagination.

Did you know, fellows, that to keep up the consumption of cigarettes at the present rate of
manufacture there must be two thousand new smokers daily to contract the habit? Nearly all
these new smokers must be boys, for men are not fooled into this practice so easily.

In a village I recently saw a large bill-board sign at the top of which in bold letters were
the words, WANTED: ONE MILLION RECRUITS! Upon reading farther, I found it was the advertisement
of a certain brand of cigarettes, and the manufacturers boldly stated that the "one million
recruits" were wanted to join the large and growing army of "delighted smokers" of their "richly
blended" cigarette.

You don't have to fall for it. You do not have to be one of the two thousand daily new recruits
to the cigarette manufacturer's army of shock troops.

But the sly wolf comes in disguise, and in this case the disguise is "satisfaction" offered.
Once the wolf gets its victim it throws off the disguise and stops talking about "satisfaction,"
but simply hands the "coffin tacks" across the counter, and takes your money, health, morals,
success, and real satisfaction, in exchange, while you--well, you proceed to drive the tacks,
one by one.

Says the cigarette: "I am not much of a mathematician, perhaps, but I can ADD nervous trouble;
I can SUBTRACT from physical energy; I can MULTIPLY aches and pains; I can DIVIDE the mental
powers; I can take INTEREST from work and I can DISCOUNT chances for success."

Dr. Heald, writing in Life and Health, says cigarettes are in many cases the direct cause of
cancer, blindness, deafness, heart disease and dyspepsia. He further says they dwarf the body,
benumb the brain and weaken character.

That cigarettes "hinder the development of the body" is testified to by the following physical
directors of universities: Drs. Seaver and Anderson, of Yale; Dr. Hitchcock, of Ambrose; Dr.
Meylin, of Columbia--as a result of repeated and careful measurements both of smokers and non-smokers.

Judge Ben Lindsey says: "No pure-minded, honest, manly, brave boy will smoke a cigarette."

"Home-Run" Baker says: "I do not smoke--never did. If any youngster wants advice from one who
doesn't mean to preach, there it is: Leave cigarettes alone!"

Dr. Coffin, of the Whittier Reform School, says: "Of the 1,700 boys who have been inmates of
this institution, 1,670 were cigarette smokers!"

There is "satisfaction" for you; no, not for you, but only satisfaction for the cigarette manufacturer
and dealer, such satisfaction as comes from ill-gotten gains, which after all cannot be permanent.

Yes, "it satisfies"--the cigarette,--it satisfies--satisfies the devil, and he laughs, and
his is the only real long laugh that the cigarette affords.

The cigarette-tree is known by its fruit. Cut it out.

     Read 1 Corinthians 9:24-27.

XXXI

THE BIG TASK

