The day preceding the passage of the Beresina was one of terrible solemnity.  The Emperor appeared
to have made his decision with the cool resolution of a man who commits an act of desperation;
nevertheless, councils were held, and it was resolved that the army should strip itself of
all useless burdens which might harass its march.  Never was there more unanimity of opinion,
never were deliberations more calm or grave. It was the calm of men who decide to make one
last effort, trusting in the will of God and their own courage.  The Emperor had the eagles
brought from each corps and burned, since he thought that fugitives had no need of them.  It
was a sad sight to see these men advancing from the ranks one by one, and casting in the flames
what they valued more than their lives, and I have never seen dejection more profound, or shame
more keenly felt; for this seemed much like a general degradation to the brave soldiers of
the battle of La Moskwa.  The Emperor had made these eagles talismans, and this showed only
too plainly he had lost faith in them. And although the soldiers realized that the situation
of affairs must be desperate to have come to this, it was at least some consolation to think
that the Russians would have only the ashes.  What a scene was presented by the burning of
these eagles, above all to those who like myself had been present at the magnificent ceremonies
attending their distribution to the army in the camp of Boulogne before the campaign of Austerlitz!

Horses were needed for the artillery, and at this critical moment the artillery was the safeguard
of the army.  The Emperor consequently gave orders that the horses should be impressed, for
he estimated the loss of a single cannon or caisson as irreparable.  The artillery was confided
to the care of a corps composed entirely of officers, and numbering about five hundred men.
His Majesty was so much touched at seeing these brave officers become soldiers again, put their
hand to the cannon like simple cannoneers, and resume their practice of the manual of arms
in their devotion to duty, that he called this corps his sacred squadron.  With the same spirit
which made these officers become soldiers again, the other superior officers descended to a
lower rank, with no concern as to the designation of their grade.  Generals of division Grouchy
and Sebastiani took again the rank of simple captain.

When near Borizow we halted at the sound of loud shouts, thinking ourselves cut off by the
Russian army.  I saw the Emperor grow pale; it was like a thunderbolt.  A few lancers were
hastily dispatched, and we saw them soon returning waving their banners in the air.  His Majesty
understood the signal, and even before the cuirassiers had reassured us, so clearly did he
keep in mind even the possible position of each corps of his army, he exclaimed, "I bet it
is Victor."  And in fact it was Marshal Victor, who awaited us with lively impatience.  It
seemed that the marshal's army had received very vague information of our disasters, and was
prepared to receive the Emperor with joy and enthusiasm.  His soldiers still fresh and vigorous,
at least compared with the rest of the army, could hardly believe the evidence of their own
eyes when they saw our wretched condition; but the cries of "Vive l'Empereur" were none the
less enthusiastic.

But a different impression was made when the rear guard of the army filed before them; and
great confusion ensued, as each one of the marshal's army who recognized a friend rushed out
of the ranks and hastened to him, offering food and clothing, and were almost frightened by
the voracity with which they ate, while many embraced each other silently in tears. One of
the marshal's best and bravest officers stripped off his uniform to give it to a poor soldier
whose tattered clothing exposed him almost naked to the cold, donning himself an old cloak
full of holes, saying that he had more strength to resist the freezing temperature.  If an
excess of misery sometimes dries up the fountains of the heart, sometimes also it elevates
men to a great height, as we see in this instance.  Many of the most wretched blew out their
brains in despair; and there was in this act, the last which nature suggests as an end to misery,
a resignation and coolness which makes one shudder to contemplate.  Those who thus put an end
to their lives cared less for death than they did to put an end to their insupportable sufferings,
and I witnessed during the whole of this disastrous campaign what vain things are physical
strength and human courage when the moral strength springing from a determined will is lacking.
The Emperor marched between the armies of Marshal Victor and Marshal Oudinot; and it was a
depressing sight to see these movable masses halt sometimes in succession,--first those in
front, then those who came next, then the last.  And when Marshal Oudinot who was in the lead
suspended his march from any unknown cause, there was a general movement of alarm, and ominous
rumors were circulated; and since men who have seen much are disposed to believe anything,
false rumors were as readily credited as true, and the alarm lasted until the front of the
army again moved forward, and their confidence was somewhat restored.

On the 25th, at five o'clock in the evening, there had been thrown across the river temporary
bridges made of beams taken from the cabins of the Poles.  It had been reported in the army
that the bridges would be finished during the night.  The Emperor was much disturbed when informed
that the army had been thus deceived; for he knew how much more quickly discouragement ensues
when hope has been frustrated, and consequently took great pains to keep the rear of the army
informed as to every incident, so that the soldiers should never be left under cruel delusions.
At a little after five the beams gave way, not being sufficiently strong; and as it was necessary
to wait until the next day, the army again abandoned itself to gloomy forebodings.  It was
evident that they must endure the fire of the enemy all the next day.  But there was no longer
any choice; for it was only at the end of this night of agony and suffering of every description
that the first beams were secured in the river.  It is hard to comprehend how men could submit
to stand up to their mouths in water filled with ice, and rallying all the strength which nature
had given them, with all that the energy of devotion furnished, and drive piles several feet
deep into a miry bed, struggling against the most horrible fatigue, pushing back with their
hands enormous blocks of ice, which would have submerged and sunk them with their weight; in
a word, warring even to the death with cold, the greatest enemy of life.  This marvelous feat
was accomplished by our French pontoon corps.  Many perished, borne away by the current or
benumbed by the cold.  The glory of this achievement, in my opinion, exceeds in value many others.

The Emperor awaited daylight in a poor hut, and in the morning said to Prince Berthier, "Well,
Berthier, how can we get out of this?  "He was seated in his room, great tears flowing down
his cheeks, which were paler than usual; and the prince was seated near him.

They exchanged few words, and the Emperor appeared overcome by his grief. I leave to the imagination
what was passing in his soul.  At last the King of Naples opened his heart to his brother-in-law,
and entreated him, in the name of the army, to think of his own safety, so imminent had the
peril become.  Some brave Poles had offered themselves as escort for the Emperor; he could
cross the Beresina higher up, and reach Wilna in five days.  The Emperor silently shook his
head in token of refusal, which the king understood, and the matter was no longer considered.

Amid overwhelming disasters, the few blessings which reach us are doubly felt.  I observed
this many times in the case of his Majesty and his unfortunate army.  On the banks of the Beresina,
just as the first supports of the bridge had been thrown across, Marshal Ney and the King of
Naples rushed at a gallop to the Emperor, calling to him that the enemy had abandoned his threatening
position; and I saw the Emperor, beside himself with joy, not being able to believe his ears,
go himself at a run to throw a searching glance in the direction they said Admiral Tschitzakoff
had taken.  This news was indeed true; and the Emperor, overjoyed and out of breath from his
race, exclaimed, "I have deceived the admiral."  This retrograde movement of the enemy was
hard to understand, when the opportunity to overwhelm us was within his reach; and I doubt
whether the Emperor, in spite of his apparent satisfaction, was very sure of the happy consequences
which this retreat of the enemy might bring to us.

Before the bridge was finished, about four hundred men were carried part of the way across
the river on two miserable rafts, which could hardly sustain themselves against the current;
and we saw them from the bank rudely shaken by the great blocks of ice which encumbered the
river. These blocks came to the very edge of the raft, where, finding an obstacle, they remained
stationary for some time, then were suddenly ingulfed under these frail planks with a terrible
shock, though the soldiers stopped the largest with their bayonets, and turned their course
aside from the rafts.

The impatience of the army was at its height.  The first who reached the opposite bank were
the brave Jacqueminot, aide-de-camp of Marshal Oudinot, and Count Predzieczki, a brave Lithuanian,
of whom the Emperor was very fond, especially since he had shared our sufferings with such
fidelity and devotion.  Both crossed the river on horseback, and the army uttered shouts of
admiration as they saw that the chiefs were the first to set the example of intrepidity.  They
braved enough dangers to make the strongest brain reel.  The current forced their horses to
swim diagonally across, which doubled the length of the passage; and as they swam, blocks of
ice struck against their flanks and sides, making terrible gashes.

At one o'clock General Legrand and his division were crossing the bridge constructed for the
infantry, while the Emperor sat on the opposite bank, and some of the cannon becoming entangled
had for an instant delayed the march.  The Emperor rushed on the bridge, put his hand to the
work, and assisted in separating the pieces.  The enthusiasm of the soldiers was at its height;
and it was amid cries of "Vive l'Empereur" that the infantry set foot on the opposite bank.

A short time after, the Emperor, learning that General Partonneaux had laid down his arms,
was deeply affected by this news, and gave vent to reproaches which were somewhat unjust to
the general.  Later, when he had received more correct information, he understood perfectly
the part which necessity and despair had played in this surrender.

It is a fact that the brave general did not come to this decision till he had done all that
a brave man could under the circumstances; for it is permitted a man to recoil when there is
nothing left but to let himself be killed to no purpose.

When the artillery and baggage-wagons passed, the bridge was so overloaded that it fell in;
and instantly a retrograde movement took place, which crowded together all the multitude of
stragglers who were advancing, like a flock being herded, in the rear of the artillery. Another
bridge had been constructed, as if the sad thought had occurred that the first might give way.
But the second was narrow and without a railing; nevertheless, it at first seemed a very valuable
makeshift in such a calamity.  But how disasters follow each other!  The stragglers rushed
there in crowds.  The artillery, the baggage-wagons, in a word, all the army material, had
been in the front on the first bridge when, it was broken; and when, from the sudden panic
which seized on those in the rear of this multitude, the dreadful catastrophe was learned,
the last there found themselves first in gaining the other bridge.  It was urgent the artillery
should pass first, consequently it rushed impetuously towards the only road to safety which
remained.  No pen can describe the scene of horror which now ensued; for it was literally over
a road of trampled human bodies that conveyances of all sorts reached the bridge.  On this
occasion could be seen how much brutality, and even cold-blooded ferocity, can be produced
in the human mind by the instinct of self-preservation.  There were some stragglers most frantic
of all, who wounded, and even killed, with their bayonets, the unfortunate horses which obeyed
the lash of their guides; and several caissons were left on the road in consequence of this
slaughter.

As I have said, the bridge had no railing; and crowds of those who forced their way across
fell into the river and were ingulfed beneath the ice. Others in their fall tried to stop themselves
by grasping the planks of the bridge, and remained suspended over the abyss until their hands,
crushed by the wheels of the vehicles, lost their grasp, and they went to join their comrades
as the' waves closed over them.  Entire caissons, with drivers and horse were precipitated
into the water.

Poor women were seen holding their children out of the water in the effort to delay for a few
instants their death, and death in such a frightful form, a truly admirable maternal incident,
which the genius of the painter has divined in painting scenes from the Deluge, and which we
saw in all its heartrending and frightful reality!  The Emperor wished to retrace his steps,
believing that his presence might restore order; but he was dissuaded from this project so
earnestly, that he withstood the promptings of his heart and remained, though certainly it
was not his elevated rank which kept him on the bank.  All the suffering he endured could be
seen when he inquired every instant where the crossing was, if they could still hear cannon
rolling over the bridge, if the cries had not ceased somewhat in that direction.  "The reckless
creatures!  Why could they not wait a little?"  said he.

There were fine examples of devotion under these distressing circumstances.  A young artilleryman
threw himself into the water to save a poor mother with two children, who was attempting to
gain the other shore in a little canoe.  The load was too heavy; an enormous block of ice floated
against and sunk the little boat.  The cannoneer seized one of the children, and, swimming
vigorously, bore it to the bank; but the mother and the other child perished.  This kind young
man adopted the orphan as his son.  I do not know if he had the happiness of regaining France.

Officers harnessed themselves to sleds to carry some of their companions who were rendered
helpless by their wounds.  They wrapped these unfortunates as warmly as possible, cheered them
from time to time with a glass of brandy when they could procure it, and lavished on them most
touching attentions.

There were many who behaved in this manner, many of whose names we are ignorant; and how few
returned to enjoy in their own country the remembrance of the most admirable deeds of their lives.

The bridge was burned at eight o'clock in the morning.

On the 29th the.  Emperor quitted the banks of the Beresina, and we slept at Kamen, where his
Majesty occupied a poor wooden building which the icy air penetrated from all sides through
the windows; nearly all the glass of which being broken, we closed the openings as well as
we could with bundles of hay.  A short distance from us, in a large lot, were penned up the
wretched Russian prisoners whom the army drove before it.  I had much difficulty in comprehending
this delusion of victory which our poor soldiers still kept up by dragging after them this
wretched luxury of prisoners, who could only be an added burden, as they required their constant
surveillance.

When the conquerors are dying of famine, what becomes of the conquered? These poor Russians,
exhausted by marches and famine, nearly all perished this night.  In the morning they were
found huddled pell-mell against each other, striving thus to obtain a little warmth.  The weakest
had succumbed; and their stiffened bodies were propped the whole night against the living without
their even being aware of it.  Some in their hunger ate their dead companions.  The hardihood
with which the Russians endure pain has often been remarked.  I can cite one instance which
surpasses belief.  One of these fellows, after being separated from his corps, had been struck
by a cannonball which had cut off both his legs and killed his horse.  A French officer on
a reconnoitering tour on the bank of the river where this Russian had fallen, perceived at
some distance an object which appeared to be a dead horse, and yet he could see that it moved.

He approached, and saw the bust of a man whose extremities were concealed in the stomach of
the horse.

This poor creature had been there four days, inclosing himself in his horse as a shelter against
the cold, and feeding upon infected morsels torn from this horrible retreat.

On the 3d of December we arrived at Malodeczno.  During the whole day the Emperor appeared
thoughtful.  and anxious.  He had frequent confidential conversations with the grand equerry,
M. de Caulaincourt, and I suspected some extraordinary measure.  I was not deceived in my conjectures.
At two leagues from Smorghoni, the Duke of Vicenza summoned me, and told me to go on in front
and give orders to have the six best horses harnessed to my carriage, which was the lightest
of all, and keep them in constant readiness.  I reached Smorghoni before the Emperor, who did
not arrive till the following night.  The cold was excessive; and the Emperor alighted in a
poor house on a square, where he established his headquarters.  He took a light repast, wrote
with his own hand the twenty-ninth bulletin of the army, and ordered all the marshals to be
summoned.

Nothing had yet transpired as to the Emperor's plans, but in great and desperate measures there
is always something unusual which does not escape the most clear-sighted.  The Emperor was
never so amiable nor so communicative, and one felt that he was endeavoring to prepare his
most devoted friends for some overwhelming news.  He talked for some time on indifferent subjects,
then spoke of the great deeds performed during the campaign, referring with pleasure to the
retreat of General Ney whom they had at last found.

Marshal Davoust appeared abstracted; and the Emperor said to him, "At least say something,
Marshal."  There had been for some time a little coolness between him and the Emperor, and
his Majesty reproached him with the rarity of his visits, but he could not dissipate the cloud
which darkened every brow; for the Emperor's secret had not been as well kept as he had hoped.
After supper the Emperor ordered Prince Eugene to read the twenty-ninth bulletin, and spoke
freely of his plan, saying that his departure was essential in order to send help to the army.
He gave his orders to the marshals, all of whom appeared sad and discouraged.  It was ten o'clock
when the Emperor, saying it was time to take some repose, embraced all the marshals and retired.
He felt the need of withdrawing; for he had been oppressed by the constraint of this interview,
as could easily be seen by the extreme agitation his countenance manifested at its close. 
About half an hour after, the Emperor called me into his room and said, "Constant, I am about
to leave; I thought I should be able to take you with me, but I have taken into consideration
the fact that several carriages would attract attention; it is essential that I experience
no delay, and I have given orders that you are to set out immediately upon the return of my
horses, and you will consequently follow me at a short distance."  I was suffering greatly
from my old malady; hence the Emperor would not allow me to go with him on the boot as I requested,
in order that he should receive his customary attentions from me.  He said, "No, Constant,
you will follow me in a carriage, and I hope that you will be able to arrive not more than
a day behind me."  He departed with the Duke of Vicenza, and Roustan on the box; my carriage
was unharnessed, and I remained to my great regret.  The Emperor left in the night.

By daybreak the army had learned the news, and the impression it made cannot be depicted. 
Discouragement was at its height; and many soldiers cursed the Emperor, and reproached him
for abandoning them.  There was universal indignation.  The Prince of Neuchatel was very uneasy,
and asked news of every one, though he would naturally have been the first to receive any information.
He feared lest Napoleon, who had a feeble escort, should be made prisoner by the Cossacks,
who, if they had learned his departure, would make the greatest efforts to carry him off.

This night, the 6th, the cold increased greatly; and its severity may be imagined, as birds
were found on the ground frozen stiff with the cold. Soldiers who had seated themselves with
their head in their hands, and bodies bent forward in order to thus feel less the emptiness
of their stomachs, were found dead in this position.  As we breathed, the vapor from our lips
froze on our eyebrows, little white icicles formed on the mustaches and beards of the soldiers;
and in order to melt them they warmed their chins by the bivouac fire, and as may be imagined
a large number did not do this with impunity.  Artillerymen held their hands to the horses'
nostrils to get a little warmth from the strong breathing of these animals.  Their flesh was
the usual food of the soldiers.  Large slices of this meat were thrown on the coals; and when
frozen by the cold, it was carried without spoiling, like salted bacon, the powder from the
cartridge-boxes taking the place of salt.

This same night we had with us a young Parisian belonging to a very wealthy family, who had
endeavored to obtain employment in the Emperor's household.  He was very young, and had been
received among the boys of the apartments, and the poor child was taking his first journey.
He was seized with the fever as we left Moscow, and was so ill this evening that we could not
remove him from the wagon belonging to the wardrobe service in which he had been made as comfortable
as possible.  He died there in the night, much to be regretted by all who knew him.  Poor Lapouriel
was a youth of charming character, fine education, the hope of his family, and an only son.
The ground was so hard that we could not dig a grave, and experienced the chagrin of leaving
his remains unburied.

I set out next day armed with an order from the Prince de Neuchatel that all on the road should
furnish me horses in preference to all others. At the first post after leaving Smorghoni, whence
the Emperor had set out with the Duke of Vicenza, this order was of invaluable aid to me, for
there were horses for only one carriage.  I found myself a rival to M. the Count Daru, who
arrived at the same time.  It is useless to say that without the Emperor's orders to rejoin
him as quickly as possible I would not have exercised my right to take precedence over the
intendant general of the army; but impelled by my duty I showed the order of the Prince de
Neuchatel to M. the Count Daru, and the latter, after examining it, said to me, "You are right,
M. Constant; take the horses, but I beg you send them back as quickly as possible."  How crowded
with disasters was this retreat.

After much suffering and privation we arrived at Wilna, where it was necessary to pass a long,
narrow bridge before entering the town.  The artillery and wagons occupied the whole bridge
so entirely that no other carriage could pass; and it was useless to say "His Majesty's service,"
as we received only maledictions.  Seeing the impossibility of advancing, I alighted from my
carriage, and found there the Prince of Aremberg, ordnance officer of the Emperor, in a pitiable
condition, his face, nose, ears, and feet having been frozen.  He was seated behind my carriage.
I was cut to the heart, and said to the prince that if he had informed me of his condition
I would have given him my place.  He could hardly answer me.  I helped him for some time; but
seeing how necessary it was that we should both advance, I undertook to carry him.  He was
delicate, slender, and about medium height.  I took him in my arms; and with this burden, elbowing,
pushing, hurting some, being hurt by others, I at last reached the headquarters of the King
of Naples, and deposited the prince there, recommending that he should receive every attention
which his condition required.  After this I resumed my carriage.

Everything had failed us.  Long before reaching Wilna, the horses being dead, we had received
orders to burn our carriages with all the contents. I lost heavily in this journey, as I had
purchased several valuable articles which were burned with my baggage of which I always had
a large quantity on our journeys.  A large part of the Emperor's baggage was lost in the same
manner.

A very handsome carriage of Prince Berthier, which had just arrived and had not been used,
was also burned.  At these fires, four grenadiers were stationed, who with fixed bayonet prevented
any one from taking from the fire what had been ordered to be sacrificed.

The next day the carriages which had been spared were visited in order to be assured that nothing
had been kept back.  I was allowed to keep only two shirts.  We slept at Wilna; but the next
day very early the alarm was given that the Russians were at the gates of the town.  Men rushed
in, beside themselves with terror, crying, "We are lost!"  The King of Naples was quickly aroused;
sprang from his bed; and the order was instantly given that the Emperor's service should leave
at once.  The confusion made by all this can be imagined.  There was no time for any arrangements;
we were obliged to start without delay.  The Prince of Aremberg was put into one of the king's
carriages with what could be secured for the most pressing needs; and we had hardly left the
town before we heard shouts behind us, and the thunder of cannon accompanied by rapid firing.
We had to climb a mountain of ice.  The horses were fatigued, and we made no progress.  The
wagon with the treasure-chest of the army was abandoned; and a part of the money was pillaged
by men who had not gone a hundred steps before they were obliged to throw it away in order
to save their lives.