Austin Steward]

TWENTY-TWO YEARS A SLAVE, AND FORTY YEARS A FREEMAN;

EMBRACING A CORRESPONDENCE OF SEVERAL YEARS, WHILE PRESIDENT OF WILBERFORCE COLONY, LONDON,
CANADA WEST,

BY AUSTIN STEWARD.

1856

FROM GOVERNOR CLARK.

STATE OF NEW YORK, EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT,

Albany, May 10, 1856.

MR. A. STEWARD, Canandaigua,

Dear Sir:--I notice a paragraph in the "Ontario Times" of this date, making the announcement
that you are preparing "a sketch of events occurring under your own observation during an eventful
life," to be entitled, "Twenty Years a Slave, and Forty Years a Freeman;" and that you design
soon to make an effort to obtain subscribers for the book.

Being desirous of rendering you what encouragement I may in the work, you are permitted to
place my name on your list of subscribers.

Respectfully Yours,

MYRON H. CLARK.

       *       *       *       *       *

ROCHESTER, SEPTEMBER, 1856

MR. WM. ALLING,

Dear Sir:--The undersigned have heard with pleasure, that you are about issuing a Book made
up from incidents in the life of Austin STEWARD. We have been the early acquaintances and associates
of Mr. Steward, while a business man in Rochester in an early day, and take pleasure in bearing
testimony to his high personal, moral and Christian character. In a world of vicissitude, Mr.
Steward has received no ordinary share, and we hope, while his book may do the world good,
it may prove a substantial benefit to him in his declining years.

ASHLEY SAMPSON, THOMAS KEMPSHALL, FREDERICK STARR, CHAS. J. HILL, L.A. WARD, EDWIN SCRANTOM,
JACOB GOULD.

       *       *       *       *       *

RECOMMENDATORY.

ROCHESTER, JULY 1, 1856.

A. STEWARD, ESQ.,

Dear Sir:--In reply to your letter upon the propriety of publishing your life, I answer, that
there is not only no objection to it, but it will be timely, and is demanded by every consideration
of humanity and justice. Every tongue which speaks for Freedom, which has once been held by
the awful gag of Slavery, is trumpet-tongued--and he who pleads against this monstrous oppression,
if he can say, "here are the scars," can do much.

It is a great pleasure to me to run back to my boyhood, and stop at that spot where I first
met you. I recollect the story of your wrongs, and your joy in the supposition that all were
now ended in your freedom; of your thirst for knowledge, as you gathered up from the rudimental
books--not then very plenty--a few snatches of the elements of the language; of playing the
school-master to you, in "setting copies" for your writing-- book; of guiding your mind and
pen. I remember your commencement in business, and the outrage and indignity offered you in
Rochester, by white competitors on no other ground than that of color.[1] I saw your bitter
tears, and recollect assuring you--what afterwards proved true--that justice would overtake
the offenders, and that you would live to see these enemies bite the dust! I remember your
unsullied character, and your prosperity, and when your word or endorsement was equal to that
of any other citizen. I remember too, when yourself, and others of your kind, sunk all the
gatherings of years of toil, in an unsuccessful attempt to establish an asylum for your enslaved
and oppressed brethren--and, not to enumerate, which I might do much farther, I remember when
your "old master," finding you had been successful, while he himself had lost in the changes
on fortune's wheel--came here and set up a claim to yourself and your property--a claim which
might have held both, had not a higher power suddenly summoned him to a tribunal, where both
master and slave shall one day answer each for himself!

But to the book. Let its plain, unvarnished tale be sent out, and the story of Slavery and
its abominations, again be told by one who has felt in his own person its scorpion lash, and
the weight of its grinding heel. I think it will do good service, and could not have been sent
forth at a more auspicious period. The downfall of the hateful system of Slavery is certain.
Though long delayed, justice is sure to come at length; and he must be a slow thinker and a
poor seer, who cannot discern in the elements already at work, the mighty forces which must
eventually crush this oppression. I know that you and I have felt discouraged at the long delay,
years ago,--when we might have kept up our hopes by the fact that every thing that is slow
is sure. Your book may be humble and your descriptions tame, yet truth is always mighty; and
you may furnish the sword for some modern Sampson, who shall shout over more slain than his
ancient prototype. I close with the wish, that much success may attend your labors, in more
ways than one, and that your last days may be your best--and am,

Your old Friend,

And obed't serv't,

EDWIN SCRANTOM.

[Footnote 1: The indignity spoken of was this: Mr. Steward had established a grocery and provision
store on Buffalo Street, in a part of Abner Wakelee's building, opposite the Eagle Hotel. He
put up his sign, a very plain and proper one, and at night, some competitors, whom he knew,
as well as he could know anything which he could not prove, smeared his sign with black paint,
utterly destroying it! But the misguided men who stooped to such an act--the victims of sensuality
and excess--have years ago ended their journey, and passed to the bar of a higher adjudication.]

       *       *       *       *       *

CONTENTS.

I. SLAVE LIFE ON THE PLANTATION

II. AT THE GREAT HOUSE

III. HORSE-RACING AND ITS CONSEQUENCES

IV. JOURNEY TO OUR NEW HOME IN NEW YORK

V. INCIDENTS AT SODUS

VI. REMOVAL FROM SODUS TO BATH

VII. DUELING

VIII. HORSE-RACING AND GENERAL TRAINING

IX. DEATH-BED AND BRIDAL SCENES

X. HIRED OUT TO A NEW MASTER

XI. THOUGHTS ON FREEDOM

XII. CAPTAIN HELM--DIVORCE--KIDNAPPING

XIII. LOCATE IN THE VILLAGE OF ROCHESTER

XIV. INCIDENTS IN ROCHESTER AND VICINITY

XV. SAD REVERSES CAPTAIN HELM

XVI. BRITISH EMANCIPATION OF SLAVERY

XVII. ORATION--TERMINATION OF SLAVERY IN THE BRITISH POSSESSIONS

XVIII. CONDITION OF FREE COLORED PEOPLE

XIX. PERSECUTION OF THE COLORED PEOPLE

XX. REMOVAL TO CANADA

XXI. ROUGHING IT IN THE WILDS OF CANADA

XXII. NARROW ESCAPE OF A SMUGGLER

XXIII. NARRATIVE OF TWO FUGITIVES FROM VIRGINIA

XXIV. PLEASANT RE-UNION OF OLD AND TRIED FRIENDS

XXV. PRIVATE LOSSES AND PRIVATE DIFFICULTIES

XXVI. INCIDENTS AND PECULIARITIES OF THE INDIANS

XXVII. OUR DIFFICULTIES WITH ISRAEL LEWIS

XXVIII. DESPERATION OF A FUGITIVE SLAVE

XXIX. A NARROW ESCAPE FROM MY ENEMIES

XXX. DEATH OF B. PAUL AND RETURN OF HIS BROTHER

XXXI. MY FAMILY RETURN TO ROCHESTER

XXXII. THE LAND AGENT AND THE SQUATTER

XXXIII. CHARACTER AND DEATH OF ISRAEL LEWIS

XXXIV. MY RETURN TO ROCHESTER

XXXV. BISHOP BROWN--DEATH OF MY DAUGHTER

XXXVI. CELEBRATION OF THE FIRST OF AUGUST

XXXVII. CONCLUSION

CORRESPONDENCE

PREFACE.

The author does not think that any apology is necessary for this issue of his Life and History.
He believes that American Slavery is now the great question before the American People: that
it is not merely a political question, coming up before the country as the grand element in
the making of a President, and then to be laid aside for four years; but that its moral bearings
are of such a nature that the Patriot, the Philanthropist, and all good men agree that it is
an evil of so much magnitude, that longer to permit it, is to wink at sin, and to incur the
righteous judgments of God. The late outrages and aggressions of the slave power to possess
itself of new soil, and extend the influence of the hateful and God-provoking "Institution,"
is a practical commentary upon its benefits and the moral qualities of those who seek to sustain
and extend it. The author is therefore the more willing--nay, anxious, to lay alongside of
such arguments the history of his own life and experiences as a slave, that those who read
may know what are some of the characteristics of that highly favored institution, which is
sought to be preserved and perpetuated. "Facts are stubborn things,"--and this is the reason
why all systems, religious, moral, or social, which are founded in injustice, and supported
by fraud and robbery, suffer so much by faithful exposition.

The author has endeavored to present a true statement of the practical workings of the system
of Slavery, as he has seen and felt it himself. He has intended "nothing to extenuate, nor
aught set down in malice;" indeed, so far from believing that he has misrepresented Slavery
as an institution, he does not feel that he has the power to give anything like a true picture
of it in all its deformity and wickedness; especially that Slavery which is an institution
among an enlightened and Christian people, who profess to believe that all men are born free
and equal, and who have certain inalienable rights, among which are life, liberty, and the
pursuit of happiness.

The author claims that he has endeavored since he had his freedom, as much as in him lay, to
benefit his suffering fellows in bondage; and that he has spent most of his free life in efforts
to elevate them in manners and morals, though against all the opposing forces of prejudice
and pride, which of course, has made much of his labor vain. In his old age he sends out this
history--presenting as it were his own body, with the marks and scars of the tender mercies
of slave drivers upon it, and asking that these may plead in the name of Justice, Humanity,
and Mercy, that those who have the power, may have the magnanimity to strike off the chains
from the enslaved, and bid him stand up, a Freeman and a Brother!

CHAPTER I.

SLAVE LIFE ON THE PLANTATION.

I was born in Prince William County, Virginia. At seven years of age, I found myself a slave
on the plantation of Capt. William Helm. Our family consisted of my father and mother--whose
names were Robert and Susan Steward--a sister, Mary, and myself. As was the usual custom, we
lived in a small cabin, built of rough boards, with a floor of earth, and small openings in
the sides of the cabin were substituted for windows. The chimney was built of sticks and mud;
the door, of rough boards; and the whole was put together in the rudest possible manner. As
to the furniture of this rude dwelling, it was procured by the slaves themselves, who were
occasionally permitted to earn a little money after their day's toil was done. I never knew
Capt. H. to furnish his slaves with household utensils of any description.

The amount of provision given out on the plantation per week, was invariably one peck of corn
or meal for each slave. This allowance was given in meal when it could be obtained; when it
could not, they received corn, which they pounded in mortars after they returned from their
labor in the field. The slaves on our plantation were provided with very little meat In addition
to the peck of corn or meal, they were allowed a little salt and a few herrings. If they wished
for more, they were obliged to earn it by over-work. They were permitted to cultivate small
gardens, and were thereby enabled to provide themselves with many trifling conveniences. But
these gardens were only allowed to some of the more industrious. Capt. Helm allowed his slaves
a small quantity of meat during harvest time, but when the harvest was over they were obliged
to fall back on the old allowance.

It was usual for men and women to work side by side on our plantation; and in many kinds of
work, the women were compelled to do as much as the men. Capt. H. employed an overseer, whose
business it was to look after each slave in the field, and see that he performed his task.
The overseer always went around with a whip, about nine feet long, made of the toughest kind
of cowhide, the but-end of which was loaded with lead, and was about four or five inches in
circumference, running to a point at the opposite extremity. This made a dreadful instrument
of torture, and, when in the hands of a cruel overseer, it was truly fearful. With it, the
skin of an ox or a horse could be cut through. Hence, it was no uncommon thing to see the poor
slaves with their backs mangled in a most horrible manner. Our overseer, thus armed with his
cowhide, and with a large bull-dog behind him, followed the slaves all day; and, if one of
them fell in the rear from any cause, this cruel weapon was plied with terrible force. He would
strike the dog one blow and the slave another, in order to keep the former from tearing the
delinquent slave in pieces,--such was the ferocity of his canine attendant.

It was the rule for the slaves to rise and be ready for their task by sun-rise, on the blowing
of a horn or conch-shell; and woe be to the unfortunate, who was not in the field at the time
appointed, which was in thirty minutes from the first sounding of the horn. I have heard the
poor creatures beg as for their lives, of the inhuman overseer, to desist from his cruel punishment.
Hence, they were usually found in the field "betimes in the morning," (to use an old Virginia
phrase), where they worked until nine o'clock. They were then allowed thirty minutes to eat
their morning meal, which consisted of a little bread. At a given signal, all hands were compelled
to return to their work. They toiled until noon, when they were permitted to take their breakfast,
which corresponds to our dinner.

On our plantation, it was the usual practice to have one of the old slaves set apart to do
the cooking. All the field hands were required to give into the hands of the cook a certain
portion of their weekly allowance, either in dough or meal, which was prepared in the following
manner. The cook made a hot fire and rolled up each person's portion in some cabbage leaves,
when they could be obtained, and placed it in a hole in the ashes, carefully covered with the
same, where it remained until done. Bread baked in this way is very sweet and good. But cabbage
leaves could not always be obtained. When this was the case, the bread was little better than
a mixture of dough and ashes, which was not very palatable. The time allowed for breakfast,
was one hour. At the signal, all hands were obliged to resume their toil. The overseer was
always on hand to attend to all delinquents, who never failed to feel the blows of his heavy whip.

The usual mode of punishing the poor slaves was, to make them take off their clothes to the
bare back, and then tie their hands before them with a rope, pass the end of the rope over
a beam, and draw them up till they stood on the tips of their toes. Sometimes they tied their
legs together and placed a rail between. Thus prepared, the overseer proceeded to punish the
poor, helpless victim. Thirty-nine was the number of lashes ordinarily inflicted for the most
trifling offence.

Who can imagine a position more painful? Oh, who, with feelings of common humanity, could look
quietly on such torture? Who could remain unmoved, to see a fellow-creature thus tied, unable
to move or to raise a hand in his own defence; scourged on his bare back, with a cowhide, until
the blood flows in streams from his quivering flesh? And for what? Often for the most trifling
fault; and, as sometimes occurs, because a mere whim or caprice of his brutal overseer demands
it. Pale with passion, his eyes flashing and his stalwart frame trembling with rage, like some
volcano, just ready to belch forth its fiery contents, and, in all its might and fury, spread
death and destruction all around, he continues to wield the bloody lash on the broken flesh
of the poor, pleading slave, until his arm grows weary, or he sinks down, utterly exhausted,
on the very spot where already stand the pools of blood which his cruelty has drawn from thee
mangled body of his helpless victim, and within the hearing of those agonized groans and feeble
cries of "Oh do, Massa! Oh do, Massa! Do, Lord, have mercy! Oh, Lord, have mercy!" &c.

Nor is this cruel punishment inflicted on the bare backs of the male portion of slaves only.
Oh no! The slave husband must submit without a murmur, to see the form of his cherished, but
wretched wife, not only exposed to the rude gaze of a beastly tyrant, but he must unresistingly
see the heavy cowhide descend upon her shrinking flesh, and her manacled limbs writhe in inexpressible
torture, while her piteous cries for help ring through his ears unanswered. The wild throbbing
of his heart must be suppressed, and his righteous indignation find no voice, in the presence
of the human monster who holds dominion over him.

After the infuriated and heartless overseer had satiated his thirst for vengeance, on the disobedient
or delinquent slave, he was untied, and left to crawl away as best he could; sometimes on his
hands and knees, to his lonely and dilapidated cabin, where, stretched upon the cold earth,
he lay weak and bleeding and often faint from the loss of blood, without a friend who dare
administer to his necessities, and groaning in the agony of his crushed spirit. In his cabin,
which was not as good as many of our stables at the North, he might lie for weeks before recovering
sufficient strength to resume the labor imposed upon him, and all this time without a bed or
bed clothing, or any of the necessaries considered so essential to the sick.

Perhaps some of his fellow-slaves might come and bathe his wounds in warm water, to prevent
his clothing from tearing open his flesh anew, and thus make the second suffering well nigh
equal to the first; or they might from their scanty store bring him such food as they could
spare, to keep him from suffering hunger, and offer their sympathy, and then drag their own
weary bodies to their place of rest, after their daily task was finished.

Oh, you who have hearts to feel; you who have kind friends around you, in sickness and in sorrow,
think of the sufferings of the helpless, destitute, and down-trodden slave. Has sickness laid
its withering hand upon you, or disappointment blasted your fairest earthly prospects, still,
the outgushings of an affectionate heart are not denied you, and you may look forward with
hope to a bright future. Such a hope seldom animates the heart of the poor slave. He toils
on, in his unrequited labor, looking only to the grave to find a quiet resting place, where
he will be free from the oppressor.

CHAPTER II.

AT THE GREAT HOUSE.

When eight years of age, I was taken to the "great house," or the family mansion of my master,
to serve as an errand boy, where I had to stand in the presence of my master's family all the
day, and a part of the night, ready to do any thing which they commanded me to perform.

My master's family consisted of himself and wife, and seven children. His overseer, whose name
was Barsly Taylor, had also a wife and five children. These constituted the white population
on the plantation. Capt. Helm was the owner of about one hundred slaves, which made the residents
on the plantation number about one hundred and sixteen persons in all. One hundred and seven
of them, were required to labor for the benefit of the remaining nine, who possessed that vast
domain; and one hundred of the number doomed to unrequited toil, under the lash of a cruel
task-master during life, with no hope of release this side of the grave, and as far as the
cruel oppressor is concerned, shut out from hope beyond it.

And here let me ask, why is this practice of working slaves half clad, poorly fed, with nothing
or nearly so, to stimulate them to exertion, but fear of the lash? Do the best interests of
our common country require it? I think not. Did the true interest of Capt. Helm demand it?
Whatever may have been his opinion, I cannot think it did. Can it be for the best interest
or good of the enslaved? Certainly not; for there is no real inducement for the slaveholder
to make beasts of burden of his fellow men, but that which was frankly acknowledged by Gibbs
and other pirates: "we have the power,"--the power to rob and murder on the high seas!--which
they will undoubtedly continue to hold, until overtaken by justice; which will certainly come
some time, just as sure as that a righteous God reigns over the earth or rules in heaven.

Some have attempted to apologize for the enslaving of the Negro, by saying that they are inferior
to the Anglo-Saxon race in every respect. This charge I deny; it is utterly false. Does not
the Bible inform us that "God hath created of one blood all the nations of the earth?" And
certainly in stature and physical force the colored man is quite equal to his white brother,
and in many instances his superior; but were it otherwise, I can not see why the more favored
class should enslave the other. True, God has given to the African a darker complexion than
to his white brother; still, each have the same desires and aspirations. The food required
for the sustenance of one is equally necessary for the other. Naturally or physically, they
alike require to be warmed by the cheerful fire, when chilled by our northern winter's breath;
and alike they welcome the cool spring and the delightful shade of summer. Hence, I have come
to the conclusion that God created all men free and equal, and placed them upon this earth
to do good and benefit each other, and that war and slavery should be banished from the face
of the earth.

My dear reader will not understand me to say, that all nations are alike intelligent, enterprising
and industrious, for we all know that it is far otherwise; but to man, and not to our Creator,
should the fault be charged. But, to resume our narrative,

Capt. Helm was not a very hard master; but generally was kind and pleasant. Indulgent when
in good humor, but like many of the southerners, terrible when in a passion. He was a great
sportsman, and very fond of company. He generally kept one or two race horses, and a pack of
hounds for fox-hunting, which at that time, was a very common and fashionable diversion in
that section of country. He was not only a sportsman, but a gamester, and was in the habit
of playing cards, and sometimes betting very high and losing accordingly.

I well remember an instance of the kind: it was when he played cards with a Mr. W. Graham,
who won from him in one sweep, two thousand and seven hundred dollars in all, in the form of
a valuable horse, prized at sixteen hundred dollars, another saddle-horse of less value, one
slave, and his wife's gold watch. The company decided that all this was fairly won, but Capt.
Holm demurred, and refused to give up the property until an application was made to Gen. George
Washington, ("the father of his country,") who decided that Capt. Helm had lost the game, and
that Mr. Graham had fairly won the property, of which Mr. G. took immediate possession, and
conveyed to his own plantation.

