      NEVADA MINES IN NEW YORK.--G.  M.  Marshall, Sheba Hurs and Amos H.
      Rose, who left San Francisco last July for New York City, with ores
      from mines in Pine Wood District, Humboldt County, and on the Reese
      River range, have disposed of a mine containing six thousand feet
      and called the Pine Mountains Consolidated, for the sum of
      $3,000,000.  The stamps on the deed, which is now on its way to
      Humboldt County, from New York, for record, amounted to $3,000,
      which is said to be the largest amount of stamps ever placed on one
      document.  A working capital of $1,000,000 has been paid into the
      treasury, and machinery has already been purchased for a large
      quartz mill, which will be put up as soon as possible.  The stock in
      this company is all full paid and entirely unassessable.  The ores
      of the mines in this district somewhat resemble those of the Sheba
      mine in Humboldt.  Sheba Hurst, the discoverer of the mines, with
      his friends corralled all the best leads and all the land and timber
      they desired before making public their whereabouts.  Ores from
      there, assayed in this city, showed them to be exceedingly rich in
      silver and gold--silver predominating. Dear. i. 34.] both of his coining,
      yet, as he owns himself, with something strange and unattractive about
      them, found almost no acceptance at all in the classical literature
      of Rome: 'beatitude,' indeed, obtained a home, as it deserved to do,
      in the Christian Church, but 'beatitas' none.

Coleridge's 'esemplastic,' by which he was fain to express the all-atoning or unifying power
of the imagination, has not pleased others at all in the measure
in which it pleased himself; while the words of Jeremy Taylor, of
such Latinists as Sir Thomas Browne and Henry More, born only to die,
are multitudinous as the fallen leaves of autumn.

The value of these is incalculable. By the cutting short of lengthy explanations and tedious circuits
of language, they facilitate mental processes, such as would often have been nearly or quite
impossible without them; and such as have invented or put these into circulation, are benefactors
of a high order to knowledge. In the ordinary traffic of life, unless our dealings are on
the smallest scale, we willingly have about us our money in the shape rather of silver than of
copper; and if our transactions are at all extensive, rather in gold than in silver: while, if we
were setting forth upon a long and costly journey, we should be best pleased to turn even our gold
coin itself into bills of exchange or circular notes; in fact, into the highest denomination of money
which it was capable of assuming. How many words with which we are now perfectly familiar are
for us what the circular note or bill of exchange is for the traveller
or the merchant.

  But the journal still languished, and the printers
sold out to Captain Ogden, a rich man and a pleasant gentleman who chose to amuse himself with
such an expensive luxury without much caring about the cost of it.  When he grew tired of the
novelty, he re-sold to the printers, the paper presently died a peaceful death, and I was out
of work again.  I would not mention these things but for the fact that they so aptly illustrate
the ups and downs that characterize life on the Pacific coast.  A man could hardly stumble
into such a variety of queer vicissitudes in any other country.

For two months my sole occupation was avoiding acquaintances; for during that time I did not
earn a penny, or buy an article of any kind, or pay my board.  I felt meaner, and lowlier and
more despicable than the worms.  During all this time I had but one piece of money--a silver
ten cent piece--and I held to it and would not spend it on any account, lest the consciousness
coming strong upon me that I was entirely penniless, might suggest suicide.  I had pawned every
thing but the clothes I had on; so I clung to my dime desperately, till it was smooth with
handling.

However, I am forgetting.  I did have one other occupation beside that of "slinking."  It was
the entertaining of a collector (and being entertained by him,) who had in his hands the Virginia
banker's bill for forty-six dollars which I had loaned my schoolmate, the "Prodigal."  This
man used to call regularly once a week and dun me, and sometimes oftener. He did it from sheer
force of habit, for he knew he could get nothing. He would get out his bill, calculate the
interest for me, at five per cent a month, and show me clearly that there was no attempt at
fraud in it and no mistakes; and then plead, and argue and dun with all his might for any sum--any
little trifle--even a dollar--even half a dollar, on account.  Then his duty was accomplished
and his conscience free.  He immediately dropped the subject there always; got out a couple
of cigars and divided, put his feet in the window, and then we would have a long, luxurious
talk about everything and everybody, and he would furnish me a world of curious dunning adventures
out of the ample store in his memory. By and by he would clap his hat on his head, shake hands
and say briskly:

"Well, business is business--can't stay with you always!"--and was off in a second.

The idea of pining for a dun!  And yet I used to long for him to come, and would get as uneasy
as any mother if the day went by without his visit, when I was expecting him.  But he never
collected that bill, at last nor any part of it.  I lived to pay it to the banker myself.

Misery loves company.  Now and then at night, in out-of-the way, dimly lighted places, I found
myself happening on another child of misfortune. He looked so seedy and forlorn, so homeless
and friendless and forsaken, that I yearned toward him as a brother.  I wanted to claim kinship
with him and go about and enjoy our wretchedness together.  The drawing toward each other must
have been mutual; at any rate we got to falling together oftener, though still seemingly by
accident; and although we did not speak or evince any recognition, I think the dull anxiety
passed out of both of us when we saw each other, and then for several hours we would idle along
contentedly, wide apart, and glancing furtively in at home lights and fireside gatherings,
out of the night shadows, and very much enjoying our dumb companionship.

Finally we spoke, and were inseparable after that.  For our woes were identical, almost.  He
had been a reporter too, and lost his berth, and this was his experience, as nearly as I can
recollect it.  After losing his berth he had gone down, down, down, with never a halt: from
a boarding house on Russian Hill to a boarding house in Kearney street; from thence to Dupont;
from thence to a low sailor den; and from thence to lodgings in goods boxes and empty hogsheads
near the wharves.  Then; for a while, he had gained a meagre living by sewing up bursted sacks
of grain on the piers; when that failed he had found food here and there as chance threw it
in his way.  He had ceased to show his face in daylight, now, for a reporter knows everybody,
rich and poor, high and low, and cannot well avoid familiar faces in the broad light of day.

This mendicant Blucher--I call him that for convenience--was a splendid creature.  He was full
of hope, pluck and philosophy; he was well read and a man of cultivated taste; he had a bright
wit and was a master of satire; his kindliness and his generous spirit made him royal in my
eyes and changed his curb-stone seat to a throne and his damaged hat to a crown.

