LORD'S LECTURES

BEACON LIGHTS OF HISTORY, VOLUME III

ANCIENT ACHIEVEMENTS.

BY JOHN LORD, LL.D.,

AUTHOR OF "THE OLD ROMAN WORLD," "MODERN EUROPE," ETC., ETC.

CONTENTS.

GOVERNMENTS AND LAWS.

GREEK AND ROMAN JURISPRUDENCE.

Governments and laws Oriental laws Priestly jurisprudence The laws of Lycurgus The laws of
Solon Cleisthenes The Ecclesia at Athens Struggle between patricians and plebeians at Rome
Tribunes of the people Roman citizens The Roman senate The Roman constitution Imperial power
The Twelve Tables Roman lawyers Jurisprudence under emperors Labeo Capito Gaius Paulus Ulpian
Justinian Tribonian Code, Pandects, and Institutes Roman citizenship Laws pertaining to marriage
Extent of paternal power Transfer of property Contracts The courts Crimes Fines Penal statutes
Personal rights Slavery Security of property Authorities

THE FINE ARTS.

ARCHITECTURE, SCULPTURE, PAINTING.

Early architecture Egyptian monuments The Temple of Karnak The pyramids Babylonian architecture
Indian architecture Greek architecture The Doric order The Parthenon The Ionic order The Corinthian
order Roman architecture The arch Vitruvius Greek sculpture Phidias Statue of Zeus Praxiteles
Scopas Lysippus Roman sculpture Greek painters Polygnotus Apollodorus Zeuxis Parrhasius Apelles
The decline of art Authorities

ANCIENT SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE.

ASTRONOMY, GEOGRAPHY, ETC.

Ancient astronomy Chaldaean astronomers Egyptian astronomy The Greek astronomers Thales Anaximenes
Aristarchus Archimedes Hipparchus Ptolemy The Roman astronomers Geometry Euclid Empirical science
Hippocrates Galen Physical science Geography Pliny Eratosthenes Authorities

MATERIAL LIFE OF THE ANCIENTS.

MECHANICAL AND USEFUL ARTS.

Mechanical arts Material life in Egypt Domestic utensils Houses and furniture Entertainments
Glass manufacture Linen fabrics Paper manufacture Leather and tanners Carpenters and boat-builders
Agriculture Field sports Ornaments of dress Greek arts Roman luxuries Material wonders Great
cities Commerce Roman roads Ancient Rome Architectural wonders Roman monuments Roman spectacles
Gladiatorial shows Roman triumphs Authorities

THE MILITARY ART.

WEAPONS, ENGINES, DISCIPLINE.

The tendency to violence and war Early wars Progress in the art of war Sesostris Egyptian armies
Military weapons Chariots of war Persian armies, Cyrus Greek warfare Spartan phalanx Alexander
the Great Roman armies Hardships of Roman soldiers Military discipline The Roman legion Importance
of the infantry The cavalry Military engines Ancient fortifications Military officers The praetorian
cohort Roman camps Consolidation of Roman power Authorities

CICERO. 

He says that there were certain 'philosophers and theologians' that
were called Druids who were held in exceptional honour.

In addition to these, the Celts, he says, had also seers, who foretold the future from the flight of
birds and by means of the offering of sacrifices. According to him it was these priestly seers
who had the masses in subjection to them. In great affairs they had, he says, the practice of divination
by the slaughter of a human victim, and the observation of the attitude in which he fell,
the contortions of the limbs, the spurting of the blood, and the like. This, he states, was
an ancient and established practice. Moreover, it was the custom, according to Diodorus, to make
no sacrifice without the presence of a philosopher (apparently a Druid in addition to the sacrificing
seer), the theory being that those who were authorities on the divine nature were to the gods
intelligible mediators for the offering of gifts and the presentation of petitions. These philosophers
were in great request, together with their poets, in war as well
as in peace, and were consulted not merely by the men of their own
side, but also by those of the enemy.

Even when two armies were on the point of joining battle, these philosophers
had been able, Diodorus says, to step into the space between them
and to stop them from fighting, exactly as if they had charmed wild
beasts.

The moral which Diodorus draws from this is, that even among the
wildest of barbarians the spirited principle of the soul yields to
wisdom, and that Ares (the god of war) even there respects the Muses.

It is clear from this account that Diodorus had in mind the three classes of non-military professional
men among the Celts, to whom other ancient writers also refer, namely, the Bards, the Seers,
and the Druids. His narrative is apparently an expansion, in the light of his reading and philosophical
meditation, of information supplied by previous writers, notably Posidonius. The latter, too,
appears to have been Julius Caesar's chief authority, in addition to his own observation, but
Caesar does not appear expressly to indicate the triple division here in question. The account which
he gives is important, and would be even more valuable than it is had he told us how far what
he describes was written from his own personal information, and the degree of variation (if
any) of religious practice in different districts. However, Caesar's statements deserve the
closest consideration.


GLORY AND SHAME.

Glories of the ancient civilization A splendid external deception Moral evils Imperial despotism
Prostration of liberties Some good emperors Disproportionate fortunes Luxurious living General
extravagance Pride and insolence of the aristocracy Gibbon's description of the nobles The
plebeian class Hopelessness and disgrace of poverty Popular superstitions The slaves The curse
of slavery Degradation of the female sex Bitter satires of Juvenal Games and festivals Gladiatorial
shows General abandonment to pleasure The baths General craze for money-making Universal corruption
Saint Paul's estimate of Roman vices Decline and ruin a logical necessity The Sibylline prophecy
Authorities

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

VOLUME III.

Cleopatra Tests the Poison which She Intends for Her Own Destruction on Her Slaves.... Frontispiece
After the painting by Alexander Cabanel.

Justinian Orders the Compilation of the Pandects After the painting by Benjamin Constant.

The Temple of Karnak After a photograph.

The Laocoön After the photograph from the statue in the Vatican, Rome.

The Death of Archimedes After the painting by E. Vimont.

Race of Roman Chariots After the painting by V. Checa.

Sale of Slaves in a Roman Camp After the painting by R. Coghe.

Marcus Tullius Cicero From the bust in the Uffizi Gallery, Florence.

Cleopatra Obtains an Interview with Caesar After the painting by J.L. Gerome.

Death of Cleopatra After the painting by John Collier.

A Roman Bacchanal After the painting by W. Kotarbinski.

GOVERNMENTS AND LAWS.

GREEK AND ROMAN JURISPRUDENCE.

624 B.C.-550 A.D.

There is not much in ancient governments and laws to interest us, except such as were in harmony
with natural justice, and were designed for the welfare of all classes in the State. A jurisprudence
founded on the edicts of absolute kings, or on the regulations of a priestly caste, is necessarily
partial, and may be unenlightened. But those laws which are gradually enacted for the interests
of the whole body of the people,--for the rich and poor, the powerful and feeble alike,--have
generally been the result of great and diverse experiences, running through centuries, the
work of wise men under constitutional forms of government. The jurisprudence of nations based
on equity is a growth or development according to public wants and necessities, especially
in countries having popular liberty and rights, as in England and the United States.

We do not find in the history of ancient nations such a jurisprudence, except in the free States
of Greece and among the Romans, who had a natural genius or aptitude for government, and where
the people had a powerful influence in legislation, until even the name of liberty was not invoked.

Among the Egyptians, Assyrians, and Babylonians the only laws were the edicts of kings or the
regulations of priests, mostly made with a view of cementing their own power, except those
that were dictated by benevolence or the pressing needs of the people, who were ground down
and oppressed, and protected only as slaves were once protected in the Southern States of America.
Wise and good monarchs doubtless issued decrees for the benefit of all classes, such as conscience
or knowledge dictated, whenever they felt their great responsibilities, as in some of the absolute
monarchies of Europe; but they never issued their decrees at the suggestions or demands of
those classes for whom the laws were made. The voice of the people was ignored, except so far
as it moved the pity or appealed to the hearts and consciences of their rulers; the people
had, and claimed, no rights. The only men to whom rulers listened, or by whom they were controlled,
were those whom they chose as counsellors and ministers, who were supposed to advise with a
view to the sovereign's benefit, and that of the empire generally.

The same may be said in general of other Oriental monarchies, especially when embarked in aggressive
wars, where the will of the monarch was supreme and unresisted, as in Persia. In India and
China the government was not so absolute, since it was checked by feudatory princes, almost
independent like the feudal barons and dukes of mediaeval Europe.

Nor was there probably among Oriental nations any elaborate codification of the decrees and
laws as in Greece and Rome, except by the priests for their ritual service, like that which
marked the jurisprudence of the Israelites. There were laws against murder, theft, adultery,
and other offences, since society cannot exist anywhere without such laws; but there was no
complicated jurisprudence produced by the friction of competing classes striving for justice
and right, or even for the interests of contending parties. We do not look to Egypt or to China
for wise punishment of ordinary crimes; but we do look to Greece and Rome, and to Rome especially,
for a legislation which shall balance the complicated relations of society on principles of
enlightened reason. Moreover, those great popular rights which we now most zealously defend
have generally been extorted in the strife of classes and parties, sometimes from kings, and
sometimes from princes and nobles. Where there has been no opposition to absolutism these rights
have not been secured; but whenever and wherever the people have been a power they have imperiously
made their wants known, and so far as they have been reasonable they have been finally secured,--perhaps
after angry expostulations and, disputations.

Now, it is this kind of legislation which is remarkable in the history of Greece and Rome,
secured by a combination of the people against the ruling classes in the interests of justice
and the common welfare, and finally endorsed and upheld even by monarchs themselves. It is
from this legislation that modern nations have learned wisdom; for a permanent law in a free
country may be the result of a hundred years of discussion or contention,--a compromise of
parties, a lesson in human experience. As the laws of Greece and Rome alone among the ancients
are rich in moral wisdom and adapted more or less to all nations and ages in the struggle for
equal rights and wise social regulations, I shall confine myself to them. Besides, I aim not
to give useless and curious details, but to show how far in general the enlightened nations
of antiquity made attainments in those things which we call civilization, and particularly
in that great department which concerns so nearly all human interests,--that of the regulation
of mutual social relations; and this by modes and with results which have had their direct
influence upon our modern times.

When we consider the native genius of the Greeks, and their marvellous achievements in philosophy,
literature, and art, we are surprised that they were so inferior to the Romans in jurisprudence,--although
in the early days of the Roman republic a deputation of citizens was sent to Athens to study
the laws of Solon. But neither nations nor individuals are great in everything. Before Solon
lived, Lycurgus had given laws to the Spartans. This lawgiver, one of the descendants of Hercules,
was born, according to Grote, about eight hundred and eighty years before Christ, and was the
uncle of the reigning king. There is, however, no certainty as to the time when he lived; it
was probably about the period when Carthage was founded by the Phoenicians. He instituted the
Spartan senate, and gave an aristocratic form to the constitution. But the senate, composed
of about thirty old men who acted in conjunction with the two kings, did not differ materially
from the council of chiefs, or old men, found in other ancient Grecian States; the Spartan
chiefs simply modified or curtailed the power of the kings. In the course of time the senate,
with the kings included in it, became the governing body of the State, and this oligarchical
form of government lasted several hundred years. We know but little of the especial laws given
by Lycurgus. We know the distinctions of society,--citizens and helots, and their mutual relations,--the
distribution of lands to check luxury, the public men, the public training of youth, the severe
discipline to which all were subjected, the cruelty exercised towards slaves, the attention
given to gymnastic exercises and athletic sports,--in short, the habits and customs of the
people rather than any regular system of jurisprudence. Lycurgus was the trainer of a military
brotherhood rather than a law-giver. Under his régime the citizen belonged to the State rather
than to his family, and all the ends of the State were warlike rather than peaceful,--not looking
to the settlement of quarrels on principles of equity, or a development of industrial interests,
which are the great aims of modern legislation.

The influence of the Athenian Solon on the laws which affected individuals is more apparent
than that of the Spartan Lycurgus, the earliest of the Grecian legislators. But Solon had a
predecessor in Athens itself,--Draco, who in 624 was appointed to reduce to writing the arbitrary
decisions of the archons, thus giving a form of permanent law and a basis for a court of appeal.
Draco's laws were extraordinarily severe, punishing small thefts and even laziness with death.
The formulation of any system of justice would have, as Draco's did, a beneficial influence
on the growth of the State; but the severity of these bloody laws caused them to be hated and
in practice neglected, until Solon arose. Solon was born in Athens about 638 B.C., and belonged
to the noblest family of the State. He was contemporary with Pisistratus and Thales. His father
having lost his property, Solon applied himself to merchandise,--always a respectable calling
in a mercantile city. He first became known as a writer of love poems; then came into prominence
as a successful military commander of volunteer forces in a disastrous war; and at last he
gained the confidence of his countrymen so completely that in a period of anarchy, distress,
and mutiny,--the poor being so grievously oppressed by the rich that a sixth part of the produce
of land went to the landlord,--he was chosen archon, with authority to revise the laws, and
might have made himself king. He abolished the custom of selling the body of a debtor for debt,
and even annulled debts in a state of general distress,--which did not please the rich, nor
even the poor, since they desired a redivision of lands such as Lycurgus had made in Sparta.
He repealed the severe laws of Draco, which inflicted capital punishment for so many small
offences, retaining the extreme penalty only for murder and treason. In order further to promote
the interests of the people, he empowered any man whatever to enter an action for one that
was injured. He left the great offices of state, however, in the hands of the rich, giving
the people a share in those which were not so important. He re-established the council of the
Areopagus, composed of those who had been archons, and nine were appointed annually for the
general guardianship of the laws; but he instituted another court or senate of four hundred
citizens, for the cognizance of all matters before they were submitted to the higher court.
Although the poorest and most numerous class were not eligible for office, they had the right
of suffrage, and could vote for the principal officers. It would at first seem that the legislation
of Solon gave especial privileges to the rich, but it is generally understood that he was the
founder of the democracy of Athens. He gave the Athenians, not the best possible code, but
the best they were capable of receiving. He intended to give to the people as much power as
was strictly needed, and no more; but in a free State the people continually encroach on the
privileges of the rich, and thus gradually the chief power falls into their hands.

Whatever the power which Solon gave to the people, and however great their subsequent encroachments,
it cannot be doubted that he was the first to lay the foundations of constitutional government,--that
is, one in which the people took part in legislation and in the election of rulers. The greatest
benefit which he conferred on the State was in the laws which gave relief to poor debtors,
those which enabled people to protect themselves by constitutional means, and those which prohibited
fathers from selling their daughters and sisters for slaves,--an abomination which had long
disgraced the Athenian republic.

Some of Solon's laws were of questionable utility. He prohibited the exportation of the fruits
of the soil in Attica, with the exception of olive-oil alone,--a regulation difficult to be
enforced in a mercantile State. Neither would he grant citizenship to immigrants; and he released
sons from supporting their parents in old age if the parents had neglected to give them a trade.
He encouraged all developments of national industries, knowing that the wealth of the State
depended on them. Solon was the first Athenian legislator who granted the power of testamentary
bequests when a man had no legitimate children. Sons succeeded to the property of their parents,
with the obligation of giving a marriage dowry to their sisters. If there were no sons, the
daughters inherited the property of their parents; but a person who had no children could bequeath
his property to whom he pleased. Solon prohibited costly sacrifices at funerals; he forbade
evil-speaking of the dead, and indeed of all persons before judges and archons; he pronounced
a man infamous who took part in a sedition.

When this enlightened and disinterested man had finished his work of legislation, 494 B.C.,
he visited Egypt and Cyprus, and devoted his leisure to the composition of poems. He also,
it is said, when a prisoner in the hands of the Persians, visited Croesus, the rich king of
Lydia, and gave to him an admonitory lesson on the vicissitudes of life. After a prolonged
absence, Solon returned to Athens about the time of the usurpation of his kinsman Peisistratus
(560 B.C.), who, however, suffered the aged legislator and patriot to go unharmed, and even
allowed most of his laws to remain in force.

The constitution and laws of Athens continued substantially for about a hundred years after
the archonship of Solon, when the democratic party under Cleisthenes gained complete ascendency.
Some modification of the laws was then made. The political franchise was extended to all free
native Athenians. The command of the military forces was given to ten generals, one from each
tribe, instead of being intrusted to one of the archons. The Ecclesia, a formal assembly of
the citizens, met more frequently. The people were called into direct action as dikasts, or
jurors; all citizens were eligible to the magistracy, even to the archonship; ostracism,--which
virtually was exile without disgrace,--became a political necessity to check the ascendency
of demagogues.

Such were the main features of the constitution and jurisprudence of Athens when the struggle
between the patricians and plebeians of Rome began, to which we now give our attention. It
was the real beginning of constitutional liberty in Rome. Before this time the government was
in the hands either of kings or aristocrats. The patricians were descendants of the original
Latin, Sabine, and Etruscan families; the plebeians were the throng of common folk brought
in by conquest or later immigration,--mostly of Latin origin. The senate was the ruling power
after the expulsion of the kings, and senators were selected from the great patrician families,
who controlled by their wealth and influence the popular elections, the army and navy, and
all foreign relations. Consuls, the highest magistrates, who commanded the armies, were annually
elected by the people; but for several centuries the consuls belonged to great families. The
constitution was essentially aristocratic, and the aristocracy was based on wealth. Power was
in the hands of nobles, whether their ancestors were patricians or plebeians, although in the
early ages of the Republic they were mostly patricians by birth. But with the growth of Rome
new families that were not descended from the ancient tribes became prominent,--like the Claudii,
the Julii, and the Servilii,--and were incorporated with the nobility. The plebs, or common
people, had at first no political privileges whatever, not even the right of suffrage, and
were not allowed to marry into patrician rank. Indeed, they were politically and socially oppressed.

The first great event which gave the plebs protection and political importance was the appointment
of representatives called "tribunes of the people,"--a privilege extorted from the patricians.
The tribunes had the right to be present at the deliberations of the senate; their persons
were inviolable, and they had the power of veto over obnoxious laws. Their power continually
increased, until they were finally elected from the senatorial body. In 421 B.C. the plebs
had gained sufficient influence to establish the connubium, by which they were allowed to intermarry
with patricians. In the same year they were admitted to the quaestorship, which office entitled
the possessor to a seat in the senate. The quaestors had charge of the public money. In 336
B.C. the plebeians obtained the praetorship, a judicial office.

In the year 286 B.C. the distinctions vanished between plebeians and patricians, and the term
populus instead of plebs, was applied to all Roman people alike. Originally the populus comprised
strictly Roman citizens, those who belonged to the original tribes, and who had the right of
suffrage. When the plebeians obtained access to the great offices of the state, the senate
represented the whole people as it formerly represented the populus, and the term populus was
enlarged to embrace the entire community.

The senate was an august body, and was very powerful. It was both judicial and legislative,
and for several centuries was composed of patricians alone. Its members always belonged to
the aristocracy, whether of patrician or plebeian descent, and were supposed to be rich. Under
Augustus it required one million two hundred thousand sesterces annually to support the senatorial
dignity. The senators, as a badge of distinction, wore upon their tunics a broad purple stripe,
and they had the privilege of the best seats in the theatres. Their decisions were laws (leges).
A large part of them had held curule offices, which entitled them to a seat in the senate for
life. The curule officers were the consuls, the praetors, the aediles, the quaestors, the tribunes;
so that an able senator was sure of a great office in the course of his life. A man could scarcely
be a senator unless he had held a great office, nor could he often have held a great office
unless he were a senator. Thus it would seem that the Roman constitution for three hundred
years after the expulsion of the kings was essentially aristocratic. The plebs had but small
consideration till the time of the Gracchi.

But after the institution of tribunes a change in the constitution gradually took place, so
that it was neither aristocratic nor popular exclusively, but was composed of both elements,
and was a system of balance of power between the various classes. The more complete the balance
of power, the closer is the resemblance to a constitutional government. When one class acted
as a check against another class, as gradually came to pass, until the subversion of liberties
by successful generals, the senate, the magistrates, and the people in their assemblies shared
between them the political power, but the senate had a preponderating influence. The judicial,
the legislative, and the executive authority was as well defined in Roman legislation as it
is in English or American. No person was above the authority of the laws; no one class could
subvert the liberties and prerogatives of another class,--even the senate could not override
the constitution. The consuls, elected by the centuries, presided over the senate and over
the assemblies of the people. There was no absolute power exercised at Rome until the subversion
of the constitution, except by dictators chosen by the senate in times of imminent danger.
Nor could senators elect members of their own body; the censors alone had the right of electing
from the ex-magistrates, and of excluding such as were unworthy. The consuls could remain in
office but a year, and could be called to account when their terms of office had expired. The
tribunes of the people ultimately could prevent a consul from convening the senate, could seize
a consul and imprison him, and could veto an ordinance of the senate itself. A patrician, long
before the reforms of the Gracchi, had become a man of secondary importance, but the nobles
were aristocrats to the close of the republic, and continued to secure the highest offices;
they prevented their own extinction by admitting into their ranks those who distinguished themselves,--that
is, exercising their influence in the popular elections to secure the magistracies from among
themselves.

The Roman constitution then, as gradually developed by the necessities and crises that arose,
which I have not space to mention, was a wonderful monument of human wisdom. The nobility were
very powerful from their wealth and influence, but the people were not ground down. There were
no oppressive laws to reduce them to practical slavery; what rights they gained they retained.
They constantly extorted new privileges, until they were sufficiently powerful to be courted
by demagogues. It was the demagogues, generally aristocratic ones, like Catiline and Caesar,
who subverted the liberties of the people by buying votes. But for nearly five hundred years
not a man arose whom the Roman people feared, and the proud symbol "SPQR," on the standards
of the armies of the republic, bore the name of the Roman Senate and People to the ends of
the earth. And yet the old forms remained; the senate met as in the days of the Gracchi, and
there were consuls and praetors as before.

However much we may deplore the subversion of the Roman constitution and the absolute reign
of the emperors, in which most historians see a political necessity, there was yet under these
emperors, whether good or bad, the reign of law, the bequest of five hundred years' experience.
The emperors reigned despotically, but under the forms of legislation. Nor did they attempt
to subvert laws which did not interfere with their own political power. What is called jurisprudence
they even improved, as that later imperial despot Napoleon gave a code to the nation he ruled.
It is this science of jurisprudence, for which the Romans had a genius, that gives them their
highest claim to be ranked among the benefactors of mankind. They created legal science. Its
aim was justice,--equity in the relations between man and man. This was the pride of the Roman
world, even under the rule of tyrants and madmen, and this has survived all the calamities
of fifteen hundred years. The Roman laws--founded by the Republic, but symmetrically completed
by the Empire--have more powerfully affected the interests of civilization than have the philosophy
and arts of Greece. Roman jurisprudence was not perfectly developed until five hundred years
after the Christian era, when Justinian consolidated it into the Code, the Pandects, and the
Institutes. The classical jurists, like Gaius, Ulpian, and Paulus, may have laid the foundation,
but the superstructure was raised under the auspices of the imperial despots.

The earliest code of Roman laws was called the Twelve Tables, framed from the report of the
commissioners sent to Athens and other Greek States, to collect what was most useful in their
legal systems. Three thousand engraved plates of brass containing these various laws were deposited
in the capitol. It was very influential among the Germanic nations, serving as the chief basis
of their early legislation; it also paved the way for the more complete codification that followed
in the Justinian Code, which superseded it. The emperors had very early begun to issue ordinances,
under the authority of the various offices gathered into their hands; and these, together with
the answers to appeals from the lower courts made to the emperors directly, or to the sort
of supreme court which they established, were called imperial constitutions and rescripts.
The Roman Catholic Church regards marriage as one of the sacraments, and through all the Middle
Ages and down to our own day the great authority of the Church has been one of the strongest
supports of that institution, as necessary to Christianity as to civilization. We Americans
have improved on the morality of Jesus, of the early and later Church, and of the great nations
of modern Europe; and in many of our States persons are allowed to slip out of the marriage
tie about as easily as they get into it. The youth ceased to be a pupil, if a boy, at fourteen;
if a girl, at twelve. In England, a man can disinherit both his wife and children. These, and
many other matters,--bequests in trust, succession of men dying intestate, heirs at law, etc.,--were
regulated by the Romans in ways on which our modern legislators have improved little or none.

Next to the perfection of contracts by re,--the intervention of things,--were obligations contracted
by verbis, spoken words, and by literis, or writings.

Contracts perfected by consent, consensu, had reference to sale, hiring; partnership, and mandate,
or orders to be carried out by agents. All contracts of sale were good without writing.

Acts which caused damage to another opened a new class of cases. In cases of libel or slander,
the truth of the allegation might be pleaded in justification.

The praetor delegated his power to three classes of judges, called respectively judex, arbiter,
and recuperator. The recuperators heard and determined cases, but the number appointed for
each case was usually three or five. In most cases two witnesses were enough to prove a fact.
These were finally established into regular and permanent courts, called quaestores perpetui.

But there were also crimes against individuals, which were punished with the death penalty.
Particularly was everything pertaining to property and contracts and wills guarded with the
most jealous care. A man was sure of possessing his own, and of transmitting it to his children.
It is possible that our modern laws may show too great leniency to debtors who are not merely
unfortunate, but dishonest. But all this is the necessary attendant on a factitious state of
society, and by many is regarded as being quite as characteristic of modern, civilized Christian
England and America as it was of Pagan Rome.

THE FINE ARTS.

ARCHITECTURE, SCULPTURE, PAINTING.

500-430 B.C.

My object in the present lecture is not a criticism of the principles of art so much as an
enumeration of its various forms among the ancients, to show that in this department of civilization
they reached remarkable perfection, and were not inferior to modern Christian nations.

The first development of art among all the nations of antiquity was in architecture. The earliest
buildings erected were houses to protect people from heat, cold, and the fury of the elements
of Nature. At that remote period much more attention was given to convenience and practical
utility than to beauty or architectural effect. The earliest houses were built of wood, and
stone was not employed until temples and palaces arose. Ordinary houses were probably not much
better than log-huts and hovels, until wealth was accumulated by private persons.

The earliest monuments of enduring magnificence were the temples of powerful priests and the
palaces of kings; and in Egypt and Assyria these appear earliest, as well as most other works
showing civilization. Perhaps the first great monument which arose after the deluge of Noah
was the Tower of Babel, built probably of brick. It was intended to be very lofty, but of its
actual height we know nothing, nor of its style of architecture. Indeed, we do not know that
it was ever advanced beyond its foundations; yet there are some grounds for supposing that
it was ultimately finished, and became the principal temple of the Chaldaean metropolis.

From the ruins of ancient monuments we conclude that architecture received its earliest development
in Egypt, and that its effects were imposing, massive, and grand. It was chiefly directed to
the erection of palaces and temples, the ruins of which attest grandeur and vastness. They
were built of stone, in blocks so huge and heavy that even modern engineers are at loss to
comprehend how they could have been transported and erected. At Karnak the alley was six thousand
feet long, and before the main body of the edifice stood two obelisks commemorative of the
dedication. The columns stand within the walls. We do not know for what purpose they were raised,
unless as sepulchres for kings. They are supposed to have been built at a remote antiquity,
between two thousand and three thousand years before Christ. Lepsius thought that the oldest
of these Pyramids were built more than three thousand years before Christ. It is a solid mass
of stone, which has suffered less from time than the mountains near it. Some think that the
famous labyrinth was a collective palace of many rulers.

Of Babylonian architecture we know little beyond what the Hebrew Scriptures and ancient authors
tell us. This account of Babylon, however, is probably exaggerated, especially as to the height
of the walls.

Architectural art in India was not so impressive and grand as in Egypt, and was directed chiefly
to the erection of temples. Nor is it of very ancient date. There is no stone architecture
now remaining in India, according to Sir James Fergusson, older than two and a half centuries
before Christ; and this is in the form of Buddhist temples, generally traced to the great Asoka,
who reigned from 272 B.C. to 236 B.C., and who established Buddhism as a state religion. There
were doubtless magnificent buildings before his time, but they were of wood, and have all perished.
We know, however, nothing about them.

The Buddhist temples were generally excavated out of the solid rock, and only the façades were
ornamented. These were not larger than ordinary modern parochial churches, and do not give
the impression of extraordinary magnificence. Besides these rock-hewn temples in India there
remain many examples of a kind of memorial monument called stupas, or topes. The earliest of
these are single columns; but the later and more numerous are in the shape of cones or circular
mounds, resembling domes, rarely exceeding one hundred feet in diameter. Around the apex of
each was a balustrade, or some ornamental work, about six feet in diameter. These topes remind
one of the Pantheon at Rome in general form, but were of much smaller size. They were built
on a stone basement less than fifty feet in height, above which was the brickwork. In process
of time they came to resemble pyramidal towers rather than rounded domes, and were profusely
ornamented with carvings. The great peculiarity of all Indian architectural monuments is excessive
ornamentation rather than beauty of proportion or grand effect.

In course of time, however, Indian temples became more and more magnificent; and a Chinese
traveller in the year 400 A.D. describes one in Gaudhava as four hundred and seventy feet high,
decorated with every sort of precious substance. Its dome, as it appears in a bas-relief, must
have rivalled that of St. Peter's at Rome; but no trace of it now remains. The topes of India,
which were numerous, indicate that the Hindus were acquainted with the arch, both pointed and
circular, which was not known to the Egyptians or the Greeks. The most important of these buildings,
in which are preserved valuable relics, are found in the Punjab. They were erected about twenty
years before Christ. In size, they are about one hundred and twenty-seven feet in diameter.
Connected with the circular topes are found what are called rails, surrounding the topes, built
in the form of rectangles, with heavy pillars. One of the most interesting of these was found
to be two hundred and seventy-five feet long, having square pillars twenty-two feet in height,
profusely carved with scenes from the life of Buddha, topped by capitals in the shape of elephants
supporting a succession of horizontal stone beams, all decorated with a richness of carving
unknown in any other country. The Amravati rail, one of the finest of the ancient monuments
of India, is found to be one hundred and ninety-five by one hundred and sixty-five feet, having
octagonal pillars ornamented with the most elaborate carvings.

From an architectural point of view, the rails were surpassed by the chaityas, or temple-caves,
in western India. These were cut in the solid rock. Some one thousand different specimens are
to be found. The facades of these caves are perfect, generally in the form of an arch, executed
in the rock with every variety of detail, and therefore imperishable without violence. The
process of excavation extended through ten centuries from the time of Asoka; and the interiors
as well as the façades were highly ornamented with sculptures. The temple-caves are seldom
more than one hundred and fifty feet deep and fifty feet in width, and the roofs are supported
by pillars like the interior of Gothic cathedrals, some of which are of beautiful proportions
with elaborated capitals. Though these rock-hewn temples are no larger than ordinary Christian
churches, they are very impressive from the richly decorated carvings; they were lighted from
a single opening in the façade, sometimes in the shape of a horseshoe.

Besides these chaityas, or temples, there are still more numerous viharas, or monasteries,
found in India, of different dates, but none older than the third century before Christ. They
show a central hall, surrounded on three sides by cells for the monks. On the fourth side is
an open verandah; facing this is generally a shrine with an image of Buddha. These edifices
are not imposing unless surrounded by galleries, as some were, supported by highly decorated
pillars. The halls are constructed in several stories with heavy masonry, in the shape of pyramids
adorned with the figures of men and animals. One of these halls in southern India had fifteen
hundred cells. The most celebrated was the Nalanda monastery, founded in the first century
by Nagarjuna, which accommodated ten thousand priests, and was enclosed by a wall measuring
sixteen hundred feet by four hundred. It was to Central India what Mount Casino was to Italy,
and Cluny was to France, in the Middle Ages,--the seat of learning and art.

It was not until the Mohammedan conquest in India that architecture received a new impulse
from the Saracenic influence. Then arose the mosques, minarets, and palaces which are a wonder
for their magnificence, and in which are seen the influence of Greek art as well as that of
India. There is an Oriental splendor in these palaces and mosques which has called out the
admiration of critics, although it is different from those types of beauty which we are accustomed
to praise. But these later edifices were erected in the Middle Ages, coeval with the cathedrals
of Europe, and therefore do not properly come under the head of ancient art, in which the ancient
Hindus, whether of Aryan or Turanian descent, did not particularly excel. It was in matters
of religion and philosophy that the Hindus felt most interest, even as the ancient Jews thought
more of theology than of art and science.

Architecture, however, as the expression of genius and high civilization, was carried to perfection
only by the Greeks, who excelled in so many things. The lintel of the doorway of the Mycenaean
treasury is composed of a single stone twenty-seven feet long and sixteen broad. It was used
exclusively until after the Macedonian conquest, and was chiefly applied to temples. The column,
simply set upon the stylobate, without base or pedestal, was from four to six diameters in
height, with twenty flutes, having a capital of half a diameter. On this rested the entablature,
two column-diameters in height, which was divided into architrave (lower mouldings), frieze
(broad middle space), and cornice (upper mouldings). These curved lines gave to the structure
a peculiar grace which cannot be imitated, as well as an effect of solidity. The discoveries
of many of the Ionic ornamentations among the remains of Assyrian architecture indicate the
Oriental source of the Ionic ideas, just as the Doric style seems to have originated in Egypt.
The artistic Greeks, however, always simplified and refined upon their masters. In front of
the cella was the vestibule, and in the rear or back a chamber in which the treasures of the
temple were kept.

There is now no doubt that the exteriors of the Grecian temples were ornamented in color,--perhaps
with historical pictures, etc.,--although as the traces have mostly disappeared it is impossible
to know the extent or mode of decoration. It has been thought that the mouldings also may have
been gilded or colored, and that the background of the sculptures had some flat color laid
on as a relief to the raised figures. We may be sure, however it was done, that the effect
was not gaudy or crude, but restrained within the limits of refinement and good taste by the
infallible artistic instinct of those masters of the beautiful. They generally were projected
three columns, while the Greek portico had usually but a single row.

The Romans invented no new principle in architecture, unless it be the arch, which was known,
though not practically applied, by the Assyrians, Egyptians, and Greeks. It was another custom
to stucco the surface of brick walls, as favorable to decorations.

Aside from this invention of the arch, to which we are indebted for the most beautiful ecclesiastical
structures ever erected, we owe everything in architecture to the Greeks and Romans.

The genius displayed by the ancients in sculpture is even more remarkable than their skill
in architecture. The Egyptians were probably the first who made any considerable advances in
the execution of statues. The walls of Babylon were painted after Nature with representations
of different species of animals and of combats between them and man. He strove, like Phidias,
to express character in repose. He imitated the personages and the subjects of the old mythology,
and treated them in an epic spirit, his subjects being almost invariably taken from Homer and
the Epic cycle.

Among the works of Polygnotus, as mentioned by Pliny, are his paintings in the Temple at Delphi,
in the Propylaea of the Acropolis, in the Temple of Theseus, and in the Temple of the Dioscuri
at Athens.

The use of oil was unknown to the ancients.

Fresco, or water-color, on fresh plaster, was used for coloring walls, which were divided into
compartments or panels.

A greater painter still was Apollodorus of Athens. Zeuxis acquired a great fortune, and lived
ostentatiously.

The art probably culminated in Apelles, who was at once a rich colorist and portrayer of sensuous
charm and a scientific artist, while he added a peculiar grace of his own, which distinguished
him above both his predecessors and contemporaries. He was contemporaneous with Alexander,
and was alone allowed to paint the picture of the great conqueror. He made great improvement
in the mechanical part of his art, inventing some colors, and being the first to varnish pictures.
He feared no criticism, and was unenvious of the fame of rivals. This general destroyed, or
carried to Rome, more works than all his predecessors combined. So in sculpture,--the finest
modern works are inspired by antique models.

       *       *       *       *       *

AUTHORITIES. Müller's Ancient Art alludes to the leading masterpieces. Vitruvius (on Architecture,
translated by Gwilt) writes at some length on ancient wall-paintings.

ANCIENT SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE. It is this which has distinguished and elevated the races of
Europe, and carried them in the line of progress beyond the attainments of the Greeks and Romans.
At that time the world was not in the stage of development when this particular direction of
intellect could have been favored. The development of the physical sciences, with their infinite
multiplicity and complexity, required more centuries of observation, collection and collation
of facts, deductions from known phenomena, than the ancients had had to work with; while the
more ethereal realms of philosophy, ethics, aesthetics, and religion, though needing keen study
of Nature and of man, depended more upon inner spiritual forces, and less upon accumulated
detail of external knowledge. Nevertheless, there were departments in which they made noble
attempts, and in which they showed large capacity, even if they were unsuccessful in great
practical results.

Astronomy was one of these. The Chinese also determined the obliquity of the ecliptic eleven
hundred years before our era. Diodorus asserts that the Chaldaeans used the Temple of Belus,
in the centre of Babylon, for their survey of the heavens. Whatever was known of real value
among the ancients is due to the earnest inquiries of the Greeks.

And yet their researches were very unsatisfactory until the time of Hipparchus. The primitive
knowledge was almost nothing. Homer believed that the sun arose out of the ocean, ascended
the heaven, and again plunged into the ocean, passing under the earth, and producing darkness.
He constructed geographical charts, and attempted to delineate the celestial sphere, and to
measure time with a gnomon, or time-pillar, by the motion of its shadow upon a dial.[2]

[Footnote 2: Dr. E.H. Knight, in his "American Mechanical Dictionary" (i. 692), cites the Scriptural
account of the beautiful altar seen by King Ahaz of Jerusalem, in Damascus, when he went thither
to greet Tiglath-Pileser, the Assyrian who had helped him against his Samarian enemy. Ahaz
erected a similar altar at Jerusalem, and also a sun-dial, the same one mentioned in the account
of the miraculous cure of his son Hezekiah. He regarded astronomy as more intimately connected
with mathematics than any other branch of science.

Astronomical science received a great impulse from the school of Alexandria, the greatest light
of which was Hipparchus, who flourished early in the second century before Christ. But even
Ptolemy did not conceive the heliocentric theory,--the sun the centre of our system. There
is hardly any trace of geometry among the Hebrews. Among the Hindus there are some works on
this science, of great antiquity. Their mathematicians knew the rule for finding the area of
a triangle from its sides, and also the celebrated proposition concerning the squares on the
sides of the right-angled triangle. The Chinese, it is said, also knew this proposition before
it was known to the Greeks, among whom it was first propounded by Thales. He applied a circle
to the measurement of angles. Solomon was a great botanist,--a realm with which the science
of medicine is indissolubly connected. The origin of Hindu medicine is lost in remote antiquity.
They are mythical personages, like Hermes and Chiron. Yet who have been greater ornaments and
lights than these two distinguished Greeks? The great principles of his practice were that
disease is to be overcome by that which is contrary to the disease itself,--hence the name
Allopathy, invented by the founder of Homoeopathy to designate the fundamental principle of
the general practice,--and that nature is to be preserved by that which has relation with nature.
He did not attach himself to any particular school, but studied the doctrines of each. But
geography was not utterly neglected in those early times, nor was natural history. Nor did
he evince great judgment in his selection: he had a great love of the marvellous, and his work
was often unintelligible; but it remains a wonderful monument of human industry.

Eratosthenes, though more properly an astronomer, and the most distinguished among the ancients,
was also a considerable writer on geography, indeed, the first who treated the subject systematically,
although none of his writings have reached us. The improvements he pointed out were applied
by Ptolemy himself. His writings on history and geography are preserved only in quotations
by Cicero, Strabo, and others.

Thus it would seem that among the ancients, in those departments of science which are inductive,
there were not sufficient facts, well established, from which to make sound inductions; but
in those departments which are deductive, like pure mathematics, and which require great reasoning
powers, there were lofty attainments,--which indeed gave the foundation for the achievements
of modern science.

       *       *       *       *       *

AUTHORITIES.

An exceedingly learned work (London, 1862) on the Astronomy of the Ancients, by Sir George
Cornewall Lewis, though rather ostentatious in the parade of authorities, and minute on points
which are not of much consequence, is worth consulting. Whewell's History of the Inductive
Sciences may also be consulted with profit. Dunglison's History of Medicine is a standard,
giving much detailed information, and Leclerc among the French and Speugel among the Germans
are esteemed authorities. Strabo's Geography is the most valuable of antiquity; see also Polybius:
both of these have been translated and edited for English readers.

MATERIAL LIFE OF THE ANCIENTS.

MECHANICAL AND USEFUL ARTS.

4000-50 B.C.

While the fine arts made great progress among the cultivated nations of antiquity, and with
the Greeks reached a refinement that has never since been surpassed, the ancients were far
behind modern nations in everything that has utility for its object. In implements of war,
in agricultural instruments, in the variety of manufactures, in machinery, in chemical compounds,
in domestic utensils, in grand engineering works, in the comfort of houses, in modes of land-travel
and transportation, in navigation, in the multiplication of books, in triumphs over the forces
of Nature, in those discoveries and inventions which abridge the labors of mankind and bring
races into closer intercourse,--especially by such wonders as are wrought by steam, gas, electricity,
gunpowder, the mariner's compass, and the art of printing,--the modern world feels its immense
superiority to all the ages that have gone before. And yet, considering the infancy of science
and the youth of nations, more was accomplished by the ancients for the comfort and convenience
and luxury of man than we naturally might suppose.

Egypt was the primeval seat of what may be called material civilization, and many arts and
inventions were known there when the rest of the world was still in ignorance and barbarism.
More than four thousand years ago the Egyptians had chariots of war and most of the military
weapons known afterward to the Greeks,--especially the spear and bow, which were the most effective
offensive weapons known to antiquity or the Middle Ages. Some of their warriors were clothed
in coats of brass equal to the steel or iron cuirass worn by the Mediaeval knights of chivalry.
They had the battle-axe, the shield, the sword, the javelin, the metal-headed arrow. One of
the early Egyptian kings marched against his enemies with six hundred thousand infantry, twenty
thousand cavalry, and twenty-three thousand chariots of war, each drawn by two horses. The
saddles and bridles of their horses were nearly as perfect as ours are at the present time;
the leather they used was dyed in various colors, and adorned with metal edges. The wheels
of their chariots were bound with hoops of metal, and had six spokes. Umbrellas to protect
from the rays of the sun were held over the heads of their women of rank when they rode in
their highly-decorated chariots. Walls of solid masonry, thick and high, surrounded their principal
cities, while an attacking or besieging army used movable towers. Their disciplined troops
advanced to battle in true military precision, at the sound of the trumpet.

The public works of Egyptian kings were on a grand scale. They united rivers with seas by canals
which employed hundreds of thousands of workmen. They transported heavy blocks of stone, of
immense weight and magnitude, for their temples, palaces, and tombs. They erected obelisks
in single shafts nearly one hundred feet in height, and they engraved the sides of these obelisks
from top to bottom with representations of warriors, priests, and captives. They ornamented
their vast temples with sculptures which required the hardest metals. Rameses the Great, the
Sesostris of the Greeks, had a fleet of four hundred vessels in the Arabian Gulf, and the rowers
wore quilted helmets. His vessels had sails, which implies the weaving of flax and the twisting
of heavy ropes; some of his war-galleys were propelled by forty-four oars, and were one hundred
and twenty feet in length.

Among their domestic utensils the Egyptians used the same kind of buckets for wells that we
find to-day among the farmhouses of New England. Skilful gardeners were employed in ornamenting
grounds and in raising fruits and vegetables. The leather cutters and dressers were famous
for their skill, as well as workers in linen. Most products of the land, as well as domestic
animals, were sold by weight in carefully adjusted scales. Instead of coins, money was in rings
of gold, silver, and copper. The skill used by the Egyptians in rearing fowls, geese, and domestic
animals greatly surpassed that known to modern farmers. According to Wilkinson, they caught
fish in nets equal to the seines employed by modern fishermen. Their houses as well as their
monuments were built of brick, and were sometimes four or five stories in height, and secured
by bolts on the doors. Locks and keys were also in use, made of iron; and the doorways were
ornamented. Some of the roofs of their public buildings were arched with stone. In their mills
for grinding wheat circular stones were used, resembling in form those now employed, generally
turned by women, but sometimes so large that asses and mules were employed in the work. The
walls and ceilings of their buildings were richly painted, the devices being as elaborate as
those of the Greeks. Besides town-houses, the rich had villas and gardens, where they amused
themselves with angling and spearing fish in the ponds. The gardens were laid in walks shaded
with trees, and were well watered from large tanks. Vines were trained on trellis-work supported
by pillars, and sometimes in the form of bowers. For gathering fruit, baskets were used somewhat
similar to those now employed. Their wine-presses showed considerable ingenuity, and after
the necessary fermentation the wine was poured into large earthen jars, corresponding to the
amphorae of the Romans, and covered with lids made air-tight by resin and bitumen. The Egyptians
had several kinds of wine, highly praised by the ancients; and wine among them was cheap and
abundant. Egypt was also renowned for drugs unknown to other nations, and for beer made of
barley, as well as wine. As for fruits, they had the same variety as we have at the present
day, their favorite fruit being dates. "So fond were the Egyptians of trees and flowers that
they exacted a contribution from the nations tributary to them of their rarest plants, so that
their gardens bloomed with flowers of every variety in all seasons of the year." Wreaths and
chaplets were in common use from the earliest antiquity. It was in their gardens, abounding
with vegetables as well as with fruits and flowers, that the Egyptians entertained their friends.

In Egyptian houses were handsome chairs and fauteuils, stools and couches, the legs of which
were carved in imitation of the feet of animals; and these were made of rare woods, inlaid
with ivory, and covered with rich stuffs. Some of the Egyptian chairs were furnished with cushions
and covered with the skins of leopards and lions; the seats were made of leather, painted with
flowers. Footstools were sometimes made of elegant patterns, inlaid with ivory and precious
woods. Mats were used in the sitting-rooms. The couches were of every variety of form, and
utilized in some instances as beds. The tables were round, square, and oblong, and were sometimes
made of stone and highly ornamented with carvings. Bronze bedsteads were used by the wealthy
classes.

In their entertainments nothing was omitted by the Egyptians which would produce festivity,--music,
songs, dancing, and games of chance. The guests arrived in chariots or palanquins, borne by
servants on foot, who also carried parasols over the heads of their masters. Previous to entering
the festive chamber water was brought for the feet and hands, the ewers employed being made
often of gold and silver, of beautiful form and workmanship. Servants in attendance anointed
the head with sweet-scented ointment from alabaster vases, and put around the heads of the
guests garlands and wreaths in which the lotus was conspicuous; they also perfumed the apartments
with myrrh and frankincense, obtained chiefly from Syria. Then wine was brought, and emptied
into drinking-cups of silver or bronze, and even of porcelain, beautifully engraved, one of
which was exclusively reserved for the master of the house. While at dinner the party were
enlivened with musical instruments, the chief of which were the harp, the lyre, the guitar,
the tambourine, the pipe, the flute, and the cymbal. Music was looked upon by the Egyptians
as an important science, and was diligently studied and highly prized; the song and the dance
were united with the sounds of musical instruments. Many of the ornamented vases and other
vessels used by the Egyptians in their banquets were not inferior in elegance of form and artistic
finish to those made by the Greeks at a later day. The Pharaoh of the Jewish Exodus had drinking-vessels
of gold and silver, exquisitely engraved and ornamented with precious stones.

Some of the bronze vases found at Thebes and other parts of Egypt show great skill in the art
of compounding metals, and were highly polished. Their bronze knives and daggers had an elastic
spring, as if made of steel. Wilkinson expresses his surprise at the porcelain vessels recently
discovered, as well as admiration of them, especially of their rich colors and beautiful shapes.
There is a porcelain bowl of exquisite workmanship in the British Museum inscribed with the
name of Rameses II., proving that the arts of pottery were carried to great perfection two
thousand years before Christ. Boxes of elaborate workmanship, made of precious woods finely
carved and inlaid with ivory, are also preserved in the different museums of Europe, all dating
from a remote antiquity. These boxes are of every form, with admirably fitting lids, representing
fishes, birds, and animals. The rings, bracelets, and other articles of jewelry that have been
preserved show great facility on the part of the Egyptians in cutting the hardest stones. The
skill displayed in the sculptures on the hard obelisks and granite monuments of Egypt was remarkable,
since they were executed with hardened bronze.

Glass-blowing was another art in which the Egyptians excelled. Fifteen hundred years before
Christ they made ornaments of glass, and glass vessels of large size were used for holding
wine. Such was their skill in the manufacture of glass that they counterfeited precious stones
with a success unknown to the moderns. We read of a counterfeited emerald six feet in length.
Counterfeited necklaces were sold at Thebes which deceived strangers. The uses to which glass
was applied were in the manufacture of bottles, beads, mosaic work, and drinking-cups, and
their different colors show considerable knowledge of chemistry. The art of cutting and engraving
stones was doubtless learned by the Israelites in their sojourn in Egypt. So perfect were the
Egyptians in the arts of cutting precious stones that they were sought by foreign merchants,
and they furnished an important material in commerce.

From the earliest times the Egyptians were celebrated for their manufacture of linen, which
was one of the principal articles of commerce; and cotton and woollen cloths as well as linen
were woven. Cotton was used not only for articles of dress, but for the covering of chairs
and other kinds of furniture. The great mass of the mummy cloths is of coarse texture; but
the "fine linen" spoken of in the Scripture was as fine as muslin, in some instances containing
more than five hundred threads to an inch, while the finest productions of the looms of India
have only one hundred threads to the inch. Not only were the threads of linen cloth of extraordinary
fineness, but the dyes were equally remarkable, and were unaffected by strong alkalies. Spinning
was principally the occupation of women, who also practised the art of embroidery, in which
gold thread was used, supposed to be beaten out by the hammer; but in the arts of dyeing and
embroidery the Egyptians were surpassed by the Babylonians, who were renowned for their cloths
of various colors.

The manufacture of paper was another art for which the Egyptians were famous, made from the
papyrus, a plant growing in the marsh-land of the Nile. The papyrus was also applied to the
manufacture of sails, baskets, canoes, and parts of sandals. Some of the papyri, on which is
hieroglyphic writing dating from two thousand years before our era, are in good preservation.
Sheep-skin parchment also was used for writing.

The Egyptians were especially skilled in the preparation of leather for sandals, shields, and
chairs. The curriers used the same semicircular knife which is now in use. The great consumption
of leather created a demand far greater than could be satisfied by the produce of the country,
and therefore skins from foreign countries were imported as part of the tribute laid on conquered
nations or tribes.

More numerous than the tanners in Egypt were the potters, among whom the pottery-wheel was
known from a remote antiquity, previous to the arrival of Joseph from Canaan, and long before
the foundation of the Greek Athens. Earthenware was used for holding wine, oils, and other
liquids; but the finest production of the potter were the vases, covered with a vitreous glaze
and modelled in every variety of forms, some of which were as elegant as those made later by
the Greeks, who excelled in this department of art.

Carpenters and cabinet-makers formed a large class of Egyptian workmen for making coffins,
boxes, tables, chairs, doors, sofas, and other articles of furniture, frequently inlaid with
ivory and rare woods. Veneering was known to these workmen, probably arising from the scarcity
of wood. The tools used by the carpenters, as appear from the representations on the monuments,
were the axe, the adze, the hand-saw, the chisel, the drill, and the plane. These tools were
made of bronze, with handles of acacia, tamarisk, and other hard woods. The hatchet, by which
trees were felled, was used by boat-builders. The boxes and other articles of furniture were
highly ornamented with inlaid work.

Boat-building in Egypt also employed many workmen. Boats were made of the papyrus plant, deal,
cedar, and other woods, and were propelled both by sails and oars. One ship-of-war built for
Ptolemy Philopater is said by ancient writers to have been 478 feet long, to have had forty
banks of oars, and to have carried 400 sailors, 4,000 rowers, and 3,000 soldiers. This is doubtless
an exaggeration, but indicates great progress in naval architecture. The construction of boats
varied according to the purpose for which they were intended. They were built with ribs as
at the present day, with small keels, square sails, with spacious cabins in the centre, and
ornamented sterns; there was usually but one mast, and the prows terminated in the heads of
animals. The boats of burden were somewhat similar to our barges; the sails were generally
painted with rich colors. The origin of boat-building was probably the raft, and improvement
followed improvement until the ship-of-war rivalled in size our largest vessels, while Egyptian
merchant vessels penetrated to distant seas, and probably doubled the Cape of Good Hope.

In regard to agriculture the Egyptians were the most advanced of the nations of antiquity,
since the fertility of their soil made the occupation one of primary importance. Irrigation
was universally practised, the Nile furnishing water for innumerable canals. The soil was often
turned up with the hoe rather than the plough. The grain was sown broadcast, and was trodden
in by goats. Their plough was very simple, and was drawn by oxen; the yoke being attached to
the horns. Although the soil was rich, manures were frequently used. The chief crops were those
of wheat, barley, beans, peas, lentils, vetches, lupines, clover, rice, indigo, cotton, lettuce,
flax, hemp, cumin, coriander, poppy, melons, cucumbers, onions, and leeks. We do not read of
carrots, cabbages, beets, or potatoes, which enter so largely into modern husbandry. Oil was
obtained from the olive, the castor-berry, simsin, and coleseed. Among the principal trees
which were cultivated were the vine, olive, locust, acacia, date, sycamore, pomegranate, and
tamarisk. Grain, after harvest, was trodden out by oxen, and the straw was used as provender.
To protect the fields from inundation dykes were built.

All classes in Egypt delighted in the sports of the field, especially in the hunting of wild
animals, in which the arrow was most frequently used. Sometimes the animals were caught in
nets, in enclosed places near water-brooks. The Egyptians also had numerous fish-ponds, since
they were as fond of angling as they were of hunting. Hunting in Egypt was an amusement, not
an occupation as among nomadic people. Not only was hunting for pleasure a great amusement
among Egyptians, but also among Babylonians and Persians, who coursed the plains with dogs.
They used the noose or lasso also to catch antelopes and wild cattle, which were hunted with
lions; the bow used in the chase was similar to that employed in war. All the subjects of the
chase were sculptured on the monuments with great spirit and fidelity, especially the stag,
the ibex, the porcupine, the wolf, the hare, the lion, the fox, and the giraffe. The camel
is not found among the Egyptian sculptures, nor the bear. Of the birds found in their sculptures
were vultures, eagles, kites, hawks, owls, ravens, larks, swallows, turtle-doves, quails, ostriches,
storks, plovers, snipes, geese, and ducks, many of which were taken in nets. The Nile and Lake
Birket el Keroun furnished fish in great abundance. The profits of the fisheries were enormous,
and were farmed out by the government.

The Egyptians were very fond of ornaments in dress, especially the women. They paid great attention
to their sandals; they wore their hair long and plaited, bound round with an ornamented fillet
fastened by a lotus bud; they wore ear-rings and a profusion of rings on the fingers and bracelets
for the arms, made of gold and set with precious stones. The scarabaeus, or sacred beetle,
was the adornment of rings and necklaces; even the men wore necklaces and rings and chains.
Both men and women stained the eyelids and brows. Pins and needles were among the articles
of the toilet, usually made of bronze; also metallic mirrors finely polished. The men carried
canes or walking-sticks,--the wands of Moses and Aaron.

As the Egyptians paid great attention to health, physicians were held in great repute; and
none were permitted to practise but in some particular branch, such as diseases of the eye,
the ear, the head, the teeth, and the internal maladies. They were paid by government, and
were skilled in the knowledge of drugs. The art of curing diseases originated, according to
Pliny, in Egypt. Connected with the healing art was the practice of embalming dead bodies,
which was carried to great perfection.

In elegance of life the Greeks and Romans, however, far surpassed any of the nations of antiquity,
if not in luxury itself, which was confined to the palaces of kings. In social refinements
the Greeks were not behind any modern nation, as one infers from reading Becker's Charicles.
Among the Greeks was the network of trades and professions, as in Paris and London, and a complicated
social life in which all the amenities known to the modern world were seen, especially in Athens
and Corinth and the Ionian capitals. What could be more polite and courteous than the intercourse
carried on in Greece among cultivated and famous people? When were symposia more attractive
than when the élite of Athens, in the time of Pericles, feasted and communed together? When
was art ever brought in support of luxury to greater perfection? We read of libraries and books
and booksellers, of social games, of attractive gardens and villas, as well as of baths and
spectacles, of markets and fora in Athens. The common life of a Pericles or a Cicero differed
but little from that of modern men of rank and fortune.

In describing the various arts which marked the nations of antiquity, we cannot but feel that
in a material point of view the ancient civilization in its important features was as splendid
as our own. In the decoration of houses, in social entertainments, in cookery, the Romans were
our equals. A banquet dish of Drusillus weighed five hundred pounds of silver.

What a concentration of material wonders was to be seen in all the countries that bordered
on the Mediterranean,--not merely in Italy and Greece, but in Sicily and Asia Minor, and even
in Gaul and Spain! Every country was dotted with cities, villas, and farms. Every country was
famous for oil, or fruit, or wine, or vegetables, or timber, or flocks, or pastures, or horses.
More than two hundred and fifty cities or towns in Italy alone are historical, and some were
famous.

The excavations of Pompeii attest great luxury and elegance of life. Cortona, Clusium, Veii,
Ancona, Ostia, Praeneste, Antium, Misenum, Baiae, Puteoli, Neapolis, Brundusium, Sybaris, were
all celebrated.

And still more remarkable were the old capitals of Greece, Asia Minor, and Africa. Syracuse
was older than Rome, and had a fortress of a mile and a half in length. Carthage, under the
emperors, nearly equalled its ancient magnificence. Athens was never more splendid than in
the time of the Roman Antonines. In spite of successive conquests, there still towered upon
the Acropolis the most wonderful temple of antiquity, built of Pentelic marble, and adorned
with the sculptures of Phidias. Corinth was richer and more luxurious than Athens, and possessed
the most valuable pictures of Greece, as well as the finest statues; a single street for three
miles was adorned with costly edifices. And even the islands which were colonized by Greeks
were seats of sculpture and painting, as well as of schools of learning. Still grander were
the cities of Asia Minor. Antioch had a street four miles in length, with double colonnades;
and its baths, theatres, museums, and temples excited universal admiration. At Ephesus was
the grand temple of Diana, four times as large as the Parthenon at Athens, covering as much
ground as Cologne Cathedral, with one hundred and twenty-eight columns sixty feet high. The
Ephesian theatre was capable of seating sixty thousand spectators. Egypt even in its decline
was still a great monarchy; and when the sceptre of three hundred kings passed from Cleopatra
the last of the Ptolemies, to Augustus Caesar the conqueror at Actium, the military force of
Egypt is said to have amounted to seven hundred thousand men. What European monarch ever possessed
such a sum? The kings of Egypt, even when tributary to Rome, were richer in gold and silver
than was Louis XIV. in the proudest hour of his life.

The ground-plan of Alexandria was traced by Alexander himself, but it was not completed until
the reign of Ptolemy Philadelphus. In a commercial point of view Alexandria was the most important
city in the world, and its ships whitened every sea. Alexandria, could it have been transported
in its former splendor to our modern world, would be a great capital in these times. The philosophers
of Greece were the tutors of Roman nobility. What a concentration of works of art on the hills,
and around the Forum, and in the Campus Martius, and other celebrated quarters! The view south
took in the Caelian Hill, the ancient residence of Tullus Hostilius. This hill was the residence
of many distinguished Romans, among whose palaces was that of Claudius Centumalus, which towered
ten or twelve stories into the air.

Such were the material wonders of the ancient civilizations, culminating in their latest and
greatest representative, and displayed in its proud capital,--nearly all of which became later
the spoil of barbarians, who ruthlessly marched over the classic world, having no regard for
its choicest treasures. Those old glories are now indeed succeeded by a prouder civilization,--the
work of nobler races after sixteen hundred years of new experiments. But why such an eclipse
of the glory of man? The reason is apparent if we survey the internal state of the ancient
empires, especially of society as it existed under the Roman emperors.

       *       *       *       *       *

AUTHORITIES. Wilkinson has revealed the civilization of ancient Egypt. Professor Becker's Handbook
of Rome, as well as his Gallus and Charicles shed much light on manners and customs. Dyer's
History of the City of Rome is the fullest description of its wonders that I have read. Niebuhr,
Bunsen, and Platner, among the Germans, have written learnedly, but also have created much
doubt about things supposed to be established. Mommsen, Curtius, and Merivale are also great
authorities. Nor are the magnificent chapters of Gibbon to be disregarded by the student of
Roman history, notwithstanding his elaborate and inflated style.

THE MILITARY ART.

WEAPONS, ENGINES, DISCIPLINE.

1300-100 A.D.

In surveying the nations of antiquity nothing impresses us more forcibly than the perpetual
wars in which they were engaged, and the fact that military art and science seem to have been
among the earliest things that occupied the thoughts of men. Personal strife and tribal warfare
are coeval with the earliest movements of humanity.

The first recorded act in the Hebraic history of the world after the expulsion of Adam from
Paradise is a murder. In patriarchal times we read of contentions between the servants of Abraham
and of Lot, and between the petty kings and chieftains of the countries where they journeyed.
Long before Abraham was born, violence was the greatest evil with which the world was afflicted.
Before his day mighty conquerors arose and founded kingdoms. Babylon and Egypt were powerful
military States in pre-historic times. Wars more or less fierce were waged before nations were
civilized. The earliest known art, therefore, was the art of destruction, growing out of the
wicked and brutal passions of men,--envy and hatred, ambition and revenge; in a word, selfishness.
Race fought with race, kingdom with kingdom, and city with city, in the very infancy of society.
In secular history the greatest names are those of conquerors and heroes in every land under
the sun; and it was by conquerors that those grand monuments were erected the ruins of which
astonish every traveller, especially in Egypt and Assyria.

But wars in the earliest ages were not carried on scientifically, or even as an art. There
was little to mark them except brute force. Armies were scarcely more than great collections
of armed men, led by kings, either to protect their States from hostile invaders, or to acquire
new territory, or to exact tribute from weaker nations. We do not read of military discipline,
or of skill in strategy and tactics. A battle was lost or won by individual prowess; it was
generally a hand-to-hand encounter, in which the strongest and bravest gained the victory.

One of the earliest descriptions of war is to be found in the Iliad of Homer, where individual
heroes fought with one another, armed with the sword, the lance, and the javelin, protected
by shields, helmets, and coats of mail. They fought on foot, or from chariots, which were in
use before cavalry. The war-horse was driven before he was ridden in Egypt or Palestine; but
the Aryan barbarians in their invasion rode their horses, and fought on horseback, like the
modern Cossacks.

Until the Greeks became familiar with war as an art, armies were usually very large, as if
a great part of the population of a country followed the sovereign who commanded them. Rameses
the Great, the Sesostris of the Greeks, according to Herodotus led nearly a million of men
in his expeditions. He was the most noted of ancient warriors until Cyrus the Persian arose,
and was nearly contemporaneous with Moses. The Trojan war is supposed to have taken place during
the period when the Israelites were subject to the Ammonites; and about the time that the Philistines
were defeated by David, the Greeks were forced by war to found colonies in Asia Minor.

After authentic history begins, war is the main subject with which it has to deal; and for
three thousand years history is simply the record of the feats of warriors and generals, of
their conquests and defeats, of the rise and fall of kingdoms and cities, of the growth or
decline of military virtues. No arts of civilization have preserved nations from the sword
of the conqueror, and war has been both the amusement and the business of kings. From the earliest
ages, the most valued laurels have been bestowed for success in war, and military fame has
eclipsed all other glories. The cry of the mourner has been unheeded in the blaze of conquest;
even the aspirations of the poet and the labors of the artist have been as nought, except to
celebrate the achievements of heroes.

It is interesting then to inquire how far the ancients advanced in the arts of war, which include
military weapons, movements, the structure of camps, the discipline of armies, the construction
of ships and of military engines, and the concentration and management of forces under a single
man. What was that mighty machinery by which nations were subdued, or rose to greatness on
the ruin of States and Empires? The conquests of Rameses, of David, of Nebuchadnezzar, of Cyrus,
of Alexander, of Hannibal, of Caesar, and other heroes are still the subjects of contemplation
among statesmen and schoolboys. The exploits of heroes are the pith of history.

The art of war must have made great progress in the infancy of civilization, when bodily energies
were most highly valued, when men were fierce, hardy, strong, and uncorrupted by luxury; when
mere physical forces gave law alike to the rich and the poor, to the learned and the ignorant;
and when the avenue to power led across the field of battle.

We must go to Egypt for the earliest development of art and science in all departments; and
so far as the art of war consists in the organization of physical forces for conquest or defence,
under the direction of a single man, it was in Egypt that this was first accomplished, about
seventeen hundred years before Christ, as chronologists think, by Rameses the Great.

This monarch, according to Wilkinson, the greatest and most ambitious of the Egyptian kings,
to whom the Greeks gave the name of Sesostris, showed great ability in collecting together
large bodies of his subjects, and controlling them by a rigid military discipline. He accustomed
them to heat and cold, hunger and thirst, fatigue, and exposure to danger. With bodies thus
rendered vigorous by labor and discipline, they were fitted for distant expeditions. Rameses
first subdued the Arabians and Libyans, and annexed them to the Egyptian monarchy. While he
inured his subjects to fatigue and danger, he was careful to win their affections by acts of
munificence and clemency. It is difficult to understand how a small country like Egypt could
furnish such an immense force. If the account of the historian be not exaggerated, Rameses
must have enrolled the conquered Libyans and Arabians and other nations among his soldiers.
He subjected his army to a stern discipline and an uncomplaining obedience to orders,--the
first principle in the science of war, which no successful general in the world's history has
ever disregarded, from Alexander to Napoleon. With this powerful army his march was irresistible.
Ethiopia was first subdued, and an exaction made from the conquered of a tribute of gold, ivory,
and ebony. In those ancient times a conquering army did not resettle or colonize the territories
it had subdued, but was contented with overrunning the country and exacting tribute from the
people. Such was the nature of the Babylonian and Persian conquests. After overrunning Ethiopia
and some other countries near the Straits of Babelmandeb, the conqueror proceeded to India,
which he overran beyond the Ganges, and ascended the high table-land of Central Asia; then
proceeding westward, he entered Europe, nor halted in his devastating career until he reached
Thrace. From thence he marched to Asia Minor, conquering as he went, and invaded Assyria, seating
himself on the throne of Ninus and Semiramis. Then, laden with booty from the Eastern world,
he returned to Egypt after an absence of thirty years and consolidated his empire, building
those vast structures at Thebes, which for magnitude have never been surpassed. Thus was Egypt
enriched with the spoil of nations, and made formidable for a thousand years. Rameses was the
last of the Pharaohs who pursued the phantom of military renown, or sought glory in distant
expeditions.

We are in ignorance as to the details of the conquests and the generals who served under Rameses.
There is doubtless some exaggeration in the statements of the Greek historian, but there is
no doubt that this monarch was among the first of the great conquerors to establish a regular
army, and to provide a fleet to co-operate with his land forces.

The strength of the Egyptian army consisted mainly in archers. They fought either on foot or
in chariots; cavalry was not much relied upon, although mention is frequently made of horsemen
as well as of chariots. The Egyptian infantry was divided into regiments, and Wilkinson tells
us that they were named according to the arms they bore,--as "bowmen, spearmen, swordsmen,
clubmen, slingers." These regiments were divided into battalions and companies, commanded by
their captains. The infantry, heavily armed with spears and shields, formed a phalanx almost
impenetrable of twelve men deep, who marched with great regularity. Each company had its standard-bearer,
who was an officer of approved valor; the royal standards were carried by the royal princes
or by persons of the royal household. The troops were summoned by the sound of trumpet, and
also by the drum, both used from the earliest period. The offensive weapons were the bow, the
spear, the javelin, the sword, the club, or mace, and the battle-axe. The chief defensive weapon
was the shield, about three feet in length, covered with bull's hide, having the hair outward
and studded with nails. The shape of the bow was not essentially different from that used in
Europe in the Middle Ages, being about five feet and a half long, round, and tapering at the
ends; the bowstring was of hide or catgut. The arrows of the archers averaged about thirty
inches in length, and were made of wood or reeds, tipped with a metal point, or flint, and
winged with feathers. Each bowman was furnished with a plentiful supply of arrows. When arrows
were exhausted, the bowman fought with swords and battle-axes; his defensive armor was confined
chiefly to the helmet and a sort of quilted coat. The spear was of wood, with a metal head,
was about five or six feet in length, and used for thrusting. The javelin was lighter, for
throwing. The sling was a thong of plaited leather, broad in the middle, with a loop at the
end. The sword was straight and short, between two and three feet in length, with a double
edge, tapering to a sharp point, and used for either cut or thrust; the handle was frequently
inlaid with precious stones. The metal used in the manufacture of swords and spear-heads was
bronze, hardened by a process unknown to us. The battle-axe had a handle about two-and a-half
feet in length, and was less ornamented than other weapons. The cuirass, or coat of armor,
was made of horizontal rows of metal plate, about an inch in breadth, well secured together
by bronze pieces. The Egyptian chariot held two persons,--the charioteer, and the warrior armed
with his bow-and-arrow and wearing a cuirass, or coat of mail. The warrior carried also other
weapons for close encounter, when he should descend from his chariot to fight on foot. The
chariot was of wood, the body of which was light, strengthened with metal; the pole was inserted
in the axle; the two wheels usually had six spokes, but sometimes only four; the wheel revolved
on the axle, and was secured by a lynch-pin. The leathern harness and housings were simple,
and the bridles, or reins, were nearly the same as are now in use.

"The Egyptian chariot corps, like the infantry," says Wilkinson, "were divided into light and
heavy troops, both armed with bows,--the former chiefly employed in harassing the enemy with
missiles; the latter called upon to break through opposing masses of infantry." The infantry,
when employed in the assault of fortified towns, were provided with shields, under cover of
which they made their approaches to the place to be attacked. In their attack they advanced
under cover of the arrows of the bowmen, and instantly applied the scaling-ladder to the ramparts.
The testudo, a wooden shelter, was also used, large enough to contain several men. The battering-ram
and movable towers resembled those of the Romans a thousand years later.

It would thus appear that the ancient Egyptians, in the discipline of armies, in military weapons
offensive and defensive, in chariots and horses, and in military engines for the reduction
of fortified towns, were scarcely improved upon by the Greeks and Romans, or by the Europeans
in the Middle Ages. Yet the Egyptians were an ingenious rather than a warlike people, fond
of peace, and devoted to agricultural pursuits.

More warlike than they were the Assyrians and the Persians, although we fail to discover any
essential difference in the organization of armies, or in military weapons. The great difference
between the Persian and the Egyptian armies was in the use of cavalry. From their earliest
settlements the Persians were skilful horsemen, and these formed the guard of their kings.
Under Cyrus, the Persians became the masters of the world, but they rapidly degenerated, not
being able to withstand the luxurious life of the conquered Babylonians; and when they were
marshalled against the Greeks, and especially against the disciplined forces of Alexander,
they were disgracefully routed in spite of their enormous armies, which could not be handled,
and became mere mobs of armed men.

The art of war made a great advance under the Greeks, although we do not notice any striking
superiority of arms over the Eastern armies led by Sesostris or Cyrus. The Greeks were among
the most warlike of all the races of men; they had a genius for war. The Grecian States were
engaged in perpetual strifes with one another, and constant contention developed military strength;
and yet the Greeks, until the time of Philip, had no standing armies. They relied for offence
and defence on the volunteer militia, which was animated by intense patriotic ideas. All armies
in the nature of things are more or less machines, moved by one commanding will; but the Greek
armies owed much of their success to the individual bravery of their troops, who were citizens
of States under constitutional forms of government.

The most remarkable improvement in the art of war was made by the Spartans, who, in addition
to their strict military discipline, introduced the phalanx,--files of picked soldiers, eight
deep, heavily armed with spear, sword, and shield, placed in ranks of eight, at intervals of
about six feet apart. This phalanx of eight files and eight ranks,--sixty-four men,--closely
locked when the soldiers received or advanced to attack, proved nearly impregnable and irresistible.
It combined solidity and the power of resistance with mobility. The picked men were placed
in the front and rear; for in skilful evolutions the front often became the rear, and the rear
became the front. Armed with spears projecting beyond the front, and with their shields locked
together, the phalanx advanced to meet the enemy with regular step, and to the cadence of music;
if beaten, it retired in perfect order. After battle, each soldier was obliged to produce his
shield as a proof that he had fought or retired as a soldier should. The Athenian phalanx was
less solid than that of Sparta,--Miltiades having decreased the depth to four ranks, in order
to lengthen his front,--but was more efficient in a charge against the enemy. The Spartan phalanx
was stronger in defence, the Athenian more agile in attack. The attack was nearly irresistible,
as the soldiers advanced with accelerated motion, corresponding to the double-quick time of
modern warfare. This was first introduced by Miltiades at Marathon.

Philip of Macedon adopted the Spartan phalanx, but made it sixteen deep, which gave it greater
solidity, and rendered it still more effective. He introduced the large oval buckler and a
larger and heavier spear. When the phalanx was closed for action, each man occupied but three
square feet of ground: as the pikes were twenty-four feet in length, and projected eighteen
feet beyond the front, the formation presented an array of points such as had never been seen
before. The greatest improvement effected by Philip, however, was the adoption of standing
armies instead of the militia heretofore in use throughout the Grecian States. He also attached
great importance to his cavalry, which was composed of the flower of the nobility, about twelve
hundred in number, all covered with defensive armor; these he formed into eight squadrons,
and constituted them his body-guard. The usual formation of the regular cavalry was in the
form of a wedge, so as to penetrate and break the enemy's line,--a manoeuvre probably learned
from Epaminondas of Thebes, a great master in the art of war, who defeated the Spartan phalanx
by forming his columns upon a front less than their depth, thus enabling him to direct his
whole force against a given point. By these tactics he gained the great victory at Leuctra,
as Napoleon likewise prevailed over the Austrians in his Italian campaign. In like manner Philip's
son Alexander, following the example of Epaminondas, concentrated his forces upon the enemy's
centre, and easily defeated the Persian hosts by creating a panic. There was no resisting a
phalanx sixteen files deep, with their projecting pikes, aided by the heavily armed cavalry,
all under the strictest military discipline and animated by patriotic ardor. This terrible
Macedonian phalanx was a great advance over the early armies of the Greeks, who fought without
discipline in a hand to hand encounter, with swords and spears, after exhausting their arrows.
They had learned two things of great importance,--a rigid discipline, and a concentration of
forces which made an army a machine. Under Alexander, the grand phalanx consisted of 16,384
men, made up of four divisions and smaller phalanxes.

In Roman armies we see a still further advance in the military art, as it existed in the time
of Augustus, which required centuries to perfect. The hardy physique and stern nature of the
Romans, exercised and controlled by their organizing genius, evolved the Roman legion, which
learned to resist the impetuous assaults of the elephants of the East, the phalanx of the Greeks,
and the Teutonic barbarians. The indomitable courage of the Romans, trained under severest
discipline and directed by means of an organization divided and subdivided and officered almost
as perfectly as our modern corps and divisions and brigades and regiments and companies and
squads, marched over and subdued the world. The Hastati were so called because they were armed
with the hasta, or spear; the Principes for being placed so near to the front; the Triarii,
from having been arrayed behind the first two lines as a body of reserve. The soldiers in the
turris were also provided with scaling-ladders, sometimes on wheels; so that when the top of
the wall was cleared by means of the turris, it might be scaled by means of the ladders. Still
below these were two sub-officers, or sergeants, and the decanus, or corporal, to every ten men.

Thus it was by blended art and heroism that the Roman legions prevailed over the armies of
the ancient world.

But these conquests introduced luxury, wealth, pride, and avarice, which degrade while they
elevate. Successful war created great generals, and founded great families; increased slavery,
and promoted inequalities. Meanwhile the great generals struggled for supremacy; civil wars
followed in the train of foreign conquests; Marius, Sulla, Pompey, Caesar, Antony, Augustus,
sacrificed the State to their own ambitions. Good men lamented and protested, and hid themselves;
Cato, Cicero, Brutus, spoke in vain. Degenerate morals kept pace with civil contests. Rome
revelled in the spoils of all kingdoms and countries, was intoxicated with power, became cruel
and tyrannical, and after sacrificing the lives of citizens to fortunate generals, yielded
at last her liberties, and imperial despotism began its reign. It lasted three hundred years,
but was broken to pieces by the barbarians.

       *       *       *       *       *

AUTHORITIES.

Wilkinson is the best authority pertaining to Egyptian armies. The eighth chapter of Livy is
also very much prized. Salmasius and Lepsius wrote learned treatises. Gibbon gives some important
facts. Josephus describes with great vividness the siege of Jerusalem. The articles "Exercitus,"
in Smith's Dictionary, and "Army," in the Encyclopedia Britannica, give a practical summary
of the best writers.

CICERO.

106-43 B.C.

ROMAN LITERATURE.

Marcus Tullius Cicero is one of the great lights of history, because his genius and influence
were directed to the conservation of what was most precious in civilization among the cultivated
nations of antiquity.

He was not a warrior, like so many of the Roman Senators, but his excellence was higher than
that of a conqueror. "He was doomed, by his literary genius, to an immortality," and was confessedly
the most prominent figure in the political history of his time, next to Caesar and Pompey.
His influence was greater than his power, reaching down to our time; and if his character had
faults, let us remember that he was stained by no crimes and vices, in an age of violence and
wickedness. Until lately he has received almost unmixed praise. The Fathers of the Church revered
him. To Erasmus, as well as to Jerome and Augustine, he was an oracle.

In presenting this immortal benefactor, I have no novelties to show. Novelties are for those
who seek to upturn the verdicts of past ages by offering something new, rather than what is true.

Cicero was born B.C. 106, in the little suburban town of Arpinum, about fifty miles from Rome,--the
town which produced Marius. The period of his birth was one of marked national prosperity.
Great military roads were built, which were a marvel of engineering skill; canals were dug;
sails whitened the sea; commerce was prosperous; the arts of Greece were introduced, and its
literature also; elegant villas lined the shores of the Mediterranean; pictures and statues
were indefinitely multiplied,--everything indicated an increase of wealth and culture. With
these triumphs of art and science and literature, we are compelled to notice likewise a decline
in morals. Money had become the god which everybody worshipped. Religious life faded away;
there was a general eclipse of faith. An Epicurean life produced an Epicurean philosophy. Pleasure-seeking
was universal, and even revolting in the sports of the Amphitheatre. Sensualism became the
convertible word for utilities. The Romans were thus rapidly "advancing" to a materialistic
millennium,--an outward progress of wealth and industries, but an inward decline in "those
virtues on which the strength of man is based," accompanied with seditions among the people,
luxury and pride among the nobles, and usurpations on the part of successful generals,--when
Cicero began his memorable career.

He was well-born, but not of noble ancestors. The great peculiarity of his youth was his precocity.
He was an intellectual prodigy,--like Pitt, Macaulay, and Mill. Like them, he had a wonderful
memory. He early mastered the Greek language; he wrote poetry, studied under eminent professors,
frequented the Forum, listened to the speeches of different orators, watched the posture and
gestures of actors, and plunged into the mazes of literature and philosophy. He was conscious
of his marvellous gifts, and was, of course, ambitious of distinction.

There were only three ways at Rome in which a man could rise to eminence and power. One was
by making money, like army contractors and merchants, such as the Equites, to whose ranks he
belonged; the second was by military service; and the third by the law,--an honorable profession.
Like Caesar, a few years younger than he, Cicero selected the law. But he was a new man,--not
a patrician, as Caesar was,--and had few powerful friends. Hence his progress was not rapid
in the way of clients. He was twenty-five years of age before he had a case. He was twenty-seven
when he defended Roscius, which seems to have brought him into notice,--even as the fortune
of Erskine was made in the Greenwich Hospital case and that of Daniel Webster in the case of
Dartmouth College. To have defended Roscius against all the influence of Sulla, then the most
powerful man in Rome, was considered bold and audacious. His fame for great logical power rests
on his defence of Milo,--the admiration of all lawyers.

Cicero was not naturally robust. His figure was tall and spare, his neck long and slender,
and his mouth anything but sensual. He looked more like an elegant scholar than a popular public
speaker. Yet he was impetuous, ardent, and fiery, like Demosthenes, resorting to violent gesticulations. Men
who were seriously ill, who were engaged in war, or who stood in any peril, offered, or promised
to offer, human sacrifices, and made use of the Druids as their agents for such sacrifices.
Their theory was, that the immortal gods could not be appeased unless a human life were given
for a human life. In addition to these private sacrifices, they had also similar human sacrifices
of a public character. Caesar further contrasts the Germans with the Gauls, saying that the former
had no Druids to preside over matters of religion, and that they paid no attention to sacrifices.

In
his work on divination, Cicero, too, refers to the profession which the Druids made of natural
science, and of the power of foretelling the future, and instances
the case of the AEduan Diviciacus, his brother's guest and friend.

Nothing is here said by Cicero of the three classes implied in Diodorus, but Timagenes (quoted
in Ammianus) refers to the three classes under the names 'bardi,' 'euhages' (a mistake for 'vates'),
and 'drasidae' (a mistake for 'druidae'). The study of nature and of the heavens is here attributed
to the second class of seers (vates). The highest class, that of the Druids, were, he says,
in accordance with the rule of Pythagoras, closely linked together in confraternities, and by
acquiring a certain loftiness of mind from their investigations into things that were hidden
and exalted, they despised human affairs and declared the soul immortal. We see here the view
expressed that socially as well as intellectually the Druids lived according to the Pythagorean
philosophy.

Origen also refers to the view that was prevalent in his time, that Zamolxis, the servant of Pythagoras,
had taught the Druids the philosophy of Pythagoras. He further states that the Druids practised
sorcery. The triple division of the non-military aristocracy is perhaps best given by Strabo, the
Greek geographer, who here follows Posidonius. The three classes are the Bards, the Seers (ouateis=vates),
and Druids. The Bards were hymn-writers and poets, the Seers sacrificers and men of science,
while the Druids, in addition to natural science, practised also moral philosophy. They were
regarded as the justest of men, and on this account were intrusted
with the settlement of private and public disputes.

They had been the means of preventing armies from fighting when on the very verge of battle, and
were especially intrusted with the judgment of cases involving human life. According to Strabo,
they and their fellow-countrymen held that souls and the universe were immortal, but that fire and
water would sometime prevail. Sacrifices were never made, Strabo says, without the intervention
of the Druids. Pomponius Mela says that in his time (c. 44 A.D.), though the ancient savagery
was no more, and the Gauls abstained from human sacrifices, some traces of their former practices
still remained, notably in their habit of cutting a portion of the flesh of those condemned
to death after bringing them to the altars. The Gauls, he says, in spite of their traces of
barbarism, had an eloquence of their own, and had the Druids as their teachers in philosophy.
These professed to know the size and form of the earth and of the universe, the motions of the
sky and stars, and the will of the gods. He refers, as Caesar does, to their work in education,
and says that it was carried on in caves or in secluded groves. Mela speaks of their doctrine
of immortality, but says nothing as to the entry of souls into other bodies. As a proof of this
belief he speaks of the practice of burning and burying with the
dead things appropriate to the needs of the living.

Lucan, the Latin poet, in his Pharsalia, refers to the seclusion of the Druids' groves and to their
doctrine of immortality. The Scholiasts' notes on this passage are after the manner of their kind,
and add very little to our knowledge. In Pliny's Natural History (xvi, 249), however, we seem to
be face to face with another, though perhaps a distorted, tradition. Pliny was an indefatigable compiler,
and appears partly by reading, partly by personal observation, to have noticed phases of Celtic
religious practices which other writers had overlooked. In the first place he calls attention
to the veneration in which the Gauls held the mistletoe and the tree on which it grew, provided
that that tree was the oak. Hence their predilection for oak groves and their requirement of oak
leaves for all religious rites. Pliny here remarks on the consonance of this practice with
the etymology of the name Druid as interpreted even through Greek (the Greek for an oak being
drus). Were not this respect for the oak and for the mistletoe paralleled by numerous examples
of tree and plant-worship given by Dr. Frazer and others, it might well have been suspected that
Pliny was here quoting some writer who had tried to argue from the etymology of the name Druid.
Another suspicious circumstance in Pliny's account is his reference to the serpent's egg composed
of snakes rolled together into a ball. He states that he himself had seen such an 'egg,' of
about the size of an apple. Pliny, too, states that Tiberius Caesar abolished by a decree of the
Senate the Druids and the kind of seers and physicians the Gauls then had. This statement, when
read in its context, probably refers to the prohibition of human sacrifices. The historian Suetonius,
in his account of the Emperor Claudius, also states that Augustus had prohibited 'the religion
of the Druids' (which, he says, 'was one of fearful savagery') to Roman citizens, but that Claudius
had entirely abolished it. What is here also meant, in view of the description given of Druidism,
is doubtless the abolishing of its human sacrifices. In later Latin writers there are several
references to Druidesses, but these were probably only sorceresses. In Irish the name drui (genitive
druad) meant a magician, and the word derwydd in mediaeval Welsh was especially used in reference
to the vaticinations which were then popular in Wales.

When we analyse the testimony of ancient writers concerning the Druids, we see in the first place
that to different minds the name connoted different things. To Caesar it is the general name for
the non-military professional class, whether priests, seers, teachers, lawyers, or judges. To
others the Druids are pre-eminently the philosophers and teachers
of the Gauls, and are distinguished from the seers designated vates.

To others again, such as Pliny, they were the priests of the oak-ritual, whence their name
was derived. In view of the variety of grades of civilisation then co-existing in Gaul and Britain,
it is not improbable that the development of the non-military professional class varied very
considerably in different districts, and that all the aspects of Druidism which the ancient
writers specify found their appropriate places in the social system of the Celts. In Gaul and
Britain, as elsewhere, the office of the primitive tribal medicine-man was capable of indefinite
development, and all the forms of its evolution could not have proceeded pari passu where
the sociological conditions found such scope for variation.

It may well be that the oak and mistletoe ceremonies, for example, lingered in remote agricultural
districts long after they had ceased to interest men along the main routes of Celtic civilisation.
The bucolic mind does not readily abandon the practices of millennia.

In addition to the term Druid, we find in Aulus Hirtius' continuation of Caesar's Gallic War
(Bk. viii., c. xxxviii., 2), as well as on two inscriptions, one at Le-Puy-en-Velay (Dep. Haute-Loire),
and the other at Macon (Dep. Saone-et-Loire), another priestly title, 'gutuater.' At Macon
the office is that of a 'gutuater Martis,' but of its special features nothing is known.

CHAPTER VII--THE CELTIC OTHER-WORLD

In the preceding chapter we have seen that the belief was widely prevalent among Greek and Roman
writers that the Druids taught the immortality of the soul. Some of these writers, too, point out
the undoubted fact, attested by Archaeology, that objects which would
be serviceable to the living were buried with the dead, and this was
regarded as a confirmation of the view that the immortality of souls
was to the Celts an object of belief.

The study of Archaeology on the one hand, and of Comparative Religion on the other, certainly leads
to the conclusion that in the Bronze and the Early Iron Age, and in all probability in the Stone
Age, the idea prevailed that death was not the end of man. The holed cromlechs of the later
Stone Age were probably designed for the egress and ingress of souls. The food and the weapons
that were buried with the dead were thought to be objects of genuine need. Roman religion, too,
in some of its rites provided means for the periodical expulsion of hungry and hostile spirits
of the dead, and for their pacification by the offer of food. A tomb and its adjuncts were
meant not merely for the honour of the dead, but also for the protection of the living. A clear
line of distinction was drawn between satisfied and beneficent ghosts like the Manes, and the
unsatisfied and hostile ghosts like the Lemures and Larvae. To the Celtic mind, when its analytical
powers had come to birth, and man was sufficiently self-conscious to reflect upon himself, the
problem of his own nature pressed for some solution. In these solutions the breath, the blood, the name,
the head, and even the hair generally played a part, but these would
not in themselves explain the mysterious phenomena of sleep, of dreams,
of epilepsy, of madness, of disease, of man's shadow and his reflection,
and of man's death.

By long familiarity with the scientific or quasi-scientific explanations of these things, we find it
difficult to realise fully their constant fascination for early man, who had his thinkers and
philosophies like ourselves. One very widely accepted solution of early man in the Celtic world
was, that within him there was another self which could live a life of its own apart from the body,
and which survived even death, burial, and burning. Sometimes this inner self was associated with
the breath, whence, for example, the Latin 'anima' and the Welsh
'enaid,' both meaning the soul, from the root an-, to breathe.

At other times the term employed for the second self had reference to man's shadow: the Greek
'skia,' the Latin 'umbra,' the Welsh 'ysgawd,' the English 'shade.' There are abundant evidences,
too, that the life-principle was frequently regarded as being especially associated with the
blood. Another tendency, of which Principal Rhys has given numerous examples in his Welsh folk-lore,
was to regard the soul as capable of taking a visible form, not necessarily human, preferably
that of some winged creature. In ancient writers there is no information as to the views prevalent among
the Celts regarding the forms or the abodes of the spirits of the dead, beyond the statement
that the Druids taught the doctrine of their re-birth. We are thus compelled to look to the evidence
afforded by myth, legend, and folk-lore. These give fair indications as to the types of earlier popular
belief in these matters, but it would be a mistake to assume that the ideas embodied in them
had remained entirely unchanged from remote times. The mind of man at certain levels is quite
capable of evolving new myths and fresh folk-lore along the lines of its own psychology and its
own logic.

The forms which the soul could take doubtless varied greatly in men's opinions in different
districts and in different mental perspectives, but folk-lore tends to confirm the view that
early man, in the Celtic world as elsewhere, tended to emphasise his conception of the subtlety
and mobility of the soul as contrasted with the body. Sooner or later the primitive philosopher was
bound to consider whither the soul went in dreams or in death. He may not at first have thought
of any other sphere than that of his own normal life, but other questions, such as the home of
the spirits of vegetation in or under the earth, would suggest, even if this thought had not
occurred to him before, that the spirits of men, too, had entrance to the world below. Whether this
world was further pictured in imagination depended largely on the poetic genius of any given people.
The folk-lore of the Celtic races bears abundant testimony to their belief that beneath this
world there was another. The 'annwfn' of the Welsh was distinctly conceived in the folk-lore embodied
in mediaeval poetry as being 'is elfydd' (beneath the world). In mediaeval Welsh legend, again,
this lower world is regarded as divided into kingdoms, like this
world, and its kings, like Arawn and Hafgan in the Mabinogi of Pwyll,
are represented as being sometimes engaged in conflict.

From this lower world had come to man some of the blessings of civilisation, and among them the
much prized gift of swine. The lower world could be even plundered by enterprising heroes. Marriages
like that of Pwyll and Rhiannon were possible between the dwellers of the one world and the other.
The other-world of the Celts does not seem, however, to have been always pictured as beneath
the earth. Irish and Welsh legend combine in viewing it at times as situated on distant islands,
and Welsh folk-lore contains several suggestions of another world situated beneath the waters
of a lake, a river, or a sea. In one or two passages also of Welsh mediaeval poetry the shades
are represented as wandering in the woods of Caledonia (Coed Celyddon).

This was no doubt a traditional idea in those families that migrated
to Wales in post- Roman times from Strathclyde.

To those who puzzled over the fate of the souls of the dead the idea of their re-birth was a
very natural solution, and Mr. Alfred Nutt, in his Voyage of Bran, has called attention to the
occurrence of this idea in Irish legend. It does not follow, however, that the souls of all men
would enjoy the privilege of this re-birth. As Mr. Alfred Nutt points out, Irish legend seems
to regard this re-birth only as the privilege of the truly great. It is of interest to note the curious
persistence of similar ideas as to death and the other-world in literature written even in Christian
times and by monastic scribes. In Welsh, in addition to Annwfn, a term which seems to mean
the 'Not-world,' we have other names for the world below, such as 'anghar,' the loveless place;
'difant,' the unrimmed place (whence the modern Welsh word 'difancoll,' lost for ever); 'affwys,'
the abyss; 'affan,' the land invisible. The upper-world is sometimes called 'elfydd,' sometimes
'adfant,' the latter term meaning the place whose rim is turned back. Apparently it implies
a picture of the earth as a disc, whose rim or lip is curved back so as to prevent men from falling over
into the 'difant,' or the rimless place. In modern Celtic folk-lore the various local other-
worlds are the abodes of fairies, and in these traditions there may possibly be, as Principal
Rhys has suggested, some intermixture of reminiscences of the earlier
inhabitants of the various districts.

Modern folk-lore, like mediaeval legend, has its stories of the inter-marriages of natives
of this world with those of the other-world, often located underneath a lake. The curious reader
will find several examples of such stories in Principal Rhys's collection of Welsh and Manx folk-lore.
In Irish legend one of the most classical of these stories is that of the betrothal of Etain,
a story which has several points of contact with the narrative of
the meeting of Pwyll and Rhiannon in the Welsh Mabinogi.

The name of Arthur's wife, Gwenhwyfar, which means 'the White Spectre,' also suggests that
originally she too played a part in a story of the same kind. In all these and similar narratives,
it is important to note the way in which the Celtic conceptions of the other-world, in Britain
and in Ireland, have been coloured by the geographical aspects of
these two countries, by their seas, their islands, their caves, their
mounds, their lakes, and their mountains.

The local other-worlds of these lands bear, as we might have expected, the clear impress of their
origin. On the whole the conceptions of the other-world which we meet in Celtic legend are joyous;
it is a land of youth and beauty. Cuchulainn, the Irish hero, for example, is brought in a
boat to an exceedingly fair island round which there is a silver
wall and a bronze palisade.

In one Welsh legend the cauldron of the Head of Annwfn has around it a rim of pearls. One
Irish story has a naive description of the glories of the Celtic Elysium in the words--'Admirable
was that land: there are three trees there always bearing fruit, one pig always alive, and another
ready cooked.' Occasionally, however, we find a different picture. In the Welsh poem called 'Y Gododin'
the poet Aneirin is represented as expressing his gratitude at being rescued by the son of Llywarch
Hen from 'the cruel prison of the earth, from the abode of death, from the loveless land.' The
salient features, therefore, of the Celtic conceptions of the other-world are their consonance with
the suggestions made by Celtic scenery to the Celtic imagination, the vagueness and variability of
these conceptions in different minds and in different moods, the absence of any ethical considerations
beyond the incentive given to bravery by the thought of immortality, and the remarkable development
of a sense of possible inter-relations between the two worlds, whether pacific or hostile.
Such conceptions, as we see from Celtic legend, proved an admirable stimulus and provided excellent
material for the development of Celtic narrative, and the weird and romantic effect was further
heightened by the general belief in the possibilities of magic and metamorphosis. Moreover,
the association with innumerable place-names of legends of this type
gave the beautiful scenery of Celtic lands an added charm, which has
attached their inhabitants to them with a subtle and unconquerable
attachment scarcely intelligible to the more prosaic inhabitants of
prosaic lands.

To the poetic Celt the love of country tends to become almost a religion. The Celtic mind cannot
remain indifferent to lands and seas whose very beauty compels the eyes of man to gaze upon
them to their very horizon, and the lines of observation thus drawn to the horizon are for the
Celt continual temptations to the thought of an infinity beyond. The preoccupation of the Celtic
mind with the deities of his scenery, his springs, his rivers, his seas, his forests, his
mountains, his lakes, was in thorough keeping with the tenour of his mind, when tuned to its natural surroundings.


On his return to Rome the state of public affairs was most alarming. Caesar and Pompey were
in antagonism. He must choose between them, and he distrusted both. Caesar was the more able,
accomplished, and magnanimous, but he was the more unscrupulous and dangerous. He had ventured
to cross the Rubicon,--the first general who ever dared thus openly to assail his country's
liberties. Pompey was pompous, overrated, and proud, and had been fortunate in the East. But
then he sided with the Constitutional authorities,--that is, with the Senate,--so far as his
ambition allowed. So Cicero took his side feebly, reluctantly, as the least of the evils he
had to choose, but not without vacillation, which is one of the popular charges against him.
"His distraction almost took the form of insanity." "His inconsistency was an incoherence."
Never did a more wretched man than Cicero resort to Pompey's camp, where he remained until
his cause was lost. He returned, after the battle of Pharsalia, a suppliant at the feet of
Caesar, the conqueror. This, to me, is one of his weakest acts. It would have been more lofty
and heroic to have perished in the camp of Pompey's sons.

In the midst of these public misfortunes which saddened his soul, his private miseries began.
He was now prematurely an old man, under sixty years of age, almost broken down with grief.
His beloved daughter Tullia, with whom his life was bound up, died; and he was divorced from
his wife Terentia,--a proceeding the cause of which remains a mystery. Neither in his most
confidential letters, nor in his conversations with most intimate friends, does it appear that
he ever unbosomed himself, although he was the frankest and most social of men. In his impressive
silence he has set one of the noblest examples of a man afflicted with domestic infelicities.
He buries his conjugal troubles in eternal silence; although he is forced to give vent to sorrows,
so plaintive and bitter that both friend and foe were constrained to pity. He expects no sympathy,
even at Rome, for the sundering of conjugal relations, and he communicates no secrets. In his
grief and sadness he does, however, a most foolish thing: he marries a young lady one-third
his age. She accepted him for his name and rank; he sought her for her beauty, her youth, and
her fortune. This union of May with December was of course a failure. Both parties were soon
disenchanted and disappointed. Neither party found happiness, only discontent and chagrin.
The everlasting incongruities of such a relation--he sixty and she nineteen--soon led to another
divorce. He expected his young wife to mourn with him the loss of his daughter Tullia. She
expected that her society and charms would be a compensation for all that he had lost; yea,
more, enough to make him the most fortunate and happy of mortals. In truth, he was too old
a man to have married a young woman whatever were the inducements. It was the great folly of
his life; an illustration of the fact that, as a general thing, the older a man grows the greater
fool he becomes, so far as women are concerned; a folly that disgraced and humiliated the two
wisest and greatest men who ever sat on the Jewish throne.

In his accumulated sorrows Cicero now plunged for relief into literary labors. It was thus
that his private sorrows were the means which Providence employed to transmit his precious
thoughts and experiences to future ages, as the most valued inheritance he could bestow on
posterity. What a precious legacy to the mind of the world was the book of "Ecclesiastes,"
yet by what bitter experiences was its wisdom earned!

It was in the short period when Caesar rejoiced in the mighty power which he transmitted to
the Roman Emperors that Cicero wrote, in comparative retirement, his history of "Roman Eloquence,"
his inquiry as to the "Greatest Good and Evil," his "Cato," his "Orator," his "Nature of the
Gods," and his treatises on "Glory," on "Fate," on "Friendship," on "Old Age," and his grandest
work of all, the "Offices."--the best manual in ethics which has come down to us from heathen
antiquity. In his studious retirement he reminds us of Bacon after his fall, when on his estate,
surrounded with friends, and in the enjoyment of elegant leisure, he penned the most valued
of his immortal compositions. And in those degenerate days at Rome, when liberty was crushed
under foot forever, it is beautiful to see the greatest of Roman statesmen and lawyers consoling
himself and instructing posterity by his exhaustive treatises on the fundamental principles
of law, of morality, and of philosophy.

The assassination of Caesar by Roman senators, which Cicero seems to have foreseen, and in
which he rejoiced, at this time shocked and disturbed the world. For nearly two thousand years
the verdict of the civilized world respecting this great conqueror has been unanimous. But
Mr. Froude has attempted to reverse this verdict, as he has in reference to Henry VIII., and
as Carlyle--another idolater of force--has attempted in the cases of Oliver Cromwell and Frederick
II. This remarkable word-painter, in his Life of Caesar,--which is, however, interesting from
first to last, as everything he writes is interesting,--has presented him as an object of unbounded
admiration, as I have already noticed in my lecture on Caesar. Whether in his eagerness to
say something new, or from an ill-concealed hostility to aristocratic and religious institutions,
or from an admiration of imperialism, or disdain of the people in their efforts at self-government,
this able special pleader seems to hail the Roman conqueror as a benefactor to the cause of
civilization. But imperialism crushed all alike,--the people, no longer able to send their
best men to the Senate through the higher offices perchance to represent their interests, and
the nobles, shorn of the administration of the Empire. Soldiers, not civilians, henceforth
were to rule the world,--a dreary thought to a great lawyer like Cicero, or a landed proprietor
like Brutus. Even if such a terrible revolution as occurred in Rome under Caesar may have been
ordered wisely by a Superintending Power for those degenerate times, and as a preservation
of the peace of the world, that Christianity might take root and spread in countries where
all religions were dead,--still, the prostration of what was dearest to the hearts of all true
citizens by the sword was a crime; and men are not to be commended for crime, even if those
crimes may be palliated. "It must need be that offences come, but woe to those by whom they come."

Cicero was now sixty-three, prematurely old, discouraged, and heart-broken. And yet he braced
himself up for one more grand effort,--for a life and death struggle with Antony, one of the
ablest of Caesar's generals; a demagogue, eloquent and popular, but outrageously cruel and
unscrupulous, and with unbridled passions. Had it not been for his infatuated love of Cleopatra,
he probably would have succeeded to the imperial sceptre, for it was by the sword that he too
sought to suppress the liberties of the Senate and people. Against him, as the enemy of his
country, Cicero did not scruple to launch forth the most terrible of his invectives. In thirteen
immortal philippics--some of which, however, were merely written and never delivered, after
the fashion of Demosthenes, with whom as an orator and a patriot he can alone be compared--he
denounced the unprincipled demagogue and general with every offensive epithet the language
afforded,--unveiling his designs, exposing his forgeries, and proving his crimes. Nobler eloquence
was never uttered, and wasted, than that with which Cicero pursued, in passionate vengeance,
the most powerful and the most unscrupulous man in the Roman Empire. And Cicero must have anticipated
the fate which impended over him if Antony were not decreed a public enemy. But the protests
of the orator were in vain. He lived to utter them, as a witness of truth; and nothing was
left to him but to die.

Of course Antony, when he became Triumvir,--when he made a bargain that he never meant to keep
with Octavius and Lepidus for a division of the Empire between them,--would not spare such
an enemy as Cicero. The broken-hearted patriot fled mechanically, with a vacillating mind,
when his proscription became known to him,--now more ready to die than live, since all hope
in his country's liberties was utterly crushed. Perhaps he might have escaped to some remote
corner of the Empire. But he did not wish for life, any more than did Socrates when summoned
before his judges. Desponding, uncertain, pursued, he met his fate with the heroism of an ancient
philosopher. He surrendered his wearied and exhausted body to the hand of the executioner,
and his lofty soul to the keeping of that personal and supreme God in whom he believed as firmly
as any man, perhaps, of Pagan antiquity. And surely of him, more than of any other Roman, could
it be said,--as Sir Walter Scott said of Pitt, and as Gladstone quoted, and applied to Sir
Robert Peel,--

     "Now is the stately column broke,
     The beacon light is quenched in smoke;
     The trumpet's silver voice is still,
     The warder silent on the hill."

With the death--so sad--of the most illustrious of the Romans whose fame was not earned on
the battlefield, I should perhaps close my lecture. Yet it would be incomplete without a short
notice of those services which--as statesman, orator, and essayist--he rendered to his country
and to future ages and nations.

In regard to his services as a statesman, they were rendered chiefly to his day and generation,
for he elaborated no system of political wisdom like Burke, which bears (except casually and
indirectly) on modern governments and institutions. It was his aim, as a statesman, to continue
the Roman Constitution and keep the people from civil war. Nor does he seem to have held, like
Rousseau, the vox populi as the voice of God. He could find no language sufficiently strong
to express his abhorrence of those who led the people for their own individual advancement.
He was equally severe on corrupt governors and venal judges. He upheld morality and justice
as the only guides in public affairs. He loved popularity, but he loved his country better.
He hated anarchy as much as did Burke. Like Bright, he looked upon civil war as the greatest
of national calamities. He advocated the most enlightened views, based on the principles of
immutable justice. He wished to preserve his country equally from unscrupulous generals and
unprincipled politicians.

As for his orations, they also were chiefly designed for his own contemporaries. They are not
particularly valuable to us, except as models of rhetorical composition and transcendent beauty
and grace of style. They are not so luminous with fundamental principles as they are vivid
with invective, sarcasm, wit, and telling exaggeration,--sometimes persuasive and working on
the sensibilities, and at other times full of withering scorn. They are more like the pleadings
of an advocate than an appeal to universal reason. He lays down no laws of political philosophy,
nor does he soar into the region of abstract truth, evolving great deductions in morals. But
as an orator he was transcendently effective, like Demosthenes, though not equal to the Greek
in force. His sentences are perhaps too involved for our taste; yet he always swayed an audience,
whether the people from the rostrum, or the judges at the bar, or the senators in the Curia.
He seldom lost a case; no one could contend with him successfully. He called out the admiration
of critics, and even of actors. He had a wonderful electrical influence; his very tones and
gestures carried everything before him; his action was superb; and his whole frame quivered
from real (or affected) emotion, like Edward Everett in his happiest efforts. He was vehement
in gesture, like Brougham and Mirabeau. He was intensely earnest and impressive, like Savonarola.
He had exceeding tact, and was master of the passions of his audience. There was an irresistible
music in his tones of voice, like that of St. Bernard when he fanned crusades. He was withering
in his denunciations, like Wendell Phillips, whom in person he somewhat resembled. He was a
fascination like Pericles, and the people could not long spare him from the excitement he produced.
It was their desire to hear him speak which had no small share in producing his recall from
banishment. They crowded around him as the people did around Chrysostom in Antioch. He amused
like an actor, and instructed like a sage. His sentences are not short, terse, epigrammatic,
and direct, but elaborate and artificial. Yet with all his arts of eloquence his soul, fired
with great sentiments, rose in its inspired fervor above even the melody of voice, the rhythm
of language, and the vehemence of action. A listener, who was not a critic, might fancy it
was gesture, voice, and language combined; but, after all, it was the man communicating his
soul to those who hung upon his lips, and securing conviction by his sincerity and appeals
to conscience. He must have had a natural gift for oratory, aside from his learning and accomplishments
and rhetorical arts,--a talent very rare and approaching to creative genius. But to his natural
gifts--like Luther, or Henry Clay, born an orator--he added marvellous attainments. He had
a most retentive memory. He was versed in the whole history of the world. He was always ready
with apt illustrations, which gave interest and finish to his discourses. He was the most industrious
and studious man of his age. His attainments were prodigious. He was master of all the knowledge
then known, like Gladstone of our day. He was not so learned a man as Varro; but Varro's works
have perished, as the great monuments of German scholars are perhaps destined to perish, for
lack of style. Cicero's style embalmed his thoughts and made them imperishable. No writer is
immortal who is not an artist; Cicero was a consummate artist, and studied the arrangement
of sentences, like the historian Tacitus and the Grecian Thucydides.

But greater than as an artist was he in the loftiness of his mind. He appealed to what is noblest
in the soul. Transcendent eloquence ever "raises mortals to the skies" and never "pulls angels
down." Love of country, love of home, love of friends, love of nature, love of law, love of
God, is brought out in all his discourses, exalting the noblest sentiments which move the human
soul. He was the first to give to the Latin language beauty and artistic finish. He added to
its richness, copiousness, and strength; he gave it music. For style alone he would be valued
as one of the immortal classics. All men of culture have admired it, from Augustine to Bossuet,
and acknowledged their obligations to him. We accord to the great poets the formation of languages,--Homer,
Dante, Chaucer, Shakspeare; but I doubt if either Virgil or Horace contributed to the formation
of the Latin language more than Cicero. Certainly they have not been more studied and admired.
In every succeeding age the Orations of Cicero have been one of the first books which have
been used as textbooks in colleges. Is it not something to have been one of the acknowledged
masters of human composition? What a great service did Cicero render to the education of the
Teutonic races! Whatever the Latin language has done for the modern world, Cicero comes in
for a large share of the glory. More is preserved of his writings than of any other writer
of antiquity.

But not for style alone--seen equally in his essays and in his orations--is he admirable. His
most enduring claim on the gratitude of the world is the noble tribute he rendered to those
truths which save the world. His testimony, considering he was a pagan, is remarkable in reference
to what is sound in philosophy and morals. His learning, too, is seen to most advantage in
his ethical and philosophical writings. It is true he did not originate, like Socrates and
Plato; but he condensed and sifted the writings of the Greeks, and is the best expounder of
their philosophy. Who has added substantially to what the Greeks worked out of their creative
brain? I know that no Roman ever added to the domain of speculative thought, yet what Roman
ever showed such a comprehension and appreciation of Greek philosophy as did Cicero? He was
profoundly versed in all the learning the Grecians ever taught. Like Socrates, he had a contempt
for physical science, because science in his day was based on imperfect inductions. There were
not facts enough known of the material world to construct sound theories. Physical science
at that time was the most uncertain of all knowledge, although there were great pretenders
then, as now, who maintained it was the only certainty. But the speculations of scientists
disgusted him, for he saw nothing in them upon which to base incontrovertible truth. They were
mere dreams and baseless theories on the origin of the universe. They were even puerile; and
they were then, as now, atheistic in their tendency. They mocked the consciousness of mankind.
They annihilated faith and Providence. At best, they made all things subject to necessity,
to an immutable fate, not to an intelligent and ever-present Creator. But Cicero, like Socrates,
believed in God and in providential interference,--in striking contrast with Caesar, who believed
nothing. He taught moral obligation, on the basis of accountability to God. He repudiated expediency
as the guide in life, and fell back on the principles of eternal right. As an ethical writer
he was profounder and more enlightened than Paley. He did not seek to overturn the popular
religion, like Grecian Sophists, only (like Socrates) to overturn ignorance, before a sound
foundation could be laid for any system of truth. Nor did he ridicule religion, as Lucian did
in after-times, but soared to comprehend it, like the esoteric priests of Egypt in the time
of Moses or Pythagoras. He cherished as lofty views of God and his moral government as any
moralist of antiquity. And all these lofty views he taught in matchless language,--principles
of government, principles of law, of ethics, of theology, giving consolation not only to the
men of his day, but to Christian sages in after-times. And there is nothing puerile or dreamy
or demoralizing in his teachings; they all are luminous for learning as well as genius. He
rivalled Bacon in the variety and profundity of his attainments. He gloried in the certitudes
which consciousness reveals, as well as in the facts which experience and history demonstrate.
With these he consoled himself in trouble; on these he reposed in the hour of danger. Like
Pascal he meditated on the highest truths which task the intellect of man, but, unlike him,
did not disdain those weapons which reason forged, and which no one used more triumphantly
than Pascal himself. And these great meditations he transmitted for all ages to ponder, as
among the most precious of the legacies of antiquity.

Thus did he live, a shining light in a corrupt and godless age, in spite of all the faults
which modern critics have enlarged upon in their ambitious desire for novelties, or in their
thoughtless or malignant desire? to show up human frailties. He was a patriot, taking the side
of his country's highest interests; a statesman, seeking to conserve the wisdom of his ancestors;
an orator, exposing vices and defending the innocent; a philosopher, unfolding the wisdom of
the Greeks; a moralist, laying down the principles of immutable justice; a sage, pondering
the mysteries of life; ever active, studious, dignified; the charm and fascination of cultivated
circles; as courteous and polished as the ornaments of modern society; revered by friends,
feared by enemies, adored by all good people; a kind father, an indulgent husband, a generous
friend; hospitable, witty, magnificent,--a most accomplished gentleman, one of the best men
of all antiquity. What if he was vain and egotistical and vacillating, and occasionally weak?
Can you expect perfection in him who "is born of a woman"? We palliate the backslidings of
Christians; we excuse the crimes of a Constantine, a Theodosius, a Cromwell: shall we have
no toleration for the frailties of a Pagan, in one of the worst periods of history? I have
no patience with those critics who would hurl him from the pedestal on which he has stood for
two thousand years. Contrast him with other illustrious men. How few Romans or Greeks were
better than he! How few have rendered such exalted services! And even if he has not perpetuated
a faultless character, he has yet bequeathed a noble example; and, more, has transmitted a
legacy in the richness of which we forget the faults of the testator,--a legacy of imperishable
thought, clothed in the language of imperishable art,--a legacy so valuable that it is the
treasured inheritance of all civilized nations, and one which no nation can afford to lose.

       *       *       *       *       *

AUTHORITIES.

Plutarch's Life of Cicero, Appian, Dion Cassius, Villeius Paterculus, are the original authorities,--next
to the writings of Cicero himself, especially his Letters and Orations. Middleton's Life is
full, but one-sided. Forsyth takes the opposite side in his Life. The last work in English
is that of Anthony Trollope. In Smith's Biographical Dictionary is an able article. Dr. Vaughan
has written an interesting lecture. Merivale has elaborately treated this great man in his
valuable History of the Romans. Colley Cibber's Character and Conduct of Cicero, Drumann's
Roman History, Rollin's Ancient History, Biographic Universelle. Mr. Froude alludes to Cicero
in his Life of Caesar, taking nearly the same view as Forsyth.

CLEOPATRA.

69-30 B.C.

THE WOMAN OF PAGANISM.

It is my object in this lecture to present the condition of woman under the influences of Paganism,
before Christianity enfranchised and elevated her. As a type of the Pagan woman I select Cleopatra,
partly because she was famous, and partly because she possessed traits and accomplishments
which made her interesting in spite of the vices which degraded her. She was a queen, the heir
of a long line of kings, and ruled over an ancient and highly civilized country. She was intellectual,
accomplished, beautiful, and fascinating. She lived in one of the most interesting capitals
of the ancient world, and by birth she was more Greek than she was African or Oriental. She
lived, too, in a great age, when Rome had nearly conquered the world; when Roman senators and
generals had more power than kings; when Grecian arts and literature were copied by the imperial
Romans; when the rich and fortunate were luxurious and ostentatious beyond all precedent; when
life had reached the highest point of material splendor, and yet when luxury had not destroyed
military virtues or undermined the strength of the empire. The "eternal city" then numbered
millions of people, and was the grandest capital ever seen on this earth, since everything
was there concentrated,--the spoils of the world, riches immeasurable, literature and art,
palaces and temples, power unlimited,--the proudest centre of civilization which then existed,
and a civilization which in its material aspects has not since been surpassed. The civilized
world was then most emphatically Pagan, in both spirit and forms. Religion as a controlling
influence was dead. Only a very few among speculative philosophers believed in any god, except
in a degrading sense,--as a blind inexorable fate, or an impersonation of the powers of Nature.
The future state was a most perplexing uncertainty. Epicurean self-indulgence and material
prosperity were regarded as the greatest good; and as doubt of the darkest kind hung over the
future, the body was necessarily regarded as of more value than the soul. In fact, it was only
the body which Paganism recognized as a reality; the soul, God, and immortality were virtually
everywhere ignored.

It was in this godless, yet brilliant, age that Cleopatra appears upon the stage, having been
born sixty-nine years before Christ,--about a century before the new revolutionary religion
was proclaimed in Judea. Her father was a Ptolemy, and she succeeded him on the throne of Egypt
when quite young,--the last of a famous dynasty that had reigned nearly three hundred years. In
connection, however, with the history of Celtic religion it is not the spread of the varying
types of Celtic dialect that is important, but the changes in the civilisation of Gaul and Britain, which
reacted on religious ideas or which introduced new factors into the religious development
of these lands.

The predatory expeditions and wars of conquest of military Celtic tribes in search for new
homes for their superfluous populations brought into prominence the deities of war, as was
the case also with the ancient Romans, themselves an agricultural and at the same time a predatory
race. The prominence of war in Celtic tribal life at one stage has left us the names of a large
number of deities that were identified with Mars and Bellona, though all the war-gods were not
originally such.

In the Roman calendar there is abundant evidence that Mars was at one time an agricultural god
as well as a god of war. The same, as will be shown later, was the probable history of some of
the Celtic deities, who were identified in Roman times with Mars and Bellona. Caesar tells
us that Mars had at one time been the chief god of the Gauls, and that in Germany that was
still the case. In Britain, also, we find that there were several deities identified with Mars,
notably Belatucadrus and Cocidius, and this, too, points in the direction of a development of religion
under military influence. The Gauls appear to have made great strides in military matters and
in material civilisation during the Iron Age.

The culture of the Early Iron Age of Hallstatt had been developed in Gaul on characteristic lines
of its own, resulting in the form now known as the La Tene or Marnian type. This type derives
it name from the striking specimens of it that were discovered at La Tene on the shore of Lake Neuchatel,
and in the extensive cemeteries of the Marne valley, the burials of which cover a period of from
350-200 B.C. It was during the third century B.C. that this characteristic culture of Gaul reached
its zenith, and gave definite shape to the beautiful curved designs
known as those of Late-Celtic Art. Iron appears to have been introduced
into Britain about 300 B.C., and the designs of Late-Celtic Art are
here represented best of all.
The priests and jugglers alike mingled in the crowd of Jews, Syrians, Romans, Greeks, Parthians,
Arabs, who congregated in this learned and mercantile city.

So we have a right to presume that Cleopatra, when she first appeared upon the stage of history
as a girl of fourteen, was simply a very beautiful and accomplished Greek princess, who could
speak several languages with fluency, as precocious as Elizabeth of England, skilled in music,
conversant with history, and surrounded with eminent masters. She was only twenty-one when
she was an object of attraction to Caesar, then in the midst of his triumphs. How remarkable
must have been her fascinations if at that age she could have diverted, even for a time, the
great captain from his conquests, and chained him to her side! That refined, intellectual old
veteran of fifty, with the whole world at his feet, loaded down with the cares of government,
as temperate as he was ambitious, and bent on new conquests, would not have been chained and
enthralled by a girl of twenty-one, however beautiful, had she not been as remarkable for intellect
and culture as she was for beauty. Nor is it likely that Cleopatra would have devoted herself
to this weather-beaten old general, had she not hoped to gain something from him besides caresses,--namely,
the confirmation of her authority as queen. She also may have had some patriotic motives touching
the political independence of her country. Left by her father's will at the age of eighteen
joint heir of the Egyptian throne with her brother Ptolemy, she soon found herself expelled
from the capital by him and the leading generals of the army, because they did not relish her
precocious activity in government. Her gathered adherents had made but little advance towards
regaining her rights when, in August, 48, Caesar landed in pursuit of Pompey, whom he had defeated
at Pharsalia. Pompey's assassination left Caesar free, and he proceeded to Alexandria to establish
himself for the winter. Here the wily and beautiful young exile sought him, and won his interest
and his affection. After some months of revelry and luxury, Caesar left Egypt in 47 to chastise
an Eastern rebel, and was in 46 followed to Rome by Cleopatra, who remained there in splendid
state until the assassination of Caesar drove her back to Egypt. Her whole subsequent life
showed her to be as cunning and politic as she was luxurious and pleasure-seeking. Possibly
she may have loved so interesting and brilliant a man as the great Caesar, aside from the admiration
of his position; but he never became her slave, although it was believed, a hundred years after
his death, that she was actually living in his house when he was assassinated, and was the
mother of his son Caesarion. But Froude doubts this; and the probabilities are that he is correct,
for, like Macaulay, he is not apt to be wrong in facts, but only in the way he puts them.

Cleopatra was twenty-eight years of age when she first met Antony,--"a period of life," says
Plutarch, "when woman's beauty is most splendid, and her intellect is in full maturity." We
have no account of the style of her beauty, except that it was transcendent,--absolutely irresistible,
with such a variety of expression as to be called infinite. As already remarked, from the long
residence of her family in Egypt and intermarriages with foreigners, her complexion may have
been darker than that of either Persians or Greeks. It probably resembled that of Queen Esther
more than that of Aspasia, in that dark richness and voluptuousness which to some have such
attractions; but in grace and vivacity she was purely Grecian,--not like a "blooming Eastern
bride," languid and passive and effeminate, but bright, witty, and intellectual. Shakspeare
paints her as full of lively sallies, with the power of adapting herself to circumstances with
tact and good nature, like a Madame Récamier or a Maintenon, rather than like a Montespan or
a Pompadour, although her nature was passionate, her manner enticing, and her habits luxurious.
She did not weary or satiate, like a mere sensual beauty.

     "Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale
      Her infinite variety."

She certainly had the power of retaining the conquests she had won,--which rarely happens except
with those who are gifted with intellectual radiance and freshness. She held her hold on Antony
for eleven years, when he was burdened with great public cares and duties, and when he was
forty-two years of age. Such a superior man as he was intellectually, and, after Caesar, the
leading man of the empire,--a statesman as well as soldier,--would not have been enslaved so
long by Cleopatra had she not possessed remarkable gifts and attainments, like those famous
women who reigned in the courts of the Bourbons in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries,
and who, by their wit and social fascinations, gathered around their thrones the most distinguished
men of France, and made them friends as well as admirers. The Pompadours of the world have
only a brief reign, and at last become repulsive. But Cleopatra, like Maintenon, was always
attractive, although she, could not lay claim to the virtues of the latter. She was as politic
as the French beauty, and as full of expedients to please her lord. She may have revelled in
the banquets she prepared for Antony, as Esther did in those she prepared for Xerxes; but with
the same intent, to please him rather than herself, and win, from his weakness, those political
favors which in his calmer hours he might have shrunk from granting. Cleopatra was a politician
as well as a luxurious beauty, and it may have been her supreme aim to secure the independence
of Egypt. She wished to beguile Antony as she had sought to beguile Caesar, since they were
the masters of the world, and had it in their power to crush her sovereignty and reduce her
realm to a mere province of the empire. Nor is there evidence that in the magnificent banquets
she gave to the Roman general she ever lost her self-control. She drank, and made him drink,
but retained her wits, "laughing him out of patience and laughing him into patience," ascendant
over him by raillery, irony, and wit.

And Antony, again, although fond of banquets and ostentation, like other Roman nobles, and
utterly unscrupulous and unprincipled, as Roman libertines were, was also general, statesman,
and orator. He grew up amid the dangers and toils and privations of Caesar's camp. He was as
greedy of honors as was his imperial master. He was a sunburnt and experienced commander, obliged
to be on his guard, and ready for emergencies. No such man feels that he can afford to indulge
his appetites, except on rare occasions. One of the leading peculiarities of all great generals
has been their temperance. It marked Caesar, Charlemagne, Gustavus Adolphus, Frederic the Great,
Cromwell, and Napoleon. When Alexander gave himself up to banquets, his conquests ended. Even
such a self-indulgent, pleasure-seeking man as Louis XIV. always maintained the decencies of
society amid his dissipated courtiers. We feel that a man who could discourse so eloquently
as Antony did over the dead body of Caesar was something more than a sensualist or a demagogue.
He was also the finest-looking man in Rome, reminding the people, it is said, of the busts
of Hercules. He was lavish, like Caesar, but, like him, sought popularity, and cared but little
what it cost. It is probable that Cicero painted him, in his famous philippics, in darker colors
than he deserved, because he aimed to be Caesar's successor, as he probably would have been
but for his infatuation for Cleopatra. Caesar sent him to Rome as master of the horse,--a position
next in power to that of dictator. When Caesar was assassinated, Antony was the most powerful
man of the empire. He was greater than any existing king; he was almost supreme. And after
Caesar's death, when he divided his sovereignty of the world with Octavius and Lepidus, he
had the fairest chance of becoming imperator. He had great military experience, the broad Orient
as his domain, and half the legions of Rome under his control.

It was when this great man was Triumvir, sharing with only two others the empire of the world,
and likely to overpower them, when he was in Asia consolidating and arranging the affairs of
his vast department, that he met the woman who was the cause of all his calamities. He was
then in Cilicia, and, with all the arrogance of a Roman general, had sent for the Queen of
Egypt to appear before him and answer to an accusation of having rendered assistance to Cassius
before the fatal battle of Philippi. He had already known and admired Cleopatra in Rome, and
it is not improbable that she divined the secret of his judicial summons. His envoy, struck
with her beauty and intelligence, advised her to appear in her best attire. Such a woman scarcely
needed such a hint. So, making every preparation for her journey,--money, ornaments, gifts,--a
kind of Queen of Sheba, a Zenobia in her pride and glory, a Queen Esther when she had invited
the king and his minister to a banquet,--she came to the Cydnus, and ascended the river in
a magnificent barge, such as had never been seen before, and prepared to meet her judge, not
as a criminal, but as a conqueror, armed with those weapons that few mortals can resist.

     "The barge she sat in, like a burnish'd throne,
     Burn'd on the water; the poop was beaten gold;
     Purple the sails, and so perfumed that
     The winds were love-sick with them: the oars were silver,
     Which to the tune of flutes kept stroke, and made
     The water, which they beat, to follow faster,
     As amorous of their strokes. For her own person,
     It beggar'd all description: she did lie
     In her pavilion (cloth-of-gold of tissue)
     O'er-picturing that Venus, where we see
     The fancy outwork nature: on each side her
     Stood pretty dimpled boys, like smiling Cupids,
     With diverse-color'd fans....
     Her gentlewomen, like the Nereides,
     So many mermaids, tended her i' the eyes.
     ... At the helm
     A seeming mermaid steers....
     ... From the barge
     A strange invisible perfume hits the sense
     Of the adjacent wharves. The city cast
     Her people out upon her; and Antony,
     Enthroned i' the market-place, did sit alone,
     Whistling to th' air; which, but for vacancy,
     Had gone to gaze on Cleopatra too,
     And made a gap in nature."

On the arrival of this siren queen, Antony had invited her to supper,--the dinner of the Romans,--but
she, with woman's instinct, had declined, till he should come to her; and he, with the urbanity
of a polished noble,--for such he probably was,--complied, and found a banquet which astonished
even him, accustomed as he was to senatorial magnificence, and which, with all the treasures
of the East, he could not rival. From that fatal hour he was enslaved. She conquered him, not
merely by her display and her dazzling beauty, but by her wit. Her very tones were music. So
accomplished was she in languages, that without interpreters she conversed not only with Greeks
and Latins, but with Ethiopians, Jews, Arabians, Syrians, Medes, and Parthians. So dazzled
and bewitched was Antony, that, instead of continuing the duties of his great position, he
returned with Cleopatra to Alexandria, there to keep holiday and squander riches, and, still
worse, his precious time, to the shame and scandal of Rome, inglorious and without excuse,--a
Samson at the feet of Delilah, or a Hercules throwing away his club to seize the distaff of
Omphale, confessing to the potency of that mysterious charm which the sage at the court of
an Eastern prince pronounced the strongest power on earth. Never was a strong man more enthralled
than was Antony by this bewitching woman, who exhausted every art to please him. She played
at dice with him, drank with him, hunted with him, rambled with him, jested with him, angled
with him, flattering and reproving him by turn, always having some new device of pleasure to
gratify his senses or stimulate his curiosity. Thus passed the winter of 41-40, and in the
spring he was recalled to Borne by political dissensions there.

At this stage, however, it would seem that ambition was paramount with him, not love; for his
wife Fulvia having died, he did not marry Cleopatra, but Octavia, sister of Octavius, his fellow-triumvir
and general rival. It was evidently from political considerations that he married Octavia,
who was a stately and noble woman, but tedious in her dignity, and unattractive in her person.
And what a commentary on Roman rank! The sister of a Roman grandee seemed to the ambitious
general a greater match than the Queen of Egypt. How this must have piqued the proud daughter
of the Ptolemies,--that she, a queen, with all her charms, was not the equal in the eyes of
Antony to the sister of Caesar's heir! But she knew her power, and stifled her resentment,
and waited for her time. She, too, had a political end to gain, and was too politic to give
way to anger and reproaches. She was anything but the impulsive woman that some suppose,--but
a great actress and artist, as some women are when they would conquer, even in their loves,
which, if they do not feign, at least they know how to make appear greater than they are. For
about three years Antony cut loose from Cleopatra, and pursued his military career in the East,
as the rival of Octavius might, having in view the sovereignty that Caesar had bequeathed to
the strongest man.

But his passion for Cleopatra could not long be suppressed, neither from reasons of state nor
from the respect he must have felt for the admirable conduct of Octavia, who was devoted to
him, and who was one of the most magnanimous and reproachless women of antiquity. And surely
he must have had some great qualities to call out the love of the noblest and proudest woman
of the age, in spite of his many vices and his abandonment to a mad passion, forgetful alike
both of fame and duty. He had not been two years in Athens, the headquarters of his Eastern
Department, before he was called upon to chastise the Parthians, who had thrown off the Roman
yoke and invaded other Roman provinces. But hardly had he left Octavia, and set foot again
in Asia, before he sent for his Egyptian mistress, and loaded her with presents; not gold,
and silver, and precious stones, and silks, and curious works of art merely, but whole provinces
even,--Phoenicia, Syria, Cilicia, and a part of Judea and Arabia,--provinces which belonged
not to him, but to the Roman Empire. How indignant must have been the Roman people when they
heard of such lavish presents, and presents which he had no right to give! And when the artful
Cleopatra feigned illness on the approach of Octavia, pretending to be dying of love, and wasting
her body by fasting and weeping by turns, and perhaps tearing her hair in a seeming paroxysm
of grief,--for an actress can do even this,--Antony was totally disarmed, and gave up his Parthian
expedition altogether, which was treason to the State, and returned to Alexandria more submissive
than ever. This abandonment of duty and official trust disgusted and incensed the Romans, so
that his cause was weakened. Octavius became stronger every day, and now resolved on reigning
alone. This meant another civil war. How strong the party of Antony must have been to keep
together and sustain him amid such scandals, treasons, and disgrace!

Antony, perceiving a desperate contest before him, ending in his supremacy or ruin, put forth
all his energies, assisted by the contributions of Cleopatra, who furnished two hundred ships
and twenty thousand talents,--about twenty million dollars. He had five hundred war-vessels,
beside galleys, one hundred thousand foot and twelve thousand horse,--one of the largest armies
that any Roman general had ever commanded,--and he was attended by vassal kings from the East.
The forces of Octavius were not so large, though better disciplined; nor was he a match for
Antony in military experience. Antony with his superior forces wished to fight upon the land,
but against his better judgment was overruled by Cleopatra, who, having reinforced him with
sixty galleys, urged him to contend upon the sea. The rivals met at Actium, where was fought
one of the great decisive battles of the world. For a while the fortunes of the day were doubtful,
when Cleopatra, from some unexplained motive, or from panic, or possibly from a calculating
policy, was seen sailing away with her ships for Egypt. And what was still more extraordinary,
Antony abandoned his fleet and followed her. Had he been defeated on the sea, he still had
superior forces on the land, and was a match for Octavius. His infatuation ended in a weakness
difficult to comprehend in a successful Roman general. And never was infatuation followed by
more tragic consequences. Was this madness sent upon him by that awful Power who controls the
fate of war and the destinies of nations? Who sent madness upon Nebuchadnezzar? Who blinded
Napoleon at the very summit of his greatness? May not that memorable defeat have been ordered
by Providence to give consolidation and peace and prosperity to the Roman Empire, so long groaning
under the complicated miseries of anarchy and civil war? If an imperial government was necessary
for the existing political and social condition of the Roman world,--and this is maintained
by most historians,--how fortunate it was that the empire fell into the hands of a man whose
subsequent policy was peace, the development of resources of nations, and a vigorous administration
of government!

It is generally conceded that the reign of Octavius--or, as he is more generally known, Augustus
Caesar--was able, enlightened, and efficient. He laid down the policy which succeeding emperors
pursued, and which resulted in the peace and prosperity of the Roman world until vices prepared
the way for violence. Augustus was a great organizer, and the machinery of government which
he and his ministers perfected kept the empire together until it was overrun by the New Germanic
races. Had Antony conquered at Actium, the destinies of the empire might have been far different.
But for two hundred years the world never saw a more efficient central power than that exercised
by the Roman emperors or by their ministers. Imperialism at last proved fatal to genius and
the higher interests of mankind; but imperialism was the creation of Julius Caesar, as a real
or supposed necessity; it was efficiently and beneficently continued by his grand-nephew Augustus;
and its consolidated strength became an established institution which the civilized world quietly
accepted. 

It does not follow that all the races which spoke a form of the Celtic tongue, a tongue of the
Indo-European family, were all of the same stock. Indeed, ethnological and archaeological
evidence tends to establish clearly that, in Gaul and Britain, for
example, man had lived for ages before the introduction of any variety
of Aryan or Indo-European speech, and this was probably the case throughout
the whole of Western and Southern Europe.

         Further, in the
     light of comparative philology, it has
         now become abundantly
     clear that the forms of Indo-European speech which we call Celtic
are most closely related to those of the Italic family, of which family
Latin is the best known representative.

From this it follows that we are to look for the centre of dissemination of Aryan Celtic speech
in some district of Europe that could have been the natural centre of dissemination also for the Italic
languages. From this common centre, through conquest and the commercial intercourse which followed
it, the tribes which spoke the various forms of Celtic and Italic speech spread into the districts
occupied by them in historic times. The common centre of radiation for Celtic and Italic speech
was probably in the districts of Noricum and Pannonia, the modern Carniola, Carinthia, etc.,
and the neighbouring parts of the Danube valley. The conquering Aryan-speaking Celts and Italians
formed a military aristocracy, and their success in extending the range of their languages was
largely due to their skill in arms, combined, in all probability, with a talent for administration.
This military aristocracy was of kindred type to that which carried Aryan speech into India and Persia,
Armenia and Greece, not to speak of the original speakers of the Teutonic and Slavonic tongues.
In view of the necessity of discovering a centre, whence the Indo-European or Aryan languages
in general could have radiated Eastwards, as well as Westwards, the
tendency to-day is to regard these tongues as having been spoken originally
in some district between the Carpathians and the Steppes, in the form
of kindred dialects of a common speech.

     
     Light the path to Stygian horrors
       With the splendors of thy smile
     I can scorn the Senate's triumphs,
       Triumphing in love like thine.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Ah! no more amid the battle
       Shall my heart exulting swell:
     Isis and Osiris guard thee!
       Cleopatra--Rome--farewell!

Thus perished the great Triumvir, dying like a Roman, whose blinded but persistent love, whatever
were its elements, ever shall make his name memorable. All the ages will point to him as a
man who gave the world away for the caresses of a woman, and a woman who deceived and ruined him.

As for her,--this selfish, heartless sorceress, gifted and beautiful as she was,--what does
she do when she sees her lover dead,--dying for her? Does she share his fate? Not she. What
selfish woman ever killed herself for love?

     "Some natural tears she shed, but wiped them soon."

She may have torn her clothes, and beaten her breast, and disfigured her face, and given vent
to mourning and lamentations. But she does not seek death, nor surrender herself to grief,
nor court despair. She renews her strength. She reserves her arts for another victim. She hopes
to win Octavius as she had won Julius and Antony; for she was only thirty-nine, and still a
queen. And for what? That she might retain her own sovereignty, or the independence of Egypt,--still
the most fertile of countries, rich, splendid, and with grand traditions which went back thousands
of years; the oldest, and once the most powerful of monarchies. Her love was ever subservient
to her interests. Antony gave up ambition for love,--whatever that love was. It took possession
of his whole being, not pure and tender, but powerful, strange; doubtless a mad infatuation,
and perhaps something more, since it never passed away,--admiration allied with desire, the
worship of dazzling gifts, though not of moral virtues. Would such a love have been permanent?
Probably not, since the object of it did not shine in the beauty of the soul, but rather in
the graces and adornments of the body, intensified indeed by the lustre of bewitching social
qualities and the brightness of a cultivated intellect. It is hard to analyze a passionate
love between highly gifted people who have an intense development of both the higher and the
lower natures, and still more difficult when the idol is a Venus Polyhymnia rather than a Venus
Urania. But the love of Antony, whether unwise, or mysterious, or unfortunate, was not feigned
or forced: it was real, and it was irresistible; he could not help it. He was enslaved, bound
hand and foot. His reason may have rallied to his support, but his will was fettered. He may
have had at times dark and gloomy suspicions,--that he was played with, that he was cheated,
that he would be deserted, that Cleopatra was false and treacherous. And yet she reigned over
him; he could not live without her. She was all in all to him, so long as the infatuation lasted;
and it had lasted fourteen years, with increasing force, in spite of duty and pressing labors,
the calls of ambition and the lust of power. In this consuming and abandoned passion, for fourteen
years,--so strange and inglorious, and for a woman so unworthy, even if he were no better than
she,--we see one of the great mysteries of our complex nature, not uncommon, but insoluble.

I have no respect for Antony, and but little admiration. I speak of such mad infatuation as
a humiliating exhibition of human weakness. Any one under its fearful spell is an object of
pity. But I have more sympathy for him than for Cleopatra, although she was doubtless a very
gifted woman. He was her victim; she was not his. If extravagant and reckless and sensual,
he was frank, generous, eloquent, brave, and true to her. She was artful, designing, and selfish,
and used him for her own ends, although we do not know that she was perfidious and false to
him. But for her he would have ruled the world. He showed himself capable of an enormous sacrifice.
She made no sacrifices for him. She could even have transferred her affections, since she afterwards
sought to play her blandishments upon his rival. Conceive of Antony, if you can, as loving
any one else than her who led him on to ruin. In the very degradation of love we see its sacredness.
In his fidelity we find some palliation. Nor does it seem that Octavia, the slighted wife of
Antony, gave way to vengeance. Her sense of injury was overshadowed by her pity. This lofty
and dignified matron even took his six surviving children, three of whom were Cleopatra's,
and brought them up in her own house as her own. Can Paganism show a greater magnanimity?

The fate of Cleopatra was tragic also. She too destroyed herself, not probably by the bite
of asps, as is the popular opinion, but by some potent and subtile poison that she ever carried
with her, and which had the effect of benumbing the body and making her insensible to pain.
Yet she does not kill herself because she cannot survive the death of Antony, but because she
is too proud to be carried to Rome to grace the triumph of the new Caesar. She will not be
led a captive princess up the Capitoline Hill. She has an overbearing pride. "Know, sir," says
she to Proculeius, "that I

     "Will not wait pinion'd at your master's court,
     Nor once be chastis'd with the sober eye
     Of dull Octavia....
      ... Rather a ditch in Egypt
     Be gentle grave to me!"

But whether pride or whether shame was the more powerful motive in committing suicide, I do
not read that she was a victim of remorse. She had no moral sense. Nor did she give way to
sentimental grief on the death of Antony. Her grief was blended with disappointment and rage.
Nor did she hide her head, but wore a face of brass. She used all her arts to win Octavius.
Her resources did not fail her; but she expended them on one of the coldest, most politic,
and most astute men that ever lived. And the disappointment that followed her defeat--that
she could not enslave another conqueror--was greater than the grief for Antony. Nor during
her whole career do we see any signs of that sorrow and humility which, it would seem, should
mark a woman who has made so great and fatal a mistake,--cut off hopelessly from the respect
of the world and the peace of her own soul. We see grief, rage, despair, in her miserable end,
as we see pride and shamefacedness in her gilded life, but not remorse or shame. And when she
dies by her own hand, it is not in madness, but to escape humiliation. Suicide was one of the
worst features of Pagan antiquity. It was a base and cowardly reluctance to meet the evils
of life, as much as indifference to the future and a blunted moral sense.

So much for the woman herself, her selfish spirit, her vile career; but as Cleopatra is one
of the best known and most striking examples of a Pagan woman, with qualities and in circumstances
peculiarly characteristic of Paganism, I must make a few remarks on these points.

One of the most noticeable of these is that immorality seems to have been no bar to social
position. Some of those who were most attractive and sought after were notoriously immoral.
Aspasia, whom Socrates and Pericles equally admired, and whose house was the resort of poets,
philosophers, statesmen, and artists, and who is said to have been one of the most cultivated
women of antiquity, bore a sullied name. Sappho, who was ever exalted by Grecian poets for
the sweetness of her verses, attempted to reconcile a life of pleasure with a life of letters,
and threw herself into the sea because of a disappointed passion. Lais, a professional courtesan,
was the associate of kings and sages as well as the idol of poets and priests. Agrippina, whose
very name is infamy, was the admiration of courtiers and statesmen. Lucilla, who armed her
assassins against her own brother, seems to have ruled the court of Marcus Aurelius.

And all these women, and more who could be mentioned, were--like Cleopatra--cultivated, intellectual,
and brilliant. They seem to have reigned for their social fascinations as much as by their
physical beauty. Hence, that class of women who with us are shunned and excluded from society
were not only flattered and honored, but the class itself seems to have been recruited by those
who were the most attractive for their intellectual gifts as well as for physical beauty. No
woman, if bright, witty, and beautiful, was avoided because she was immoral. It was the immoral
women who often aspired to the highest culture. They sought to reign by making their homes
attractive to distinguished men. Their houses seem to have been what the salons of noble and
fascinating duchesses were in France in the last two centuries. The homes of virtuous and domestic
women were dull and wearisome. In fact, the modest wives and daughters of most men were confined
to monotonous domestic duties; they were household slaves; they saw but little of what we now
call society. I do not say that virtue was not held in honor. I know of no age, however corrupt,
when it was not prized by husbands and fathers. I know of no age when virtuous women did not
shine at home, and exert a healthful influence upon men, and secure the proud regard of their
husbands. But these were not the women whose society was most sought. The drudgeries and slaveries
of domestic life among the ancients made women unattractive to the world. The women who were
most attractive were those who gave or attended sumptuous banquets, and indulged in pleasures
that were demoralizing. Not domestic women, but bright women, carried away those prizes which
turned the brain. Those who shone were those that attached themselves to men through their
senses, and possibly through their intellects, and who were themselves strong in proportion
as men were weak. In the museum at Mayence is a bas-relief of the goddess of horses, Epona (from
the Gaulish Epos=Lat. equus, horse), riding on horseback. One of the most important monuments
of this kind is a figure of Artio, the bear-goddess (from Celtic Artos, a bear), found at Muri
near Berne. In front of her stood a figure of a bear, which was also found with her. The bull
of the Tarvos Trigaranos bas-relief of Notre Dame was also in all likelihood originally a totem,
and similarly the horned serpents of other bas-reliefs, as well as
the boar found on Gaulish ensigns and coins, especially in Belgic
territory.

There is a representation, too, of a raven on a bas-relief at Compiegne. The name 'Moccus,' which
is identified with Mercury, on inscriptions, and which is found inscribed at Langres, Trobaso,
the valley of the Ossola and the Borgo san Dalmazzo, is undoubtedly the philological equivalent
of the Welsh moch (swine). In Britain, too, the boar is frequently found on the coins of the
Iceni and other tribes. In Italy, according to Mr. Warde Fowler, the pig was an appropriate offering
to deities of the earth, so that in the widespread use of the pig as a symbol in the Celtic world,
there may be some ancient echo of a connection between it and the earth-spirit. Its diet of acorns,
too, may have marked it out, in the early days of life in forest- clearings, as the animal
embodiment of the oak-spirit. In the legends of the Celtic races, even in historic times, the pig,
and especially the boar, finds an honoured place. In addition to the animals aforementioned,
the ass, too, was probably at one time venerated in one of the districts
of Gaul, and it is not improbable that Mullo, the name of a god identified
with Mars and regarded as the patron of muleteers, mentioned on inscriptions
(at Nantes, Craon, and Les Provencheres near Craon), meant originally
'an ass.' The goddess Epona, also, whose worship was widely spread,
was probably at one time an animal goddess in the form of a mare,
and the name of another goddess, Damona, either from the root dam=Ir.
dam, (ox); or Welsh daf-ad (sheep), may similarly be that of an ancient
totem sheep or cow.

Nor was it in the animal world alone that the Celts saw indications of the divine. While the
chase and the pastoral life concentrated the mind's attention on the life of animals, the growth
of agriculture fixed man's thoughts on the life of the earth, and all that grew upon it, while
at the same time he was led to think more and more of the mysterious world beneath the earth,
from which all things came and to which all things returned. Nor could he forget the trees of
the forest, especially those which, like the oak, had provided him with their fruit as food in time
of need. The name Druid, as well as that of the centre of worship of the Gauls of Asia Minor,
Drunemeton (the oak-grove), the statement of Maximus of Tyre that the representation of Zeus
to the Celts was a high oak, Pliny's account of Druidism (Nat. Hist., xvi. 95), the numerous inscriptions
to Silvanus and Silvana, the mention of Dervones or Dervonnae on an inscription at Cavalzesio
near Brescia, and the abundant evidence of survivals in folk- lore as collected by Dr. J. G.
Frazer and others, all point to the fact that tree-worship, and especially that of the oak, had
contributed its full share to the development of Celtic religion, at any rate in some districts
and in some epochs.
 And when the mind
was both neglected and undervalued, how could respect and admiration be kindled, or continue
after sensual charms had passed away? Paganism taught the inequality of the sexes, and produced
it; and when this inequality is taught, or believed in, or insisted upon, then farewell to
the glory of homes, to all unbought charms, to the graces of domestic life, to everything that
gilds our brief existence with the radiance of imperishable joy.

Nor did Paganism offer any consolations to the down-trodden, injured, neglected, uninteresting
woman of antiquity. She could not rise above the condition in which she was born. No sympathetic
priest directed her thoughts to another and higher and endless life. Nobody wiped away her
tears; nobody gave encouragement to those visions of beauty and serenity for which the burdened
spirit will, under any oppressions, sometimes aspire to enjoy. No one told her of immortality
and a God of forgiveness, who binds up the bleeding heart and promises a future peace and bliss.
Paganism was merciful only in this,--that it did not open wounds it could not heal; that it
did not hold out hopes and promises it could not fulfil; that it did not remind the afflicted
of miseries from which they could not rise; that it did not let in a vision of glories which
could never be enjoyed; that it did not provoke the soul to indulge in a bitterness in view
of evils for which there was no remedy; that it did not educate the mind for enjoyments which
could never be reached; that it did not kindle a discontent with a condition from which there
is no escape. If one cannot rise above debasement or misery, there is no use in pointing it
out. If the Pagan woman was not seemingly aware of the degradation which kept her down, and
from which it was impossible to rise, Paganism did not add stings to her misery by presenting
it as an accident which it was easy to surmount. There would be no contentment or submission
among animals if they were endowed with the reason of men. Give to a healthy, but ignorant,
coarse, uncultivated country girl, surrounded only with pigs and chickens, almost without neighbors,
a glimpse of the glories of cities, the wonders of art, the charms of social life, the triumphs
of mind, the capacities of the soul, and would she be any happier, if obliged to remain for
life in her rustic obscurity and labor, and with no possible chance of improving her condition?
Such was woman under Paganism. She could rise only so far as men lifted her up; and they lifted
her up only further to consummate her degradation.

But there was another thing which kept women in degradation. Paganism did not recognize the
immaterial and immortal soul: it only had regard to the wants of the body. Of course there
were exceptions. There were sages and philosophers among the men who speculated on the grandest
subjects which can elevate the mind to the regions of immortal truth,--like Socrates, Plato,
Epictetus, Marcus Aurelius,--even as there were women who rose above all the vile temptations
which surrounded them, and were poets, heroines, and benefactors,--like Telessa, who saved
Argos by her courage; and Volumnia, who screened Rome from the vengeance of her angry son;
and Lucretia, who destroyed herself rather than survive the dishonor of her house. There are
some people who rise and triumph over every kind of oppression and injury. Under Paganism there
was the possibility of the emancipation of the soul, but not the probability. Its genius was
directed to the welfare of the body,--to utilitarian ends of life, to ornaments and riches,
to luxury and voluptuousness, to the pleasures which are brief, to the charms of physical beauty
and grace. It could stimulate ambition and inculcate patriotism and sing of love, if it coupled
the praises of Venus with the praises of wine. But everything it praised or honored had reference
to this life and to the mortal body. It may have recognized the mind, but not the soul, which
is greater than the mind. It had no aspirations for future happiness; it had no fears of future
misery. Hence the frequency of suicide under disappointment, or ennui, or satiated desire,
or fear of poverty, or disgrace, or pain.

And thus, as Paganism did not take cognizance of the soul in its future existence, it disregarded
man's highest aspirations. It did not cultivate his graces; it set but a slight value on moral
beauty; it thought little of affections; it spurned gentleness and passive virtues; it saw
no lustre in the tender eye; it heard no music in the tones of sympathy; it was hard and cold.
That which constitutes the richest beatitudes of love it could not see, and did not care for.
Ethereal blessedness it despised. That which raises woman highest, it was indifferent to. The
cold atmosphere of Paganism froze her soul, and made her callous to wrongs and sufferings.
It destroyed enthusiasm and poetic ardor and the graces which shine in misfortune. Woman was
not kindled by lofty sentiments, since no one believed in them. The harmonies of home had no
poetry and no inspiration, and they disappeared. The face of woman was not lighted by supernatural
smiles. Her caresses had no spiritual fervor, and her benedictions were unmeaning platitudes.
Take away the soul of woman, and what is she? Rob her of her divine enthusiasm, and how vapid
and commonplace she becomes! Destroy her yearnings to be a spiritual solace, and how limited
is her sphere! Take away the holy dignity of the soul, and how impossible is a lofty friendship!
Without the amenities of the soul there can be no real society. Crush the soul of a woman,
and you extinguish her life, and shed darkness on all who surround her. She cannot rally from
pain, or labor, or misfortune, if her higher nature is ignored. Paganism ignored what is grandest
and truest in a woman, and she withered like a stricken tree. She succumbed before the cold
blasts that froze her noblest impulses, and sunk sullenly into obscurity. Oh, what a fool a
man is to make woman a slave! He forgets that though he may succeed in keeping her down, chained
and fettered by drudgeries, she will be revenged; that though powerless, she will instinctively
learn to hate him; and if she cannot defy him she will scorn him,--for not even a brute animal
will patiently submit to cruelty, still less a human soul become reconciled to injustice. And
what is the possession of a human body without the sympathy of a living soul?

And hence women, under Paganism,--having no hopes of future joy, no recognition of their diviner
attributes, no true scope for energies, no field of usefulness but in a dreary home, no ennobling
friendships, no high encouragements, no education, no lofty companionship; utterly unappreciated
in what most distinguishes them, and valued only as household slaves or victims of guilty pleasure;
adorned and bedecked with trinkets, all to show off the graces of the body alone, and with
nothing to show their proud equality with men in influence, if not in power, in mind as well
as heart,--took no interest in what truly elevates society. What schools did they teach or
even visit? What hospitals did they enrich? What miseries did they relieve? What charities
did they contribute to? What churches did they attend? What social gatherings did they enliven?
What missions of benevolence did they embark in? What were these to women who did not know
what was the most precious thing they had, or when this precious thing was allowed to run to
waste? What was there for a woman to do with an unrecognized soul but gird herself with ornaments,
and curiously braid her hair, and ransack shops for new cosmetics, and hunt for new perfumes,
and recline on luxurious couches, and issue orders to attendant slaves, and join in seductive
dances, and indulge in frivolous gossip, and entice by the display of sensual charms? Her highest
aspiration was to adorn a perishable body, and vanity became the spring of life.

And the men,--without the true sanctities and beatitudes of married life, without the tender
companionship which cultivated women give, without the hallowed friendships which the soul
alone can keep alive, despising women who were either toys or slaves,--fled from their dull,
monotonous, and dreary homes to the circus and the theatre and the banqueting hall for excitement
or self-forgetfulness. They did not seek society, for there can be no high society where women
do not preside and inspire and guide. Society is a Christian institution. It was born among
our German ancestors, amid the inspiring glories of chivalry. It was made for women as well
as men of social cravings and aspirations, which have their seat in what Paganism ignored.
Society, under Paganism, was confined to men, at banquets or symposia, where women seldom entered,
unless for the amusement of men,--never for their improvement, and still less for their restraint.

It was not until Christianity permeated the old Pagan civilization and destroyed its idols,
that the noble Paulas and Marcellas and Fabiolas arose to dignify human friendships, and give
fascination to reunions of cultivated women and gifted men; that the seeds of society were
sown. It was not until the natural veneration which the Gothic nations seem to have had for
women, even in their native forests, had ripened into devotion and gallantry under the teachings
of Christian priests, that the true position of women was understood. And after their equality
was recognized in the feudal castles of the Middle Ages, the salons of the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries established their claims as the inspiring geniuses of what we call society.
Then, and not till then, did physical beauty pale before the brilliancy of the mind and the
radiance of the soul,--at last recognized as the highest charm of woman. The leaders of society
became, not the ornamented and painted heterae which had attracted Grecian generals and statesmen
and men of letters, but the witty and the genial and the dignified matrons who were capable
of instructing and inspiring men superior to themselves, with eyes beaming with intellectual
radiance, and features changing with perpetual variety. Modern society, created by Christianity,--since
only Christianity recognizes what is most truly attractive and ennobling among women--is a
great advance over the banquets of imperial Romans and the symposia of gifted Greeks.

But even this does not satisfy woman in her loftiest aspirations. The soul which animates and
inspires her is boundless. Its wants cannot be fully met even in an assemblage of wits and
beauties. The soul of Madame de Staël pined amid all her social triumphs. The soul craves friendships,
intellectual banquetings, and religious aspirations. And unless the emancipated soul of woman
can have these wants gratified, she droops even amid the glories of society. She is killed,
not as a hero perishes on a battle-field; but she dies, as Madame de Maintenon said that she
died, amid the imposing splendors of Versailles. It is only the teachings and influences of
that divine religion which made Bethany the centre of true social banquetings to the wandering
and isolated Man of Sorrows, which can keep the soul alive amid the cares, the burdens, and
the duties which bend down every son and daughter of Adam, however gilded may be the outward
life. How grateful, then, should women be to that influence which has snatched them from the
pollutions and heartless slaveries of Paganism, and given dignity to their higher nature! It
is to them that it has brought the greatest boon, and made them triumphant over the evils of
life. And how thoughtless, how misguided, how ungrateful is that woman who would exchange the
priceless blessings which Christianity has brought to her for those ornaments, those excitements,
and those pleasures which ancient Paganism gave as the only solace fox the loss and degradation
of her immortal soul!

       *       *       *       *       *

AUTHORITIES.

Plutarch's Lives; Froude's Caesar; Shakspeare's Antony and Cleopatra; Plato's Dialogues; Horace,
Martial, and Juvenal, especially among the poets; Lord's Old Roman World; Suetonius's Lives
of the Caesars; Dion Cassius; Rollin's Ancient History; Merivale's History of the Romans; Biographic
Universelle; Rees's Encyclopedia has a good article.

PAGAN SOCIETY.

GLORY AND SHAME. We are filled with admiration by all these trophies of genius, and cannot
but feel that only superior races could have accomplished such mighty triumphs.

The first thing which arrests our attention as we survey the civilized countries of the old
world, is the imperial despotism of Rome. Outrages, extortions, and disturbances were punished.
Order reigned, and all classes felt secure; they could sleep without fear of robbery or assassination.
All influences conspired to elevate the man whom no one could hope successfully to rival. Revolt
was madness, and treason absurdity. Nor did the Emperors attempt to check the gigantic social
evils of the empire. Despotism implies slavery, and slavery is the worst condition of mankind.

As the wealth of the world flowed naturally to the capital, Rome became a city of princes,
whose fortunes were almost incredible.

The extravagance of that period almost surpasses belief. His suppers never cost less than one
hundred thousand sesterces. Frivolity and luxury loosened all the ties of society. They were
bound up in themselves, and had no care for the people except as they might extract more money
from them. The people were amused with games and festivals, fed like slaves, and of course
lost at last even the semblance of manliness and independence. Even the mechanical arts were
cultivated by the slaves.

     "Balnea, vina, Venus corrumpunt corpora nostra." Who was ever
allowed at Borne to become a son-in-law, if his estate was inferior?
What poor man's name appears in any will?" If any one deems it an exaggeration, he has only to read
Saint Paul's first chapter in his epistle to the Romans. Of what value was the cultivation of
Nature, or a splendid material civilization, or great armies, or an
unrivalled jurisprudence, or the triumph of energy and skill, when the
moral health was completely undermined? A world therefore as fair and
glorious as our own must needs crumble away. No form of civilization, however brilliant and lauded, could
arrest decay and ruin when public and private virtue had fled. The house
was built upon the sand.

The army might rally under able generals, in view of the approaching catastrophe; philosophy
might console the days of a few indignant citizens; good Emperors might attempt to raise barriers
against corruption,--still, nothing, according to natural laws, could save the empire. Even
Christianity could not arrest the ruin. It had converted thousands, and had sowed the seeds
of future and better civilizations. It was sent, however, not to save a decayed and demoralized
empire, but the world itself. Not until the Germanic barbarians, with their nobler elements
of character, had taken possession of the seats of the old civilization, were the real triumphs
of Christianity seen. Had the Roman empire continued longer, Christianity might have become
still more corrupted; in the prevailing degeneracy it certainly could not save what was not
worth preserving. The strong grasp which Rome had laid upon the splendors of all the ancient
Pagan Civilizations was to be relaxed. Antiquity had lived out its life.

       *       *       *       *       *

AUTHORITIES. Lucian does not describe Roman manners, but he aims his sarcasm at the hollowness
of Roman life, as do the great satirists generally. These can all be had in translations.

