5. AMATORY. "Speak'st thou of nothing but ladies?" says Feste the Jester to poor Malvolio.
He might have said the same to Horace; for of the Odes in the first three Books one third part
is addressed to or concerned with women. How many of the pretty female names which musicalize
his love songs, in syllables that breathe of the sweet south and melt like kisses in the utterance,
are representative of real girls, we cannot guess; with none of them except perhaps one, who
died young, does he seem to have been really in love. He was forty years old when most of his
amorous Odes were written; an age at which, as George Eliot has reminded us, the baptism of
passion is by aspersion rather than immersion. Something he must have known of love, or he
could not write as he has done; but it is the superficial gallantry of a flirt rather than
the impassioned self-surrender of a lover; of a gay bachelor, with roving critical eye, heart
whole yet fancy free, too practised a judge of beauty to become its slave. Without emotion,
without reverence, but with keen relishing appreciation, he versifies Pyrrha's golden curls,
and Lycoris' low forehead--feminine beauties both to a Roman eye--and Phyllis' tapering arms
and shapely ankles, and Chia's dimpled cheek, and the tangles of Neaera's hair, and the gadabout
baggage Lyde, and Glycera's dazzling complexion that blinds the gazer's eye (I, v, xix, xxxiii;
II, iv, 21; III, xiv, 21). They are all inconstant good-for-noughts, he knows; but so are men,
and so is he; keep up the pleasant give-and-take, the quarrels and the reconciliations. All
the youths of Rome are in love with a beautiful Ninon D'Enclos named Barine--Matthew Arnold
declared this to be the finest of all the Odes (II, viii)--she perjures herself with every
one in turn. But it seems to answer; she shines forth lovelier than ever. Venus and the nymphs
only laugh, and her lovers, young and old, continue to hug their chains.

  New captives fill the nets you weave;
    New slaves are bred; and those before,
  Though oft they threaten, never leave
    Your perjured door.

Sometimes he plays the monitor. Asterie's husband is laid up in Greece by contrary winds: he
is faithful to his wife, though his hostess tempts him: let the wife be on her guard against
her handsome neighbour Enipeus (III, vii). His own charmers are sometimes obdurate: Chloe and
Lyde run away from him like fawns (I, xxiii): that is because they are young; he can wait till
they are older; they will come to him then of themselves: "they always come," says Disraeli
in "Henrietta Temple." He has quarrelled with an old flame (I, xvi), whom he had affronted
by some libellous verses. He entreats her pardon; was young and angry when he wrote; will burn
the offending lines, or fling them into the sea:

  Come, let me change my sour for sweet,
    And smile complacent as before;
  Hear me my palinode repeat,
    And give me back your heart once more.

He professes bitter jealousy of a handsome stripling whose beauty Lydia praises (I, xiii).
She is wasting her admiration; she will find him unfaithful; Horace knows him well:

  Oh, trebly blest, and blest for ever,
    Are they, whom true affection binds,
  In whom no doubts nor janglings sever
    The union of their constant minds;
  But life in blended current flows,
    Serene and sunny to the close.

But, perhaps, if a jury of scholars could be polled as to the most enchanting amongst all Horace's
lovesongs, the highest vote would be cast in favour of the famous "Reconciliation" of the roving
poet with this or with some other Lydia (III, ix). The pair of former lovers, mutually faithless,
exchange defiant experience of their several infidelities; then, the old affection reviving
through the contact of their altercation, agree to discard their intervening paramours, and
return to their first allegiance.