5. I dined in the City to-day, and went from hence early to town, and visited the Duke of Ormond
and Mr. Secretary. They say my Lord Treasurer has a dead warrant in his pocket; they mean a
list of those who are to be turned out of employment; and we every day now expect those changes.
I passed by the Treasury to-day, and saw vast crowds waiting to give Lord Treasurer petitions
as he passes by. He is now at the top of power and favour: he keeps no levees yet. I am cruel
thirsty this hot weather.--I am just this minute going to swim. I take Patrick down with me,
to hold my nightgown, shirt, and slippers, and borrow a napkin of my landlady for a cap. So
farewell till I come up; but there is no danger, don't be frighted.--I have been swimming this
half-hour and more; and when I was coming out I dived, to make my head and all through wet,
like a cold bath; but, as I dived, the napkin fell off and is lost, and I have that to pay
for. O, faith, the great stones were so sharp, I could hardly set my feet on them as I came
out. It was pure and warm. I got to bed, and will now go sleep.

6. Morning. This letter shall go to-morrow; so I will answer yours when I come home to-night.
I feel no hurt from last night's swimming. I lie with nothing but the sheet over me, and my
feet quite bare. I must rise and go to town before the tide is against me. Morrow, sirrahs;
dear sirrahs, morrow.--At night. I never felt so hot a day as this since I was born. I dined
with Lady Betty Germaine, and there was the young Earl of Berkeley(15) and his fine lady. I
never saw her before, nor think her near so handsome as she passes for.--After dinner, Mr.
Bertue(16) would not let me put ice in my wine, but said my Lord Dorchester(17) got the bloody
flux with it, and that it was the worst thing in the world. Thus are we plagued, thus are we
plagued; yet I have done it five or six times this summer, and was but the drier and the hotter
for it. Nothing makes me so excessively peevish as hot weather. Lady Berkeley after dinner
clapped my hat on another lady's head, and she in roguery put it upon the rails. I minded them
not; but in two minutes they called me to the window, and Lady Carteret(18) showed me my hat
out of her window five doors off, where I was forced to walk to it, and pay her and old Lady
Weymouth(19) a visit, with some more beldames. Then I went and drank coffee, and made one or
two puns, with Lord Pembroke,(20) and designed to go to Lord Treasurer; but it was too late,
and beside I was half broiled, and broiled without butter; for I never sweat after dinner,
if I drink any wine. Then I sat an hour with Lady Betty Butler at tea, and everything made
me hotter and drier. Then I walked home, and was here by ten, so miserably hot, that I was
in as perfect a passion as ever I was in my life at the greatest affront or provocation. Then
I sat an hour, till I was quite dry and cool enough to go swim; which I did, but with so much
vexation that I think I have given it over: for I was every moment disturbed by boats, rot
them; and that puppy Patrick, standing ashore, would let them come within a yard or two, and
then call sneakingly to them. The only comfort I proposed here in hot weather is gone; for
there is no jesting with those boats after it is dark: I had none last night. I dived to dip
my head, and held my cap on with both my hands, for fear of losing it. Pox take the boats!
Amen. 'Tis near twelve, and so I'll answer your letter (it strikes twelve now) to-morrow morning.

7. Morning. Well, now let us answer MD's letter, N.15, 15, 15, 15. Now have I told you the
number? 15, 15; there, impudence, to call names in the beginning of your letter, before you
say, How do you do, Mr. Presto? There is your breeding! Where is your manners, sirrah, to a
gentleman? Get you gone, you couple of jades.--No, I never sit up late now; but this abominable
hot weather will force me to eat or drink something that will do me hurt. I do venture to eat
a few strawberries.--Why then, do you know in Ireland that Mr. St. John talked so in Parliament?(21)
Your Whigs are plaguily bit; for he is entirely for their being all out.--And are you as vicious
in snuff as ever? I believe, as you say, it does neither hurt nor good; but I have left it
off, and when anybody offers me their box, I take about a tenth part of what I used to do,
and then just smell to it, and privately fling the rest away. I keep to my tobacco still,(22)
as you say; but even much less of that than formerly, only mornings and evenings, and very
seldom in the day.--As for Joe,(23) I have recommended his case heartily to my Lord Lieutenant;
and, by his direction, given a memorial of it to Mr. Southwell, to whom I have recommended
it likewise. I can do no more, if he were my brother. His business will be to apply himself
to Southwell. And you must desire Raymond, if Price of Galway comes to town, to desire him
to wait on Mr. Southwell, as recommended by me for one of the Duke's chaplains, which was all
I could do for him; and he must be presented to the Duke, and make his court, and ply about,
and find out some vacancy, and solicit early for it. The bustle about your Mayor I had before,
as I told you, from the Archbishop of Dublin. Was Raymond not come till May 18? So he says
fine things of me? Certainly he lies. I am sure I used him indifferently enough; and we never
once dined together, or walked, or were in any third place; only he came sometimes to my lodgings,
and even there was oftener denied than admitted.--What an odd bill is that you sent of Raymond's!
A bill upon one Murry in Chester, which depends entirely not only upon Raymond's honesty, but
his discretion; and in money matters he is the last man I would depend on. Why should Sir Alexander
Cairnes(24) in London pay me a bill, drawn by God knows who, upon Murry in Chester? I was at
Cairnes's, and they can do no such thing. I went among some friends, who are merchants, and
I find the bill must be sent to Murry, accepted by him, and then returned back, and then Cairnes
may accept or refuse it as he pleases. Accordingly I gave Sir Thomas Frankland the bill, who
has sent it to Chester, and ordered the postmaster there to get it accepted, and then send
it back, and in a day or two I shall have an answer; and therefore this letter must stay a
day or two longer than I intended, and see what answer I get. Raymond should have written to
Murry at the same time, to desire Sir Alexander Cairnes to have answered such a bill, if it
come. But Cairnes's clerks (himself was not at home) said they had received no notice of it,
and could do nothing; and advised me to send to Murry.--I have been six weeks to-day at Chelsea,
and you know it but just now. And so Dean ------ thinks I write the Medley. Pox of his judgment!
It is equal to his honesty. Then you han't seen the Miscellany yet?(25) Why, 'tis a four-shilling
book: has nobody carried it over?--No, I believe Manley(26) will not lose his place; for his
friend(27) in England is so far from being out that he has taken a new patent since the Post
Office Act; and his brother Jack Manley(28) here takes his part firmly; and I have often spoken
to Southwell in his behalf, and he seems very well inclined to him. But the Irish folks here
in general are horribly violent against him. Besides, he must consider he could not send Stella
wine if he were put out. And so he is very kind, and sends you a dozen bottles of wine AT A
TIME, and you win eight shillings AT A TIME; and how much do you lose? No, no, never one syllable
about that, I warrant you.--Why, this same Stella is so unmerciful a writer, she has hardly
left any room for Dingley. If you have such summer there as here, sure the Wexford waters are
good by this time. I forgot what weather we had May 6th; go look in my journal. We had terrible
rain the 24th and 25th, and never a drop since. Yes, yes, I remember Berested's bridge; the
coach sosses up and down as one goes that way, just as at Hockley-in-the-Hole.(29) I never
impute any illness or health I have to good or ill weather, but to want of exercise, or ill
air, or something I have eaten, or hard study, or sitting up; and so I fence against those
as well as I can: but who a deuce can help the weather? Will Seymour,(30) the General, was
excessively hot with the sun shining full upon him; so he turns to the sun, and says, "Harkee,
friend, you had better go and ripen cucumbers than plague me at this rate," etc. Another time,
fretting at the heat, a gentleman by said it was such weather as pleased God: Seymour said,
"Perhaps it may; but I am sure it pleases nobody else." Why, Madam Dingley, the First-Fruits
are done. Southwell told me they went to inquire about them, and Lord Treasurer said they were
done, and had been done long ago. And I'll tell you a secret you must not mention, that the
Duke of Ormond is ordered to take notice of them in his speech in your Parliament: and I desire
you will take care to say on occasion that my Lord Treasurer Harley did it many months ago,
before the Duke was Lord Lieutenant. And yet I cannot possibly come over yet: so get you gone
to Wexford, and make Stella well. Yes, yes, I take care not to walk late; I never did but once,
and there are five hundred people on the way as I walk. Tisdall is a puppy, and I will excuse
him the half-hour he would talk with me. Make a mouth there. Mrs. Vedeau's business I have
answered, and I hope the bill is not lost. Morrow. 'Tis stewing hot, but I must rise and go
to town between fire and water. Morrow, sirrahs both, morrow.--At night. I dined to-day with
Colonel Crowe, Governor of Jamaica, and your friend Sterne. I presented Sterne to my Lord Treasurer's
brother,(33) and gave him his case, and engaged him in his favour. At dinner there fell the
swingingest long shower, and the most grateful to me, that ever I saw: it thundered fifty times
at least, and the air is so cool that a body is able to live; and I walked home to-night with
comfort, and without dirt. I went this evening to Lord Treasurer, and sat with him two hours,
and we were in very good humour, and he abused me, and called me Dr. Thomas Swift fifty times:
I have told you he does that when he has mind to make me mad.(34) Sir Thomas Frankland gave
me to-day a letter from Murry, accepting my bill; so all is well: only, by a letter from Parvisol,
I find there are some perplexities.--Joe has likewise written to me, to thank me for what I
have done for him; and desires I would write to the Bishop of Clogher, that Tom Ashe(35) may
not hinder his father(36) from being portreve. I have written and sent to Joe several times,
that I will not trouble myself at all about Trim. I wish them their liberty, but they do not
deserve it: so tell Joe, and send to him. I am mighty happy with this rain: I was at the end
of my patience, but now I live again. This cannot go till Saturday; and perhaps I may go out
of town with Lord Shelburne and Lady Kerry to-morrow for two or three days. Lady Kerry has
written to desire it; but tomorrow I shall know farther.--O this dear rain, I cannot forbear
praising it: I never felt myself to be revived so in my life. It lasted from three till five,
hard as a horn, and mixed with hail.

8. Morning. I am going to town, and will just finish this there, if I go into the country with
Lady Kerry and Lord Shelburne: so morrow, till an hour or two hence.--In town. I met Cairnes,
who, I suppose, will pay me the money; though he says I must send him the bill first, and I
will get it done in absence. Farewell, etc. etc.

LETTER 25.

I have been all this time at Wycombe, between Oxford and London, with Lord Shelburne, who has
the squire's house at the town's end, and an estate there in a delicious country. Lady Kerry
and Mrs. Pratt were with us, and we passed our time well enough; and there I wholly disengaged
myself from all public thoughts, and everything but MD, who had the impudence to send me a
letter there; but I'll be revenged: I will answer it. This day, the 20th, I came from Wycombe
with Lady Kerry after dinner, lighted at Hyde Park Corner, and walked: it was twenty-seven
miles, and we came it in about five hours.

21. I went at noon to see Mr. Secretary at his office, and there was Lord Treasurer: so I killed
two birds, etc., and we were glad to see one another, and so forth. And the Secretary and I
dined at Sir William Wyndham's,(1) who married Lady Catharine Seymour, your acquaintance, I
suppose. There were ten of us at dinner. It seems, in my absence, they had erected a Club,(2)
and made me one; and we made some laws to-day, which I am to digest and add to, against next
meeting. Our meetings are to be every Thursday. We are yet but twelve: Lord Keeper and Lord
Treasurer were proposed; but I was against them, and so was Mr. Secretary, though their sons
are of it, and so they are excluded; but we design to admit the Duke of Shrewsbury. The end
of our Club is, to advance conversation and friendship, and to reward deserving persons with
our interest and recommendation. We take in none but men of wit or men of interest; and if
we go on as we begin, no other Club in this town will be worth talking of. The Solicitor-General,
Sir Robert Raymond, is one of our Club; and I ordered him immediately to write to your Lord
Chancellor in favour of Dr. Raymond: so tell Raymond, if you see him; but I believe this will
find you at Wexford. This letter will come three weeks after the last, so there is a week lost;
but that is owing to my being out of town; yet I think it is right, because it goes enclosed
to Mr. Reading:(3) and why should he know how often Presto writes to MD, pray?--I sat this
evening with Lady Betty Butler and Lady Ashburnham, and then came home by eleven, and had a
good cool walk; for we have had no extreme hot weather this fortnight, but a great deal of
rain at times, and a body can live and breathe. I hope it will hold so. We had peaches to-day.

22. I went late to-day to town, and dined with my friend Lewis. I saw Will Congreve attending
at the Treasury, by order, with his brethren, the Commissioners of the Wine Licences. I had
often mentioned him with kindness to Lord Treasurer; and Congreve told me that, after they
had answered to what they were sent for, my lord called him privately, and spoke to him with
great kindness, promising his protection, etc. The poor man said he had been used so ill of
late years that he was quite astonished at my lord's goodness, etc., and desired me to tell
my lord so; which I did this evening, and recommended him heartily. My lord assured me he esteemed
him very much, and would be always kind to him; that what he said was to make Congreve easy,
because he knew people talked as if his lordship designed to turn everybody out, and particularly
Congreve: which indeed was true, for the poor man told me he apprehended it. As I left my Lord
Treasurer, I called on Congreve (knowing where he dined), and told him what had passed between
my lord and me; so I have made a worthy man easy, and that is a good day's work.(4) I am proposing
to my lord to erect a society or academy for correcting and settling our language, that we
may not perpetually be changing as we do. He enters mightily into it, so does the Dean of Carlisle;(5)
and I design to write a letter to Lord Treasurer with the proposals of it, and publish it;(6)
and so I told my lord, and he approves it.

23. I have not been in London to-day: for Dr. Gastrell(8) and I dined, by invitation, with
the Dean of Carlisle, my neighbour; so I know not what they are doing in the world, a mere
country gentleman. And are not you ashamed both to go into the country just when I did, and
stay ten days, just as I did, saucy monkeys? But I never rode; I had no horses, and our coach
was out of order, and we went and came in a hired one. Do you keep your lodgings when you go
to Wexford? I suppose you do; for you will hardly stay above two months. I have been walking
about our town to-night, and it is a very scurvy place for walking. I am thinking to leave
it, and return to town, now the Irish folks are gone. Ford goes in three days. How does Dingley
divert herself while Stella is riding? work, or read, or walk? Does Dingley ever read to you?
Had you ever a book with you in the country? Is all that left off? Confess. Well, I'll go sleep;
'tis past eleven, and I go early to sleep: I write nothing at night but to MD.

24. Stratford and I, and Pastoral Philips (just come from Denmark) dined at Ford's to-day,
who paid his way, and goes for Ireland on Tuesday. The Earl of Peterborow is returned from
Vienna without one servant: he left them scattered in several towns of Germany. I had a letter
from him, four days ago, from Hanover, where he desires I would immediately send him an answer
to his house at Parson's Green,(9) about five miles off. I wondered what he meant, till I heard
he was come. He sent expresses, and got here before them. He is above fifty, and as active
as one of five-and-twenty. I have not seen him yet, nor know when I shall, or where to find him.

25. Poor Duke of Shrewsbury has been very ill of a fever: we were all in a fright about him:
I thank God, he is better. I dined to-day at Lord Ashburnham's, with his lady, for he was not
at home: she is a very good girl, and always a great favourite of mine. Sterne tells me he
has desired a friend to receive your box in Chester, and carry it over. I fear he will miscarry
in his business, which was sent to the Treasury before he was recommended; for I was positive
only to second his recommendations, and all his other friends failed him. However, on your
account I will do what I can for him to-morrow with the secretary of the Treasury.

26. We had much company to-day at dinner at Lord Treasurer's. Prior never fails: he is a much
better courtier than I; and we expect every day that he will be a Commissioner of the Customs,
and that in a short time a great many more will be turned out. They blame Lord Treasurer for
his slowness in turning people out; but I suppose he has his reasons. They still keep my neighbour
Atterbury in suspense about the deanery of Christ Church,(10) which has been above six months
vacant, and he is heartily angry. I reckon you are now preparing for your Wexford expedition;
and poor Dingley is full of carking and caring, scolding. How long will you stay? Shall I be
in Dublin before you return? Don't fall and hurt yourselves, nor overturn the coach. Love one
another, and be good girls; and drink Presto's health in water, Madam Stella; and in good ale,
Madam Dingley.

27. The Secretary appointed me to dine with him to-day, and we were to do a world of business:
he came at four, and brought Prior with him, and had forgot the appointment, and no business
was done. I left him at eight, and went to change my gown at Mrs. Vanhomrigh's; and there was
Sir Andrew Fountaine at ombre with Lady Ashburnham and Lady Frederic Schomberg, and Lady Mary
Schomberg,(11) and Lady Betty Butler, and others, talking; and it put me in mind of the Dean
and Stoyte, and Walls, and Stella at play, and Dingley and I looking on. I stayed with them
till ten, like a fool. Lady Ashburnham is something like Stella; so I helped her, and wished
her good cards. It is late, etc.

28. Well, but I must answer this letter of our MD's. Saturday approaches, and I han't written
down this side. O, faith, Presto has been a sort of a lazy fellow: but Presto will remove to
town this day se'ennight; the Secretary has commanded me to do so; and I believe he and I shall
go for some days to Windsor, where he will have leisure to mind some business we have together.
To-day, our Society (it must not be called a Club) dined at Mr. Secretary's: we were but eight;
the rest sent excuses, or were out of town. We sat till eight, and made some laws and settlements;
and then I went to take leave of Lady Ashburnham, who goes out of town to-morrow, as a great
many of my acquaintance are already, and left the town very thin. I shall make but short journeys
this summer, and not be long out of London. The days are grown sensibly short already, all
our fruit blasted. Your Duke of Ormond is still at Chester; and perhaps this letter will be
with you as soon as he. Sterne's business is quite blown up: they stand to it to send him back
to the Commissioners of the Revenue in Ireland for a reference, and all my credit could not
alter it, though I almost fell out with the secretary of the Treasury,(12) who is my Lord Treasurer's
cousin-germain, and my very good friend. It seems every step he has hitherto taken hath been
wrong; at least they say so, and that is the same thing. I am heartily sorry for it; and I
really think they are in the wrong, and use him hardly; but I can do no more.

29. Steele has had the assurance to write to me that I would engage my Lord Treasurer to keep
a friend of his in an employment: I believe I told you how he and Addison served me for my
good offices in Steele's behalf; and I promised Lord Treasurer never to speak for either of
them again. Sir Andrew Fountaine and I dined to-day at Mrs. Vanhomrigh's. Dilly Ashe has been
in town this fortnight: I saw him twice; he was four days at Lord Pembroke's in the country,
punning with him; his face is very well. I was this evening two or three hours at Lord Treasurer's,
who called me Dr. Thomas Swift twenty times; that's his way of teasing. I left him at nine,
and got home here by ten, like a gentleman; and to-morrow morning I'll answer your little letter,
sirrahs.

30. Morning. I am terribly sleepy always in a morning; I believe it is my walk over-night that
disposes me to sleep: faith, 'tis now striking eight, and I am but just awake. Patrick comes
early, and wakes me five or six times; but I have excuses, though I am three parts asleep.
I tell him I sat up late, or slept ill in the night, and often it is a lie. I have now got
little MD's letter before me, N.16, no more, nor no less, no mistake. Dingley says, "This letter
won't be above six lines"; and I was afraid it was true, though I saw it filled on both sides.
The Bishop of Clogher writ me word you were in the country, and that he heard you were well:
I am glad at heart MD rides, and rides, and rides. Our hot weather ended in May, and all this
month has been moderate: it was then so hot I was not able to endure it; I was miserable every
moment, and found myself disposed to be peevish and quarrelsome: I believe a very hot country
would make me stark mad.--Yes, my head continues pretty tolerable, and I impute it all to walking.
Does Stella eat fruit? I eat a little; but I always repent, and resolve against it. No, in
very hot weather I always go to town by water; but I constantly walk back, for then the sun
is down. And so Mrs. Proby(13) goes with you to Wexford: she's admirable company; you'll grow
plaguy wise with those you frequent. Mrs. Taylor and Mrs. Proby! take care of infection. I
believe my two hundred pounds will be paid, but that Sir Alexander Cairnes is a scrupulous
puppy: I left the bill with Mr. Stratford, who is to have the money. Now, Madam Stella, what
say you? you ride every day; I know that already, sirrah; and, if you rid every day for a twelvemonth,
you would be still better and better. No, I hope Parvisol will not have the impudence to make
you stay an hour for the money; if he does, I'll UN-PARVISOL him; pray let me know. O Lord,
how hasty we are! Stella can't stay writing and writing; she must write and go a cock-horse,
pray now. Well, but the horses are not come to the door; the fellow can't find the bridle;
your stirrup is broken; where did you put the whips, Dingley? Marget, where have you laid Mrs.
Johnson's ribbon to tie about her? reach me my mask: sup up this before you go. So, so, a gallop,
a gallop: sit fast, sirrah, and don't ride hard upon the stones.--Well, now Stella is gone,
tell me, Dingley, is she a good girl? and what news is that you are to tell me?--No, I believe
the box is not lost: Sterne says it is not.--No, faith, you must go to Wexford without seeing
your Duke of Ormond, unless you stay on purpose; perhaps you may be so wise.--I tell you this
is your sixteenth letter; will you never be satisfied? No, no, I will walk late no more; I
ought less to venture it than other people, and so I was told: but I will return to lodge in
town next Thursday. When you come from Wexford, I would have you send a letter of attorney
to Mr. Benjamin Tooke, bookseller, in London, directed to me; and he shall manage your affair.
I have your parchment safely locked up in London.--O, Madam Stella, welcome home; was it pleasant
riding? did your horse stumble? how often did the man light to settle your stirrup? ride nine
miles! faith, you have galloped indeed. Well, but where is the fine thing you promised me?
I have been a good boy, ask Dingley else. I believe you did not meet the fine-thing-man: faith,
you are a cheat. So you will see Raymond and his wife in town. Faith, that riding to Laracor
gives me short sighs, as well as you. All the days I have passed here have been dirt to those.
I have been gaining enemies by the scores, and friends by the couples; which is against the
rules of wisdom, because they say one enemy can do more hurt than ten friends can do good.
But I have had my revenge at least, if I get nothing else. And so let Fate govern.--Now I think
your letter is answered; and mine will be shorter than ordinary, because it must go to-day.
We have had a great deal of scattering rain for some days past, yet it hardly keeps down the
dust.--We have plays acted in our town; and Patrick was at one of them, oh oh. He was damnably
mauled one day when he was drunk; he was at cuffs with a brother-footman, who dragged him along
the floor upon his face, which looked for a week after as if he had the leprosy; and I was
glad enough to see it. I have been ten times sending him over to you; yet now he has new clothes,
and a laced hat, which the hatter brought by his orders, and he offered to pay for the lace
out of his wages.--I am to dine to-day with Dilly at Sir Andrew Fountaine's, who has bought
a new house, and will be weary of it in half a year. I must rise and shave, and walk to town,
unless I go with the Dean in his chariot at twelve, which is too late: and I have not seen
that Lord Peterborow yet. The Duke of Shrewsbury is almost well again, and will be abroad in
a day or two: what care you? There it is now: you do not care for my friends. Farewell, my
dearest lives and delights; I love you better than ever, if possible, as hope saved, I do,
and ever will. God Almighty bless you ever, and make us happy together! I pray for this twice
every day; and I hope God will hear my poor hearty prayers.--Remember, if I am used ill and
ungratefully, as I have formerly been, 'tis what I am prepared for, and shall not wonder at
it. Yet I am now envied, and thought in high favour, and have every day numbers of considerable
men teasing me to solicit for them. And the Ministry all use me perfectly well; and all that
know them say they love me.