1. Men as well as angels are in the Lord and the Lord in them according to their conjunction
with Him, or, what is the same, according to their reception of love and wisdom from Him. 2.
Each of them has a place allotted to him in the Lord, thus in heaven, according to the nature
of the conjunction or the reception of Him. 3. Each in his place has a state of his own distinct
from that of others and draws his portion from what is had in common according to his situation,
function and need, quite as each part does in the human body. 4. Everyone is brought into his
place by the Lord according to his life. 5. Every human being is introduced from infancy into
this divine man whose soul and life is the Lord, and within it and not outside of it is led
and taught from His divine love according to His divine wisdom; but as a man is not deprived
of freedom, he can be led and taught only in the measure of his receptiveness as of himself.
6. Those who are receptive are conducted to their places through an infinite maze by winding
paths, much as the chyle is carried through the mesentery and the lacteal vessels there to
its cistern, and from this into the blood by the thoracic duct, and so to its place. 7. Those
who are not receptive are parted from those within the divine man, as excrement and urine are
removed from man.

These are arcana of angelic wisdom which man can comprehend to some extent; there are many
more which he cannot.

165. (iii) Man is led by the Lord through influx and taught through enlightenment. Man is led
through influx by the Lord because "being led" and "flowing in" are spoken of love and the
will; and he is taught by the Lord through enlightenment because "being taught" and "enlightened"
are spoken of wisdom and the understanding. It is known that every person is led by himself
from his own love and according to it by others, and not by his understanding. He is led by
his understanding and according to it only as his love or his will prompts the understanding,
and then it can be said that his understanding is led also. Even then the understanding is
not led, but the will which prompts it.

The term "influx" is used because it is commonly said that the soul flows into the body; influx
is spiritual and not physical, as we showed above, and man's soul or life is his love or will.
For another reason, influx is comparatively like the flow of the blood into the heart and from
the heart into the lungs. We showed in the treatise Divine Love and Wisdom that the heart corresponds
to the will and the lungs correspond to the understanding, and that the conjunction of the
will with the understanding is like the flowing of the blood from the heart to the lungs.

166. Man is taught, however, through enlightenment; being taught and being enlightened are
said of the understanding. For the understanding or man's internal sight is enlightened by
spiritual light quite as the eye or man's external sight is by natural light. The two are also
taught similarly; the internal sight, however, which is that of the understanding, by spiritual
objects, and the external sight or the sight of the eye by natural objects. There is spiritual
light and natural light, one like the other in outward appearance, but dissimilar in internal
appearance. For natural light comes from the sun of the natural world and so is in itself dead,
but spiritual light, which is from the sun of the spiritual world, is in itself living. This
light, not nature's, enlightens the human intellect. Natural and rational light comes from
it and not from nature's light, and is here called natural and rational because it is spiritual-natural.

[2] There are three degrees of light in the spiritual world: celestial, spiritual and spiritual-natural.
Celestial light is a flaming, ruddy light and is the light of those who are in the third heaven;
spiritual light is a gleaming white light and is the light of those in the middle heaven; and
spiritual-natural light is like daylight in our world. This is the light of those who are in
the lowest heaven and of those in the world of spirits, which is intermediate between heaven
and hell; with the good in that world it is like the light of summer on earth and with the
evil like winter's light.

It should be known, however, that light in the spiritual world has nothing in common with light
in the natural world; they are as different as what is living and what is lifeless. It is plain,
then, from what has been said that it is spiritual light and not the natural light before our
eyes that enlightens the understanding. Man does not know this, not having known anything hitherto
about spiritual light. In the work Heaven and Hell we have shown (nn. 126-140) that spiritual
light has its origin in divine wisdom and truth.

167. Having spoken about the light of heaven, we should say something about the light of hell.
This also is of three degrees. The light in the lowest hell is like that from fiery coals;
in the middle hell like that from the flame of a hearth; and in the highest hell like that
from candles and to some like moonlight at night. All this is spiritual light and not natural,
for all natural light is dead and extinguishes the understanding. As has been shown, those
in hell possess the faculty of understanding called rationality; rationality itself comes from
spiritual light and not from natural light. The spiritual light which they have in rationality
is turned, however, into infernal light, as the light of day is into the dark of night.

[2] Nevertheless, all those in the spiritual world, whether in the heavens or the hells, see
in their own light as clearly as man sees in his by day. This is because everyone's eyesight
is formed to receive the light in which it finds itself. Thus the eyesight of the angels of
heaven is formed to receive the light in which they see, and the sight of the spirits of hell
is formed to receive their light; this is comparatively like that of birds of night and bats,
which see objects at night and in the evening as clearly as other birds see them by day, for
their eyes are formed to receive their light.

[3] The difference between the one light and the other appears very clearly, however, to those
who look from one to the other. When, for instance, an angel of heaven looks into hell he sees
only thick darkness, and when a spirit of hell looks into heaven he sees only thick darkness
there. For heavenly wisdom is like thick darkness to those in hell; in turn, infernal insanity
is like thick darkness to those in heaven. It is plain from all this that such as a man's understanding
is, such is the light he has, and that after death everyone comes into his own light, for he
sees in no other. In the spiritual world, moreover, where all are spiritual even to the body,
the eyes of all are formed to see by their own light. Everyone's life-love fashions an understanding
for itself and thus a light, also, for love is like the fire of life and from this comes the
light of life.

168. As few know anything about the enlightenment in which the understanding of a man is who
is taught by the Lord, something will be said of it. There is inner and outer enlightenment
from the Lord, and inner and outer enlightenment from oneself. Inner enlightenment from the
Lord consists in man's perceiving on first hearing something whether it is true or not; outer
enlightenment consists in thought from this. Inner enlightenment from oneself is simply from
confirmation and outer enlightenment merely from information. We will say something of each.

[2] By inner enlightenment from the Lord a rational person perceives about many things the
moment he hears them whether they are true or not; for example, that love is the life of faith
or that faith lives by love. By interior enlightenment a person also perceives that a man wills
what he loves and does what he wills, consequently that to love is to do; again, that a man
wills and does whatever he believes from love, and therefore to have faith is also to do; and
that the impious man cannot have love for God or faith then in Him. By inner enlightenment
a rational man also perceives the following truths at once on hearing them: God is one; He
is omnipresent; all good is from Him; all things have relation to good and truth; all good
is from good itself and all truth from truth itself. A man perceives these and other similar
truths inwardly in himself on hearing them and does so because he possesses a rationality which
is in heaven's enlightening light.

[3] Outer enlightenment is enlightenment of one's thought from this inner enlightenment. One's
thought is in this enlightenment so far as it remains in the perception it has from inner enlightenment
and so far as it possesses knowledge of good and truth, for it gets from this knowledge reasons
confirming it. Thought from outer enlightenment sees a matter on both sides; on the one, it
sees reasons which confirm it, and on the other, the appearances that weaken it; it dispels
these and assembles the reasons.

[4] Inner enlightenment from oneself, however, is quite different. By it one regards a matter
on one side only, and having confirmed it sees it in light apparently like that just spoken
of, but it is a wintry light. For example, a judge who judges unjustly in view of gifts or
gain, once he has confirmed the judgment by law and reason sees in it nothing but justice.
Some judges see the injustice but not wanting to see it, they keep it out of sight and blind
themselves and so do not see. The same is true of a judge who renders judgments out of friendship,
or to gain favor, or on account of relationship.

[5] Such persons act in the same way in anything they have from a man in authority or from
the mouth of a celebrity or have hatched from self-intelligence; they are blind reasoners,
for they see from the falsities which they confirm; falsity closes the sight, just as truth
opens it. They do not see any truth in the light of truth nor justice from a love for it but
from the light of confirmation, which is an illusory light. They appear in the spiritual world
like headless faces or like faces resembling human faces on wooden heads, and are called reasoning
animals for rationality is potential in them. Those have outer enlightenment from themselves
who think and speak solely from information impressed on the memory; of themselves they can
hardly confirm anything.

169. Such are the differences in enlightenment and consequently in perception and thought.
There is actual enlightenment by spiritual light, but it is not manifest to one in the natural
world because natural light has nothing in common with spiritual light. This enlightenment
has sometimes been manifested to me in the spiritual world, however, visible in those enlightened
by the Lord as a luminosity around the head, aglow with the color of the human face. With those
in enlightenment from themselves the luminosity was not around the head but around the mouth
and over the chin.

170. Besides these kinds of enlightenment there is another in which it is revealed to one in
what faith, intelligence and wisdom he is; he perceives this in himself, such is the revelation.
He is admitted into a society where there is genuine faith and true intelligence and wisdom.
There his interior rationality is opened, from which he sees the nature of his own faith, intelligence
and wisdom, even to avowing it. I have seen some as they returned and heard them confessing
that they had no faith although in the world they had believed they had much faith and markedly
more than others; they said the same of their intelligence and wisdom. Some were in faith alone
and in no charity, and some in self-intelligence.

171. We said and showed above that man is led and taught by the Lord alone, and from heaven
but not through heaven or any angel there. As it is by the Lord alone, it is done immediately
and not mediately. How this takes place will be told now.

172. It was shown in Doctrine of the New Jerusalem about the Sacred Scripture that the Lord
is the Word and that all the doctrine of the church is to be drawn from the Word. Inasmuch
as the Lord is the Word the man who is taught from the Word is taught by the Lord alone. This
is comprehended with difficulty and will be clarified in this order:

1. The Lord is the Word because the Word is from Him and about Him. 2. Also because the Word
is divine truth together with divine good. 3. To be taught from the Word is to be taught from
Him, therefore. 4. That this is done mediately through preaching does not take away its immediacy.

[2] First: The Lord is the Word because it is from Him and about Him. No one in the church
denies that the Word is from the Lord, but that it is about Him alone, while not denied, is
not known. This was shown in Doctrine of the New Jerusalem about the Lord, nn. 1-7, 37-44,
and in Doctrine of the New Jerusalem about the Sacred Scripture, nn. 62-69, 80-90, 98-100.
Inasmuch as the Word is from the Lord alone and treats of Him alone, a man is taught by the
Lord when he is taught from the Word, for it is the divine Word. Who can communicate what is
divine and implant it in the heart except the Divine Himself from whom it is and of whom it
treats? Therefore, in speaking of His union with His disciples He says that they are to abide
in Him and His words in them (Jn 15:7 ), that His words are spirit and life (Jn 6:63), and
that He makes His abode with those who keep His words (Jn 14:20-24). To think from the Lord
therefore is to think from the Word, and as it were, through the Word. It was shown in Doctrine
of the New Jerusalem about the Sacred Scripture from beginning to end that all things of the
Word have communication with heaven, and as the Lord is heaven, this means that all things
of the Word have communication with the Lord Himself. The angels of heaven indeed have communication;
this, too, is from the Lord.

[3] Second: The Lord is the Word because it is divine truth together with divine good.

This passage has been understood hitherto to mean only that God teaches men through the Word
and has been explained as an hyperbole, with the implication that the Lord is not the Word
itself. That these are the Lord Himself was shown in the treatise Divine Love and Wisdom, Part
I, and that they are the Word in Doctrine of the New Jerusalem about the Sacred Scripture,
nn. 1-86.

[4] We will say briefly in what way the Lord is divine truth together with divine good. Each
human being is human not because of face and body but from the good of his love and the truths
of his wisdom; and because a man is a man from these, he is also his own good and his own truth
or his own love and his own wisdom; without these he is not a human being. But the Lord is
good itself and truth itself or, what is the same, love itself and wisdom itself; and these
are the Word which in the beginning was with God and was God and which was made flesh.

[5] Third: To be taught from the Word, then, is to be taught by the Lord Himself. For it means
that one is taught from good itself and truth itself or from love itself and wisdom itself,
and, as we have said, these are the Word. But everyone is taught according to an understanding
agreeing with his love; what goes beyond this does not remain. All who are taught by the Lord
in the Word are instructed in a few truths while in the world but in many when they become
angels. For the interiors of the Word, which are divine spiritual and divine celestial, are
implanted at the time, but are not consciously possessed until a man on his death is in heaven
where he is in angelic wisdom which, compared with human wisdom, thus his earlier wisdom, is
ineffable. That divine spiritual and divine celestial things which constitute angelic wisdom
are present in each and all things of the Word see Doctrine of the New Jerusalem about the
Sacred Scripture, nn. 5-26.

[6] Fourth: That this teaching is done mediately through preaching does not take away the immediacy.
Inevitably the Word is taught mediately by parents, teachers, preachers, books and particularly
by reading. Still it is not taught by them but by the Lord through them. Preachers, aware of
this, say that they speak not from themselves but from the spirit of God and that all truth
like all good is from God. They can speak it and bring it to the understanding of many, but
not to anyone's heart; and what is not in the heart passes away from the understanding; by
"heart" a man's love is meant. From this it is plain that man is led and taught by the Lord
alone and immediately by Him when he is taught from the Word. This is a supreme arcanum of
angelic wisdom.

173. We have shown in Doctrine of the New Jerusalem about the Sacred Scripture (nn. 104-113)
that those outside the church who do not have the Word still have light by means of it. Man
has light by means of the Word and from the light has understanding, and both the wicked and
the good have understanding. It follows that from light in its origin there is light in its
derivatives which are perceptions and thoughts on whatever subject. In the Word in its spiritual
sense by "sun" here, as elsewhere, is meant the divine good of divine love and by "rain" the
divine truth of divine wisdom. These are extended to the evil and the good, to the unjust and
the just, for if they were not, no one would possess perception and thought. It was shown above
that there is only one Life from which all have life. But perception and thought are part of
life; they are therefore from the same fountain from which life springs. It has been shown
many times before that all the light which forms the understanding is from the sun of the spiritual
world, which is the Lord.

174. (v) Man is led and taught in externals by the Lord to all appearance as of himself. This
is so of man's externals, but not inwardly. No one knows how the Lord leads and teaches man
inwardly, just as no one knows how the soul operates so that the eye sees, the ear hears, the
tongue and mouth speak, the heart circulates the blood, the lungs breathe, the stomach digests,
the liver and the pancreas distribute, the kidneys secrete, and much else. These processes
do not come to man's perception or sensation. The same is true of what the Lord does in the
infinitely more numerous interior substances and forms of the mind. The Lord's activity in
these is not apparent to man, but many of the effects are, as well as some of the causes producing
the effects. It is in the externals that man and the Lord are together, and as the externals
make one with the internals, cohering as they do in one series, no disposition can be made
by the Lord except in keeping with the disposition made in the externals with man's participation.

[2] Everyone knows that man thinks, wills, speaks and acts to all appearance as of himself,
and everyone can see that without this appearance man would have no will and understanding,
thus no affection and thought, also no reception of any good and truth from the Lord. It follows
that without this appearance there would be no rational conception of God, no charity and no
faith, consequently no reformation and regeneration, and therefore no salvation. Plainly, this
appearance is granted to man by the Lord for the sake of all these uses and particularly that
he may have the power to receive and reciprocate so that the Lord may be united to him and
he to the Lord, and that through this conjunction the human being may live forever. This is
"appearance" as it is meant here.

IX. IT IS A LAW OF DIVINE PROVIDENCE THAT MAN SHALL NOT PERCEIVE OR FEEL ANY OF THE ACTIVITY
OF DIVINE PROVIDENCE, AND YET SHOULD KNOW AND ACKNOWLEDGE PROVIDENCE

175. The natural man who does not believe in divine providence thinks to himself, "What can
divine providence be when the wicked are promoted to honors and gain wealth more than the good,
and many such things go better with those who do not believe in divine providence than with
the good who believe in it? Indeed, infidels and the impious can inflict injuries, loss, misfortune
and sometimes death on the believing and pious, doing so, too, by cunning and malice." He thinks
therefore, "Do I not see in full daylight, as it were, in actual experience that crafty schemes
prevail over fidelity and justice if only a man can make them seem trustworthy and just by
a clever artfulness? What is left except necessities, consequences and the fortuitous in which
there is no semblance of divine providence? Does not nature have its necessities, and are not
consequences causes arising from natural or civil order, while the fortuitous comes, does it
not, from unknown causes or from none?" So the natural man thinks to himself who attributes
all things to nature and nothing to God, for one who ascribes nothing to God ascribes nothing
to divine providence either; God and divine providence make one.

[2] But the spiritual man speaks and thinks within himself quite otherwise. Although he does
not perceive the course of divine providence by any thought or feel it from any sight of it,
he still knows and acknowledges providence. Inasmuch as the appearances and resulting fallacies
just mentioned have blinded the understanding, and this can receive sight only when the fallacies
which have induced the blindness and the falsities which have induced the darkness are dispelled,
and since this can be done only by truths which have the power to dispel falsities, these truths
are to be disclosed, and for distinctness let it be in this order:

i. If man perceived or felt the activity of divine providence he would not act in freedom according
to reason, nor would anything appear to be his own doing. It would be the same if he foreknew
events. ii. If man saw divine providence plainly, he would inject himself into the order and
tenor of its course, and pervert and destroy them. iii. If man beheld divine providence plainly
he would either deny God or make himself god. iv. Man can see divine providence on the back
and not in the face; also in a spiritual, not a natural state.

176. In given articles we made evident to the understanding that it is a law of providence
that man should act in freedom according to reason; also that all which a man wills, thinks,
speaks and does shall seem to be his own doing; that without this appearance a man would have
nothing of his own nor be his own man. He would thus have no selfhood and nothing could be
imputed to him, and in that case whether he did good or evil would not matter, and whether
he believed in God or was under the persuasion of hell would be immaterial; in a word, he would
not be a human being.

[2] We have now to show that man would have no liberty to act according to reason and there
would be no appearance of self-activity if he perceived or felt the activity of divine providence,
for if he did he would also be led by it. The Lord leads all men by His divine providence and
man only seemingly leads himself, as was shown above. If, therefore, man had a lively perception
or sense of being led, he would not be conscious of living life and would be moved to make
sounds and act much like a graven image. If he were still conscious of living he would be led
like one bound in manacles and fetters or like a yoked animal. Who does not see that man would
have no freedom then? And without freedom he would be without reason, for one thinks from and
in freedom; whatever he does not so think seems to him to be not from himself but from someone
else. Indeed if you consider this interiorly you will perceive that he would not possess thought,
still less reason, and hence would not be a human being.

177. The Lord's divine providence is constantly seeking to withdraw man from evils. If a man
perceived or felt this constant activity and yet was not led like one bound, would he not struggle
against it continually and then either quarrel with God or mingle himself in divine providence?
If he did the latter he would also make himself God; if he did the former he would free himself
from constraint and deny God. Manifestly two forces would constantly be acting then against
each other, the force of evil from man and the force of good from the Lord. When two opposites
act against each other, one of them conquers or they both perish. In this instance if one conquers
they both perish. For the evil, which is man's, does not let in good from the Lord in a moment,
nor does good from the Lord cast out evil from man in a moment; if either was done in a moment
no life would be left to man. These and many other harmful results would follow if man manifestly
perceived or felt the operation of divine providence. This will be demonstrated clearly by
examples in what follows.

178. Man is not given a foreknowledge of events for the same reason, namely, that he may be
able to act in freedom according to reason. It is well known that man wants what he loves effected,
and he guides himself to this end by reasoning. It is also known that what a man meditates
in his reason comes from his love of giving it effect through thought. If, then, he knew the
effect or the eventuality by divine prediction, his reason would become inactive and with it
his love; for love along with reasoning ends with the effect, to begin anew. It is reason's
very enjoyment to envision with love the effect in thought, not after it is attained but before
it is, not in the present but as future. So man has what is called hope, which rises and declines
in the reason as he beholds or awaits the event. The enjoyment is fulfilled in the event and
then is forgotten along with thought about the event. The same thing would occur with an event
that was foreknown.

[2] The human mind dwells always in the trine called end, cause and effect. If one of these
is lacking, the mind is not possessed of its life. An affection of the will is the initiating
end; the thought of the understanding is the efficient cause; and bodily action, utterance
or external sensation is the effect from the end by means of the thought. Anyone sees that
the human mind is not possessed of its life when it is only in an affection of the will and
in naught besides, or when it is only in an effect. The mind has no life from one of these
separately, therefore, but from the three together. The life of the mind would diminish and
depart if an event were foretold.

179. As a foreknowledge of future events takes away humanness itself, which is action in freedom
in accord with one's reason, no one is given to know the future; but everyone is allowed to
form conclusions by the reason about the future; the reason is then fully in its own life.
Accordingly man does not know his lot after death or know any event until he is on it. For
if he knew, he would no longer think from his inner self how he should act or live so as to
meet it, but would think only from his exterior self that he was meeting it. This state closes
the interiors of his mind where the two faculties of his life, liberty and reason, especially
reside. A desire to know the future is born with most persons but has its origin in a love
of evil. It is taken away, therefore, from those who believe in divine providence; and trust
that the Lord disposes their lot is given them. Therefore they do not desire to know it beforehand
lest they inject themselves in some way into divine providence. The Lord teaches this in many
sayings in Luke (12:14-48).

[2] Much from the world of the spirit can confirm that this is a law of divine providence.
On entering that world after death most persons desire to know their lot. The answer they receive
is that if they have lived well their lot is in heaven and if wickedly it is in hell. But as
all, including the wicked, fear hell they ask what they should do and believe to get into heaven.
They are answered that they are to do and believe as they will, but know that one does not
do good or believe truth in hell, only in heaven. "As you can, seek what is good and true,
thinking truth and doing good." Everyone is thus left to act in freedom according to reason
in the spiritual world as he is in the natural world; but as one has acted in this world he
acts in that, for everyone's life remains to him and so his lot awaits him, for this is his
life's lot.

180. To bring this distinctly to the perception of the rational man and also of the natural
man, it will be illustrated by examples in this order:

1. External things are so connected with internal things that they make one in all that is
done. 2. The human being joins the Lord only in some external things and if he did in internal
things also, he would pervert and destroy the whole order and tenor of the course of divine
providence.

As we said, these points will be illustrated by examples.

[2] First: External things are so connected with internal things that they make one in all
that is done. Let this be illustrated by examples from several things in man's body. Everywhere
in it are things external and internal. The external are called skins, membranes and coverings;
the internal are forms variously composed and woven of nerve fibres and blood vessels. The
covering over these enters into them by extensions from itself even to the inmost, so that
the external or the covering unites with the internals or the organic forms of fibres and vessels.
It follows that the internals act and are acted on as the external acts or is acted on. For
they are all constantly bound up together.

[3] Take such a common covering in the body as the pleura, for example, which covers the chest
cavity and the heart and lungs. Examine it in an anatomical view, or if you do not know anatomy
consult anatomists, and you will learn that this general covering by various circumvolutions
and finer and finer extensions from itself enters into the inmost parts of the lungs, even
into the smallest bronchial branches and into the sacs themselves which are the beginnings
of the lungs, not to mention its subsequent progress by the trachea into the larynx and toward
the tongue. From this it is plain that there is a constant connection of the outmost with inmosts;
the interiors from the inmosts on therefore act and are acted upon as the external acts or
is acted on. For this reason when that outmost covering, the pleura, is congested, inflamed
or ulcerated, the lungs labor from their inmost parts; if the disease grows worse, all action
of the lungs ceases and the man dies.

[4] The same is true everywhere else in the body. For instance it is true of the peritoneum,
the general covering of all the abdominal viscera, also of the coverings on such organs severally
as the stomach, liver, pancreas, spleen, intestines, mesentery, kidneys, and the organs of
generation in both sexes. Choose any one of these viscera, examine it yourself or consult those
skilled in the science, and you will see or hear. Take the liver, for example; you will find
there is a connection between the peritoneum and that organ and by its covering with its inmost
parts. For the covering puts out constant extensions from itself and insertions towards the
interiors and thus continues to inmosts and as a result the whole is bound together. The entire
form acts or is acted upon in such manner as the covering acts or is acted upon. The same is
true of the rest of the organs. For what is general and what is particular or the universal
and the singular in a form act together by a marvelous connection.

[5] You will see below that what occurs in natural forms and their processes, which relate
to motion and actions, occurs similarly in spiritual forms and in the changes and variations
of their state, which relate to activities of the will and the understanding. Inasmuch as man
joins the Lord in certain external activities and no one is deprived of the liberty of acting
according to reason, the Lord can act in internals only as, together with man, He does in externals.
If man does not shun and turn away from evils as sins, therefore, the external and at the same
time the internal of his thought and will are infected and destroyed, comparatively as the
pleura is by the disease in it called pleurisy, of which the body dies.

[6] Second: If man were in internals at the same time he would pervert and destroy the whole
order and tenor of divine providence. Examples from the human body will illustrate this also.
If man knew all the workings of the two brains into the fibres, of the fibres into the muscles
and of the muscles into actions, and by this knowledge were to have the disposition of them
as he disposes his deeds, would he not pervert and destroy all?

[7] If man knew how the stomach digests, and how the surrounding organs take their portion,
work the blood and distribute it where needed for life, and if he had the disposing of these
as he has of external activities, such as eating and drinking, would he not pervert and destroy
all? When he cannot handle the external, seemingly a single thing, without destroying it by
luxury and intemperance, what would he do if he had the disposal of the internals, infinite
in number? Lest man enter into them by any volition and have control of them, things internal
are therefore taken entirely away from the will except for the muscles, which are a covering;
moreover, how these act is not known, only that they do.

[8] The same can be said of other organs. To give examples: if man had the disposing of the
interiors of the eye for seeing, those of the ear for hearing, or the tongue for tasting, those
of the skin for feeling, those of the heart for systolic action, of the lungs for breathing,
of the mesentery to distribute the chyle, or of the kidneys for secretion, the interiors of
the organs of generation for propagation, or those of the womb for perfecting an embryo, and
so on, would he not pervert and destroy the ordered course of the divine providence in them
in innumerable ways? As we know, man is in externals, for example sees with the eye, hears
with the ear, tastes with the tongue, feels with the skin, breathes with the lungs, impregnates
a wife, and so on. Is it not enough for him to know the externals and dispose them for health
of body and mind? When he cannot do this, what would happen if he disposed internals also?

181. The like occurs in the spiritual things of the mind to what occurs in the natural things
of the body for the reason that all things of the mind correspond to all things of the body.
For the same reason the mind actuates the body in externals and generally does so completely.
It moves the eyes to see, the ears to hear, the mouth and tongue to eat and drink, also to
speak, the hands to do, the feet to walk, the generative organs to propagate. The mind not
only moves the externals in these ways but the internals, too, in their whole series, outmosts
from inmosts and inmosts from outmosts. Thus while moving the mouth to speak, it moves lungs,
larynx, glottis, tongue and lips at the same time, each separately to its especial function,
and the face suitably also.

[2] It is clear then that the same can be said of the spiritual forms of the mind as was said
of the natural forms of the body, and the same can be said of the spiritual activities of the
mind as was said of the natural activities of the body. Consequently the Lord orders the internals
as a man does the externals, in one way if the man orders the externals of himself and in another
if he orders them under the Lord and at the same time as of himself. The mind of man is also
in its total organization a man, for it is his spirit which appears after death altogether
as a human being as in the world; hence there are similar things in mind and body. Thus what
has been said about the conjunction of externals with internals in the body is to be understood
of the conjunction of externals with internals in the mind, with the sole difference that the
latter is spiritual and the former is natural.

182. The merely natural man says to himself, "What is divine providence? Is it anything else
or more than an expression which people get from a priest? Who sees anything of it? Is it not
by prudence, wisdom, cunning and malice that all things are done in the world? Is not all else
necessity or consequence? And does not much happen by chance? Does divine providence lie concealed
in this? How can it do so in deceptions and schemes? Yet it is said that divine providence
effects all things. Then let me see it and I will believe in it. Can one believe in it until
he sees it?"

[2] So speaks the merely natural man, but the spiritual man speaks differently. Acknowledging
God he also acknowledges divine providence and sees it, too. He cannot make it manifest, however,
to anyone whose thought is on nature only and from nature, for such a person cannot raise his
mind above nature, see anything of divine providence in its phenomena, or come to conclusions
about providence from nature's laws, which are also laws of divine wisdom. If, therefore, he
beheld divine providence plainly, he would sink it in nature and thus not only enshroud it
in fallacies but profane it. Instead of acknowledging it he would deny it, and one who denies
divine providence in his heart denies God also.

[3] Either one thinks that God governs all things or that nature does. He who thinks that God
does thinks that they are ruled by love itself and wisdom itself, thus by life itself; but
he who thinks that nature governs all, thinks that all things are ruled by nature's heat and
light, although these in themselves are dead, coming as they do from a dead sun. Does not what
is itself alive govern what is lifeless? Can what is dead govern anything? If you think that
what is lifeless can give life to itself, you are mad; life must come from life.

183. It does not seem likely that if a man saw divine providence and its activity plainly he
would deny God; it would seem that he could not but acknowledge it and thus acknowledge God.
Yet the contrary is true. Divine providence never acts in keeping with the love of man's will,
but constantly against it. For the human being by force of his hereditary evil is ever panting
for the lowest hell, but the Lord in His providence is constantly leading him away and withdrawing
him from it, first to a milder hell, then away from hell, and finally to Himself in heaven.
This activity of divine providence is perpetual. If, then, man saw or felt this withdrawing
and leading away, he would be angered, consider God his enemy, and deny Him on account of the
evil of his selfhood. In order that man may not know of it, therefore, he is held in freedom
and thereby does not know but that he leads himself.

