I shall not attempt to give you Mrs. Bobby's dialect in reporting my various interviews with
her, for the spelling of it is quite beyond my powers. Pray remove all the h's wherever they
occur, and insert them where they do not; but there will be, over and beyond this, an intonation
quite impossible to render.

Mrs. Bobby bought her place only a few months ago, for she lived in Cheltenham before Mr. Bobby
died. The last incumbent had probably been of Welsh extraction, for the cottage had been named
'Dan-y-cefn.' Mrs. Bobby declared, however, that she wouldn't have a heathenish name posted
on her house, and expect her friends to pronounce it when she couldn't pronounce it herself.
She seemed grieved when at first I could not see the absolute necessity of naming the cottage
at all, telling her that in America we named only grand places. She was struck dumb with amazement
at this piece of information, and failed to conceive of the confusion that must ensue in villages
where streets were scarcely named or houses numbered. I confess it had never occurred to me
that our manner of doing was highly inconvenient, if not impossible, and I approached the subject
of the name with more interest and more modesty.

"Well, Mrs. Bobby," I began, "it is to be Cottage; we've decided that, have we not? It is to
be Cottage, not House, Lodge, Mansion, or Villa. We cannot name it after any flower that blows,
because they are all taken. Have all the trees been used?"

"Thank you, miss, yes, miss, all but h'ash-tree, and we 'ave no h'ash."

"Very good, we must follow another plan. Family names seem to be chosen, such as Gower House,
Marston Villa, and the like. 'Bobby Cottage' is not pretty. What was your maiden name, Mrs. Bobby?"

"Buggins, thank you, miss. 'Elizabeth Buggins, Licensed to sell Poultry,' was my name and title
when I met Mr. Bobby."

"I'm sorry, but 'Buggins Cottage' is still more impossible than 'Bobby Cottage.' Now here's
another idea: where were you born, Mrs. Bobby?"

"In Snitterfield, thank you, miss."

"Dear, dear! how unserviceable!"

"Thank you, miss."

"Where was Mr. Bobby born?"

"He never mentioned, miss."

(Mr. Bobby must have been expansive, for they were married twenty years.)

"There is always Victoria or Albert," I said tentatively, as I wiped my brushes.

"Yes, miss, but with all respect to her Majesty, them names give me a turn when I see them
on the gates, I am that sick of them."

"True. Can we call it anything that will suggest its situation? Is there a Hill Crest?"

"Yes, miss, there is 'Ill Crest, 'Ill Top, 'Ill View, 'Ill Side, 'Ill End, H'under 'Ill, 'Ill
Bank, and 'Ill Terrace."

"I should think that would do for Hill."

"Thank you, miss. 'Ow would 'The 'Edge' do, miss?"

"But we have no hedge." (She shall not have anything with an h in it, if I can help it.)

"No, miss, but I thought I might set out a bit, if worst come to worst."

"And wait three or four years before people would know why the cottage was named? Oh no, Mrs.
Bobby."

"Thank you, miss."

"We might have something quite out of the common, like 'Providence Cottage,' down the bank.
I don't know why Mrs. Jones calls it Providence Cottage, unless she thinks it's a providence
that she has one at all; or because, as it's just on the edge of the hill, she thinks it's
a providence that it hasn't blown off. How would you like 'Peace' or 'Rest' Cottage?"

"Begging your pardon, miss, it's neither peace nor rest I gets in it these days, with a twenty-five
pound debt 'anging over me, and three children to feed and clothe."

"I fear we are not very clever, Mrs. Bobby, or we should hit upon the right thing with less
trouble. I know what I will do: I will go down in the road and look at the place for a long
time from the outside, and try to think what it suggests to me."

"Thank you, miss; and I'm sure I'm grateful for all the trouble you are taking with my small
affairs."

Down I went, and leaned over the wicket-gate, gazing at the unnamed cottage. The brick pathway
was scrubbed as clean as a penny, and the stone step and the floor of the little kitchen as
well. The garden was a maze of fragrant bloom, with never a weed in sight. The fowl cackled
cheerily still, adding insult to injury, the pet sheep munched grass contentedly, and the canaries
sang in their cages under the vines. Mrs. Bobby settled herself on the porch with a pan of
peas in her neat gingham lap, and all at once I cried:--

"'Comfort Cottage'! It is the very essence of comfort, Mrs. Bobby, even if there is not absolute
peace or rest. Let me paint the signboard for you this very day."

Mrs. Bobby was most complacent over the name. She had the greatest confidence in my judgment,
and the characterisation pleased her housewifely pride, so much so that she flushed with pleasure
as she said that if she 'ad 'er 'ealth she thought she could keep the place looking so that
the passers-by would easily h'understand the name.

Chapter XXIII. Tea served here.

It was some days after the naming of the cottage that Mrs. Bobby admitted me into her financial
secrets, and explained the difficulties that threatened her peace of mind. She still has twenty-five
pounds to pay before Comfort Cottage is really her own. With her cow and her vegetable garden,
to say nothing of her procrastinating fowl, she manages to eke out a frugal existence, now
that her eldest son is in a blacksmith's shop at Worcester, and is sending her part of his
weekly savings. But it has been a poor season for canaries, and a still poorer one for lodgers;
for people in these degenerate days prefer to be nearer the hotels and the mild gaieties of
the larger settlements. "The beds are renewed every third year. This is necessary to retain the vigour
of the plant, as if allowed to remain too long without lifting, the bulbs crowd each other
and send up barren and feeble shoots. When the bulbs are lifted they are divided, and any surplus
stock either sold or replanted in fresh ground. The beds require very little attention further
than being kept free from weeds, and having a top-dressing of stable litter or freshly gathered
seaweed. Bulbs will not stand forcing, and are always sturdier when grown in the open." Men,
women, and children find employment in the flower-fields, and in the busy time are often engaged
from early morning till long after sunset. But when her American lodger leaves her, she asks,--and who is she that can expect
to keep a beautiful young lady who will be naming her own cottage and painting signboards for
herself before long, likely?--but when her American lodger is gone, how is she, Mrs. Bobby,
to put by a few shillings a month towards the debt on the cottage? These are some of the problems
she presents to me. I have turned them over and over in my mind as I have worked, and even
asked Willie Beresford in my weekly letter what he could suggest. Of course he could not suggest
anything: men never can; although he offered to come there and lodge for a month at twenty-five
pounds a week. All at once, one morning, a happy idea struck me, and I ran down to Mrs. Bobby,
who was weeding the onion-bed in the back garden.

"Mrs. Bobby," I said, sitting down comfortably on the edge of the lettuce-frame, "I am sure
I know how you can earn many a shilling during the summer and autumn months, and you must begin
the experiment while I am here to advise you. I want you to serve five-o'clock tea in your garden."

"But, miss, thanking you kindly, nobody would think of stoppin' 'ere for a cup of tea once
in a twelvemonth."

"You never know what people will do until you try them. People will do almost anything, Mrs.
Bobby, if you only put it into their heads, and this is the way we shall make our suggestion
to the public. I will paint a second signboard to hang below 'Comfort Cottage.' It will be
much more beautiful than the other, for it shall have a steaming kettle on it, and a cup and
saucer, and the words 'Tea Served Here' underneath, the letters all intertwined with tea-plants.
I don't know how tea-plants look, but then neither does the public. You will set one round
table on the porch, so that if it threatens rain, as it sometimes does, you know, in England,
people will not be afraid to sit down; and the other you will put under the yew-tree near the
gate. The tables must be immaculate; no spotted, rumpled cloths and chipped cups at Comfort
Cottage, which is to be a strictly first-class tea station. You will put vases of flowers on
the tables, and you will not mix red, yellow, purple, and blue ones in the same vase-"

"It's the way the good Lord mixes 'em in the fields," interjected Mrs. Bobby piously.

"Very likely; but you will permit me to remark that the good Lord can manage things successfully
which we poor humans cannot. You will set out your cream-jug that was presented to Mrs. Martha
Buggins by her friends and neighbours as a token of respect in 1823, and the bowl that was
presented to Mr. Bobby as a sword and shooting prize in 1860, and all your pretty little odds
and ends. You will get everything ready in the kitchen, so that customers won't have to wait
long; but you will not prepare much in advance, so that there'll be nothing wasted."

"It sounds beautiful in your mouth, miss, and it surely wouldn't be any 'arm to make a trial
of it."

"Of course it won't. There is no inn here where nice people will stop (who would ever think
of asking for tea at the Retired Soldier?), and the moment they see our sign, in walking or
driving past, that moment they will be consumed with thirst. You do not begin to appreciate
our advantages as a tea station. In the first place, there is a watering-trough not far from
the gate, and drivers very often stop to water their horses; then we have the lovely garden
which everybody admires; and if everything else fails, there is the baby. Put that faded pink
flannel slip on Jem, showing his tanned arms and legs as usual, tie up his sleeves with blue
bows as you did last Sunday, put my white tennis-cap on the back of his yellow curls, turn
him loose in the hollyhocks, and await results. Did I not open the gate the moment I saw him,
though there was no apartment sign in the window?"

Mrs. Bobby was overcome by the magic of my arguments, and as there were positively no attendant
risks, we decided on an early opening. The very next day after the hanging of the second sign,
I superintended the arrangements myself. It was a nice thirsty afternoon, and as I filled the
flower-vases I felt such a desire for custom and such a love of trade animating me that I was
positively ashamed. At three o'clock I went upstairs and threw myself on the bed for a nap,
for I had been sketching on the hills since early morning. It may have been an hour later when
I heard the sound of voices and the stopping of a heavy vehicle before the house. I stole to
the front window, and, peeping under the shelter of the vines, saw a char-a-bancs, on the way
from Great Belvern to the Beacon. It held three gentlemen, two ladies, and four children, and
everything had worked precisely as I intended. The driver had seen the watering-trough, the
gentlemen had seen the tea-sign, the children had seen the flowers and the canaries, and the
ladies had seen the baby. I went to the back window to call an encouraging word to Mrs. Bobby,
but to my horror I saw that worthy woman disappearing at the extreme end of the lane in full
chase of our cow, that had broken down the fence, and was now at large with some of our neighbour's
turnip-tops hanging from her mouth.

Chapter XXIV. An unlicensed victualler.

Ruin stared us in the face. Were our cherished plans to be frustrated by a marauding cow, who
little realised that she was imperilling her own means of existence? Were we to turn away three,
five, nine thirsty customers at one fell swoop? Never! None of these people ever saw me before,
nor would ever see me again. What was to prevent my serving them with tea? I had on a pink
cotton gown,--that was well enough; I hastily buttoned on a clean painting apron, and seizing
a freshly laundered cushion cover lying on the bureau, a square of lace and embroidery, I pinned
it on my hair for a cap while descending the stairs. Everything was right in the kitchen, for
Mrs. Bobby had flown in the midst of her preparations. The loaf, the bread-knife, the butter,
the marmalade, all stood on the table, and the kettle was boiling. I set the tea to draw, and
then dashed to the door, bowed appetisingly to the visitors, showed them to the tables with
a winning smile (which was to be extra), seated the children maternally on the steps and laid
napkins before them, dashed back to the kitchen, cut the thin bread-and-butter, and brought
it with the marmalade, asked my customers if they desired cream, and told them it was extra,
went back and brought a tray with tea, boiling water, milk, and cream. Lowering my voice to
an English sweetness, and dropping a few h's ostentatiously as I answered questions, I poured
five cups of tea, and four mugs for the children, and cut more bread-and-butter, for they were
all eating like wolves. They praised the butter. I told them it was a specialty of the house.
They requested muffins. With a smile of heavenly sweetness tinged with regret, I replied that
Saturday was our muffin day; Saturday, muffins; Tuesday, crumpets; Thursday, scones; and Friday,
tea-cakes. This inspiration sprang into being full grown, like Pallas from the brain of Zeus.
While they were regretting that they had come on a plain bread-and-butter day, I retired to
the kitchen and made out a bill for presentation to the oldest man of the party.

                                  s.  d.
     Nine teas.   .   .   .       3   6
     Cream    .   .   .   .           3
     Bread-and-butter   .   .     1   0
     Marmalade.   .   .   .           6
                                  -----
                                  5   3

Feeling five and threepence to be an absurdly small charge for five adult and four infant teas,
I destroyed this immediately, and made out another, putting each item fourpence more, and the
bread-and-butter at one-and-six. I also introduced ninepence for extra teas for the children,
who had had two mugs apiece, very weak. This brought the total to six shillings and tenpence,
and I was beset by a horrible temptation to add a shilling or two for candles; there was one
young man among the three who looked as if he would have understood the joke.

The father of the family looked at the bill, and remarked quizzically, "Bond Street prices, eh?"

"Bond Street service," said I, curtsying demurely.

He paid it without flinching, and gave me sixpence for myself. I was very much afraid he would
chuck me under the chin; they are always chucking barmaids under the chin in old English novels,
but I have never seen it done in real life. As they strolled down to the gate, the second gentleman
gave me another sixpence, and the nice young fellow gave me a shilling; he certainly had read
the old English novels and remembered them, so I kept with the children. Just such a rule was
needed, for matters demanded a firm hand.

There was some resistance, some kicking, some difference of opinion
between himself and his people; but the strong will and the firm hand
conquered in the end and a better time dawned for Scilly.



