Mr. Thomasson might have undeceived her, but the sudden stoppage of the chaise had left no
place in the tutor's mind for aught but terror. At any moment, now the chaise was at a stand,
the door might open and he be hauled out to meet the fury of his pupil's eye, and feel the
smart of his brutal whip. It needed no more to sharpen Mr. Thomasson's long ears--his eyes
were useless; but for a time crouching in his corner and scarce daring to breathe, he heard
only the confused muttering of several men talking at a distance. Presently the speakers came
nearer, he caught the click of flint on steel, and a bright gleam of light entered the chaise
through a crack in one of the shutters. The men had lighted a lamp.

It was only a slender shaft that entered, but it fell athwart the girl's face and showed him
her closed eyes. She lay back in her corner, her cheeks colourless, an expression of dull,
hopeless suffering stamped on her features. She did not move or open her eyes, and the tutor
dared not speak lest his words should be heard outside. But he looked, having nothing to check
him, and looked; and in spite of his fears and his preoccupation, the longer he looked the
deeper was the impression which her beauty made on his senses.

He could hear no more of the men's talk than muttered grumblings plentifully bestrewn with
curses; and wonder what was forward and why they remained inactive grew more and more upon
him. At length he rose and applied his eyes to the crack that admitted the light; but he could
distinguish nothing outside, the lamp, which was close to the window, blinding him. At times
he caught the clink of a bottle, and fancied that the men were supping; but he knew nothing
for certain, and by-and-by the light was put out. A brief--and agonising--period of silence
followed, during which he thought that he caught the distant tramp of horses; but he had heard
the same sound before, it might be the beating of his heart, and before he could decide, oaths
and exclamations broke the silence, and there was a sudden bustle. In less than a minute the
chaise lurched forward, a whip cracked, and they took the road again.

The tutor breathed more freely, and, rid of the fear of being overheard, regained a little
of his unctuousness. 'My dear good lady,' he said, moving a trifle nearer to Julia, and even
making a timid plunge for her hand, 'you must not give way. I protest you must not give way.
Depend on me! Depend on me, and all will be well. I--oh dear, what a bump! I'--this as he retreated
precipitately to his corner--'I fear we are stopping!'

They were, but only for an instant, that the lamps might be lighted. Then the chaise rolled
on again, but from the way in which it jolted and bounded, shaking its passengers this way
and that, it was evident that it no longer kept the main road. The moment this became clear
to Mr. Thomasson his courage vanished as suddenly as it had appeared.

'Where are they taking us?' he cried, rising and sitting down again; and peering first this
way and then the other. 'My G--d, we are undone! We shall be murdered--I know we shall! Oh
dear! what a jolt! They are taking us to some cut-throat place! There again! Didn't you feel
it? Don't you understand, woman? Oh, Lord,' he continued, piteously wringing his hands, 'why
did I mix myself up with this trouble?'

She did not answer, and enraged by her silence and insensibility, the cowardly tutor could
have found it in his heart to strike her. Fortunately the ray of light which now penetrated
the carriage suggested an idea which he hastened to carry out. He had no paper, and, given
paper, he had no ink; but falling back on what he had, he lugged out his snuff-box and pen-knife,
and holding the box in the ray of light, and himself as still as the road permitted, he set
to work, laboriously and with set teeth, to scrawl on the bottom of the box the message of
which we know. To address it to Mr. Fishwick and sign it Julia were natural precautions, since
he knew that the girl, and not he, would be the object of pursuit. When he had finished his
task, which was no light one--the road growing worse and the carriage shaking more and more--he
went to thrust the box under the door, which fitted ill at the bottom. But stooping to remove
the straw, he reflected that probably the road they were in was a country lane, where the box
would be difficult to find; and in a voice trembling with fear and impatience, he called to
the girl to give him her black kerchief.

She did not ask him why or for what, but complied without opening her eyes. No words could
have described her state more eloquently.

He wrapped the thing loosely in the kerchief--which he calculated would catch the passing eye
more easily than the box--and knotted the ends together. But when he went to push the package
under the door, it proved too bulky; and, with an exclamation of rage, he untied it, and made
it up anew and more tightly. At last he thought that he had got it right, and he stooped to
feel for the crack; but the carriage, which had been travelling more and more heavily and slowly,
came to a sudden standstill, and in a panic he sat up, dropping the box and thrusting the straw
over it with his foot.

He had scarcely done this when the door was opened, and the masked man, who had threatened
them before, thrust in his head. 'Come out!' he said curtly, addressing the tutor, who was
the nearer. 'And be sharp about it!'

But Mr. Thomasson's eyes, peering through the doorway, sought in vain the least sign of house
or village. Beyond the yellow glare cast by the lamp on the wet road, he saw nothing but darkness,
night, and the gloomy shapes of trees; and he hung back. 'No,' he said, his voice quavering
with fear. 'I--my good man, if you will promise--'

The man swore a frightful oath. 'None of your tongue!' he cried, 'but out with you unless you
want your throat cut. You cursed, whining, psalm-singing sniveller, you don't know when you
are well off'! Out with you!'

Mr. Thomasson waited for no more, but stumbled out, shaking with fright.

'And you!' the ruffian continued, addressing the girl, 'unless you want to be thrown out the
same way you were thrown in! The sooner I see your back, my sulky Madam, the better I shall
be pleased. No more meddling with petticoats for me! This comes of working with fine gentlemen,
say I!'

Julia was but half roused. 'Am. I--to get out?' she said dully.

'Ay you are! By G--d, you are a cool one!' the man continued, watching her in a kind of admiration,
as she rose and stepped by him like one in a dream. 'And a pretty one for all your temper!
The master is not here, but the man is; and if--'

'Stow it, you fool!' cried a voice from the darkness, 'and get aboard!'

'Who said anything else?' the ruffian retorted, but with a look that, had Julia been more sensible
of it, must have chilled her blood. 'Who said anything else? So there you are, both of you,
and none the worse, I'll take my davy! Lash away, Tim! Make the beggars fly!'

As he uttered the last words he sprang on the wheel, and before the tutor could believe his
good fortune, or feel assured that there was not some cruel deceit playing on him, the carriage
splashed up the mud, and rattled away. In a trice the lights grew small and were gone, and
the two were left standing side by side in the darkness. On one hand a mass of trees rose high
above them, blotting out the grey sky; on the other the faint outline of a low wall appeared
to divide the lane in which they stood--the mud rising rapidly about their shoes--from a flat
aguish expanse over which the night hung low.

It was a strange position, but neither of the two felt this to the fall; Mr. Thomasson in his
thankfulness that at any cost he had eluded Mr. Dunborough's vengeance, Julia because at the
moment she cared not what became of her. Naturally, however, Mr. Thomasson, whose satisfaction
knew no drawback save that of their present condition, and who had to congratulate himself
on a risk safely run, and a good friend gained, was the first to speak.

'My dear young lady,' he said, in an insinuating tone very different from that in which he
had called for her kerchief, 'I vow I am more thankful than I can say, that I was able to come
to your assistance! I shudder to think what those ruffians might not have done had you been
alone, and--and unprotected! Now I trust all danger is over. We have only to find a house in
which we can pass the night, and to-morrow we may laugh at our troubles!'

She turned her head towards him, 'Laugh?' she said, and a sob took her in the throat.

He felt himself set back; then remembered the delusion under which she lay, and went to dispel
it--pompously. But his evil angel was at his shoulder; again at the last moment he hesitated.
Something in the despondency of the girl's figure, in the hopelessness of her tone, in the
intensity of the grief that choked her utterance, wrought with the remembrance of her beauty
and her disorder in the coach, to set his crafty mind working in a new direction. He saw that
she was for the time utterly hopeless; utterly heedless what became of herself. That would
not last; but his cunning told him that with returning sensibility would come pique, resentment,
the desire to be avenged. In such a case one man was sometimes as good as another. It was impossible
to say what she might not do or be induced to do, if full advantage were taken of a moment
so exceptional. Fifty thousand pounds! And her fresh young beauty! What an opening it was!
The way lay far from clear, the means were to find; but faint heart never won fair lady, and
Mr. Thomasson had known strange things come to pass.

He was quick to choose his part. 'Come, child,' he said, assuming a kind of paternal authority.
'At least we must find a roof. We cannot spend the night here.'

'No,' she said dully, 'I suppose not.'

'So--shall we go this way?'

'As you please,' she answered.

They started, but had not moved far along the miry road before she spoke again. 'Do you know,'
she asked drearily, 'why they set us down?'

He was puzzled himself as to that, but, 'They may have thought that the pursuit was gaining
on them,' he answered, 'and become alarmed.' Which was in part the truth; though Mr. Dunborough's
failure to appear at the rendezvous had been the main factor in determining the men.

'Pursuit?' she said. 'Who would pursue us?'

'Mr. Fishwick,' he suggested.

'Ah!' she answered bitterly; 'he might. If I had listened to him! If I had--but it is over now.'

'I wish we could see a light,' Mr. Thomasson said, anxiously looking into the darkness, 'or
a house of any kind. I wonder where we are.' She did not speak.

'I do not know--even what time it is,' he continued pettishly; and he shivered. 'Take care!'
She had stumbled and nearly fallen. 'Will you be pleased to take my arm, and we shall be able
to proceed more quickly. I am afraid that your feet are wet.'

Absorbed in her thoughts she did not answer.

'However the ground is rising,' he said. 'By-and-by it will be drier under foot.'

They were an odd couple to be trudging a strange road, in an unknown country, at the dark hour
of the night. The stars must have twinkled to see them. Mr. Thomasson began to own the influence
of solitude, and longed to pat the hand she had passed through his arm--it was the sort of
caress that came natural to him; but for the time discretion withheld him. He had another temptation:
to refer to the past, to the old past at the College, to the part he had taken at the inn,
to make some sort of apology; but again discretion intervened, and he went on in silence.

As he had said, the ground was rising; but the outlook was cheerless enough, until the moon
on a sudden emerged from a bank of cloud and disclosed the landscape. Mr. Thomasson uttered
a cry of relief. I promised mother to take care of her."

[Footnote A: In Massachusetts each town has its own poor-house.]

"Very
well," said the man, "I'm going to North Chicopee, but shall be back
in two hours, so you must have your things all ready."

"Don't cry so, Mary," whispered Billy, when he saw how fast her tears
were falling.

"I'll come to see you every week, and when I am older, and have money, I will take you from the
poor-house, and Alice too."
Just then, Mrs. Campbell's carriage drove up. She had been taking
her afternoon ride, and now, on her way home, had stopped for Ella,
who in her delight at going with so handsome a woman, forgot the dreary
home which awaited her sister, and which, but for Mrs. Campbell's
fancy, would have been hers also. The gate swung to behind them,
and they plodded a hundred yards between the trees arm in arm; then one and then a second light
twinkled out in front. These as they approached were found to proceed from two windows in the
ground floor of a large house. The travellers had not advanced many paces towards them before
the peaks of three gables rose above them, vandyking the sky and docking the last sparse branches
of the elms.

Mr. Thomasson's exclamation of relief, as he surveyed the building, was cut short by the harsh
rattle of a chain, followed by the roar of a watch-dog, as it bounded from the kennel; in a
second a horrid raving and baying, as of a score of hounds, awoke the night. The startled tutor
came near to dropping his companion's hand, but fortunately the threshold, dimly pillared and
doubtfully Palladian, was near, and resisting the impulse to put himself back to back with
the girl--for the protection of his calves rather than her skirts--the reverend gentleman hurried
to occupy it. Once in that coign of refuge, he hammered on the door with the energy of a frightened
man.

When his anxiety permitted him to pause, a voice made itself heard within, cursing the dogs
and roaring for Jarvey. A line of a hunting song, bawled at the top of a musical voice and
ending in a shrill 'View Halloa!' followed; then 'To them, beauties; to them!' and the crash
of an overturned chair. Again the house echoed with 'Jarvey, Jarvey!' on top of which the door
opened and an elderly man-servant, with his wig set on askew, his waistcoat unbuttoned, and
his mouth twisted into a tipsy smile, confronted the wanderers.

CHAPTER XXIII

BULLY POMEROY

The man held a candle in a hand that wavered and strewed tallow broadcast; the light from this
for a moment dazzled the visitors. Then the draught of air extinguished it, and looking over
the servant's shoulder--he was short and squat--Mr. Thomasson's anxious eyes had a glimpse
of a spacious old-fashioned hall, panelled and furnished in oak, with here a blazon, and there
antlers or a stuffed head. At the farther end of the hall a wide easy staircase rose, to branch
at the first landing into two flights, that returning formed a gallery round the apartment.
Between the door and the foot of the staircase, in the warm glow of an unseen fire, stood a
small heavily-carved oak table, with Jacobean legs, like stuffed trunk-hose. This was strewn
with cards, liquors, glasses, and a china punch-bowl; but especially with cards, which lay
everywhere, not only on the table, but in heaps and batches beneath and around it, where the
careless hands of the players had flung them.

Yet, for all these cards, the players were only two. One, a man something under forty, in a
peach coat and black satin breeches, sat on the edge of the table, his eyes on the door and
his chair lying at his feet. It was his voice that had shouted for Jarvey and that now saluted
the arrivals with a boisterous 'Two to one in guineas, it's a catchpoll! D'ye take me, my lord?'--the
while he drummed merrily with his heels on a leg of the table. His companion, an exhausted
young man, thin and pale, remained in his chair, which he had tilted on its hinder feet; and
contented himself with staring at the doorway.

The latter was our old friend, Lord Almeric Doyley; but neither he nor Mr. Thomasson knew one
another, until the tutor had advanced some paces into the room. Then, as the gentleman in the
peach coat cried, 'Curse me, if it isn't a parson! The bet's off! Off!' Lord Almeric dropped
his hand of cards on the table, and opening his mouth gasped in a paroxysm of dismay.

'Oh, Lord,' he exclaimed, at last. 'Hold me, some one! If it isn't Tommy! Oh, I say,' he continued,
rising and speaking in a tone of querulous remonstrance, 'you have not come to tell me the
old man's gone! And I'd pitted him against Bedford to live to--to--but it's like him! It is
like him, and monstrous unfeeling. I vow and protest it is! Eh! oh, it is not that! Hal--loa!'

He paused there, his astonishment greater even than that which he had felt on recognising the
tutor. His eye had lighted on Julia, whose figure was now visible on the threshold.

His companion did not notice this. He was busy identifying the tutor. 'Gad! it is old Thomasson!'
he cried, for he too had been at Pembroke. 'And a petticoat! And a petticoat!' he repeated.
'Well, I am spun!'

The tutor raised his hands in astonishment. 'Lord!' he said, with a fair show of enthusiasm,
'do I really see my old friend and pupil, Mr. Pomeroy of Bastwick?'

'Who put the cat in your valise? When you got to London--kittens? You do, Tommy.'

'I thought so!' Mr. Thomasson answered effusively. 'I was sure of it! I never forget a face
when my--my heart has once gone out to it! And you, my dear, my very dear Lord Almeric, there
is no danger I shall ever--'

'But, crib me, Tommy,' Lord Almeric shrieked, cutting him short without ceremony, so great
was his astonishment, 'it's the Little Masterson!'

'You old fox!' Mr. Pomeroy chimed in, shaking his finger at the tutor with leering solemnity;
he, belonging to an older generation at the College, did not know her. Then, 'The Little Masterson,
is it?' he continued, advancing to the girl, and saluting her with mock ceremony. 'Among friends,
I suppose? Well, my dear, for the future be pleased to count me among them. Welcome to my poor
house! And here's to bettering your taste--for, fie, my love, old men are naughty. Have naught
to do with them!' And he laughed wickedly. He was a tall, heavy man, with a hard, bullying,
sneering face; a Dunborough grown older.

'Hush! my good sir. Hush!' Mr. Thomasson cried anxiously, after making more than one futile
effort to stop him. Between his respect for his companion, and the deference in which he held
a lord, the tutor was in agony. 'My good sir, my dear Lord Almeric, you are in error,' he continued
strenuously. 'You mistake, I assure you, you mistake--'

'Do we, by Gad!' Mr. Pomeroy cried, winking at Julia.' Well, you and I, my dear, don't, do
we? We understand one another very well.'

The girl only answered by a fierce look of contempt. But Mr. Thomasson was in despair. 'You
do not, indeed!' he cried, almost wringing his hands. 'This lady has lately come into a--a
fortune, and to-night was carried off by some villains from the Castle Inn at Marlborough in
a--in a post-chaise. I was fortunately on the spot to give her such protection as I could,
but the villains overpowered me, and to prevent my giving the alarm, as I take it, bundled
me into the chaise with her.'

'Oh, come,' said Mr. Pomeroy, grinning. 'You don't expect us to swallow that?'

'It is true, as I live,' the tutor protested. 'Every word of it.'

'Then how come you here?'

