At this period the queen of Hungary saw herself abandoned by all her allies, and seemingly
voted to destruction. She was not, however, forsaken by her courage; nor destitute of good
officers, and an able ministry. She retired to Presburgh, and in a pathetic Latin speech to
the states, expressed her confidence in the loyalty and valour of her Hungarian subjects. The
nobility of that kingdom, touched with her presence and distress, assured her unanimously that
they would sacrifice their lives and fortunes in her defence. The ban being raised, that brave
people crowded to her standard; and the diet expressed their sentiments against her enemy by
a public edict, excluding for ever the electoral house of Bavaria from the succession to the
crown of Hungary; yet, without the subsidy she received from Great Britain, their courage and
attachment would have proved ineffectual. By this supply she was enabled to pay her army, erect
magazines, complete her warlike preparations, and put her strong places in a posture of defence.
In December, her generals Berenclau and Mentzel, defeated count Thoring, who commanded eight
thousand men, at the pass of Scardingen, and opening their way to Bavaria, laid the whole country
under contribution; while count Khevenhuller retook the city of Lintz, and drove the French
troops out of Austria. The grand seignor assured the queen of Hungary, that far from taking
advantage of her troubles, he should seize all opportunities to convince her of his friendship;
the pope permitted her to levy a tenth on the revenues of the clergy within her dominions;
and even to use all the church plate for the support of the war.

WAR BETWEEN RUSSIA AND SWEDEN. 

I renewed my marriage-contract, and added thereto a vow of chastity, with a promise to make it
perpetual, if M. Bertot my director, would permit me. After that I was filled with great joy, which
was new to me, as for a long time past I had been plunged in the deepest bitterness. After that
I remained in a deep silence, both exterior and interior, quite dry and without any support.
I could neither weep nor speak. My mother-in-law said very fine things, and was very much commended
for it by everyone. They were offended at my silence, which they attributed to want of resignation.
A friar told me, that everyone admired the fine acts which my mother-in-law did; but as for
me, they heard me say nothing; that I must sacrifice my loss to God. But I could not say one
single word, let me strive as I would.

I was indeed very much exhausted. Although I was but recently delivered of my daughter, yet I attended
and sat up with my husband four and twenty nights before his death. I was more than a year after
in recovering from fatigue, joined to my great weakness and pain both of body and of mind.
The great depression, or dryness and stupidity which I was in, was such that I could not say a word
about God. It bore me down in such a manner that I could hardly speak. However, I entered for
some moments into the admiration of thy goodness, O my God. I saw well that my crosses would not
fail, since my mother-in-law had survived my husband. Also I was still tied, in having two
children given me in so short a time before my husband's death, which evidently appeared the effect
of divine wisdom; for had I only my eldest son, I would have put
him in a college; and have gone myself into the convent of the Benedictines,
and so frustrated all the designs of God upon me.

I was willing to show the esteem I had for my husband, in causing the most magnificent funeral to
be made for him at my own expense. I paid off the legacies he had left. My mother-in-law violently
opposed everything I could do for securing my own interests. I had nobody to apply to for advice
or help; for my brother would not give me the least assistance. I was ignorant of business affairs;
but God, independent of my natural understandings, always made me fit for everything that pleased
Him, and supplied me with such a perfect intelligence that I succeeded. I omitted not the least minutia,
and was surprised that in these matters I should know without ever having learned. I digested all
my papers, and regulated all my affairs, without assistance from any one. My husband had abundance
of writings deposited in his hands. I took an exact inventory of them, and sent them severally
to their owners, which, without divine assistance, would have been very difficult for me; because,
my husband having been a long time sick, everything was in the greatest confusion. This gained
me the reputation of being a skillful woman.

There was one matter of great importance. A number of persons, who had been contending at law for
several years, applied to my husband to settle their affairs. Though it was not properly the business
of a gentleman, yet they applied to him, because he had both understanding and prudence; and
as he had a love for several of them, he consented. There were twenty actions one upon another,
and in all twenty-two persons concerned, who could not get any end put to their differences,
by reason of new incidents continually falling out. My husband charged himself with getting lawyers
to examine their papers, but died before he could make any procedure therein. After his death
I sent for them to give them their papers; but they would not receive them, begging of me that
I would accommodate them, and prevent their ruin. It appeared to me as ridiculous, as impossible,
to undertake an affair of so great consequence, and which would require so long a discussion.
Nevertheless, relying on the strength and wisdom of God, I consented. I shut myself up about
thirty days for all these affairs, without ever going out, but to mass and to my meals. The
arbitration being at length prepared, they all signed it without seeing it. They were all so well
satisfied therewith, that they could not forbear publishing it everywhere. It was God alone who did those
things; for after they were settled I knew nothing about them; and if I now hear any talk of such
things, to me it sounds like Arabic.

CHAPTER 23

Being now a widow, my crosses, which one would have thought should have abated, only increased.
That turbulent domestic I have often mentioned, instead of growing milder, now that she depended on me
became more furious than ever. In our house she had amassed a good fortune, and I settled
on her, besides, an annuity for the remainder of her life, for the services she had done my husband.
She swelled with vanity and haughtiness. Having been used to sit up so much with an invalid,
she had taken to drink wine, to keep up her spirits. This had now passed into a habit. As she
grew aged and weak, a very little of it affected her. I tried to hide this fault, but it grew
so that it could not be concealed. I spoke of it to her confessor, in order that he might try, softly
and artfully to reclaim her from it; but instead of profiting by her director's advice, she was
outrageous against me. My mother-in-law, who could hardly bear the fault of intemperance, and had
often spoken to me about it, now joined in reproaching me and vindicating her. This strange creature,
when any company came, would cry out with all her might, that I had dishonored her, thrown
her into despair, and would be the cause of her damnation, as I was taking the ready course
to my own. Yet God gave me an unbounded patience. I answered only with mildness and charity
all her passionate invectives, giving her besides every possible mark of my affection. If any other
maid came to wait on me, she would drive her back in a rage, crying out, that I hated her on
account of the affection with which she had served my husband. When she had not a mind to come,
I was obliged to serve myself; and when she did come, it was to chide me and make a noise. When
I was very unwell, as was often the case, this girl would appear to be in despair. From hence
I thought it was from Thee, O Lord, that all this came upon me. Without thy permission, she
was scarcely capable of such unaccountable conduct. She seemed not sensible of any faults,
but always to think herself in the right. All those whom Thou hast made use of to cause me
to suffer, thought they were rendering service to Thee in so doing.

Before my husband's death, I went to Paris on purpose to see Monsieur Bertot, who had been of
very little service to me as a director. Not knowing my state, and I being incapable of telling
him of it, he grew weary of the charge. At length he gave it up, and wrote to me to take another
director. I made no doubt but God had revealed to him my wicked state;
and this desertion of me seemed a most certain mark of my reprobation.

     This was during the life of my husband. But now my renewed
     solicitations, and his sympathy with me on my husband's death,
     prevailed on him to resume my direction, which to me still proved
     of very little service. I went again to Paris to see him.
     While there, I visited him twelve or fifteen times, without
     being able to tell him anything of my condition. I told
     him, indeed, that I wanted some ecclesiastic to educate my
     son, to rid him of his bad habits, and of the wrong
     impressions he had conceived against me.

He found one for me, of whom he had received very good recommendations.

I went to make a retreat with M. Bertot and Madame de C. All that time he spoke to me not a quarter of
an hour at most. As he saw that I said nothing to him, for indeed I knew not what to say, as I
had not spoken to him of the favors which God had conferred on me
(not from a desire to conceal them, but because the Lord did not permit
me to do it, as He had over me only the designs of death) he therefore
spoke to such as he looked upon to be more advanced in grace.

He let me alone as one for whom there was nothing to be done.

So well did God hide from him the situation of my soul, in order to make me suffer, that he
wanted to refer me, thinking that I had not the spirit of prayer, and that Mrs. Granger was
mistaken when she told him I had. I did what I could to obey him, but it was entirely impossible.
On this account I was displeased with myself, because I believed M. Bertot rather than my experience.
Through this whole retreat my inclination, which I discerned only by my resistance to it, was
to rest in silence and nakedness of thought. In the settling of my mind therein I feared I
was disobeying the orders of my director. This made me think that I had fallen from grace. I kept
myself in a state of nothingness, content with my poor low degree of prayer, without envying
the higher degree of others, of which I judged myself unworthy. I would have, however, desired
much to do the will of God, and to please Him, but despaired altogether of ever attaining that
desirable end.

There was in the place where I lived, and had been for some years, one whose doctrine was suspected.
He possessed a dignity in the church, which always obliged me to have a deference for him. As
he understood how averse I was to all who were suspected of unsoundness in the faith, and knowing
that I had some credit in the place, he used his utmost efforts to engage me in his sentiments.
I answered him with so much clearness and energy, that he had not a word to reply. This increased
his desire to win me in order to do it, to contract a friendship for me. He continued to importune
me for two years and a half. As he was very polite, and of an obliging temper, and had a good share
of learning, I did not mistrust him. I even conceived a hope of his conversion, in which I found
myself mistaken. I then ceased going near him. He came to inquire
why he could see me no more.

At that time he was so agreeable to my sick husband, in his assiduities about him, that I
could not avoid him though I thought the shortest and best way for me would be break off all acquaintance
with him, which I did after the death of my husband. M. Bertot would not permit me to do it
before. When he now saw that he could not renew it, he and his party raised up strong persecutions
against me.

These gentlemen had at that time a method among them, by which they soon knew who were of their
party, and who were opposite. They sent to one another circular letters, by means of which, in
a very little time, they cried me down on every side, after a very strange manner. Yet this
gave me little trouble. I was glad of my new liberty, intending never again to enter into
an intimacy with anyone, which would give me so much difficulty to break.

This inability I was now in, of doing those exterior acts of charity I had done before, served
this person with a pretext to publish that it was owing to him I had formerly done them. Willing
to ascribe to himself the merit of what God alone, by His grace, had made me do, he went so far
as to preach against me publicly, as one who had been a bright pattern
to the town, but was now become a scandal to it.

Several times he preached very offensive things.

Though I was present at those sermons, and they were enough to weigh me down with confusion,
for they offended all that heard them, I could not be troubled. I carried in myself my own
condemnation beyond utterance. I thought I merited abundantly worse than all he could say of
me, and that, if all men knew me, they would trample me under their feet. My reputation then was
blasted by the industry of this ecclesiastic. He caused all such as passed for persons of piety
to declare against me. I thought he and they were in the right and therefore quietly bore it
all. Confused like a criminal that dares not lift up his eyes, I looked upon the virtue of others
with respect. I saw no fault in others and no virtue in myself. When any happened to praise me,
it was like a heavy blow struck at me, and I said in myself, "They little know my miseries,
and from what state I have fallen." When any blamed me, I agreed to it, as right and just. Nature
wanted sometimes to get out of such an abject condition, but could not find any way. If I tried
to make an outward appearance of righteousness, by the practice of some good thing, my heart
in secret rebuked me as guilty of hypocrisy, in wanting to appear what I was not; and God did not
permit that to succeed. Oh, how excellent are the crosses of Providence! All other crosses
are of no value.

I was often very ill and in danger of death, and knew not how to prepare myself for it. Several
persons of piety, who had been acquainted with me, wrote to me about those things which the
gentleman spread about me. I did not offer to justify myself, although I knew myself innocent
of the things whereof they accused me. One day being in the greatest desolation and distress,
I opened the New Testament on these words, "My grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength
is made perfect in weakness." That for a little time gave me some relief.

CHAPTER 24

The Lord took from me all the sensibility which I had for the creatures, or things created,
even in an instant, as one takes off a robe. After that time I had none for any whatsoever. Though
He had done me that favor, for which I can never be sufficiently grateful, I was, however, neither
more contented nor less confused by it. My God seemed to be so estranged and displeased with
me, that there remained nothing but the grief of having lost His blessed presence through my
fault. The loss of my reputation every day increasing, became sensible to my heart, though I was
not allowed to justify or bewail myself.

As I became always more impotent for every kind of exterior works, as I could not go to see the poor, nor
stay at church, nor practice prayer; as I became colder toward God, in proportion as I was more
sensible of my wrong steps, all this destroyed me the more both in my own eyes and in those of others.
There were some very considerable gentlemen who made proposals for me, and even such persons as according
to the rules of fashion ought not to think of me. They presented themselves during the very
depth of my outward and inward desolation. At first it appeared to me a means of drawing me
out of the distress I was in. But it seemed to me then notwithstanding my pains of body and
mind, that if a king had presented himself to me, I would have refused him with pleasure, to
show thee, O my God, that with all my miseries I was resolved to be thine alone.
If Thou wouldst not accept of me, I should at least have the consolation
of having been faithful to Thee to the utmost of my power. For as
to my inward state, I never mentioned it to anybody. I never spoke
thereof, nor of the suitors, though my mother-in-law would say that
if I did not marry, it was because none would have me. It was sufficient
for me that Thou, O my God, knewest that I sacrificed them to Thee,
(without saying a word to anybody) especially one whose high birth
and amiable exterior qualities might have tempted both my vanity and
inclination. Oh, could I but have hoped, to become agreeable to Thee,
such a hope would have been like a change from Hell to Heaven. So
far was I from presuming to hope for it, that I feared this sea of
affliction might also be followed by everlasting misery, in the loss
of Thee. I dared not even desire to enjoy Thee--I only desired not
to offend Thee.

I was for five or six weeks at the last extremity.
I could not take any nourishment. A spoonful of broth made me faint.
My voice was so gone, that when they put their ears close to my mouth,
they could scarcely distinguish my words. I could not see any hope
of salvation, yet was not unwilling to die. I bore a strong impression
that the longer I lived the more I would sin. Of the two, I thought
I would rather choose Hell than sin. He asserted, that from a review of that minister's conduct since the beginning
of the dispute with Spain, it would appear that he had been guilty not only of single errors,
but of deliberate treachery; that he had always co-operated with the enemies of his country,
and sacrificed to his private interest the happiness and honour of the British nation. He then
entered into a detail of that conduct against which he had so often declaimed; and being transported
by an overheated imagination, accused him of personal attachment and affection to the enemies
of the kingdom. A charge that was doubtless the result of exaggerated animosity, and served
only to invalidate the other articles of imputation that were much better founded. His objections
were overruled; and the address, as at first proposed, was presented to his majesty.

THE COUNTRY PARTY OBTAIN A MAJORITY IN THE COMMONS.

This small advantage, however, the minister did not consider as a proof of his having ascertained
an undoubted majority in the house of commons. There was a great number of disputed elections;
and the discussion of these was the point on which the people had turned their eyes, as the
criterion of the minister's power and credit. In the first which was heard at the bar of the
house, he cai-ried his point by a majority of six only; and this he looked upon as a defeat
rather than a victory. His enemies exulted in their strength; as they knew they should be joined,
in matters of importance, by several members who voted against them on this occasion. The inconsiderable
majority that appeared on the side of the administration, plainly proved that the influence
of the minister was greatly diminished, and seemed to prognosticate his further decline. This
consideration induced some individuals to declare against him as a setting sun, from whose
beams they could expect no further warmth. His adherents began to tremble; and he himself had
occasion for all his art and equanimity. The court interest was not sufficient to support the
election of their own members for Westminster. The high-bailiff had been guilty of some illegal
practices at the poll; and three justices of the peace had, on pretence of preventing riots,
sent for a military force to overawe the election. A petition presented by the electors of
Westminster was taken into consideration by the house; and the election was declared void by
a majority of four voices. The high-bailiff was taken into custody; the officer who ordered
the soldiers to march, and the three justices who signed the letter, in consequence of which
he acted, were reprimanded on their knees at the bar of the house.

SIR ROBERT WALPOLE CREATED EARL OF ORFORD.

The country party maintained the advantage they had gained in deciding upon several other controverted
elections; and sir Robert Walpole tottered on the brink of ruin. He knew that the majority
of a single vote would at any time commit him prisoner to the Tower, should ever the motion
be made; and he saw that his safety could be effected by no other expedient but that of dividing
the opposition. Towards the accomplishment of this purpose he employed all his credit and dexterity.
His emissaries did not fail to tamper with those members of the opposite party who were the
most likely to be converted by their arguments. A message was sent by the bishop of Oxford
to the prince of Wales, importing, That if his royal highness would write a letter of condescension
to the king, he and all his counsellors should be taken into favour; that fifty thousand pounds
should be added to his revenue; four times that sum be disbursed immediately for the payment
of his debts; and suitable provision be made in due time for all his followers. The prince
declined this proposal. He declared that he would accept no such conditions while sir Robert
Walpole continued to direct the public affairs; that he looked upon him as a bar between his
majesty and the affections of his people; as the author of the national grievances both at
home and abroad; and as the sole cause of that contempt which Great Britain had incurred in
all the courts of Europe. His royal highness was now chief of this formidable party, revered
by the whole nation--a party which had gained the ascendancy in the house of commons; which
professed to act upon the principles of public virtue; which demanded the fall of an odious
minister, as a sacrifice due to an injured people; and declared that no temptation could shake
their virtue; that no art could dissolve the cement by which they were united. Sir Robert Walpole,
though repulsed in his attempt upon the prince of Wales, was more successful in his other endeavours.
He resolved to try his strength once more in the house of commons, in another disputed election;
and had the mortification to see the majority augmented to sixteen voices. He declared he would
never more sit in that house; and next day, which was the third of February, the king adjourned
both houses of parliament to the eighteenth day of the same month. In this interim sir Robert
Walpole was created earl of Orford, and resigned all his employments.

CHANGE IN THE MINISTRY.

At no time of his life did he acquit himself with such prudential policy as he now displayed.
He found means to separate the parts that composed the opposition, and to transfer the popular
odium from himself to those who had professed themselves his keenest adversaries. The country-party
consisted of the tories, reinforced by discontented whigs, who had either been disappointed
in their own ambitious views, or felt for the distresses of their country, occasioned by a
weak and worthless administration. The old patriots, and the whigs whom they had joined, acted
upon very different, and, indeed, upon opposite principles of government; and there-fore they
were united only by the ties of convenience. A coalition was projected between the discontented
whigs, and those of the same denomination who acted in the ministry. Some were gratified with
titles and offices; and all were assured, that in the management of affairs a new system would
be adopted, according to the plan they themselves should propose. The court required nothing
of them, but that the earl of Orford should escape with impunity. His place of chancellor of
the exchequer was bestowed upon Mr. Sandys, who was likewise appointed a lord of the treasury;
and the earl of Wilmington succeeded him as first commissioner of that board. Lord Harrington,
being dignified with the title of carl, was declared president of the council; and in his room
lord Carteret became secretary of state. The duke of Argyle was made master-general of the
ordnance, colonel of his majesty's royal regiment of horse guards, field-marshal and commander-in-chief
of all the forces in South-Britain; but, finding himself disappointed in his expectations of
the coalition, he, in less than a month, renounced all these employments. The marquis of Tweedale
was appointed secretary of state for Scotland, a post which had been long suppressed; Mr. Pulteney
was sworn of the privy-council, and afterwards created earl of Bath. The earl of Winchelsea
and Nottingham was preferred to the head of the admiralty, in the room of sir Charles Wager;
and, after the resignation of the duke of Argyle, the earl of Stair was appointed field-marshal
of all his majesty's forces, as well as ambassador-extraordinary to the states-general. On
the seventeenth day of February the prince of Wales, attended by a numerous retinue of his
adherents, waited on his majesty, who received him graciously, and ordered his guards to be
restored. Lord Carteret and Mr. Sandys were the first who embraced the offers of the court,
without the consent or privity of any other leaders in the opposition, except that of Mr. Pulteney;
but they declared to their friends, they would still proceed upon patriot principles; that
they would concur in promoting an inquiry into past measures; and in enacting necessary laws
to secure the constitution from the practices of corruption. These professions were believed,
not only by their old coadjutors in the house of commons, but also by the nation in general.
The reconciliation between the king and the prince of Wales, together with the change in the
ministry, were celebrated with public rejoicings all over the kingdom; and immediately after
the adjournment nothing but concord appeared in the house of commons.

INQUIRY INTO THE ADMINISTRATION OF SIR ROBERT WALPOLE.

But this harmony was of short duration. It soon appeared, that those who had declaimed the
loudest for the liberties of their country, had been actuated solely by the most sordid and
even the most ridiculous motives of self-interest. Jealousy and mutual distrust ensued between
them and their former confederates. The nation complained, that, instead of a total change
of men and measures, they saw the old ministry strengthened by this coalition; and the same
interest in parliament predominating with redoubled influence. They branded the new converts
as apostates and betrayers of their country; and in the transports of their indignation, they
entirely overlooked the old object of their resentment. That a nobleman of pliant principles,
narrow fortune, and unbounded ambition, should forsake his party for the blandishments of affluence,
power, and authority, will not appear strange to any person acquainted with the human heart;
but the sensible part of mankind will always reflect with amazement upon the conduct of a man,
who seeing himself idolized by his fellow-citizens, as the first and firmest patriot in the
kingdom, as one of the most shining ornaments of his country, could give up all his popularity,
and incur the contempt or detestation of mankind, for the wretched consideration of an empty
title, without office, influence, or the least substantial appendage. One cannot, without an
emotion of grief, contemplate such an instance of infatuation--one cannot but lament that such
glory should have been so weakly forfeited; that such talents should have been lost to the
cause of liberty and virtue. Doubtless he flattered himself with the hope of one day directing
the councils of his sovereign; but this was never accomplished, and he remained a solitary
monument of blasted ambition. Before the change in the ministry, Mr. Pulteney moved, that the
several papers relating to the conduct of the war, which had been laid before the house, should
be referred to a select committee, who should examine strictly into the particulars, and make
a report to the house of their remarks and objections. The motion introduced a debate; but,
upon a division, was rejected by a majority of three voices. Petitions having been presented
by the merchants of London, Bristol, Liverpool, Glasgow, and almost all the trading towns in
the kingdom, complaining of the losses they had sustained by the bad conduct of the war, the
house resolved itself into a committee to deliberate on these remonstrances. The articles of
the London petition were explained by Mr. Glover, an eminent merchant of that city. Six days
were spent in perusing papers and examining witnesses; then the same gentleman summed up the
evidence, and in a pathetic speech endeavoured to demonstrate, that the commerce of Great Britain
had been exposed to the insults and rapine of the Spaniards, not by inattention or accident,
but by one uniform and continued design. This inquiry being resumed after the adjournment,
copies of instructions to admirals and captains of cruising ships were laid before the house:
the commons passed several resolutions, upon which a bill was prepared for the better protecting
and securing the trade and navigation of the kingdom. It made its way through the lower house;
but was thrown out by the lords. The pension-bill was revived and sent up to the peers, where
it was again rejected, lord Carteret voting against that very measure which he had so lately
endeavoured to promote. On the ninth day of March, lord Limerick made a motion for appointing
a committee to inquire into the conduct of affairs for the last twenty years; he was seconded
by sir John St. Aubyn, and supported by Mr. Velters Cornwall, Mr. Phillips, Mr. W. Pitt, and
lord Percival, the new member for Westminster, who had already signalized himself by his eloquence
and capacity. The motion was opposed by sir Charles Wager, Mr. Pelham, and Mr. Henry Pox, surveyor-general
to his majesty's works, and brother to lord Ilchester. Though the opposition was faint and
frivolous, the proposal was rejected by a majority of two voices.

{1742}

Lord Limerick, not yet discouraged, made a motion on the twenty-third day of March, for an
inquiry into the conduct of Robert earl of Orford, for the last ten years of his administration;
and, after a sharp debate, it was carried in the affirmative. The house resolved to choose
a secret committee by ballot; and in the meantime presented an address to the king, assuring
him of their fidelity, zeal, and affection.

Sir Robert Godschall having moved for leave to bring in a bill to repeal the act for septennial
parliaments, he was seconded by sir John Barnard; but warmly opposed by Mr. Pulteney and Mr.
Sandys; and the question passed in the negative. The committee of secrecy being chosen, began
to examine evidence, and Mr. Paxton, solicitor to the treasury, refusing to answer such questions
as were put to him, lord Limerick, chairman of the committee, complained to the house of his
obstinacy. He was first taken into custody; and still persisting in his refusal, committed
to Newgate. Then his lordship moved, that leave should be given to bring in a bill for indemnifying
evidence against the earl of Orford; and it was actually prepared by a decision of the majority.
In the house of lords it was vigorously opposed by lord Carteret, and as strenuously supported
by the duke of Argyle; but fell upon a division, by the weight of superior numbers. Those members
in the house of commons who heartily wished the inquiry might be prosecuted, were extremely
incensed at the fate of this bill. A committee was appointed to search the journals of the
lords for precedents; their report being read, lord Strange, son to the earl of Derby, moved
for a resolution, "That the lords refusing to concur with the commons of Great Britain, in
an indemnification necessary to the effectual carrying on the inquiry now depending in parliament,
is an obstruction to justice, and may prove fatal to the liberties of this nation."--This motion,
which was seconded by lord Quarendon, son of the earl of Lichfield, gave rise to a warm debate;
and Mr. Sandys declaimed against it, as a step that would bring on an immediate dissolution
of the present form of government. It is really amazing to see with what effrontery some men
can shift their maxims, and openly contradict the whole tenor of their former conduct. Mr.
Sandys did not pass uncensured: he sustained some severe sarcasms on his apostacy from sir
John Hinde Cotton, who refuted all his objections; nevertheless, the motion passed in the negative.
Notwithstanding this great obstruction, purposely thrown in the way of the inquiry, the secret
committee discovered many flagrant instances of fraud and corruption in which the earl of Orford
had been concerned. It appeared, that he had granted fraudulent contracts for paying the troops
in the West Indies; that he had employed iniquitous arts to influence elections; that for secret
service, during the last ten years, he had touched one million four hundred fifty-three thousand
four hundred pounds of public money; that above fifty thousand pounds of this sum had been
paid to authors and printers of newspapers and political tracts, written in defence of the
ministry; that on the very day which preceded his resignation, he had signed orders on the
civil list revenues for above thirty thousand pounds; but as the cash remaining in the exchequer
did not much exceed fourteen thousand pounds, he had raised the remaining part of the thirty
thousand, by pawning the orders to a banker. The committee proceeded to make further progress
in their scrutiny, and had almost prepared a third report, when they were interrupted by the
prorogation of parliament.

The ministry finding it was necessary to take some step for conciliating the affection of the
people, gave way to a bill for excluding certain officers from scats in the house of commons.
They passed another for encouraging the linen manufacture; a third for regulating the trade
of the plantations; and a fourth to prevent the marriage of lunatics. They voted forty thousand
seamen, and sixty-two thousand five hundred landmen, for the service of the current year. They
provided for the subsidies to Denmark and Hesse-Cassel, and voted five hundred thousand pounds
to the queen of Hungary. In the month of July, John lord Gower was appointed keeper of his
majesty's privy-seal; Allen lord Bathurst was made captain of the band of pensioners; and on
the fifteenth day of the month, Mr. Pulteney took his seat in the house of peers as earl of
Bath. The king closed the session in the usual way, after having given them to understand,
that a treaty of peace was concluded between the queen of Hungary and the king of Prussia,
under his mediation; and that the late successes of the Austrian arms were in a great measure
owing to the generous assistance afforded by the British nation.

{GEORGE II. 1727-1760}

THE ELECTOR OF BAVARIA CHOSEN EMPEROR.

By this time great changes had happened in the affairs of the continent. The elector of Bavaria
was chosen emperor of Germany at Franckfort on the Maine, and crowned by the name of Charles
VII. on the twelfth day of February. Thither the imperial diet was removed from Batisbon; they
confirmed his election, and indulged him with a subsidy of fifty Roman months, amounting to
about two hundred thousand pounds sterling. In the meantime the Austrian general, Khevenhuller,
ravaged his electorate, and made himself master of Munich the capital of Bavaria; he likewise
laid part of the palatinate under contribution, in resentment for that elector's having sent
a body of his troops to reinforce the Imperial army. In March, count Saxe, with a detachment
of French and Bavarians, reduced Egra; and the Austrians were obliged to evacuate Bavaria,
though they afterwards returned. Khevenhuller took post in the neighbourhood of Passau, and
detached general Beraclau to Dinglesing on the Iser, to observe the motions of the enemy, who
were now become extremely formidable. In May, a detachment of French and Bavarians advanced
to the castle of Hilk-Ersberg on the Danube, with a view to take possession of a bridge over
the river; the Austrian garrison immediately marched out to give them battle, and a severe
action ensued, in which the Imperialists were defeated.

THE KING OF PRUSSIA GAINS THE BATTLE AT CZASLAW.

In the beginning of the year the queen of Hungary had assembled two considerable armies in
Moravia and Bohemia. Prince Charles of Lorraine, at the head of fifty thousand men, advanced
against the Saxons and Prussians, who thought proper to retire with precipitation from Moravia,
which they had invaded. Then the prince took the route to Bohemia; and marshal Broglio, who
commanded the French forces in that country, must have fallen a sacrifice, had not the king
of Prussia received a strong reinforcement, and entered that kingdom before his allies could
be attacked. The two armies advanced towards each other; and on the seventeenth of May joined
battle at Czaslaw, where the Austrians at first gained a manifest advantage, and penetrated
as far as the Prussian baggage; then the irregulars began to plunder so eagerly, that they
neglected every other consideration. The Prussian infantry took this opportunity to rally;
the battle was renewed, and after a very obstinate contest, the victory was snatched out of
the hands of the Austrians, who were obliged to retire with the loss of five thousand men killed,
and twelve hundred taken by the enemy. The Prussians paid dear for the honour of remaining
on the field of battle; and from the circumstances of this action, the king is said to have
conceived a disgust to the war. When the Austrians made such progress in the beginning of the
engagement, he rode off with great expedition, until he was recalled by a message from his
general, the count de Schwerin, assuring his majesty that there was no danger of a defeat.
Immediately after this battle, he discovered an inclination to accommodate all differences
with the queen of Hungary. The earl of Hyndford, ambassador from the court of Great Britain,
who accompanied him in this campaign, and was vested with full powers by her Hungarian majesty,
did not fail to cultivate this favourable disposition; and on the first day of June, a treaty
of peace between the two powers was concluded at Breslau. The queen ceded to his Prussian majesty
the Upper and Lower Selesia, with the county of Glatz in Bohemia; and he charged himself with
the payment of the sum lent by the merchants of London to the late emperor, on the Silesian
revenues. He likewise engaged to observe a strict neutrality during the war, and to withdraw
his forces from Bohemia in fifteen, days after the ratification of the treaty, in which were
comprehended the king of Great Britain elector of Hanover, the czarina, the king of Denmark,
the states-general, the house of Wolfenbuttle, and the king of Poland elector of Saxony, on
certain conditions, which were accepted.

The king of Prussia recalled his troops; while mare-schal Broglio, who commanded the French
auxiliaries in that kingdom, and the count de Belleisle, abandoned their magazines and baggage,
and retired with precipitation under the cannon of Prague. There they intrenched themselves
in an advantageous situation; and prince Charles being joined by the other body of Austrians,
under prince Lobkowitz, encamped in sight of them on the hills of Girinsnitz. The grand duke
of Tuscany arrived in the Austrian army, of which he took the command; and the French generals
offered to surrender Prague, Egra, and all the other places they possessed in Bohemia, provided
they might be allowed to march off with their arms, artillery, and baggage. The proposal was
rejected, and Prague invested on all sides about the end of July. Though the operations of
the siege were carried on in an awkward and slovenly manner, the place was so effectually blocked
up, that famine must have compelled the French to surrender at discretion, had not very extraordinary
efforts been made for their relief. The emperor had made advances to the queen of Hungary.
He promised that the French forces should quit Bohemia, and evacuate the empire; and he offered
to renounce all pretensions to the kingdom of Bohemia, on condition that the Austrians would
restore Bavaria; but these conditions were declined by the court of Vienna. The king of France
was no sooner apprized of the condition to which the generals Broglio and Belleisle were reduced,
than he sent orders to mareshal Maillebois, who commanded his army on the Bhine, to march to
their relief. His troops were immediately put in motion; and when they reached Amberg in the
Upper Palatinate, were joined by the French and Imperialists from Bavaria. Prince Charles of
Lorraine having received intelligence of their junction and design, left eighteen thousand
men to maintain the blockade of Prague, under the command of general Festititz, while he himself,
with the rest of his army, advanced to Hay-don on the frontiers of Bohemia. There he was joined
by count Khevenhuller, who from Bavaria had followed the enemy, now commanded by count Seckendorf,
and the count de Saxe. Seckendorf however was sent back to Bavaria, while mareschal Maillebois
entered Bohemia on the twenty-fifth day of September. But he marched with such precaution,
that prince Charles could not bring him to an engagement. Meanwhile Festititz, for want of
sufficient force, was obliged to abandon the blockade of Prague; and the French generals being
now at liberty, took post at Leutmaritz. Maillebois advanced as far as Kadan; but seeing the
Austrians possessed of all the passes of the mountains, he marched back to the palatinate,
and was miserably harassed in his retreat by prince Charles, who had left a strong body with
prince Lobkowitz to watch the motions of Belleisle and Broglio.

EXTRAORDINARY RETREAT OF M. DE BELLEISLE.

These generals seeing themselves surrounded on all hands, returned to Prague, from whence Broglio
made his escape in the habit of a courier, and was sent to command the army of Maillebois,
who was by this time disgraced. Prince Lobkowitz, who now directed the blockade of Prague,
had so effectually cut off all communication between that place and the adjacent country, that
in a little time the French troops were reduced to great extremity, both from the severity
of the season, and the want of provisions. They were already reduced to the necessity of eating
horse flesh, and unclean animals; and they had no other prospect but that of perishing by famine
or war, when their commander formed the scheme of a retreat, which was actually put in execution.
Having taken some artful precautions to deceive the enemy, he, in the middle of December, departed
from Prague at midnight, with about fourteen thousand men, thirty pieces of artillery, and
some of the principal citizens as hostages for the safety of nine hundred soldiers whom he
had left in garrison. Notwithstanding the difficulties he must have encountered at that season
of the year, in a broken and unfrequented road, which he purposely chose, he marched with such
expedition, that he had gained the passes of the mountains before he was overtaken by the horse
and hussars of prince Lobkowitz. The fatigue and hardships which the miserable soldiers underwent
are inexpressible. A great number perished in the snow, and many hundreds, fainting with weariness,
cold, and hunger, were left to the mercy of the Austrian irregulars, consisting of the most
barbarous people on the face of the earth. The count de Belleisle, though tortured with the
hip-gout, behaved with surprising resolution and activity. He caused himself to be carried
on a litter to every place where he thought his presence was necessary, and made such dispositions,
that the pursuers never could make an impression upon the body of his troops; but all his artillery,
baggage, and even his own equipage, fell into the hands of the enemy. On the twenty-ninth day
of December, he arrived at Egra, from whence he proceeded to Alsace without further molestation;
but when he returned to Versailles, he met with a very cold reception, notwithstanding the
gallant exploit which he had performed. After his escape, prince Lobkowitz returned to Prague,
and the small garrison which Belleisle had left in that place surrendered upon honourable terms;
so that this capital reverted to the house of Austria.

THE KING OF GREAT BRITAIN FORMS AN ARMY IN FLANDERS.

The king of Great Britain resolved to make a powerful diversion in the Netherlands, and in
the month of April, ordered sixteen thousand effective men to be embarked for that country;
but as this step was taken without any previous concert with the states-general, the earl of
Stair, destined to the command of the forces in Flanders, was in the meantime appointed ambassador-extraordinary
and plenipotentiary to their high mightinesses, in order to persuade them to co-operate vigorously
in the plan which his Britannic majesty had formed; a plan by which Great Britain was engaged
as a principal in a foreign dispute, and entailed upon herself the whole burden of an expensive
war, big with ruin and disgrace. England, from being the umpire, was now become a party in
all continental quarrels; and, instead of trimming the balance of Europe, lavished away her
blood and treasure in supporting the interest and allies of a puny electorate in the north
of Germany. The king of Prussia had been at variance with the elector of Hanover. The duchy
of Mecklenburgh was the avowed subject of dispute; but his Prussian majesty is said to have
had other more provoking causes of complaint, which however he did not think proper to divulge.
The king of Great Britain found it convenient to accommodate these differences. In the course
of this summer the two powers concluded a convention, in consequence of which the troops of
Hanover evacuated Mecklenburgh, and three regiments of Brandenburgh took possession of those
bailiwicks that were mortgaged to the king of Prussia. The elector of Hanover being now secured
from danger, sixteen thousand troops of that country, together with the six thousand auxiliary
Hessians, began their march for the Netherlands; and about the middle of October arrived in
the neighbourhood of Brussels, where they encamped. The earl of Stair repaired to Ghent, where
the British forces were quartered: a body of Austrians was assembled; and though the season
was far advanced, he seemed determined upon some expedition; but all of a sudden the troops
were sent into winter-quarters. The Austrians retired to Luxembourg; the English and Hessians
remained in Flanders; and the Hanoverians marched into the county of Liege, without paying
any regard to the bishop's protestation.

PROGRESS OF THE WAR BETWEEN RUSSIA AND SWEDEN.

The states-general had made a considerable augmentation of their forces by sea and land; but,
notwithstanding the repeated instances of the earl of Stair, they resolved to adhere to their
neutrality; they dreaded the neighbourhood of the French; and they were far from being pleased
to see the English get footing in the Netherlands. The friends of the house of Orange began
to exert themselves; the states of Groningen and West Friesland protested, in favour of the
prince, against the promotion of foreign generals which had lately been made; but his interest
was powerfully opposed by the provinces of Zealand and Holland, which had the greatest weight
in the republic. The revolution in Russia did not put an end to the war with Sweden. These
two powers had agreed to an armistice of three months, during which the czarina augmented her
forces in Finland.

She likewise ordered the counts Osterman and Munich, with their adherents, to be tried; they
were condemned to death, but pardoned on the scaffold, and sent in exile to Siberia. The Swedes,
still encouraged by the intrigues of France, refused to listen to any terms of accommodation,
unless Carelia, and the other conquests of the czar Peter, should be restored. The French court
had expected to bring over the new empress to their measures; but they found her as well disposed
as her predecessor to assist the house of Austria. She remitted a considerable sum of money
to the queen of Hungary; and at the same time congratulated the elector of Bavaria on his elevation
to the Imperial throne. The ceremony of her coronation was performed in May, with great solemnity,
at Moscow; and in November she declared her nephew, the duke of Holstein-Gottorp, her successor,
by the title of grand prince of all the Russias. The cessation of arms being expired, general
Lasci reduced Fredericksheim, and obliged the Swedish army, commanded by count Lewenhaupt,
to retire before him, from one place to another, until at length they were quite surrounded
near Helsingsors. August 22, 1688, it was thought I was about coming out of prison, and everything
seemed to tend toward it. But the Lord gave me a sense that, far from being willing to deliver
me they were only laying new snares to ruin me more effectually, and to make Father La Mothe
known to the king, and esteemed by him. On the day mentioned, which was my birthday, being forty years of
age, I awaked under an impression of Jesus Christ in an agony, seeing the counsel of the Jews against
Him. I knew that none but God could deliver me out of prison, and I was satisfied that He would
do it one day by His own right hand, though ignorant of the manner, and leaving it wholly to
Himself.

In the order of Divine Providence my case was laid before Madame de Maintenon, who became deeply
interested in the account given her of my sufferings, and at length procured my release. A few
days afterward I had my first interview with the Abbe Fenelon.

Coming out of St. Mary's I retired into the community of Mad. Miramion, where I kept my bed of
a fever three months, and had an imposthume in my eye. Yet at this time I was accused of going
continually out, holding suspected assemblies, together with other groundless falsehoods. In this
house my daughter was married to Mons. L. Nicholas Fouquet, Count
de Vaux.

I removed to my daughter's house, and on account of her extreme youth,
lived with her two years and an half.

Even there my enemies were ever forging one thing after another against me, I then wanted
to retire quite secretly, to the house of the Benedictines at Montargis, (my native place) but
it was discovered, and both friends and enemies jointly prevented it.

The family in which my daughter was married being of the number of Abbe Fenelon's friends, I had
the opportunity of often seeing him at our house. We had some conversations on the subject of a
spiritual life, in which he made several objections to my experiences therein. I answered
them with my usual simplicity, which, as I found, gained upon him. As the affair of Molinos at that
time made a great noise, the plainest things were distrusted, and the terms used by mystic
writers exploded. But I so clearly expounded everything to him, and so fully solved all his objections,
that no one more fully imbibed my sentiments than he; which has since laid the foundation of
that persecution he has suffered. His answers to the Bishop of Meaux
evidently show this to all who have read them.

I now took a little
private house, to follow the inclination I had for retirement; where
I sometimes had the pleasure of seeing my family and a few particular
friends. Certain young ladies of St. Cyr, having informed Mad. Maintenon,
that they found in my conversation something which attracted them
to God, she encouraged me to continue my instructions to them. About the beginning of May,
they entered the Bolognese; then the king of Sardinia declaring against them, joined the Austrian
army commanded by count Traun; marched into the duchy of Parma; and understanding that the
duke of Modena had engaged in a treaty with the Spaniards, dispossessed that prince of his
dominions. The duke de Montemar, seeing his army diminished by sickness and desertion, retreated
to the kingdom of Naples, and was followed by the king of Sardinia as far-as Rimini.

Here he received intelligence that Don Philip, third son of his catholic majesty, had made
an irruption into Savoy with another army of Spaniards, and already taken possession of Chamberri,
the capital. He forthwith began his march for Piedmont. Don Philip abandoned Savoy at his approach,
and retreating into Dauphiné, took post under the cannon of fort Barreaux. The king pursued
him thither, and both armies remained in sight of each other till the month of December, when
the marquis de Minas, an active and enterprising general, arrived from Madrid, and took upon
him the command of the forces under Don Philip. This general's first exploit was against the
castle of Aspremont, in the neighbourhood of the Sardinian camp. He attacked it so vigorously,
that the garrison was obliged to capitulate in four-and-forty hours. The loss of this important
post compelled the king to retire into Piedmont, and the Spaniards marched back into Savoy,
where they established their winter quarters. In the meantime the duke de Montemar, who directed
the other Spanish army, though the duke of Modena was nominal generalissimo, resigned his command
to count Gages, who attempted to penetrate into Tuscany; but was prevented by the vigilance
of count Traun, the Austrian general. In December he quartered his troops in the Bolognese
and Romagna; while the Austrian s and Piedmontese were distributed in the Modenese and Parmesan.
The pope was passive during the whole campaign; the Venetians maintained their neutrality,
and the king of the two Sicilies was overawed by the British fleet in the Mediterranean.

The new ministry in England had sent out admiral Matthews to assume the command of this squadron,
which had been for some time conducted by Lestock, an inferior officer, as Haddock had been
obliged to resign his commission on account of his ill state of health. Matthews was likewise
invested with the character of minister-plenipotentiary to the king of Sardinia and the states
of Italy. Immediately after he had taken possession of his command, he ordered captain Norris
to destroy five Spanish galleys which had put into the bay of St. Tropez; and this service
was effectually performed. In May he detached commodore Rowley, with eight sail, to cruise
off the harbour of Toulon; and a great number of merchant ships belonging to the enemy fell
into his hands. In August he sent commodore Martin with another squadron into the bay of Naples,
to bombard that city, unless his Sicilian majesty would immediately recall his troops, which
had joined the Spanish army, and promise to remain neutral during the continuance of the war.
Naples was immediately filled with consternation; the king subscribed to these conditions;
and the English squadron rejoined the admiral on the road of Hieres, which he had chosen for
his winter station. Before this period he had landed some men at St. Remo, in the territories
of Genoa, and destroyed the magazines that were erected for the use of the Spanish army. He
had likewise ordered two of his cruisers to attack a Spanish ship of the line which lay at
anchor in the port of Ajaccio, in the island of Corsica; but the Spanish captain set his men
on shore, and blew up his ship, rather than she should fall into the hands of the English.

OPERATIONS IN THE WEST INDIES. 

Often the poor little nests must suffer; but only think how ingenious their owners are if they
do. A mower once cut off the upper part of a lark's nest. The lark sitting in it was uninjured. The man
was very sorry for what he had done; but there was no help for it--at least so he thought.
The lark knew better, and soon afterward a beautiful dome was found made of grass over the nest
by the patient, brave bird.

THE STORY OF A SEAL.

Some years ago a German Artist was travelling in Norway, on foot,
with his knapsack on his back and his stick in his hand.

     He lodged most of time in the cottages that he fell in with
     on his road. In one of them there was a seal, which the fisherman
     had found on the sand, after harpooning the mother of
     the poor animal. No sooner was it admitted into the cottage
     than the seal became the friend of the family and the playmate
     of the children. It played from morning till night with them,
     would lick their hands, and call them with a gentle little
     cry, which is not unlike the human voice, and it would look
     at them tenderly with its large blue eyes, shaded by long
     black lashes. It almost always followed its master to fish,
     swimming around the boat and taking a great many fish, which it delivered
to the fisherman without even giving them a bite.

A dog could not have been more devoted, faithful, teachable, or even more intelligent.

THE KING OF THE MOUNTAINS.

"What is that, mother?" "The eagle, boy, Proudly careering his course with joy, Firm on his
own mountain vigor relying, Breasting the dark storm, the red bolt defying; His wing on the wind,
and his eye on the sun, He swerves not a hair, but bears onward, right on. Boy, may the eagle's
flight ever be thine, Onward and upward, and true to the line."

THE BEE.

Oh! busy bee, On wing so free, Yet all in order true; Each seems to know, Both where to go, And
what it has to do.

'Mid summer heat, The honey sweet, It gathers while it may; In tiny
drops, And never stops To waste its time in play.

I hear it come,
I know its hum; It flies from flower to flower; And to its store,
A little more It adds, each day and hour.

V--THE VULTURE.

On rugged
rods the Vulture waits To scent its carrion prey, When down, into
the plains below It takes its rapid way.

W--THE WOLF.

Fierce is
the wolf, and crafty too, And swift of foot is he; In forest depths
and mountain glens He loves to wander free.

X--THE XEMA.

In far-off
lands, 'neath northern skies, And on the surfy shore, Lives the lone
Xema, and delights In ocean's thunder roar.

MOTHER AND PUPS.

The
dog that you see here looking quite maternal with her family around
her, is the sheep dog, the shepherd's faithful and invaluable friend. They said, their burdens were increased
to maintain quarrels with which they had no concern; to defray the enormous expense of inactive
fleets and pacific armies. Lord Carteret had by this time insinuated himself into the confidence
of his sovereign, and engrossed the whole direction of public affairs. The war with Spain was
now become a secondary consideration, and neglected accordingly; while the chief attention
of the new minister was turned upon the affairs of the continent. The dispute with Spain concerned
Britain only. The interests of Hanover were connected with the troubles of the empire. By pursuing
this object he soothed the wishes of his master, and opened a more ample field for his own
ambition. He had studied the policy of the continent with peculiar eagerness. This was the
favourite subject of his reflection, upon which he thought and spoke with a degree of enthusiasm.
The intolerable taxes, the poverty, the ruined commerce of his country, the iniquity of standing
armies, votes of credit, and foreign connexions, upon which he had so often expatiated, were
now forgotten or overlooked. He saw nothing but glory, conquest, or acquired dominion. He set
the power of France at defiance; and as if Great Britain had felt no distress, but teemed with
treasure which she could not otherwise employ, he poured forth her millions with a rash and
desperate hand, in purchasing beggarly allies, and maintaining mercenary armies. The earl of
Stair had arrived in England towards the end of August, and conferred with his majesty. A privy-council
was summoned; and in a few days that nobleman returned to Holland. Lord Carteret was sent with
a commission to the Hague in September; and when he returned, the baggage of the king and the
duke of Cumberland, which had been shipped for Flanders, was ordered to be brought on shore.
The parliament met on the sixteenth day of November, when his majesty told them, that he had
augmented the British forces in the low countries with sixteen thousand Hanoverians and the
Hessian auxiliaries, in order to form such a force, in conjunction with the Austrian troops,
as might be of service to the common cause at all events. He extolled the magnanimity and fortitude
of the queen of Hungary, as well as the resolute conduct of the king of Sardinia, and that
prince's strict adherence to his engagements, though attacked in his own dominions. He mentioned
the requisition made by Sweden, of his good offices for procuring a peace between that nation
and Eussia; the defensive alliances which he had concluded with the czarina, and with the king
of Prussia; as events which could not have been expected, if Great Britain had not manifested
a seasonable spirit and vigour in defence and assistance of her ancient allies, and in maintaining
the liberties of Europe. He said the honour and interest of his crown and kingdoms, the success
of the war with Spain, the re-establishment of the balance and tranquillity of Europe, would
greatly depend on the prudence and vigour of their resolution. The marquis of Tweedale moved
for an address of thanks, which was opposed by the earl of Chesterfield, for the reasons so
often urged on the same occasion; but supported by lord Carteret on his new-adopted maxims,
with those specious arguments which he could at all times produce, delivered with amazing serenity
and assurance. The motion was agreed to, and the address presented to his majesty. About this
period a treaty of mutual defence and guarantee between his majesty and the king of Prussia,
was signed at Westminster. In the house of commons Mr. Lyttelton made a motion for reviving
the place-bill; but it was opposed by a great number of members who had formerly been strenuous
advocates for this measure, and rejected upon a division. This was also the fate of a motion
made to renew the inquiry into the conduct of Robert earl of Orford. As many strong presumptions
of guilt had appeared against him in the reports of the secret committee, the nation had reason
to expect that this proposal would have been embraced by a great majority; but several members,
who in the preceding session had been loud in their demands of justice, now shamefully contributed
their talents and interest in stifling the inquiry.

{GEORGE II. 1727-1760}

EXTRAORDINARY MOTION IN THE HOUSE OF LORDS.

When the house of lords took into consideration the several estimates of the expense occasioned
by the forces in the pay of Great Britain, earl Stanhope, at the close of an elegant speech,
moved for an address, to beseech and advise his majesty, that in compassion to his people,
loaded already with such numerous and heavy taxes, such large and growing debts, and greater
annual expenses than the nation at any time before had ever sustained, he would exonerate his
subjects of the charge and burden of those mercenaries who were taken into the service last
year, without the advice or consent of parliament. The motion was supported by the earl of
Sandwich, who took occasion to speak with great contempt of Hanover; and, in mentioning the
royal family, seemed to forget that decorum which the subject required. He had, indeed, reason
to talk with asperity on the contract by which the Hanoverians had been taken into the pay
of Great Britain. Levy-money was charged to the account, though they were engaged for one year
only, and though not a single regiment had been raised on this occasion; they had been levied
for the security of the electorate; and would have been maintained if England had never engaged
in the affairs of the continent. The duke of Bedford enlarged upon the same subject. A DOWN-RIGHT
SCHOLAR

Is one that has much learning in the ore, unwrought and untried, which time and experience fashions
and refines. He is good metal in the inside, though rough and unscoured without, and therefore hated
of the courtier, that is quite contrary. The time has got a vein of making him ridiculous,
and men laugh at him by tradition, and no unlucky absurdity but is put upon his profession,
and done like a scholar. But his fault is only this, that his mind is [somewhat] too much
taken up with his mind, and his thoughts not loaden with any carriage besides. He has not put on
the quaint garb of the age, which is now a man's [Imprimis and all the Item.[40]] He has not humbled
his meditations to the industry of complement, nor afflicted his brain in an elaborate leg. His body
is not set upon nice pins, to be turning and flexible for every motion, but his scrape is homely
and his nod worse. He cannot kiss his hand and cry, madam, nor talk idle enough to bear her company.
His smacking of a gentlewoman is somewhat too savory, and he mistakes her nose for her lips.
A very woodcock would puzzle him in carving, and he wants the logick of a capon. He has not the
glib faculty of sliding over a tale, but his words come squeamishly out of his mouth, and the laughter
commonly before the jest. He names this word college too often, and
his discourse beats too much on the university. The perplexity of
mannerliness will not let him feed, and he is sharp set at an argument
when he should cut his meat. Their suggestions were answered; their conduct was severely stigmatized by
the earl of Chesterfield, who observed, that the assembling an army in Flanders, without the
concurrence of the states-general, or any other power engaged by treaty, or bound by interest,
to support the queen of Hungary, was a rash and ridiculous measure; the taking sixteen thousand
Hanoverians into British pay, without consulting the parliament, seemed highly derogatory to
the rights and dignity of the great council of the nation, and a very dangerous precedent to
future times; that these troops could not be employed against the emperor, whom they had already
recognised; that the arms and wealth of Britain alone were altogether insufficient to raise
the house of Austria to its former strength, dominion, and influence; that the assembling an
army in Flanders would engage the nation as principals in an expensive and ruinous war, with
a power which it ought not to provoke, and could not pretend to withstand in that manner; that
while Great Britain exhausted herself almost to ruin, in pursuance of schemes founded on engagements
to the queen of Hungary, the electorate of Hanover, though under the same engagements, and
governed by the same prince, did not appear to contribute any thing as an ally to her assistance,
but was paid by Great Britain for all the forces it had sent into the field, at a very exorbitant
price; that nothing could be more absurd and iniquitous than to hire these mercenaries, while
a numerous army lay inactive at home, and the nation groaned under such intolerable burdens.
"It may be proper," added he, "to repeat what may be forgotten in the multitude of other objects,
that this nation, after having exalted the elector of Hanover from a state of obscurity to
the crown, is condemned to hire the troops of that electorate to fight their own cause; to
hire them at a rate which was never demanded before; and to pay levy-money for them, though
it is known to all Europe that they were not raised for this occasion." All the partisans of
the old ministry joined in the opposition to earl Stanhope's motion, which was rejected by
the majority. Then the earl of Scarborough moved for an address, to approve of the measures
which had been taken on the continent; and this was likewise carried by dint of numbers. It
was not, however, a very eligible victory; what they gained in parliament they lost with the
people. The new ministers became more odious than their predecessors; and people began to think
that public virtue was an empty name.

But the most severe opposition they underwent was in their endeavours to support a bill which
they had concerted, and which had passed through the house of commons with great precipitation;
it repealed certain duties on spirituous liquors, and licenses for retailing these liquors;
and imposed others at an easier rate. 19. In 1671 "Le vice ridicule" appeared. A sort of translation
of Earle's characters.

20. Pictures of Passions, Fancies, and Affections, poetically deciphered in variety of characters
(no date).

21. Characters of gentlemen that have put in to the Ladies Invention. This begins--"A little Beau of
the city strain."
22. Characters of several ingenious designing gentlewomen, who have
lately put in to the Ladies Invention, which is intended to be drawn
as soon as full. (There is no date to either of these.)

One or two
extracts may be added from Anthony Wood.

"Lord Falkland, when he
became one of the gentlemen of His Majesty's Privy Chamber, had frequent
retirements to Great Tew and sometimes to Oxon, for the company of
and conversation with learned and witty men. In these dismal
caverns they lay until they recovered some use of their faculties, and then they had recourse
to the same mischievous potion; thus consuming their health, and ruining their families, in
hideous receptacles of the most filthy vice, resounding with riot, execration, and blasphemy.
Such beastly practices too plainly denoted a total want of all policy and civil regulations,
and would have reflected disgrace upon the most barbarous community. In order to restrain this
evil, which was become intolerable, the legislature enacted that law which we have already
mentioned. But the populace soon broke through all restraint. Though no license was obtained,
and no duty paid, the liquor continued to be sold in all corners of the streets, informers
were intimidated by the threats of the people, and the justices of the peace, either from indolence
or corruption, neglected to put the law in execution. The new ministers foresaw that a great
revenue would accrue to the crown from a repeal of this act; and this measure they thought
they might the more decently take, as the law had proved ineffectual; for it appeared that
the consumption of gin had considerably increased every year since those heavy duties were
imposed. They therefore pretended, that should the price of the liquor be moderately raised,
and licenses granted at twenty shillings each to the retailers, the lowest class of people
would be debarred the use of it to excess; their morals would of consequence be mended; and
a considerable sum of money might be raised for the support of the war, by mortgaging the revenue
arising from the duty and the licenses. It was ten o'clock at night. All wore the habit of mourning.
I had traveled thirty leagues in a day and a night. As I was very weak, not having taken any nourishment,
I was instantly put to bed.

About two o'clock in the morning my husband got up, and having gone out of my chamber, he returned
presently, crying out with all his might, "My daughter is dead!" She was my only daughter,
as dearly beloved as truly lovely. She had so many graces both of body and mind conferred on
her, that one must have been insensible not to have loved her. She had an extraordinary share
of love to God. Often was she found in corners at prayer. As soon as she perceived me at prayer,
she came and joined. If she discovered that I had been without her, she would weep bitterly and cry,
"Ah, mamma, you pray but I don't." When we were alone and she saw my eyes closed she would whisper,
"Are you asleep?" Then she would cry out, "Ah no, you are praying to our dear Jesus." Dropping
on her knees before me she would begin to pray too. She was several times whipped by her grandmother,
because she said, she would never have any other husband but our Lord. She could never make her
say otherwise. She was innocent and modest as a little angel; very dutiful and endearing, and
withal very beautiful. Her father doted on her, to me she was very dear, much more for the
qualities of her mind than those of her beautiful person.

I looked upon her as my only consolation on earth.

She had as much affection for me, as her brother had aversion and contempt. She died of an unseasonable
bleeding. But what shall I say? She died by the hands of Him who
was pleased, for wise reasons of His own, to strip me of all.

There
now remained to me only the son of my sorrow.
These prosecutions were founded on ambiguities in charters, or trivial informalities in the
choice of magistrates. An appeal on such a process was brought into the house of lords; and
this evil falling under consideration, a bill was prepared for securing the independency of
corporations; but as it tended to diminish the influence of the ministry, they argued against
it with their usual eagerness and success; and it was rejected on a division. The mutiny bill
and several others passed through both houses. The commons granted supplies to the amount of
six millions, raised by the land-tax, the malt-tax, duties on spirituous liquors and licenses,
and a loan from the sinking fund. In two years the national debt had suffered an increase of
two millions four hundred thousand pounds.

{1743}

On the twenty-first day of April the session was closed in the usual manner. The king, in his
speech to both houses, told them, that, at the requisition of the queen of Hungary, he had
ordered his army, in conjunction with the Austrians, to pass the Rhine for her support and
assistance; that he continued one squadron of ships in the Mediterranean, and another in the
West Indies. He thanked the commons for the ample supplies they had granted; and declared it
was the fixed purpose of his heart to promote the true interest and happiness of his kingdoms.
Immediately after the prorogation of parliament he embarked for Germany, accompanied by the
duke of Cumberland, lord Carteret, and other persons of distinction.

CONVENTION BETWEEN THE EMPEROR AND THE QUEEN OF HUNGARY.

At this period the queen of Hungary seemed to triumph over all her enemies. The French were
driven out of Bohemia and part of the Upper Palatinate; and their forces under mareschal Broglio
were posted on the Danube. Prince Charles of Lorraine, at the head of the Austrian army, entered
Bavaria; and in April obtained a victory over a body of Bavarians at Braunau; at the same time,
three bodies of Croatians penetrating through the passes of the Tyrolese, ravaged the whole
country to the very gates of Munich. The emperor pressed the French general to hazard a battle;
but he refused to run the risk, though he had received a strong reinforcement from France.
His Imperial majesty thinking himself unsafe in Munich, retired to Augsburgh; mareschal Seckendorf
retreated with the Bavarian troops to Ingoldstadt, where he was afterwards joined by mareschal
Broglio, whose troops had in this retreat been pursued and terribly harassed by the Austrian
cavalry and hussars. Prince Charles had opened a free communication with Munich, which now
for the third time fell into the hands of the queen of Hungary. Her arms likewise reduced Friedberg
and Landsperg, while prince Charles continued to pursue the French to Dona-wert, where they
were joined by twelve thousand men from the Bhine. Mr. Reed conceives him to have been a Jesuit,
and Pope terms him an Irish priest. Langbaine says, that "his acquaintance with the nobility
was more than with the muses, and he had a greater propensity to
rhyming, than a genius to poetry."
He now made advances towards an accommodation with the queen of Hungary. His general, Seckendorf,
had an interview with count Khevenhuller at the convent of Lowerscon-field, where a convention
was signed. This treaty imported, that the emperor should remain neuter during the continuance
of the present war, and that his troops should be quartered in Franconia; that the queen of
Hungary should keep possession of Bavaria till the peace; that Braunau and Scarding should
be delivered up to the Austrians; that the French garrison of Ingoldstadt should be permitted
to withdraw, and be replaced by Bavarians; but that the Austrian generals should be put in
possession of all the artillery, magazines, and warlike stores belonging to the French, which
should be found in the place. The governors of Egra and Ingoldstadt refusing to acquiesce in
the capitulation, the Austrians had recourse to the operations of war; and both places were
reduced. In Ingoldstadt they found all the emperor's domestic treasure, jewels, plate, pictures,
cabinets, and curiosities, with the archives of the house of Bavaria, the most valuable effects
belonging to the nobility of that electorate, a prodigious train of artillery, and a vast quantity
of provisions, arms, and ammunition.

DIFFERENCE BETWEEN PRUSSIA AND THE ELECTOR OF HANOVER.

The French king, baffled in all the efforts he had hitherto made for the support of the emperor,
ordered his minister at Franckfort to deliver a declaration to the diet, professing himself
extremely well pleased to hear they intended to interpose their mediation for terminating the
war. He said, he was no less satisfied with the treaty of neutrality which the emperor had
concluded with the queen of Hungary; an event of which he was no sooner informed, than he had
ordered his troops to return to the frontiers of his dominions, that the Germanic body might
be convinced of his equity and moderation. To this declaration the queen of Hungary answered
in a rescript, that the design of France was to embarrass her affairs, and deprive her of the
assistance of her allies; that the elector of Bavaria could not be considered as a neutral
party in his own cause; that the mediation of the empire could only produce a peace either
with or without the concurrence of France; that in the former case no solid peace could be
expected; in the latter, it was easy to foresee, that France would pay no regard to a peace
in which she should have no concern. She affirmed, that the aim of the French king was solely
to gain time to repair his losses, that he might afterwards revive the troubles of the empire.
The elector of Mentz, who had favoured the emperor, was now dead, and his successor inclined
to the Austrian interest. This family includes the weasel (its smallest member), the stoat, the
ferret, the pole-cat, the marten, and the otter (its largest member). You may then think of the
Otter as a water-ferret, or water-weasel. He can swim most elegantly, and he is a beautiful
diver. Let a fish glide underneath him, and he is after it in a moment; and as the fish darts
here and there to escape, the Otter follows each rapid movement with unerring precision. When
the fish is caught, the Otter carries it to the bank and makes a meal. But the Otter is like
naughty Jack who leaves a saucy plate--he spoils much more fish than he eats. The trout and other
fish are so much alarmed at the appearance of an Otter, that they will sometimes fling themselves
on the bank to get out of his way.

THE MASTIFF.

The mastiff is a large, grave, sullen-looking dog, with a wide chest, noble head, long switch
tail, bright eyes, and a loud, deep voice. Of all dogs this is the most vigilant watcher over the property
of his master, and nothing can tempt him to betray the confidence reposed in him. Notwithstanding
his commanding appearance, and the strictness with which he guards the property of his master, the
mastiff is possessed of great mildness of character, and is very grateful for any favors bestowed
upon him. I once went into the barn of a friend where there was a mastiff chained; I went up
to the dog and patted him on the head, when out rushed the groom from the stable exclaiming,
"Come away, sir! He's dangerous with strangers." But I did not remove my hand nor show any fear.
The consequence was, that the dog and I were the best of friends; but had I shown any fear,
and hastily removed my hand, I might have fared rather badly, for this dog always couples fear
with guilt.

THE CUNNING WOOD-PIGEONS.

One who loves our feathered friends has described a curious instance of their instinct. On the
back lawn at a gentleman's house, they have a feeding-box for the pheasants, which opens on their
perching upon it, but remains shut if any lesser bird than a hen pheasant perches there, which
saves the contents from the thefts of these, and of rats, mice, and other vermin. But the gentleman
discovered that the contents of the box was being more rapidly emptied than the wants of the
pheasants warranted. So he kept a watch on the box, and soon discovered a wood-pigeon perch on
the box, but his weight not being sufficient to open the lid, he beckoned to another pigeon,
and their combined weight made the lid fly open, and after each had taken what they required,
they flew away, and the box closed with a "click."

SEA REPTILES.

There were in the sea in very ancient times--long before the flood--two very large and wonderful
reptiles. Of them we present striking illustrations. One of them has been named the Ichthyosaurus,
which means Fish Reptile. Its head somewhat resembled that of the crocodile, except that the
orbit was much larger, and had the nostril placed close to it, as in the whale, and not near the
end of the snout. It had four paddles and a powerful tail, and was very active in its movements
and a rapid swimmer.

The other huge reptile was the Plesiosaurus, the meaning of which is "Near to a Reptile." Its
structure was very singular and its character very strange. In the words of Buckland: "To the
head of a lizard, it united the teeth of the crocodile, a neck of enormous length, resembling
the body of a serpent, a trunk and a tail of the size of an ordinary quadruped, the ribs of a chameleon,
and the paddles of a whale."

SWISS MOUNTAIN SCENERY.
In Switzerland, one of the chief employments of the people is that
of herdsmen and shepherds, and nearly the half of the surface of the
country is occupied as mountain pastures and meadows. Here you see
the woman tending the sheep and goats, and spinning industriously,
while her husband is busy with some other part of the duties of tending
the sheep. It is often painful to see how much the poor sheep and
oxen suffer while being driven through the streets. It is pitiful
to see them looking in vain for some place of rest and shelter. Little
boys in towns sometimes like to HELP--as they call it--to drive cattle,
but they generally increase the terror and confusion of the poor beasts,
and little think of the pain they are causing. Sheep and goats are
very useful to us; besides serving us for food, they supply our cloth
and flannel clothes, blankets, and other warm coverings.

PARTRIDGE
AND YOUNG. Had they been properly pursued, before
they recollected themselves from their first confusion, in all probability they would have
sustained a total overthrow. The earl of Stair proposed that a body of cavalry should be detached
on this service; but his advice was overruled. The loss of the allies in this action amounted
to two thousand men. The generals Clayton and Monroy were killed; the duke of Cumberland, who
exhibited uncommon proofs of courage, was shot through the calf of the leg; the earl of Albemarle,
general Huske, and several other officers of distinction, were wounded. The king exposed his
person to a severe fire of cannon as well as musquetry; he rode between the first and second
lines with his sword drawn, and encouraged the troops to fight for the honour of England. Immediately
after the action he continued his inarch to Hanau, where he was joined by the reinforcement.
The earl of Stair sent a trumpet to mareschal de Noailles, recommending to his protection the
sick and wounded that were left on the field of battle; and these the French general treated
with great care and tenderness. Such generosity softens the rigours of war, and does honour
to humanity.

TREATY OF WORMS.

The two armies continued on different sides of the river till the twelfth day of July, when
the French general receiving intelligence that prince Charles of Lorraine had approached the
Neckar, he suddenly retired, and repassed the Rhine between Worms and Oppenheim. The king of
Great Britain was visited by prince Charles and count Khevenhuller at Hanau, where the future
operations of the campaign were regulated. On the twenty-seventh day of August, the allied
army passed the Rhine at Mentz, and the king fixed his head-quarters in the episcopal palace
of Worms. Here the forces lay encamped till the latter end of September, when they advanced
to Spire, where they were joined by twenty thousand Dutch auxiliaries from the Netherlands.
Mareschal Noailles having retreated into Upper Alsace, the allies took possession of Germersheim,
and demolished the intrenchments which the enemy had raised on the Queich; then they returned
to Mentz, and in October were distributed into winter-quarters, after an inactive campaign
that redounded very little to the honour of those by whom the motions of the army were conducted.
In September a treaty had been concluded at Worms between his Britannic majesty, the king of
Sardinia, and the queen of Hungary. She engaged to maintain thirty thousand men in Italy; the
king of Sardinia obliged himself to employ forty thousand infantry and five thousand horse,
in consideration of his commanding the combined army, and receiving an annual subsidy of two
hundred thousand pounds from Great Britain. As a further gratification, the queen yielded to
him the city of Placentia, with several districts in the duchy of Pavia, and in the Nwarese;
and all her right and pretensions to Final, at present possessed by the re public of Genoa,
which, they hoped, would give it up, on being repaid the purchase money, amounting to three
hundred thousand pounds. This sum the king of England promised to disburse; and moreover to
maintain a strong squadron in the Mediterranean, the commander of which should act in concert
with his Sardinian majesty. Finally, the contracting powers agreed, that Final should be constituted
a free port, like that of Leghorn. Nothing could be more unjust than this treaty, by which
the Genoese were negotiated out of their property. They had purchased the marquisate of Final
of the late emperor for a valuable consideration, and the purchase had been guaranteed by Great
Britain. It could not, therefore, be expected that they would part with this acquisition to
a prince whose power they thought already too formidable; especially on condition of its being
made a free port, to the prejudice of their own commerce. They presented remonstrances against
this article, by their ministers at the courts of London, Vienna, and Turin; and, as very little
regard was paid to their representations, they threw themselves into the arms of France and
Spain for protection.

After the battle of Dettingen, colonel Mentzel, at the head of a large body of irregulars belonging
to the queen of Hungary, made an irruption into Lorraine, part of which they ravaged without
mercy. In September prince Charles, with the Austrian army, entered the Brisgaw, and attempted
to pass the Rhine; but mareschal Coigny had taken such precautions for guarding it on the other
side, that he was obliged to abandon his design, and marching back into the Upper Palatinate,
quartered his troops in that country, and in Bavaria. By this time the earl of Stair had solicited
and obtained leave to resign his command. He had for some time thought himself neglected; and
was unwilling that his reputation should suffer on account of measures in which he had no concern.
In October the king of Great Britain returned to Hanover, and the army separated. The troops
in British pay marched back to the Netherlands, and the rest took their route to their respective
countries. The states-general still wwered between their own immediate interest and their desire
to support the house of Austria. At length, however, they supplied her with a subsidy, and
ordered twenty thousand men to march to her assistance, notwithstanding the intrigues of the
marquis de Fenelon, the French ambassador at the Hague, and the declaration of the king of
Prussia, who disapproved of this measure, and refused them a passage through his territories
to the Rhine.

AFFAIRS IN THE NORTH.

Sweden was filled with discontents, and divided into factions. The generals Bodenbrock and
Lewenhaupt were beheaded, having been sacrificed as scape-goats for the ministry. Some unsuccessful
efforts by sea and land were made against the Russians. At last the peace of Abo was concluded;
and the duke of Holstein-Utin, uncle to the successor of the Russian throne, was chosen as
next heir to the crown of Sweden. A party had been formed in favour of the prince of Denmark;
and the order of the peasants actually elected him as successor. The debates in the college
of nobles rose to a very dangerous degree of animosity, and were appeased by an harangue in
Swedish verse, which one of the senators pronounced. The peasants yielded the point, and the
succession was settled on the duke of Holstein. Denmark, instigated by French councils, began
to make preparations of war against Sweden; but a body of Russian auxiliaries arriving in that
kingdom, under the command of general Keith, and the czarina declaring she would assist the
Swedes with her whole force, the king of Denmark thought proper to disarm. It had been an old
maxim of French policy to embroil the courts of the North, that they might be too much employed
at home to intermeddle in the affairs of Germany, while France was at war with the house of
Austria. Squirrel--squirrel hung his head; "Oh! speak not thus," he sadly said, "Heav'n gave me once
a woodland home Where I the livelong day might roam, And gaily leap from branch to twig As blithe
and merry as a grig; Then came a wicked man who laid The snare by which I'm captive made, And
now 'twill be my mournful doom Instead of in the forest free, To live pent in a narrow room By way of
bush or stately tree! What wonder if, thus sad and lorn, From all
my dearest habits torn, A-foraging I sometimes go And get a snubbing
or a blow? The marquis de Botta, the Austrian minister who had
resided at the court of the czarina, was suspected of having been concerned in the plot; though
the grounds of this suspicion did not appear until after he was recalled, and sent as ambassador
to the court of Berlin. The empress demanded satisfaction of the queen of Hungary, who appointed
commissioners to inquire into his conduct, and he was acquitted; but the czarina was not at
all satisfied of his innocence. In February a defensive treaty of alliance was concluded between
the princess and the king of Great Britain.

{GEORGE II. 1727-1760}

BATTLE OF CAMPO-SANTO.

