"My maid, Juliette, ran forward to look at it, and immediately uttered a scream.

"'Oh,' she cried, 'it is the ring!' and became as pale as death.

"The children extricated the ring from among the twigs, and carried it in great glee to my mother.

"'Yes, indeed it is my ring,' said my mother, with deep emotion. 'Oh, good and honest James!
oh, poor Mary, what injustice we have done you! I am glad enough to find my ring again, but
if I could find James and Mary, I would gladly sacrifice the ring to repair the wrong which
we have done them.'

"I was curious to know by what chance the ring was carried into the magpie's nest at the top
of the tree, and the old huntsman, Anthony, gave a ready explanation.

"'Neither the gardener James nor his daughter could have hidden the ring in this place, that
is very clear,' said he. 'The tree was too high, and it would have been impossible to climb
up so far. Besides which, they had not time to do so. Mary had scarcely returned to the house
when she and her father were both arrested. Magpies are greatly attracted by anything that
shines, and if they can find anything sparkling, they carry it off immediately to their nests.
One of these birds must have stolen the ring, and carried it to the tree. That is all the mystery.
The only thing that astonishes me is that an old hunter, as I am, should not have thought sooner
of this explanation.'

"The old man spoke with deep feeling and with tears in his eyes, but they were tears of joy
at seeing your innocence proved.

"'Anthony,' said my mother, 'I believe you are perfectly right, and now I remember quite distinctly
that very often these birds came from the top of this tree to my window, that the sash was
open when the ring disappeared, that the table on which I put the ring was close to the window,
and that, after having shut the door and bolted it, I went into the next room, where I stayed
for some time. No doubt one of these mischievous birds saw the ring from his nest, and, while
I was in the other room, he must have darted in and carried it off.'

"My father was deeply troubled at the conviction, which he could not resist, that you and your
father had been unjustly condemned.

"'My heart is almost broken,' said he, 'for having done these good people so much injury. My
only consolation is that it was not done from ill-will, but in ignorance and error.'

"My father now turned to Juliette, who in the universal rejoicing at the discovery of the ring
remained silent and pale.

"'False woman,' said he, 'deceitful servant! How could you have the hardihood to lie to me
and to the judge, and to compel us to commit an action unwillingly, the iniquity of which now
calls for vengeance? What tempted you to plunge into suffering an old and honest man, and his
poor and virtuous daughter?'

"'Officers, do your duty,' he said to two constables, who had assisted in cutting down the
tree, and who now approached the unhappy Juliette to carry out my father's orders. 'Let her
be put in chains,' he added, in a grave tone,--'the same chains that Mary wore,--and let her
be thrown into the same prison in which she caused Mary to languish. She must suffer all that
Mary suffered, only that, unlike Mary, she has deserved it. What she has been able to hoard
of money or clothes shall be taken from her, to compensate, if it be possible, the unhappy
old man and his daughter who have had to suffer an unjust sentence. The officer who conducted
Mary out of my dominions shall also conduct Juliette, just as she is, to the same place.'

"No one had ever seen my father so exasperated, never had any one heard him speak in such passionate
tones. For a while every one was silent, but at last the officers and servants gave voice to
their sentiments and thoughts.

"'It is well done,' said one of the officers, seizing Juliette by the arm; 'when one digs another's
grave he must fill it himself.'

"'That is what is gained by telling falsehoods,' said the other officer. 'It is true that no
thread is so fine that it cannot be seen in the sunshine.'

"'It was a pretty dress which the young Countess gave to Mary,' said the cook in her turn,
'that made Juliette angry. In her rage, and not knowing well what she was about, she began
to tell lies, and then it was impossible to retract without acknowledging her guilt. The proverb
is true which says that, once the devil has us by the hair, he will hold fast to us afterwards.'

"'It is well, it is well,' said the coachman, who had just finished cutting the tree, and who
still had the axe over his shoulder. 'Let us hope she will mend her ways, if she does not wish
to be worse off in the next world. The tree that bears not good fruit,' said he, shaking his
axe, 'shall be cut down, and cast into the fire.'

"The news of the finding of the ring spread through Eichbourg in a very short time, and every
one ran to the place, so that in a little while a great crowd had gathered. The judge who condemned
you came also, and every witness of the discovery was as eager as possible to tell him all
about it.

"You cannot imagine, my dear Mary," the Countess proceeded, "the effect that the story produced
on the good man. Notwithstanding his severity respecting you, he is a man of great probity,
and one who has all his life tried to administer justice with strict fidelity.

"'I would give half of my goods,' said he, in a tone that went to the heart of every one who
heard him--'yes, I would willingly have given everything I possess if this misfortune had not
happened. To have condemned innocence is a frightful thought.' Then, looking round him at the
people, he said, in a solemn voice, 'God is the only infallible judge, the only one that cannot
be deceived. He knows everything. He alone knew the hiding-place in which the ring had remained
until now. The judges of the earth are near-sighted and prone to be deceived. It is rare here
below that innocence suffers and vice triumphs. The invisible Judge, who will recompense one
day all good actions and punish all bad ones, has decreed that even here innocence shall not
always suffer from suspicion, nor hidden crime remain always concealed.'"

While Amelia had been relating this interesting narrative, Mary had been lifting up her heart
in silent thanksgiving to God for clearing her character from every stain of suspicion and
establishing her innocence in the minds of her friends. By the time Amelia had finished her
story, they had arrived at the door of the castle.

CHAPTER XVII.

REPARATION.

The Count, the Countess, and the guests who were at the castle, were assembled in the drawing-room
when Amelia and Mary entered. The worthy minister had arrived before them, and had been reciting
to a deeply-interested audience, the story of James and Mary and their life at Pine Cottage.
He had painted in a touching manner the conduct of the good old man during his residence at
Pine Farm, emphasising the love and respect which he bore to the Count and his family. He told
of Mary's activity, of her filial piety, and her patience and modesty, until tears streamed
from the eyes of his hearers.

At this moment the Countess Amelia, holding Mary by one hand and in the other the basket of
flowers, entered the brilliantly-lighted room. Mary was welcomed by all, and loaded with congratulations.
The Count himself took her kindly by the hand, and said, "Poor child, how pale and thin you
look. It was our hasty judgment that brought your misery upon you, and we must now spare nothing,
that happiness may once more be restored to you, and that the faded flowers may once more bloom
on your young cheeks. You were driven from your father's house, but in future you shall have
it for your own property."

The Countess kissed Mary, pressed her to her heart, called her her daughter, and, taking from
her finger the ring which had caused so many misfortunes, she said, "Here, my dear child, although
your piety is a great deal more precious than the large diamond which sparkles in this ring,
you must accept this present as a feeble compensation for the wrong you have suffered, and
as a token of the sincere attachment and maternal tenderness I feel towards you."

With these words she held out the ring to Mary, who was almost overcome with so much kindness
and ready to sink under the weight of the benefits she had received. Her tears flowed freely,
but they were tears of joy.

"Poor child," said one of the guests, "take what the Countess offers you. God has given the
Count and his wife fortune, but He has given them something more precious--hearts which know
how to make the best use of riches."

"Why do you flatter us?" said the Countess. "This is not a generous action, it is an act of
justice."

Still Mary hesitated about accepting the valuable gift, and turned with streaming eyes towards
the minister, as if to ask his advice.

"Yes, Mary," said the venerable man, "you must keep the ring. You see, my good child, how God
is blessing your filial piety; for whosoever sincerely honours his parents shall be better
for it. Take the valuable present with gratitude, and as adversity found you resigned to the
Divine will, so in prosperity show yourself grateful to your heavenly Father--grateful to His
dear name, benevolent and kind."

Mary put the ring on her finger and attempted to express her thanks, but tears checked her
utterance, and were thus the best expression of her gratitude. Amelia, who sat by her with
the basket of flowers in her hand, was delighted with the generous proceedings of her parents.
Her eyes shone with affection for Mary; and the minister, who had often observed how envious
children generally are when their parents exercise their benevolence towards other people,
was deeply touched by this disinterested love of Amelia. "May God," said he, "reward the generosity
of the Count and Countess. May all that they have done for the poor orphan be rendered to them
a hundredfold in the person of their own dear daughter!"

CHAPTER XVIII.

PINE FARM REVISITED.

The Count and his family were just on the eve of leaving for Eichbourg, and next morning at
break of day all was bustle in the castle, preparing for their departure. In the midst of all
the preparations, however, Mary was not forgotten, and each one vied with the other in the
attentions they paid to her.

Mary's clothes, which she had bought during her residence at Pine Farm, were made of the coarsest
material and of the plainest cut. But one of Amelia's friends, a young lady of the same age
and size as Mary, at Amelia's request presented Mary with a complete outfit, which, without
being extravagant, was more in keeping with her new situation. In answer to Mary's modest protest
against donning what seemed to her, extravagantly grand garments, Amelia said, "You are my
friend; you are henceforth to be my companion; you are also to live with me. You ought therefore
to dress yourself differently from a farm servant."

After breakfast they started on their journey homeward, and Mary sat beside Amelia in the carriage,
with the Count and Countess opposite. First of all, however, the Count gave orders for the
coachman to drive them to Pine Farm, that he might become acquainted with the people who had
entertained Mary and her father so kindly. It was not long before they gathered from Mary's
answers that the old people at Pine Farm were far from being comfortable, and that their declining
years were not so peaceful as they had a right to expect.

The arrival of a nobleman's carriage at Pine Farm caused no little excitement. No sooner had
the young farmer's wife seen the carriage stop at the door than she hastened towards it.

"Sir," said she to the Count, "allow me to assist you and also the ladies, your daughters,
I presume."

So saying, she presented her hand to one of the young ladies, when, recognising her to be Mary
herself, she uttered an exclamation of surprise, let go her hand as if she had touched a serpent,
and drew back in great confusion.

The old farmer was working in his garden when the Count with his family and Mary alighted;
and when they went to the good old man, took him by the hand, and thanked him for his kindness
towards Mary and her father, the worthy farmer was deeply moved.

"Oh," said he, "I owe that good man more than ever he owed me. The blessing of heaven came
with him into our home, and if I had followed his advice in everything, I should have been
much better for it at this moment. Since his death I have no pleasure in anything but this
garden, which I began to cultivate at his suggestion. Since I have not had strength to follow
the plough, I have occupied myself here, and I seek among the herbs and flowers the peace which
I can no longer find in my own house."

In the meantime Mary had gone to look for the old farmer's wife in her little room, and she
now came forward leading her by the hand. The worthy woman was quite overcome by the strange
circumstances in which she found Mary, and the excitement of the moment; and when she came
forward to meet the Count and Countess, it was with a timid air, and in evident distress at
finding herself the object of so much attention. By and by, however, she and her husband heard
the story of the finding of the ring, and so great was their affection for Mary that they cried
for joy like children.

"Did I not tell you," said the farmer, addressing Mary, "that your filial piety would receive
its reward? You see, my prophecy is already fulfilled," and his wife, who had recovered her
self-possession, said, "Yes, yes; your father was right when he said, 'He who clothes the flowers,
well knows how to take care of you.'"

While this conversation had been going on, the young farmer's wife stood at some distance,
consumed with jealousy and anger.

"Well, well," she said to herself, "there is no saying what will happen in this life. That
miserable beggar whom I turned out of my house--look at her now, dressed like a young lady
of high rank. Who would have thought of such a thing! Every one, however, knows who she is,
so she cannot impose on any one in this town. They know that yesterday she was sent from here
with a little package under her arm, to go into the country."

The Count had not heard this abusive language, but a glance at the woman's face was enough
to show him that she was nursing angry passions. "She is a wicked creature," he said to himself,
as he walked round the garden in a very thoughtful mood.

At last he stopped before the old farmer. "Listen, my good old friend," said he, "while I make
a proposition to you. I have given Mary a piece of ground on my estate, which was rented and
cultivated by her father. But Mary is not ready to take up housekeeping. What should prevent
you from retiring there? It will suit you, I am certain, and the owner will not exact any rent
from you. You can cultivate the herbs and flowers in which you find your pleasure, and you
will find, in the pretty cottage which is attached to the ground, rest and peace in your old age."

The Count's wife, Amelia and Mary joined in urging the old man to accept this generous offer.
But there was no need for persuasion. IMPERIALISM AND WAR

LECTURE VI

THE VICISSITUDES OF STATES AND EMPIRES

1. THE METAPHYSICAL ORIGIN OF THE STATE

2. THE STATE, EMPIRES, AND ART

3.

THE FALL OF EMPIRES: THE THEORY OF RETRIBUTION

4. THE FALL OF EMPIRES: THE CYCLIC THEORY

5.

WHAT IS MEANT BY THE "FALL OF AN EMPIRE"?

LECTURE VII

THE DESTINY OF IMPERIAL BRITAIN AND THE DESTINY OF MAN

1. THE PRESENT STAGE IN THE HISTORY OF IMPERIAL BRITAIN

2. THE DESTINY OF MAN
3. THE FOUR PERIODS OF MODERN HISTORY

4. THE IDEAL OF THE FOURTH
AGE

5. THE "ACT" AND THE "THOUGHT"

6. BRITAIN'S WORLD-MISSION: THE
WITNESS OF THE DEAD TO THE MANDATE OF THE PRESENT

NINETEENTH CENTURY
EUROPE

1. DOMINION OF THE IDEAL OF LIBERTY

2. NATIONALITY AND MODERN
REPUBLICANISM

3. THE IDEALS OF A NEW AGE

PART I

THE TESTIMONY OF
THE PAST

REFLECTIONS ON THE ORIGINS AND DESTINY OF IMPERIAL BRITAIN

LECTURE
I

WHAT IS IMPERIALISM?

[Tuesday, May 8th, 1900]

The present age
has rewritten the annals of the world, and set its own impress on
the traditions of humanity. In no period has the burden of the past
weighed so heavily upon the present, or the interpretation of its
speculative import troubled the heart so profoundly, so intimately,
so monotonously.

How remote we stand from the times when Raleigh
could sit down in the Tower, and with less anxiety about his documents,
State records, or stone monuments than would now be imperative in
compiling the history of a county, proceed to write the History of
the World! And in speculation it is the Tale, the fabula, the procession
of impressive incidents and personages, which enthralls him, and with
perfect fitness he closes his work with the noblest Invocation to
Death that literature possesses. But beneath the variety or pathos
of the Tale the present age ever apprehends a deeper meaning, or is
oppressed by a sense of mystery, of wonder, or of sorrow unrevealed,
which defies tears. If they had stayed here, it would not have cost us half as much." Her
husband was secretly pleased to think that he was still permitted to help his parents in their
old age, but he took good care not to show his joy before his wife.

The old people set off in the carriage the next morning, followed by the blessings of their
son and the secret ill-wishes of their daughter-in-law.

But the unnatural conduct of this wicked woman was visited with the trouble which is always
the lot of avarice and inhumanity. Her secretly-cherished god was gold, and she had lent the
bulk of her money to a merchant to use in his business, on his promise to pay her a large interest
for the loan. Her greatest pleasure was in making calculations, as to how much her money would
amount to after a certain number of years, with all the interest and compound interest added.
Suddenly, however, these golden dreams received a rude awakening. The manufacturer's speculations
proved unfortunate, and he shortly afterwards failed in business, and his goods were sold by
order of the sheriff.

The news came as a thunder-stroke for the farmer's wife, and from the moment that she heard
of the catastrophe she had no repose. Every day she kept running to the lawyers, or to her
neighbours to complain of her hard lot, and the nights she spent in weeping and scolding her
husband. From the wreck of her fortune of ten thousand florins she received only a paltry hundred
or two, and so deeply did she feel the loss of her money that she openly declared her wish
to die. The result of the continual worrying induced a fever which never left her. When her
husband wished to send for a physician she would not consent to it, and when, in spite of her
objections, he at last sent for one, his wife in a passion threw the medicine he prescribed
out of the window.

At last her husband saw that she was seriously ill, and he requested the minister of Erlenbrunn
to come and see her. The good old man visited her frequently and talked to her affectionately,
in order to induce her to repent of her sins, and to detach her heart from the things of this
earth, that she might turn to God.

But this advice made her very angry. She looked at the good man with utter astonishment. "I
do not know," she said, "for what purpose the minister comes to preach repentance to me. He
should have delivered such a sermon to the merchant who stole our money. Yes, there would have
been some sense in that. As for me, I do not see that I have any reason for repentance. As
long as I was able to go out I always went to church, and I have never failed to say my prayers.
I have not ceased all my life to do my duty and to behave myself like a virtuous housewife.
I defy any living soul to slander me. And of all the poor people who have come to my door,
not one can complain that I sent them away without giving them something. Now, I should like
to know how any one can behave better!"

The venerable pastor saw that she was justifying herself before God, and he tried by adopting
a more direct tone to lead her to contrition. He showed to her that she loved money more than
anything else in the world, and that the love of money was idolatry. He showed her that the
bursts of anger in which she had indulged were heinous sins before God, that she had totally
failed in the most beautiful of all Christian virtues--filial affection; that by her greed
of money she had made her husband unhappy, cruelly driven away the poor orphan Mary, and even
turned away her husband's parents, those whom she ought to have cherished as if they were her own.

He showed her also that, with a fortune like hers, a little piece of bread given to a poor
man to get rid of him did not fulfil the duties which God expected of her, that in spite of
all her boasting of going to church she was none the better of it, for her prayers had come
from a heart unwarmed by love, and could not ascend to the throne of God. In this faithful
way did he talk to her, but only with the result of making her burst into a fit of passionate
sobbing.

The illness from which she suffered was a long and trying one. She spent whole nights in coughing,
and yet the ruling passion of avarice was so strong that she would scarcely take sufficient
nourishment to sustain her. No consoling thought came to her to mitigate her suffering. She
was utterly unwilling to resign herself to God and to submit to His will.

The good minister tried in every imaginable way to bring her to a better frame of mind. During
the last days of her life she was occasionally a little softened in her manners, but she never
evinced any true repentance. In the flower of her age she died, a sad instance of the effects
of avarice, passion, and love of the world.

CHAPTER XX.

FORGIVING AN ENEMY.

And now we must return to Mary whom we left in her new surroundings.

Immediately after leaving Pine Farm, Mary went with the Count's family to the city, in which
they spent part of every year. While they were there, a clergyman came one morning to their
residence and asked to see Mary. He told her that he was charged with a message for her from
a person who was very ill and probably near death, and who desired anxiously to speak to her.
The clergyman said that the person was not willing to give her message to any one but to Mary
herself.

Mary could not imagine what the woman could want with her, and she consulted the Countess as
to what she ought to do. The Countess, knowing the clergyman to be a pious and prudent man,
advised Mary to go with him, and at the minister's request old Anthony the huntsman accompanied
them. After a long walk to the outskirts of the town, they arrived at last at a house situated
in a side street, which presented a most gloomy aspect. "Here is the house," said the clergyman,
knocking at the door, "but wait a little."

After a few moments he returned for Mary, who then entered with him into a most miserable room.
The window was narrow and dark, and some broken panes were patched with paper. The only furniture
which the room contained was a miserable truckle-bed, covered with a more miserable mattress,
and a broken chair, on which stood a stone pitcher, with neither handle nor cover.

On the miserable bed lay stretched a figure which to Mary's eyes seemed more like a skeleton,
but which she gradually made out was the form of a woman, in the last stages of illness.

In a voice which resembled the rattle of death, this miserable creature sought to speak with
Mary, who trembled in every limb. It was with the utmost difficulty that she could make out
what the poor woman said, but at last she learned, to her horror, that the frightful phantom
was Juliette, who at the Castle of Eichbourg had been the beginning and cause of all her distress.
After being turned away from the Castle, she had gone from bad to worse, until she had sunk
into her present state.

Lying upon her miserable bed, death staring her in the face, remorse had overtaken her, and
her one wish was to have Mary's forgiveness. Learning in some way, that the Count and his family
were in the city, she begged of the clergyman who was visiting her to ask Mary to come to see
her. The poor woman, judging Mary by herself, had entreated the clergyman not to mention her
name in case Mary would not come.

Mary was affected to the heart when she heard Juliette's story, and she shed tears of sympathy
with her old enemy. She assured her that she had forgiven her long ago, and that the only feeling
she experienced was that of the deepest pity for her.

"Alas," said Juliette, "I am a great sinner; I have deserved my fate. Forgetfulness of God,
contempt of good advice, love of dress, flattery, and pleasure were the first causes of misery,
and these have brought me to my present state. Oh," cried she, raising her voice to a shriek,
and weeping bitterly, "that is nothing to the fate which I fear awaits me in the world to come.
You have pardoned me, it is true, but I feel the weight of God's anger now settling on my soul."

Mary conversed long and earnestly with her, endeavouring to point her to the Saviour of the
world, who would receive her if she truly repented. At last she was obliged to leave her without
being satisfied as to her state of mind, but the idea of the unhappy Juliette dying without
hope continually pressed on her mind and weighed down her spirits. She recollected her little
apple tree in blossom, withered by the frost, and what her father had said on that occasion.
The most consoling words he had said on his deathbed presented themselves to her mind, and
she renewed the promise she had made to God to live entirely to His glory.

To the Countess she related her discovery, and that generous lady sent the unhappy Juliette
medicine, food, and linen, and everything which might tend to relieve her illness. But it was
too late, and at the age of twenty-three the once beautiful Juliette, reduced to a mere skeleton
and disfigured by disease, died without having given evidence of a changed heart towards God.

CHAPTER XXI.

CONCLUSION.

The next spring, when the country was covered with verdure and flowers, the Count, accompanied
by his wife, and daughter, and Mary, went to his home at Eichbourg. Towards evening they approached
the village, and when Mary saw in the light of the setting sun the familiar church steeple,
the Castle, and the cottage where she had spent so many happy years with her father, she was
so deeply touched that tears started to her eyes.

But in the midst of the sorrowful memories which the scene called up in her mind, there came
to her a devout feeling of thankfulness for the wonderful way in which God had led her back.

"When I left Eichbourg," she said, "it was in disgrace, and without ever expecting to come
back again. The ways of Providence are mysterious, but God is good."

When the carriage stopped at the Castle, the servants and officers belonging to the Count's
household were waiting to receive them. Mary had a warm welcome from them all. Every one showed
the greatest joy at seeing her again, and their congratulations on her innocence having been
proved were manifestly sincere. The old judge who had sent her into banishment was among those
who welcomed her most cordially. Taking her hand in the presence of all the servants, he asked
her pardon for the mistake he had made. He expressed his gratitude to the Count and Countess
for having so nobly repaired the injustice, assured them that he reproached himself for the
misfortune, and that he was willing to do everything in his power to discharge his debt. 

THE LAW OF TRAGEDY: ITS SECOND ASPECT

The second mode or aspect in which the Law of Tragedy as applied to history reveals itself in
the life of a State, corresponds to the moment of intenser vision
in the individual life, when the soul, exalted by "compassion and
terror," discerns the deeper truth, the serener ideal which henceforth
it pursues as if impelled by the fixed law of its being.

There is a word coined by Aristotle which comes down the ages to us, bringing with it as it were
the sound of the griding of the Spartan swords as they leapt from their scabbards on the morning
of Thermopylae, the +enérgeia tês psychês+--the energy of the soul.

This energy of the soul in Aristotle is the vertù of Machiavelli, the spring of political wisdom,
the foundation of the greatness of a State.


"Yes," said his wife, "it is always well to be generous and hospitable. We never know how soon
we shall receive it again."

"Well, well," said her husband, "I am glad we did not think of that then. We took Mary and
her father in without hope of reward. However, the maxim is not the less true, 'Do good to
others and you will always find some one to do good to you.'"

When Mary entered the cottage, the sight of the place where her father used to sit raised a
host of sad but sweet recollections in her mind. She walked round the garden and kissed every
tree planted by his hand, seeing in each an old acquaintance. The little apple tree which had
been their favourite, was just now covered with blossom, and before it she stopped to meditate
for a little on man's brief life, which fades away before the tree which he has planted. In
the arbour where she had passed so many happy hours with her father, she rested a little, and
gave herself up to reflection. Looking around on the garden, which he had cultivated so diligently
by the sweat of his brow, she fancied that she could still see him, and tears streamed from
her eyes, when she remembered that he had gone from her for ever. But one thought soothed her
heart and made her calm, the thought that he had gone to a better world, and was now reaping
the reward of his beautiful life.

As long as Mary lived she spent some weeks every spring at the Castle, cherished and honoured
by every one there, and endearing herself to the people of the village, and particularly to
the children, among whom she was a great favourite. Her delight was to take them apart and
to talk to them of the Saviour, and she had the happiness of believing that many of them under
her instructions gave their hearts to God.

A monument had been erected to her father in fulfilment of a promise which Amelia had made
to Mary that evening when she found her sitting on her father's grave. It was an elegant monument
of white marble, ornamented with an epitaph in gold letters. Besides the name of the deceased,
his age and occupation, nothing in the way of epitaph was added but these words of Jesus--

        "I am the Resurrection and the Life:
    He that believeth in Me, though he were dead, yet shall he live."

Underneath these words a beautiful basket of flowers had been cut from a design drawn by Amelia
herself. Underneath the basket was written--

    "All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof as the
    flowers of the field. The grass withereth, the flower fadeth, but
    the word of the Lord endureth for ever."

The erection of this monument gave great satisfaction to the good old minister of Erlenbrunn.
The dark background of the fir trees threw the monument into relief, and gave it a very beautiful
appearance; and when the rose tree planted by his grave was in bloom, and its branches covered
with roses bent over the marble, which was of dazzling whiteness, the sight was a striking
one. The humble old man's monument was the most beautiful ornament of the rural churchyard,
and the good minister never allowed strangers to leave the church without taking them to see it.

When some people observed that it was a good idea to have put a basket of flowers on the tomb
of a man who was at the same time a gardener and a basket-maker, the old minister would say--

"But it is something better than a good idea. The basket of flowers tells more than you know,
and it is not without reason that our villagers look upon it as the symbol of a touching story.
The ground on which we tread has been bathed with a daughter's tears."

Then he would pour into the attentive ears of strangers the familiar story of the basket of
flowers, concluding his recital with the assurance which this whole story is intended to illustrate:
That piety towards God and truth towards men will never fail to triumph over the malice of
the worst of foes.

Let our readers who have followed this touching story be assured that under all circumstances
it is best to do as Mary did--walk in the fear of God, love and obey their earthly parents,
stand fast by the truth, and under all circumstances trust fully in God. Thus they will live
happy and die with a sure prospect of eternal glory.

THE END

Printed by MORRISON & GIBB LIMITED Edinburgh