Their Majesties' civil marriage was celebrated at Saint-Cloud on Sunday, the 1st of April,
at two o'clock in the afternoon.  The religious ceremony was solemnized the next day in the
grand gallery of the Louvre. A very singular circumstance in this connection was the fact that
Sunday afternoon at Saint-Cloud the weather was beautiful, while the streets of Paris were
flooded with a heavy shower lasting some time, and on Monday there was rain at Saint-Cloud,
while the weather was magnificent in Paris, as if the fates had decreed that nothing should
lessen the splendor of the cortege, or the brilliancy of the wonderful illuminations of that
evening.  "The star of the Emperor," said some one in the language of that period, "has borne
him twice over equinoctial winds."

On Monday evening the city of Paris presented a scene that might have been taken from the realms
of enchantment: the illuminations were the most brilliant I have ever witnessed, forming a
succession of magic panorama in which houses, hotels, palaces, and churches, shone with dazzling
splendor, the glittering towers of the churches appeared like stars and comets suspended in
the air.  The hotels of the grand dignitaries of the empire, the ministers, the ambassadors
of Austria and Russia, and the Duke d'Abrantes, rivaled each other in taste and beauty. The
Place Louis XV.  was like a scene from fairyland; from the midst of this Place, surrounded
with orange-trees on fire, the eye was attracted in succession by the magnificent decorations
of the Champs-Elysees, the Garde Meuble, the Temple of Glory, the Tuileries, and the Corps
Legislatif.  The palace of the latter represented the Temple of Hymen, the transparencies on
the front representing Peace uniting the august spouses.  Beside them stood two figures bearing
shields, on which were represented the arms of the two empires; and behind this group came
magistrates, warriors, and the people presenting crowns.  At the two extremities of the transparencies
were represented the Seine and the Danube, surrounded by children-image of fecundity.  The
twelve columns of the peristyle and the staircase were illuminated; and the columns were united
by garlands of colored lights, the statues on the peristyle and the steps also bearing lights.
The bridge Louis XV., by which this Temple of Hymen was reached, formed in itself an avenue,
whose double rows of lamps, and obelisks and more than a hundred columns, each surmounted by
a star and connected by spiral festoons of colored lights, produced an effect so brilliant
that it was almost unendurable to the naked eye.  The cupola of the dome of Saint Genevieve
was also magnificently lighted, and each side outlined by a double row of lamps. At each corner
were eagles, ciphers in colored glass, and garlands of fire suspended between torches of Hymen.
The peristyle of the dome was lighted by lamps placed between each column, and as the columns
were not lighted they seemed as if suspended in the air.  The lantern tower was a blaze of
light; and all this mass of brilliancy was surmounted by a tripod representing the altar of
Hymen, from which shot tongues of flame, produced by bituminous materials.  At a great elevation
above the platform of the observatory, an immense star, isolated from the platform, and which
from the variety of many-colored glasses composing it sparkled like a vast diamond, under the
dome of night.  The palace of the senate also attracted a large number of the curious; but
I have already extended too far the description of this wonderful scene which unfolded itself
at every step before us.

The city of Paris did homage to her Majesty the Empress by presenting her with a toilet set
even more magnificent than that formerly presented to the Empress Josephine.  Everything was
in silver gilt, even the arm chair and the cheval glass.  The paintings on the exquisite furniture
had been made by the first artists, and the elegance and finish of the ornaments surpassed
even the rich ness of the materials.

About the end of April their Majesties set out together to visit the departments of the North;
and the journey was an almost exact repetition of the one I made in 1804 with the Emperor,
only the Empress was no longer the good, kind Josephine.  While passing again through all these
towns, where I had seen her welcomed with so much enthusiasm, and who now addressed the same
adoration and homage to a new sovereign, and while seeing again the chateaux of Lacken, Brussels,
Antwerp, Boulogne, and many other places where I had seen Josephine pass in triumph, as at
present Marie Louise passed, I thought with chagrin of the isolation of the first wife from
her husband, and the suffering which must penetrate even into her retreat, as she was told
of the honors rendered to the one who had succeeded her in the Emperor's heart and on the Imperial
throne.

The King and Queen of Westphalia and Prince Eugene accompanied their Majesties.  We saw a vessel
with eighty cannon launched at Antwerp, which received, before leaving the docks, the benediction
of M. de Pradt, Archbishop of Malines.  The King of Holland, who joined the Emperor at Antwerp,
felt most unkindly towards his Majesty, who had recently required of him the cession of a part
of his states, and soon after seized the remainder.  He was, however, present in Paris at the
marriage fetes of the Emperor, who had even sent him to meet Marie Louise; but the two brothers
had not ceased their mutual distrust of each other, and it must be admitted that that of King
Louis had only too good foundation. What struck me as very singular in their altercations was
that the Emperor, in the absence of his brother, gave vent to the most terrible bursts of rage,
and to violent threats against him, while if they had an interview they treated each other
in the most amicable and familiar and brotherly manner.  Apart they were, the one, Emperor
of the French, the other, King of Holland, with opposite interests and views; together they
were no more than, if I may be permitted to so express myself, Napoleon and Louis, companions
and friends from childhood.

Prince Louis was habitually sad and melancholy.  The annoyances he experienced on the throne,
where he had been placed against his will, added to his domestic troubles, made him evidently
very unhappy, and all who knew him pitied him sincerely; for King Louis was an excellent master,
and an honest man of much merit.  It has been said that when the Emperor had decided on the
union of Holland and France, King Louis resolved to defend himself in the town of Amsterdam
to the last extremity, and to break the dikes and inundate the whole country if necessary,
in order to arrest the invasion of the French troops.  I do not know whether this is true;
but from what I have seen of this prince's character, I am very sure that, while having enough
personal courage to expose his own person to all the chances of this desperate alternative,
his naturally kind heart and his humanity would have prevented the execution of this project.

At Middleburg the Emperor embarked on board the Charlemagne to visit the mouth of the Scheldt
and the port and island of Flushing.  During this excursion we were assailed by a terrible
tempest, three anchors were broken in succession; we met with other accidents, and encountered
great dangers.

The Emperor was made very sick, and every few moments threw himself on his bed, making violent
but unsuccessful efforts to vomit, which rendered his sickness more distressing.  I was fortunate
enough not to be at all inconvenienced, and was thus in a position to give him all the attention
he required; though all the persons of his suite were sick, and my uncle, who was usher on
duty, and obliged to remain standing at the door of his Majesty's cabin, fell over continually,
and suffered agony.  During this time of torment, which lasted for three days, the Emperor
was bursting with impatience.  "I think," said he, "that I would have made a pretty admiral."

A short time after our return from this voyage, the Emperor wished her Majesty the Empress
to learn to ride on horseback; and for this purpose she went to the riding-hall of Saint-Cloud.
Several persons of the household were in the gallery to see her take her first lesson, I among
the number; and I noticed the tender solicitude of the Emperor for his young wife, who was
mounted on a gentle, well-broken horse, while the Emperor held her hand and walked by her side,
M. Jardin, Sr., holding the horse's bridle.  At the first step the horse made, the Empress
screamed with fright, whereupon the Emperor said to her, "Come, Louise, be brave. What have
you to fear?  Am I not here?  "And thus the lesson passed, in encouragement on one side and
fright on the other.  The next day the Emperor ordered the persons in the gallery to leave,
as they embarrassed the Empress; but she soon overcame her timidity, and ended by becoming
a very good horsewoman, often racing in the park with her ladies of honor and Madame the Duchess
of Montebello, who also rode with much grace.  A coach with some ladies followed the Empress,
and Prince Aldobrandini, her equerry, never left her in her rides.

The Empress was at an age in which one enjoys balls and fetes; but the Emperor feared above
all things her becoming tired, and consequently rejoicings and amusements were given up at
the court and in the city. A fete given in honor of their Majesties by the Prince of Schwartzenberg,
ambassador from Austria, ended in a frightful accident.

The prince occupied the former Hotel de la Montesson in the rue de la Chaussee d'Antin; and
in order to give this ball had added to this residence a broad hall and wooden gallery, decorated
with quantities of flowers, banners, candelabra, etc.  Just as the Emperor, who had been present
at the fete for two or three hours, was about to retire, one of the curtains, blown by the
breeze, took fire from the lights, which had been placed too near the windows, and was instantly
in flames.  Some persons made ineffectual efforts to extinguish the fire by tearing down the
drapery and smothering the flames with their hands; but in the twinkling of an eye the curtains,
papers, and garlands caught, and the wood-work began to burn.

The Emperor was one of the first to perceive the rapid progress of the fire, and foresee the
results.  He approached the Empress, who had already risen to join him, and got out with her,
not without some difficulty, on account of the crowd which rushed towards the doors; the Queens
of Holland, Naples, Westphalia, the Princess Borghese, etc., following their Majesties, while
the Vice-queen of Italy, who was pregnant, remained in the hall, on the platform containing
the Imperial boxes.  The vice-king, fearing the crowd as much as the fire for his wife, took
her out through a little door that had been cut in the platform in order to serve refreshments
to their Majesties.  No one had thought of this opening before Prince Eugene, and only a few
persons went out with him.  Her Majesty the Queen of Westphalia did not think herself safe,
even when she had reached the terrace, and in her fright rushed into the rue Taitbout, where
she was found by a passer-by.

The Emperor accompanied the Empress as far as the entrance of the Champs- Elysees, where he
left her to return to the fire, and did not re-enter Saint-Cloud until four o'clock in the
morning.  From the time of the arrival of the Empress we were in a state of terrible apprehension,
and every one in the chateau was a prey to the greatest anxiety in regard to the Emperor. 
At last he arrived unharmed, but very tired, his clothing all in disorder, and his face blackened
with smoke, his shoes and stockings scorched and burned by the fire.  He went directly to the
chamber of the Empress to assure himself if she had recovered from the fright she had experienced;
and then returned to his room, and throwing his hat on the bed, dropped on a sofa, exclaiming,
"Mon Dieu!  What a fete!"  I remarked that the Emperor's hands were all blackened, and he had
lost his gloves at the fire.  He was much dejected, and while I was undressing him, asked if
I had attended the prince's fete, and when I replied in the negative, deigned to give me some
details of this deplorable event.  The Emperor spoke with an emotion which I saw him manifest
only two or three times in his life, and which he never showed in regard to his own misfortunes.
"The fire," said his Majesty, "has to- night devoured a heroic woman.  The sister-in-law of
the Prince of Schwartzenberg, hearing from the burning hall cries which she thought were uttered
by her eldest daughter, threw herself into the midst of the flames, and the floor, already
nearly burned through, broke under her feet, and she disappeared.  After all the poor mother
was mistaken, and all her children were out of danger.  Incredible efforts were made, and at
last she was recovered from the flames; but she was entirely dead, and all the attentions of
the physicians have been unsuccessful in restoring her to life."  The emotion of the Emperor
increased at the end of this recital.  I had taken care to have his bath in readiness, foreseeing
he would need it on his return; and his Majesty now took it, and after his customary rubbing,
found himself in much better condition.  Nevertheless, I remember his expressing fear that
the terrible accident of this night was the precursor of some fatal event, and he long retained
these apprehensions.  Three years after, during the deplorable campaign of Russia, it was announced
to the Emperor one day, that the army-corps commanded by the Prince of Schwartzenberg had been
destroyed, and that the prince himself had perished; afterwards he found fortunately that these
tidings were false, but when they were brought to his Majesty, he exclaimed as if replying
to an idea that had long preoccupied him, "Then it was he whom the bad omen threatened."

Towards morning the Emperor sent pages to the houses of all those who had suffered from the
catastrophe with his compliments, and inquiries as to their condition.  Sad answers were brought
to his Majesty.  Madame the Princess de la Layen, niece of the Prince Primate, had died from
her wounds; and the lives of General Touzart, his wife, and daughter were despaired of,--in
fact, they died that same day.  There were other victims of this disaster; and among a number
of persons who recovered after long-continued sufferings were Prince Kourakin and Madame Durosnel,
wife of the general of that name.

Prince Kourakin, always remarkable for the magnificence as well as the singular taste of his
toilet, wore at the ball a coat of gold cloth, and it was this which saved his life, as sparks
and cinders slipped off his coat and the decorations with which he was covered like a helmet;
yet, notwithstanding this, the prince was confined to his bed for several months.  In the confusion
he fell on his back, was for some time, trampled under foot and much injured, and owed his
life only to the presence of mind and strength of a musician, who raised him in his arms and
carried him out of the crowd.

General Durosnel, whose wife fainted in the ball-room, threw himself in the midst of the flames,
and reappeared immediately, bearing in his arms his precious burden.  He bore Madame Durosnel
into a house on the boulevard, where he placed her until he could find a carriage in which
to convey her to his hotel.  The Countess Durosnel was painfully burned, and was ill more than
two years.  In going from the ambassador's hotel to the boulevard he saw by the light of the
fire a robber steal the comb from the head of his wife who had fainted in his arms.  This comb
was set with diamonds, and very valuable.

Madame Durosnel's affection for her husband was equal to that he felt for her; and when at
the end of a bloody combat, in the second campaign of Poland, General Durosnel was lost for
several days, and news was sent to France that he was thought to be dead, the countess in despair
fell ill of grief, and was at the point of death.  A short time after it was learned that the
general was badly but not mortally wounded, and that he had been found, and his wounds would
quickly heal.  When Madame Durosnel received this happy news her joy amounted almost to delirium;
and in the court of her hotel she made a pile of her mourning clothes and those of her people,
set fire to them, and saw this gloomy pile turn to ashes amid wild transports of joy and delight.

Two days after the burning of the hotel of the Prince of Schwartzenberg, the Emperor received
the news of the abdication of his brother Louis, by which event his Majesty seemed at first
much chagrined, and said to some one who entered his room just as he had been informed of it,
"I foresaw this madness of Louis, but I did not think he would be in such haste." Nevertheless,
the Emperor soon decided what course to take; and a few days afterwards his Majesty, who during
the toilet had not opened his mouth, came suddenly out of his preoccupation just as I handed
him his coat, and gave me two or three of his familiar taps.  "Monsieur Constant," said he,
"do you know what are the three capitals of the French Empire?  "and without giving me time
to answer, the Emperor continued, "Paris, Rome, and Amsterdam.  That sounds well, does it not?"

CHAPTER XXVIII.

In the latter part of July large crowds visited the Church of the Hotel des Invalides, in which
were placed the remains of General Saint-Hilaire and the Duke de Montebello, the remains of
the marshal being placed near the tomb of Turenne.  The mornings were spent in the celebration
of several masses, at a double altar which was raised between the nave and the dome; and for
four days there floated from the spire of the dome a long black banner or flag edged with white.

