                "Remember Thee!
    Yea, from the table of my memory
    I'll wipe away all trivial, fond records,
    All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past
    That youth and observation copied there,
    And thy commandment all alone shall live
    Within the book and volume of my brain,
    Unmixed with baser matter."

THE OLD MEETING HOUSE.

SKETCH FROM THE NOTE BOOK OF AN OLD GENTLEMAN.

Never shall I forget the dignity and sense of importance which swelled my mind when I was first
pronounced old enough to go to meeting. That eventful Sunday I was up long before day, and
even took my Sabbath suit to the window to ascertain by the first light that it actually was
there, just as it looked the night before. With what complacency did I view myself completely
dressed! How did I count over the rows of yellow gilt buttons on my coat! how my good mother,
grandmother, and aunts fussed, and twitched, and pulled, to make every thing set up and set
down, just in the proper place! how my clean, starched white collar was turned over and smoothed
again and again, and my golden curls twisted and arranged to make the most of me! and, last
of all, how I was cautioned not to be thinking of my clothes! In truth, I was in those days
a very handsome youngster, and it really is no more than justice to let the fact be known,
as there is nothing in my present appearance from which it could ever be inferred. Every body
in the house successively asked me if I should be a good boy, and sit still, and not talk,
nor laugh; and my mother informed me, in terrorem, that there was a tithing man, who carried
off naughty children, and shut them up in a dark place behind the pulpit; and that this tithing
man, Mr. Zephaniah Scranton, sat just where he could see me. This fact impressed my mind with
more solemnity than all the exhortations which had preceded it--a proof of the efficacy of
facts above reason. Under shadow and power of this weighty truth, I demurely took hold of my
mother's forefinger to walk to meeting.

The traveller in New England, as he stands on some eminence, and looks down on its rich landscape
of golden grain and waving cornfield, sees no feature more beautiful than its simple churches,
whose white taper fingers point upward, amid the greenness and bloom of the distant prospects,
as if to remind one of the overshadowing providence whence all this luxuriant beauty flows;
and year by year, as new ones are added to the number, or succeed in the place of old ones,
there is discernible an evident improvement in their taste and architecture. Those modest Doric
little buildings, with their white pillars, green blinds, and neat enclosures, are very different
affairs from those great, uncouth mountains of windows and doors that stood in the same place
years before. To my childish eye, however, our old meeting house was an awe-inspiring thing.
To me it seemed fashioned very nearly on the model of Noah's ark and Solomon's temple, as set
forth in the pictures in my Scripture Catechism--pictures which I did not doubt were authentic
copies; and what more respectable and venerable architectural precedent could any one desire?
Its double rows of windows, of which I knew the number by heart, its doors with great wooden
quirls over them, its belfry projecting out at the east end, its steeple and bell, all inspired
as much sense of the sublime in me as Strasbourg Cathedral itself; and the inside was not a
whit less imposing.

How magnificent, to my eye, seemed the turnip-like canopy that hung over the minister's head,
hooked by a long iron rod to the wall above! and how apprehensively did I consider the question,
what would become of him if it should fall! How did I wonder at the panels on either side of
the pulpit, in each of which was carved and painted a flaming red tulip, bolt upright, with
its leaves projecting out at right angles! and then at the grape vine, bass relieved on the
front, with its exactly triangular bunches of grapes, alternating at exact intervals with exactly
triangular leaves. To me it was an indisputable representation of how grape vines ought to
look, if they would only be straight and regular, instead of curling and scrambling, and twisting
themselves into all sorts of slovenly shapes. The area of the house was divided into large
square pews, boxed up with stout boards, and surmounted with a kind of baluster work, which
I supposed to be provided for the special accommodation of us youngsters, being the "loopholes
of retreat" through which we gazed on the "remarkabilia" of the scene. It was especially interesting
to me to notice the coming in to meeting of the congregation. The doors were so contrived that
on entering you stepped down instead of up--a construction that has more than once led to unlucky
results in the case of strangers. I remember once when an unlucky Frenchman, entirely unsuspicious
of the danger that awaited him, made entrance by pitching devoutly upon his nose in the middle
of the broad aisle; that it took three bunches of my grandmother's fennel to bring my risibles
into any thing like composure. Such exhibitions, fortunately for me, were very rare; but still
I found great amusement in watching the distinctive and marked outlines of the various people
that filled up the seats around me. A Yankee village presents a picture of the curiosities
of every generation: there, from year to year, they live on, preserved by hard labor and regular
habits, exhibiting every peculiarity of manner and appearance, as distinctly marked as when
they first came from the mint of nature. And as every body goes punctually to meeting, the
meeting house becomes a sort of museum of antiquities--a general muster ground for past and
present.

I remember still with what wondering admiration I used to look around on the people that surrounded
our pew. On one side there was an old Captain McLean, and Major McDill, a couple whom the mischievous
wits of the village designated as Captain McLean and Captain McFat; and, in truth, they were
a perfect antithesis, a living exemplification of flesh and spirit. Captain McLean was a mournful,
lengthy, considerate-looking old gentleman, with a long face, digressing into a long, thin,
horny nose, which, when he applied his pocket handkerchief, gave forth a melancholy, minor-keyed
sound, such as a ghost might make, using a pocket handkerchief in the long gallery of some
old castle.

Close at his side was the doughty, puffing Captain McDill, whose full-orbed, jolly visage was
illuminated by a most valiant red nose, shaped something like an overgrown doughnut, and looking
as if it had been thrown at his face, and happened to hit in the middle. Then there was old
Israel Peters, with a wooden leg, which tramped into meeting, with undeviating regularity,
ten minutes before meeting time; and there was Jedediah Stebbins, a thin, wistful, moonshiny-looking
old gentleman, whose mouth appeared as if it had been gathered up with a needle and thread,
and whose eyes seemed as if they had been bound with red tape; and there was old Benaiah Stephens,
who used regularly to get up and stand when the minister was about half through his sermon,
exhibiting his tall figure, long, single-breasted coat, with buttons nearly as large as a tea
plate; his large, black, horn spectacles stretched down on the extreme end of a very long nose,
and vigorously chewing, meanwhile, on the bunch of caraway which he always carried in one hand.
Then there was Aunt Sally Stimpson, and old Widow Smith, and a whole bevy of little, dried
old ladies, with small, straight, black bonnets, tight sleeves to the elbow, long silk gloves,
and great fans, big enough for a windmill; and of a hot day it was a great amusement to me
to watch the bobbing of the little black bonnets, which showed that sleep had got the better
of their owners' attention, and the sputter and rustling of the fans, when a more profound
nod than common would suddenly waken them, and set them to fanning and listening with redoubled
devotion. There was Deacon Dundas, a great wagon load of an old gentleman, whose ample pockets
looked as if they might have held half the congregation, who used to establish himself just
on one side of me, and seemed to feel such entire confidence in the soundness and capacity
of his pastor that he could sleep very comfortably from one end of the sermon to the other.
Occasionally, to be sure, one of your officious blue flies, who, as every body knows, are amazingly
particular about such matters, would buzz into his mouth, or flirt into his ears a passing
admonition as to the impropriety of sleeping in meeting, when the good old gentleman would
start, open his eyes very wide, and look about with a resolute air, as much as to say, "I wasn't
asleep, I can tell you;" and then setting himself in an edifying posture of attention, you
might perceive his head gradually settling back, his mouth slowly opening wider and wider,
till the good man would go off again soundly asleep, as if nothing had happened.

It was a good orthodox custom of old times to take every part of the domestic establishment
to meeting, even down to the faithful dog, who, as he had supervised the labors of the week,
also came with due particularity to supervise the worship of Sunday. I think I can see now
the fitting out on a Sunday morning--the one wagon, or two, as the case might be, tackled up
with an "old gray" or an "old bay," with a buffalo skin over the seat by way of cushion, and
all the family, in their Sunday best, packed in for meeting; while Master Bose, Watch, or Towser
stood prepared to be an outguard and went meekly trotting up hill and down dale in the rear.
Arrived at meeting, the canine part of the establishment generally conducted themselves with
great decorum, lying down and going to sleep as decently as any body present, except when some
of the business-loving bluebottles aforesaid would make a sortie upon them, when you might
hear the snap of their jaws as they vainly sought to lay hold of the offender. Now and then,
between some of the sixthlies, seventhlies, and eighthlies, you might hear some old patriarch
giving himself a rousing shake, and pitpatting soberly up the aisles, as if to see that every
thing was going on properly, after which he would lie down and compose himself to sleep again;
and certainly this was as improving a way of spending Sunday as a good Christian dog could desire.

But the glory of our meeting house was its singers' seat--that empyrean of those who rejoiced
in the divine, mysterious art of fa-sol-la-ing, who, by a distinguishing grace and privilege,
could "raise and fall" the cabalistical eight notes, and move serene through the enchanted
region of flats, sharps, thirds, fifths, and octaves.

There they sat in the gallery that lined three sides of the house, treble, counter, tenor,
and bass, each with its appropriate leaders and supporters; there were generally seated the
bloom of our young people; sparkling, modest, and blushing girls on one side, with their ribbons
and finery, making the place where they sat as blooming and lively as a flower garden, and
fiery, forward, confident young men on the other. In spite of its being a meeting house, we
could not swear that glances were never given and returned, and that there was not often as
much of an approach to flirtation as the distance and the sobriety of the place would admit.
Certain it was, that there was no place where our village coquettes attracted half so many
eyes or led astray half so many hearts.

But I have been talking of singers all this time, and neglected to mention the Magnus Apollo
of the whole concern, the redoubtable chorister, who occupied the seat of honor in the midst
of the middle gallery, and exactly opposite to the minister. Certain it is that the good man,
if he were alive, would never believe it; for no person ever more magnified his office, or
had a more thorough belief in his own greatness and supremacy, than Zedekiah Morse. Methinks
I can see him now as he appeared to my eyes on that first Sunday, when he shot up from behind
the gallery, as if he had been sent up by a spring. He was a little man, whose fiery-red hair,
brushed straight up on the top of his head, had an appearance as vigorous and lively as real
flame; and this, added to the ardor and determination of all his motions, had obtained for
him the surname of the "Burning Bush." He seemed possessed with the very soul of song; and
from the moment he began to sing, looked alive all over, till it seemed to me that his whole
body would follow his hair upwards, fairly rapt away by the power of harmony. With what an
air did he sound the important fa-sol-la in the ears of the waiting gallery, who stood with
open mouths ready to seize their pitch, preparatory to their general set to! How did his ascending
and descending arm astonish the zephyrs when once he laid himself out to the important work
of beating time! How did his little head whisk from side to side, as now he beat and roared
towards the ladies on his right, and now towards the gentlemen on his left! It used to seem
to my astonished vision as if his form grew taller, his arm longer, his hair redder, and his
little green eyes brighter, with every stave; and particularly when he perceived any falling
off of time or discrepancy in pitch; with what redoubled vigor would he thump the gallery and
roar at the delinquent quarter, till every mother's son and daughter of them skipped and scrambled
into the right place again!

O, it was a fine thing to see the vigor and discipline with which he managed the business;
so that if, on a hot, drowsy Sunday, any part of the choir hung back or sung sleepily on the
first part of a verse, they were obliged to bestir themselves in good earnest, and sing three
times as fast, in order to get through with the others. 'Kiah Morse was no advocate for your
dozy, drawling singing, that one may do at leisure, between sleeping and waking, I assure you;
indeed, he got entirely out of the graces of Deacon Dundas and one or two other portly, leisurely
old gentlemen below, who had been used to throw back their heads, shut up their eyes, and take
the comfort of the psalm, by prolonging indefinitely all the notes. The first Sunday after
'Kiah took the music in hand, the old deacon really rubbed his eyes and looked about him; for
the psalm was sung off before he was ready to get his mouth opened, and he really looked upon
it as a most irreverent piece of business.

But the glory of 'Kiah's art consisted in the execution of those good old billowy compositions
called fuguing tunes, where the four parts that compose the choir take up the song, and go
racing around one after another, each singing a different set of words, till, at length, by
some inexplicable magic, they all come together again, and sail smoothly out into a rolling
sea of song. I remember the wonder with which I used to look from side to side when treble,
tenor, counter, and bass were thus roaring and foaming,--and it verily seemed to me as if the
psalm was going to pieces among the breakers,--and the delighted astonishment with which I
found that each particular verse did emerge whole and uninjured from the storm.

But alas for the wonders of that old meeting house, how they are passed away! Even the venerable
building itself has been pulled down, and its fragments scattered; yet still I retain enough
of my childish feelings to wonder whether any little boy was gratified by the possession of
those painted tulips and grape vines, which my childish eye used to covet, and about the obtaining
of which, in case the house should ever be pulled down, I devised so many schemes during the
long sermons and services of summer days. I have visited the spot where it stood, but the modern,
fair-looking building that stands in its room bears no trace of it; and of the various familiar
faces that used to be seen inside, not one remains. Verily, I must be growing old; and as old
people are apt to spin long stories, I check myself, and lay down my pen.

THE NEW-YEAR'S GIFT.

The sparkling ice and snow covered hill and valley--tree and bush were glittering with diamonds--the
broad, coarse rails of the fence shone like bars of solid silver, while little fringes of icicles
glittered between each bar.

In the yard of yonder dwelling the scarlet berries of the mountain ash shine through a transparent
casing of crystal, and the sable spruces and white pines, powdered and glittering with the
frost, have assumed an icy brilliancy. The eaves of the house, the door knocker, the pickets
of the fence, the honeysuckles and seringas, once the boast of summer, are all alike polished,
varnished, and resplendent with their winter trappings, now gleaming in the last rays of the
early sunset.

Within that large, old-fashioned dwelling might you see an ample parlor, all whose adjustments
and arrangements speak of security, warmth, and home enjoyment; of money spent not for show,
but for comfort. Thick crimson curtains descend in heavy folds over the embrasures of the windows,
and the ample hearth and wide fireplace speak of the customs of the good old times, ere that
gloomy, unpoetic, unsocial gnome--the air-tight--had monopolized the place of the blazing fireside.

No dark air-tight, however, filled our ancient chimney; but there was a genuine old-fashioned
fire of the most approved architecture, with a gallant backlog and forestick, supporting and
keeping in order a crackling pile of dry wood, that was whirring and blazing warm welcome for
all whom it might concern, occasionally bursting forth into most portentous and earnest snaps,
which rung through the room with a genuine, hospitable emphasis, as if the fire was enjoying
himself, and having a good time, and wanted all hands to draw up and make themselves at home
with him.

So looked that parlor to me, when, tired with a long day's ride, I found my way into it, just
at evening, and was greeted with a hearty welcome from my old friend, Colonel Winthrop.

In addition to all that I have already described, let the reader add, if he pleases, the vision
of a wide and ample tea table, covered with a snowy cloth, on which the servants are depositing
the evening meal.

I had not seen Winthrop for years; but we were old college friends, and I had gladly accepted
an invitation to renew our ancient intimacy by passing the New Year's season in his family.
I found him still the same hale, kindly, cheery fellow as in days of old, though time had taken
the same liberty with his handsome head that Jack Frost had with the cedars and spruces out
of doors, in giving to it a graceful and becoming sprinkle of silver.

"Here you are, my dear fellow," said he, shaking me by both hands--"just in season for the
ham and chickens--coffee all smoking. My dear," he added to a motherly-looking woman who now
entered, "here's John! I beg pardon, Mr. Stuart." As he spoke, two bold, handsome boys broke
into the room, accompanied by a huge Newfoundland dog--all as full of hilarity and abundant
animation as an afternoon of glorious skating could have generated.

"Ha, Tom and Ned!--you rogues--you don't want any supper to-night, I suppose," said the father,
gayly; "come up here and be introduced to my old friend. Here they come!" said he, as one by
one the opening doors admitted the various children to the summons of the evening meal. "Here,"
presenting a tall young girl, "is our eldest, beginning to think herself a young lady, on the
strength of being fifteen years old, and wearing her hair tucked up. And here is Eliza," said
he, giving a pull to a blooming, roguish girl of ten, with large, saucy black eyes. "And here
is Willie!" a bashful, blushing little fellow in a checked apron. "And now, where's the little
queen?--where's her majesty?--where's Ally?"

A golden head of curls was, at this instant, thrust timidly in at the door, and I caught a
passing glimpse of a pair of great blue eyes; but the head, curls, eyes, and all, instantly
vanished, though a little fat dimpled hand was seen holding on to the door, and swinging it
back and forward. "Ally, dear, come in!" said the mother, in a tone of encouragement. "Come
in, Ally! come in," was repeated in various tones, by each child; but brother Tom pushed open
the door, and taking the little recusant in his arms, brought her fairly in, and deposited
her on her father's knee. She took firm hold of his coat, and then turned and gazed shyly upon
me--her large splendid blue eyes gleaming through her golden curls. It was evident that this
was the pet lamb of the fold, and she was just at that age when babyhood is verging into childhood--an
age often indefinitely prolonged in a large family, where the universal admiration that waits
on every look, and motion, and word of the baby, and the multiplied monopolies and privileges
of the baby estate, seem, by universal consent, to extend as long and as far as possible. And
why not thus delay the little bark of the child among the flowery shores of its first Eden?--defer
them as we may, the hard, the real, the cold commonplace of life comes on all too soon!

"This is our New Year's gift," said Winthrop, fondly caressing the curly head. "Ally, tell
the gentleman how old you are."

"I s'all be four next New 'Ear's," said the little one, while all the circle looked applause.

"Ally, tell the gentleman what you are," said brother Ned.

Ally looked coquettishly at me, as if she did not know whether she should favor me to that
extent, and the young princess was further solicited.

"Tell him what Ally is," said the oldest sister, with a patronizing air.

"Papa's New 'Ear's pesent," said my little lady, at last.

"And mamma's, too!" said the mother gently, amid the applauses of the admiring circle.

Winthrop looked apologetically at me, and said, "We all spoil her--that's a fact--every one
of us down to Rover, there, who lets her tie tippets round his neck, and put bonnets on his
head, and hug and kiss him, to a degree that would disconcert any other dog in the world."

If ever beauty and poetic grace was an apology for spoiling, it was in this case. Every turn
of the bright head, every change of the dimpled face and round and chubby limbs, was a picture;
and within the little form was shrined a heart full of love, and running over with compassion
and good will for every breathing thing; with feelings so sensitive, that it was papa's delight
to make her laugh and cry with stories, and to watch in the blue, earnest mirror of her eye
every change and turn of his narration, as he took her through long fairy tales, and old-fashioned
giant and ghost legends, purely for his own amusement, and much reprimanded all the way by
mamma, for filling the child's head with nonsense.

It was now, however, time to turn from the beauty to the substantial realities of the supper
table. I observed that Ally's high chair was stationed close by her father's side; and ever
and anon, while gayly talking, he would slip into her rosy little mouth some choice bit from
his plate, these notices and attentions seeming so instinctive and habitual, that they did
not for a moment interrupt the thread of the conversation. Once or twice I caught a glimpse
of Rover's great rough nose, turned anxiously up to the little chair; whereat the small white
hand forthwith slid something into his mouth, though by what dexterity it ever came out from
the great black jaws undevoured was a mystery. When the supply of meat on the small lady's
plate was exhausted, I observed the little hand slyly slipping into her father's provision
grounds, and with infinite address abstracting small morsels, whereat there was much mysterious
winking between the father and the other children, and considerable tittering among the younger
ones, though all in marvellous silence, as it was deemed best policy not to appear to notice
Ally's tricks, lest they should become too obstreperous.

In the course of the next day I found myself, to all intents and purposes, as much part and
parcel of the family as if I had been born and bred among them. I found that I had come in
a critical time, when secrets were plenty as blackberries. It being New Year's week, all the
little hoarded resources of the children, both of money and of ingenuity, were in brisk requisition,
getting up New Year's presents for each other, and for father and mother. The boys had their
little tin savings banks, where all the stray pennies of the year had been carefully hoarded--all
that had been got by blacking papa's boots, or by piling wood, or weeding in the garden--mingled
with some fortunate additions which had come as windfalls from some liberal guest or friend.
All now were poured out daily, on tables, on chairs, on stools, and counted over with wonderful
earnestness.

My friend, though in easy circumstances, was somewhat old-fashioned in his notions. He never
allowed his children spending money, except such as they fairly earned by some exertions of
their own. "Let them do something," he would say, "to make it fairly theirs, and their generosity
will then have some significance--it is very easy for children to be generous on their parents'
money." Great were the comparing of resources and estimates of property at this time. Tom and
Ned, who were big enough to saw wood, and hoe in the garden, had accumulated the vast sum of
three dollars each, and walked about with their hands in their pockets, and talked largely
of purchases, like gentlemen of substance. They thought of getting mamma a new muff, and papa
a writing desk, besides trinkets innumerable for sisters, and a big doll for Ally; but after
they had made one expedition to a neighboring town to inquire prices, I observed that their
expectations were greatly moderated. As to little Willie, him of the checked apron, his whole
earthly substance amounted to thirty-seven cents; yet there was not a member of the whole family
circle, including the servants, that he could find it in his heart to leave out of his remembrance.
I ingratiated myself with him immediately; and twenty times a day did I count over his money
to him, and did sums innumerable to show how much would be left if he got this, that, or the
other article, which he was longing to buy for father or mother. I proved to him most invaluable,
by helping him to think of certain small sixpenny and fourpenny articles that would be pretty
to give to sisters, making out with marbles for Tom and Ned, and a very valiant-looking sugar
horse for Ally. Miss Emma had the usual resource of young ladies, flosses, worsted, and knitting,
and crochet needles, and busy fingers, and she was giving private lessons daily to Eliza, to
enable her to get up some napkin rings, and book marks for the all-important occasion. A gentle
air of bustle and mystery pervaded the whole circle. I was intrusted with so many secrets that
I could scarcely make an observation, or take a turn about the room, without being implored
to "remember"--"not to tell"--not to let papa know this, or mamma that. I was not to let papa
know how the boys were going to buy him a new inkstand, with a pen rack upon it, which was
entirely to outshine all previous inkstands; nor tell mamma about the crochet bag that Emma
was knitting for her. On all sides were mysterious whisperings, and showing of things wrapped
in brown paper, glimpses of which, through some inadvertence, were always appearing to the
public eye. There were close counsels held behind doors and in corners, and suddenly broken
off when some particular member of the family appeared. There were flutters of vanishing book
marks, which were always whisked away when a door opened; and incessant ejaculations of admiration
and astonishment from one privileged looker or another on things which might not be mentioned
to or beheld by others.

Papa and mamma behaved with the utmost circumspection and discretion, and though surrounded
on all sides by such pitfalls and labyrinths of mystery, moved about with an air of the most
unconscious simplicity possible.

But little Ally, from her privileged character, became a very spoil-sport in the proceedings.
Her small fingers were always pulling open parcels prematurely, or lifting pocket handkerchiefs
ingeniously thrown down over mysterious articles, and thus disconcerting the very profoundest
surprises that ever were planned; and were it not that she was still within the bounds of the
kingly state of babyhood, and therefore could be held to do no wrong, she would certainly have
fallen into general disgrace; but then it was "Ally," and that was apology for all things,
and the exploit was related in half whispers as so funny, so cunning, that Miss Curlypate was
in nowise disconcerted at the head shakes and "naughty Allys" that visited her offences.

"What dis?" said she, one morning, as she was rummaging over some packages indiscreetly left
on the sofa.

"O Emma! see Ally!" exclaimed Eliza, darting forward; but too late, for the flaxen curls and
blue eyes of a wax doll had already appeared.

"Now she'll know all about it," said Eliza, despairingly.

Ally looked in astonishment, as dolly's visage promptly disappeared from her view, and then
turned to pursue her business in another quarter of the room, where, spying something glittering
under the sofa, she forthwith pulled out and held up to public view a crochet bag sparkling
with innumerable steel fringes.

"O, what be dis!" she exclaimed again.

Miss Emma sprang to the rescue, while all the other children, with a burst of exclamations,
turned their eyes on mamma. Mamma very prudently did not turn her head, and appeared to be
lost in reflection, though she must have been quite deaf not to have heard the loud whispers--"It's
mamma's bag! only think! Don't you think, Tom, Ally pulled out mamma's bag, and held it right
up before her! Don't you think she'll find out?"

Master Tom valued himself greatly on the original and profound ways he had of adapting his
presents to the tastes of the receiver without exciting suspicion: for example, he would come
up into his mother's room, all booted and coated for a ride to town, jingling his purse gleefully,
and begin,--

"Mother, mother, which do you like best, pink or blue?"

"That might depend on circumstances, my son."

"Well, but, mother, for a neck ribbon, for example; suppose somebody was going to buy you a
neck ribbon."

"Why, blue would be the most suitable for me, I think."

"Well, but mother, which should you think was the best, a neck ribbon or a book?"

"What book? It would depend something on that."

"Why, as good a book as a fellow could get for thirty-seven cents," says Tom.

"Well, on the whole, I think I should prefer the ribbon."

"There, Ned," says Tom, coming down the stairs, "I've found out just what mother wants, without
telling her a word about it."

But the crowning mystery of all the great family arcana, the thing that was going to astonish
papa and mamma past all recovery, was certain projected book marks, that little Ally was going
to be made to work for them. This bold scheme was projected by Miss Emma, and she had armed
herself with a whole paper of sugar plums, to be used as adjuvants to moral influence, in case
the discouragements of the undertaking should prove too much for Ally's patience.

As to Ally, she felt all the dignity of the enterprise--her whole little soul was absorbed
in it. Seated on Emma's knee, with the needle between her little fat fingers, and holding the
board very tight, as if she was afraid it would run away from her, she very gravely and carefully
stuck the needle in every place but the right--pricked her pretty fingers--ate sugar plums--stopping
now to pat Rover, and now to stroke pussy--letting fall her thimble, and bustling down to pick
it up--occasionally taking an episodical race round the room with Rover, during which time
Sister Emma added a stitch or two to the work.

I would not wish to have been required, on oath, to give in my undisguised opinion as to the
number of stitches the little one really put into her present, but she had a most genuine and
firm conviction that she worked every stitch of it herself; and when, on returning from a scamper
with pussy, she found one or two letters finished, she never doubted that the whole was of
her own execution, and, of course, thought that working book marks was one of the most delightful
occupations in the world. It was all that her little heart could do to keep from papa and mamma
the wonderful secret. Every evening she would bustle about her father with an air of such great
mystery, and seek to pique his curiosity by most skilful hints, such as,--

"I know somefing! but I s'ant tell you."

"Not tell me! O Ally! Why not?"

"O, it's about--a New 'Ear's pes----"

"Ally, Ally," resounds from several voices, "don't you tell."

"No, I s'ant--but you are going to have a New 'Ear's pesant, and so is mamma, and you can't
dess what it is."

"Can't I?"

"No, and I s'ant tell you."

"Now, Ally," said papa, pretending to look aggrieved.

"Well, it's going to be--somefin worked."

"Ally, be careful," said Emma.

"Yes, I'll be very tareful; it's somefin--weall pretty--somefin to put in a book. You'll find
out about it by and by."

"I think I'm in a fair way to," said the father.

The conversation now digressed to other subjects, and the nurse came in to take Ally to bed;
who, as she kissed her father, in the fulness of her heart, added a fresh burst of information.
"Papa," said she, in an earnest whisper, "that fin is about so long"--measuring on her fat
little arm.

"A fin, Ally? Why, you are not going to give me a fish, are you?"

"I mean that thing," said Ally, speaking the word with great effort, and getting quite red
in the face.

"O, that thing; I beg pardon, my lady; that puts another face on the communication," said the
father, stroking her head fondly, as he bade her good night.

"The child can talk plainer than she does," said the father, "but we are all so delighted with
her little Hottentot dialect, that I don't know but she will keep it up till she is twenty."

       *       *       *       *       *

It now wanted only three days of the New Year, when a sudden and deadly shadow fell on the
dwelling, late so busy and joyous--a shadow from the grave; and it fell on the flower of the
garden--the star--the singing bird--the loved and loving Ally.

She was stricken down at once, in the flush of her innocent enjoyment, by a fever, which from
the first was ushered in with symptoms the most fearful.

All the bustle of preparation ceased--the presents were forgotten or lay about unfinished,
as if no one now had a heart to put their hand to any thing; while up in her little crib lay
the beloved one, tossing and burning with restless fever, and without power to recognize any
of the loved faces that bent over her.

The doctor came twice a day, with a heavy step, and a face in which anxious care was too plainly
written; and while he was there each member of the circle hung with anxious, imploring faces
about him, as if to entreat him to save their darling; but still the deadly disease held on
its relentless course, in spite of all that could be done.

"I thought myself prepared to meet God's will in any form it might come," said Winthrop to
me; "but this one thing I had forgotten. It never entered into my head that my little Ally
could die."

The evening before New Year's, the deadly disease seemed to be progressing more rapidly than
ever; and when the doctor came for his evening call, he found all the family gathered in mournful
stillness around the little crib.

"I suppose," said the father, with an effort to speak calmly, "that this may be her last night
with us."

The doctor made no answer, and the whole circle of brothers and sisters broke out into bitter
weeping.

"It is just possible that she may live till to-morrow," said the doctor.

"To-morrow--her birthday!" said the mother. "O Ally, Ally!"

Wearily passed the watches of that night. Each brother and sister had kissed the pale little
cheek, to bid farewell, and gone to their rooms, to sob themselves to sleep; and the father
and mother and doctor alone watched around the bed. O, what a watch is that which despairing
love keeps, waiting for death! Poor Rover, the companion of Ally's gayer hours, resolutely
refused to be excluded from the sick chamber. Stretched under the little crib, he watched with
unsleeping eyes every motion of the attendants, and as often as they rose to administer medicine,
or change the pillow, or bathe the head, he would rise also, and look anxiously over the side
of the crib, as if he understood all that was passing.

About an hour past midnight, the child began to change; her moans became fainter and fainter,
her restless movements ceased, and a deep and heavy sleep settled upon her.

The parents looked wistfully on the doctor. "It is the last change," he said; "she will probably
pass away before the daybreak."

Heavier and deeper grew that sleep, and to the eye of the anxious watchers the little face
grew paler and paler; yet by degrees the breathing became regular and easy, and a gentle moisture
began to diffuse itself over the whole surface. A new hope began to dawn on the minds of the
parents, as they pointed out these symptoms to the doctor.

"All things are possible with God," said he, in answer to the inquiring looks he met, "and
it may be that she will yet live."

An hour more passed, and the rosy glow of the New Year's morning began to blush over the snowy
whiteness of the landscape. Far off from the window could be seen the kindling glow of a glorious
sunrise, looking all the brighter for the dark pines that half veiled it from view; and now
a straight and glittering beam shot from the east into the still chamber. It fell on the golden
hair and pale brow of the child, lighting it up as if an angel had smiled on it; and slowly
the large blue eyes unclosed, and gazed dreamily around.

"Ally, Ally," said the father, bending over her, trembling with excitement.

"You are going to have a New 'Ear's pesent," whispered the little one, faintly smiling.

"I believe from my heart that you are, sir!" said the doctor, who stood with his fingers on
her pulse; "she has passed through the crisis of the disease, and we may hope."

A few hours turned this hope to glad certainty; for with the elastic rapidity of infant life,
the signs of returning vigor began to multiply, and ere evening the little one was lying in
her father's arms, answering with languid smiles to the overflowing proofs of tenderness which
every member of the family was showering upon her.

"See, my children," said the father gently, "this dear one is our New Year's present. What
can we render to God in return?"

THE OLD OAK OF ANDOVER.

A REVERY.

Silently, with dreamy languor, the fleecy snow is falling. Through the windows, flowery with
blossoming geranium and heliotrope, through the downward sweep of crimson and muslin curtain,
one watches it as the wind whirls and sways it in swift eddies.

Right opposite our house, on our Mount Clear, is an old oak, the apostle of the primeval forest.
Once, when this place was all wildwood, the man who was seeking a spot for the location of
the buildings of Phillips Academy climbed this oak, using it as a sort of green watchtower,
from whence he might gain a view of the surrounding country. Age and time, since then, have
dealt hardly with the stanch old fellow. His limbs have been here and there shattered; his
back begins to look mossy and dilapidated; but after all, there is a piquant, decided air about
him, that speaks the old age of a tree of distinction, a kingly oak. To-day I see him standing,
dimly revealed through the mist of falling snows; to-morrow's sun will show the outline of
his gnarled limbs--all rose color with their soft snow burden; and again a few months, and
spring will breathe on him, and he will draw a long breath, and break out once more, for the
three hundredth time, perhaps, into a vernal crown of leaves. I sometimes think that leaves
are the thoughts of trees, and that if we only knew it, we should find their life's experience
recorded in them. Our oak! what a crop of meditations and remembrances must he have thrown
forth, leafing out century after century. Awhile he spake and thought only of red deer and
Indians; of the trillium that opened its white triangle in his shade; of the scented arbutus,
fair as the pink ocean shell, weaving her fragrant mats in the moss at his feet; of feathery
ferns, casting their silent shadows on the checkerberry leaves, and all those sweet, wild,
nameless, half-mossy things, that live in the gloom of forests, and are only desecrated when
brought to scientific light, laid out and stretched on a botanic bier. Sweet old forest days!--when
blue jay, and yellow hammer, and bobalink made his leaves merry, and summer was a long opera
of such music as Mozart dimly dreamed. But then came human kind bustling beneath; wondering,
fussing, exploring, measuring, treading down flowers, cutting down trees, scaring bobalinks--and
Andover, as men say, began to be settled.

Staunch men were they--these Puritan fathers of Andover. The old oak must have felt them something
akin to himself. Such strong, wrestling limbs had they, so gnarled and knotted were they, yet
so outbursting with a green and vernal crown, yearly springing, of noble and generous thoughts,
rustling with leaves which shall be for the healing of nations.

These men were content with the hard, dry crust for themselves, that they might sow seeds of
abundant food for us, their children; men out of whose hardness in enduring we gain leisure
to be soft and graceful, through whose poverty we have become rich. Like Moses, they had for
their portion only the pain and weariness of the wilderness, leaving to us the fruition of
the promised land. Let us cherish for their sake the old oak, beautiful in its age as the broken
statue of some antique wrestler, brown with time, yet glorious in its suggestion of past achievement.

I think all this the more that I have recently come across the following passage in one of
our religious papers. The writer expresses a kind of sentiment which one meets very often upon
this subject, and leads one to wonder what glamour could have fallen on the minds of any of
the descendants of the Puritans, that they should cast nettles on those honored graves where
they should be proud to cast their laurels.

"It is hard," he says, "for a lover of the beautiful--not a mere lover, but a believer in its
divinity also--to forgive the Puritans, or to think charitably of them. It is hard for him
to keep Forefathers' Day, or to subscribe to the Plymouth Monument; hard to look fairly at
what they did, with the memory of what they destroyed rising up to choke thankfulness; for
they were as one-sided and narrow-minded a set of men as ever lived, and saw one of Truth's
faces only--the hard, stern, practical face, without loveliness, without beauty, and only half
dear to God. The Puritan flew in the face of facts, not because he saw them and disliked them,
but because he did not see them. He saw foolishness, lying, stealing, worldliness--the very
mammon of unrighteousness rioting in the world and bearing sway--and he ran full tilt against
the monster, hating it with a very mortal and mundane hatred, and anxious to see it bite the
dust that his own horn might be exalted. It was in truth only another horn of the old dilemma,
tossing and goring grace and beauty, and all the loveliness of life, as if they were the enemies
instead of the sure friends of God and man."

Now, to those who say this we must ask the question with which Socrates of old pursued the
sophist: What is beauty? If beauty be only physical, if it appeal only to the senses, if it
be only an enchantment of graceful forms, sweet sounds, then indeed there might be something
of truth in this sweeping declaration that the Puritan spirit is the enemy of beauty.

The very root and foundation of all artistic inquiry lies here. What is beauty? And to this
question God forbid that we Christians should give a narrower answer than Plato gave in the
old times before Christ arose, for he directs the aspirant who would discover the beautiful
to "consider of greater value the beauty existing in the soul, than that existing in the body."
More gracefully he teaches the same doctrine when he tells us that "there are two kinds of
Venus, (beauty;) the one, the elder, who had no mother, and was the daughter of Uranus, (heaven,)
whom we name the celestial; the other, younger, daughter of Jupiter and Dione, whom we call
the vulgar."

Now, if disinterestedness, faith, patience, piety, have a beauty celestial and divine, then
were our fathers worshippers of the beautiful. If high-mindedness and spotless honor are beautiful
things, they had those. What work of art can compare with a lofty and heroic life? Is it not
better to be a Moses than to be a Michael Angelo making statues of Moses? Is not the life of
Paul a sublimer work of art than Raphael's cartoons? Are not the patience, the faith, the undying
love of Mary by the cross, more beautiful than all the Madonna paintings in the world. If,
then, we would speak truly of our fathers, we should say that, having their minds fixed on
that celestial beauty of which Plato speaks, they held in slight esteem that more common and
earthly.

Should we continue the parable in Plato's manner, we might say that the earthly and visible
Venus, the outward grace of art and nature, was ordained of God as a priestess, through whom
men were to gain access to the divine, invisible One; but that men, in their blindness, ever
worship the priestess instead of the divinity.

Therefore it is that great reformers so often must break the shrines and temples of the physical
and earthly beauty, when they seek to draw men upward to that which is high and divine.

Christ says of John the Baptist, "What went ye out for to see? A man clothed in soft raiment?
Behold they which are clothed in soft raiment are in kings' palaces." So was it when our fathers
came here. There were enough wearing soft raiment and dwelling in kings' palaces. Life in papal
Rome and prelatic England was weighed down with blossoming luxury. There were abundance of
people to think of pictures, and statues, and gems, and cameos, vases and marbles, and all
manner of deliciousness. The world was all drunk with the enchantments of the lower Venus,
and it was needful that these men should come, Baptist-like in the wilderness, in raiment of
camel's hair. We need such men now. Art, they tell us, is waking in America; a love of the
beautiful is beginning to unfold its wings; but what kind of art, and what kind of beauty?
Are we to fill our houses with pictures and gems, and to see that even our drinking cup and
vase is wrought in graceful pattern, and to lose our reverence for self-denial, honor, and faith?

Is our Venus to be the frail, insnaring Aphrodite, or the starry, divine Urania?

OUR WOOD LOT IN WINTER.

Our wood lot! Yes, we have arrived at the dignity of owning a wood lot, and for us simple folk
there is something invigorating in the thought. To OWN even a small spot of our dear old mother
earth hath in it a relish of something stimulating to human nature. To own a meadow, with all
its thousand-fold fringes of grasses, its broidery of monthly flowers, and its outriders of
birds, and bees, and gold-winged insects--this is something that establishes one's heart. To
own a clover patch or a buckwheat field is like possessing a self-moving manufactory for perfumes
and sweetness; but a wood lot, rustling with dignified old trees--it makes a man rise in his
own esteem; he might take off his hat to himself at the moment of acquisition.

We do not marvel that the land-acquiring passion becomes a mania among our farmers, and particularly
we do not wonder at a passion for wood land. That wide, deep chasm of conscious self-poverty
and emptiness which lies at the bottom of every human heart, making men crave property as something
to add to one's own bareness, and to ballast one's own specific levity, is sooner filled by
land than any thing else.

Your hoary New England farmer walks over his acres with a grim satisfaction. He sets his foot
down with a hard stamp; here is reality. No moonshine bank stock! no swindling railroads! Here
is his bank, and there is no defaulter here. All is true, solid, and satisfactory; he seems
anchored to this life by it. So Pope, with fine tact, makes the old miser, making his will
on his death bed, after parting with every thing, die, clinging to the possession of his land.
He disposes with many a groan of this and that house, and this and that stock and security;
but at last the manor is proposed to him.

          "The manor! hold!" he cried,
    "Not that; I cannot part with that!"--and died!

In such terms we discoursed yesterday, Herr Professor and myself, while jogging along in an
old-fashioned chaise to inspect a few acres of wood lot, the acquisition of which had let us,
with great freshness, into these reflections.

Does any fair lady shiver at the idea of a drive to the woods on the first of February? Let
me assure her that in the coldest season Nature never wants her ornaments full worth looking at.

See here, for instance--let us stop the old chaise, and get out a minute to look at this brook--one
of our last summer's pets. What is he doing this winter? Let us at least say, "How do you do?"
to him. Ah, here he is! and he and Jack Frost together have been turning the little gap in
the old stone wall, through which he leaped down to the road, into a little grotto of Antiparos.
Some old rough rails and boards that dropped over it are sheathed in plates of transparent
silver. The trunks of the black alders are mailed with crystal; and the witch-hazel, and yellow
osiers fringing its sedgy borders, are likewise shining through their glossy covering. Around
every stem that rises from the water is a glittering ring of ice. The tags of the alder and
the red berries of last summer's wild roses glitter now like a lady's pendant. As for the brook,
he is wide awake and joyful; and where the roof of sheet ice breaks away, you can see his yellow-brown
waters rattling and gurgling among the stones as briskly as they did last July. Down he springs!
over the glossy-coated stone wall, throwing new sparkles into the fairy grotto around him;
and widening daily from melting snows, and such other godsends, he goes chattering off under
yonder mossy stone bridge, and we lose sight of him. It might be fancy, but it seemed that
our watery friend tipped us a cheery wink as he passed, saying, "Fine weather, sir and madam;
nice times these; and in April you'll find us all right; the flowers are making up their finery
for the next season; there's to be a splendid display in a month or two."

Then the cloud lights of a wintry sky have a clear purity and brilliancy that no other months
can rival. The rose tints, and the shading of rose tint into gold, the flossy, filmy accumulation
of illuminated vapor that drifts across the sky in a January afternoon, are beauties far exceeding
those of summer.

Neither are trees, as seen in winter, destitute of their own peculiar beauty. If it be a gorgeous
study in summer time to watch the play of their abundant leafage, we still may thank winter
for laying bare before us the grand and beautiful anatomy of the tree, with all its interlacing
network of boughs, knotted on each twig with the buds of next year's promise. The fleecy and
rosy clouds look all the more beautiful through the dark lace veil of yonder magnificent elms;
and the down-drooping drapery of yonder willow hath its own grace of outline as it sweeps the
bare snows. And these comical old apple trees, why, in summer they look like so many plump,
green cushions, one as much like another as possible; but under the revealing light of winter
every characteristic twist and jerk stands disclosed.

One might moralize on this--how affliction, which strips us of all ornaments and accessories,
and brings us down to the permanent and solid wood of our nature, develops such wide differences
in people who before seemed not much distinct.

But here! our pony's feet are now clinking on the icy path under the shadow of the white pines
of "our wood lot." The path runs in a deep hollow, and on either hand rise slopes dark and
sheltered with the fragrant white pine. White pines are favorites with us for many good reasons.
We love their balsamic breath, the long, slender needles of their leaves, and, above all, the
constant sibylline whisperings that never cease among their branches. In summer the ground
beneath them is paved with a soft and cleanly matting of their last year's leaves; and then
their talking seems to be of coolness ever dwelling far up in their fringy, waving hollows.
And now, in winter time, we find the same smooth floor; for the heavy curtains above shut out
the snow, and the same voices above whisper of shelter and quiet. "You are welcome," they say;
"the north wind is gone to sleep; we are rocking him in our cradles. Sit down and be quiet
from the cold." At the feet of these slumberous old pines we find many of our last summer's
friends looking as good as new. The small, round-leafed partridgeberry weaves its viny mat,
and lays out its scarlet fruit; and here are blackberry vines with leaves still green, though
with a bluish tint, not unlike what invades mortal noses in such weather. Here, too, are the
bright, varnished leaves of the Indian pine, and the vines of feathery green of which our Christmas
garlands are made; and here, undaunted, though frozen to the very heart this cold day, is many
another leafy thing which we met last summer rejoicing each in its own peculiar flower. What
names they have received from scientific god-fathers at the botanic fount we know not; we have
always known them by fairy nicknames of our own--the pet names of endearment which lie between
Nature's children and us in her domestic circle.

There is something peculiarly sweet to us about a certain mystical dreaminess and obscurity
in these wild wood tribes, which we never wish to have brought out into the daylight of absolute
knowledge. Every one of them was a self-discovered treasure of our childhood, as much our own
as if God had made it on purpose and presented it; and it was ever a part of the joy to think
we had found something that no one else knew, and so musing on them, we gave them names in
our heart.

We search about amid the sere, yellow skeletons of last summer's ferns, if haply winter have
forgotten one green leaf for our home vase--in vain we rake, freezing our fingers through our
fur gloves--there is not one. An icicle has pierced every heart; and there are no fern leaves
except those miniature ones which each plant is holding in its heart, to be sent up in next
summer's hour of joy. But here are mosses--tufts of all sorts; the white, crisp and crumbling,
fair as winter frostwork; and here the feathery green of which French milliners make moss rose
buds; and here the cup-moss--these we gather with some care, frozen as they are to the wintry
earth.

Now, stumbling up this ridge, we come to a little patch of hemlocks, spreading out their green
wings, and making, in the ravine, a deep shelter, where many a fresh springing thing is standing,
and where we gain much for our home vases. These pines are motherly creatures. One can think
how it must rejoice the heart of a partridge or a rabbit to come from the dry, whistling sweep
of a deciduous forest under the home-like shadow of their branches. "As for the stork, the
fir trees are her house," says the Hebrew poet; and our fir trees, this winter, give shelter
to much small game. Often, on the light-fallen snow, I meet their little footprints. They have
a naive, helpless, innocent appearance, these little tracks, that softens my heart like a child's
footprint. Not one of them is forgotten of our Father; and therefore I remember them kindly.

And now, with cold toes and fingers, and arms full of leafy treasures, we plod our way back
to the chaise. A pleasant song is in my ears from this old wood lot--it speaks of green and
cheerful patience in life's hard weather. Not a scowling, sullen endurance, not a despairing,
hand-dropping resignation, but a heart cheerfulness that holds on to every leaf, and twig,
and flower, and bravely smiles and keeps green when frozen to the very heart, knowing that
the winter is but for a season, and that the sunshine and bird singings shall return, and the
last year's dry flower stalk give place to the risen, glorified flower.

POEMS.

THE CHARMER.

     "Socrates.--'However, you and Simmias appear to me as if you
     wished to sift this subject more thoroughly, and to be afraid, like
     children, lest, on the soul's departure from the body, winds should
     blow it away.'

            *       *       *       *       *

     "Upon this Cebes said, 'Endeavor to teach us better, Socrates. * *
     * Perhaps there is a childish spirit in our breast, that has such a
     dread. Let us endeavor to persuade him not to be afraid of death,
     as of hobgoblins.'

     "'But you must charm him every day,' said Socrates, 'until you
     have quieted his fears.'

     "'But whence, O Socrates,' he said, 'can we procure a skilful
     charmer for such a case, now you are about to leave us.'

     "'Greece is wide, Cebes,' he replied: 'and in it surely there are
     skilful men, and there are also many barbarous nations, all of
     which you should search, seeking such a charmer, sparing neither
     money nor toil, as there is nothing on which you can more
     reasonably spend your money.'"--(Last conversation of Socrates
     with his disciples, as narrated by Plato in the Phædo.)

            *       *       *       *       *

    "We need that Charmer, for our hearts are sore
      With longings for the things that may not be;
    Faint for the friends that shall return no more;
      Dark with distrust, or wrung with agony.

    "What is this life? and what to us is death?
      Whence came we? whither go? and where are those
    Who, in a moment stricken from our side,
      Passed to that land of shadow and repose?

    "And are they all dust? and dust must we become?
      Or are they living in some unknown clime?
    Shall we regain them in that far-off home,
      And live anew beyond the waves of time?

    "O man divine! on thee our souls have hung;
      Thou wert our teacher in these questions high;
    But, ah, this day divides thee from our side,
      And veils in dust thy kindly-guiding eye.

    "Where is that Charmer whom thou bidst us seek?
      On what far shores may his sweet voice be heard?
    When shall these questions of our yearning souls
      Be answered by the bright Eternal Word?"

    So spake the youth of Athens, weeping round,
      When Socrates lay calmly down to die;
    So spake the sage, prophetic of the hour
      When earth's fair morning star should rise on high.

    They found Him not, those youths of soul divine,
      Long seeking, wandering, watching on life's shore--
    Reasoning, aspiring, yearning for the light,
      Death came and found them--doubting as before.

    But years passed on; and lo! the Charmer came--
      Pure, simple, sweet, as comes the silver dew;
    And the world knew him not--he walked alone,
      Encircled only by his trusting few.

    Like the Athenian sage rejected, scorned,
      Betrayed, condemned, his day of doom drew nigh;
    He drew his faithful few more closely round,
      And told them that his hour was come to die.

    "Let not your heart be troubled," then he said;
      "My Father's house hath mansions large and fair;
    I go before you to prepare your place;
      I will return to take you with me there."

    And since that hour the awful foe is charmed,
      And life and death are glorified and fair.
    Whither he went we know--the way we know--
      And with firm step press on to meet him there.

PILGRIM'S SONG IN THE DESERT.

    'Tis morning now--upon the eastern hills
      Once more the sun lights up this cheerless scene;
    But O, no morning in my Father's house
      Is dawning now, for there no night hath been.

    Ten thousand thousand now, on Zion's hills,
      All robed in white, with palmy crowns, do stray,
    While I, an exile, far from fatherland,
      Still wandering, faint along the desert way.

    O home! dear home! my own, my native home!
      O Father, friends, when shall I look on you?
    When shall these weary wanderings be o'er,
      And I be gathered back to stray no more?

    O thou, the brightness of whose gracious face
      These weary, longing eyes have never seen,--
    By whose dear thought, for whose beloved sake,
      My course, through toil and tears, I daily take,--

    I think of thee when the myrrh-dropping morn
      Steps forth upon the purple eastern steep;
    I think of thee in the fair eventide,
      When the bright-sandalled stars their watches keep.

    And trembling hope, and fainting, sorrowing love,
      On thy dear word for comfort doth rely;
    And clear-eyed Faith, with strong forereaching gaze,
      Beholds thee here, unseen, but ever nigh.

    Walking in white with thee, she dimly sees,
      All beautiful, these lovely ones withdrawn,
    With whom my heart went upward, as they rose,
      Like morning stars, to light a coming dawn.

    All sinless now, and crowned, and glorified,
      Where'er thou movest move they still with thee,
    As erst, in sweet communion by thy side,
      Walked John and Mary in old Galilee.

    But hush, my heart! 'Tis but a day or two
      Divides thee from that bright, immortal shore.
    Rise up! rise up! and gird thee for the race!
      Fast fly the hours, and all will soon be o'er.

    Thou hast the new name written in thy soul;
      Thou hast the mystic stone he gives his own.
    Thy soul, made one with him, shall feel no more
      That she is walking on her path alone.

MARY AT THE CROSS.

     "Now there stood by the cross of Jesus his mother."

    O wondrous mother! Since the dawn of time
    Was ever joy, was ever grief like thine?
    O, highly favored in thy joy's deep flow,
    And favored e'en in this, thy bitterest woe!

    Poor was that home in simple Nazareth,
      Where thou, fair growing, like some silent flower,
    Last of a kingly line,--unknown and lowly,
      O desert lily,--passed thy childhood's hour.

    The world knew not the tender, serious maiden,
      Who, through deep loving years so silent grew,
    Filled with high thoughts and holy aspirations,
      Which, save thy Father, God's, no eye might view.

    And then it came, that message from the Highest,
      Such as to woman ne'er before descended;
    Th' almighty shadowing wings thy soul o'erspread,
      And with thy life the Life of worlds was blended.

    What visions, then, of future glory filled thee,
      Mother of King and kingdom yet unknown--
    Mother, fulfiller of all prophecy,
      Which through dim ages wondering seers had shown!

    Well did thy dark eye kindle, thy deep soul
      Rise into billows, and thy heart rejoice;
    Then woke the poet's fire, the prophet's song
      Tuned with strange, burning words thy timid voice.

    Then in dark contrast came the lowly manger,
     The outcast shed, the tramp of brutal feet;
    Again, behold earth's learned, and her lowly,
      Sages and shepherds, prostrate at thy feet.

    Then to the temple bearing, hark! again
      What strange, conflicting tones of prophecy
    Breathe o'er the Child, foreshadowing words of joy,
      High triumph, and yet bitter agony.

    O, highly favored thou, in many an hour
      Spent in lone musing with thy wondrous Son,
    When thou didst gaze into that glorious eye,
      And hold that mighty hand within thy own.

    Blessed through those thirty years, when in thy dwelling
      He lived a God disguised, with unknown power,
    And thou, his sole adorer,--his best love,--
      Trusting, revering, waitedst for his hour.

    Blessed in that hour, when called by opening heaven
      With cloud, and voice, and the baptizing flame,
    Up from the Jordan walked th' acknowledged stranger,
      And awe-struck crowds grew silent as he came.

    Blessed, when full of grace, with glory crowned,
      He from both hands almighty favors poured,
    And, though he had not where to lay his head,
      Brought to his feet alike the slave and lord.

    Crowds followed; thousands shouted, "Lo, our King!"
      Fast beat thy heart; now, now the hour draws nigh:
    Behold the crown--the throne! the nations bend.
      Ah, no! fond mother, no! behold him die.

    Now by that cross thou tak'st thy final station,
      And shar'st the last dark trial of thy Son;
    Not with weak tears or woman's lamentation,
      But with high, silent anguish, like his own.

    Hail, highly favored, even in this deep passion,
      Hail, in this bitter anguish--thou art blest--
    Blest in the holy power with him to suffer
      Those deep death pangs that lead to higher rest.

    All now is darkness; and in that deep stillness
      The God-man wrestles with that mighty woe;
    Hark to that cry, the rock of ages rending--
      "'Tis finished!" Mother, all is glory now!

    By sufferings mighty as his mighty soul
      Hath the Jehovah risen--forever blest;
    And through all ages must his heart-beloved
      Through the same baptism enter the same rest.

CHRISTIAN PEACE.

     "Thou shalt hide them in the secret of thy presence from the pride
     of man; thou shalt keep them secretly as in a pavilion from the
     strife of tongues."

ABIDE IN ME AND I IN YOU.

THE SOUL'S ANSWER.

    That mystic word of thine, O sovereign Lord,
      Is all too pure, too high, too deep for me;
    Weary of striving, and with longing faint,
      I breathe it back again in prayer to thee.

    Abide in me, I pray, and I in thee;
      From this good hour, O, leave me nevermore;
    Then shall the discord cease, the wound be healed,
      The lifelong bleeding of the soul be o'er.

    Abide in me--o'ershadow by thy love
      Each half-formed purpose and dark thought of sin;
    Quench, e'er it rise, each selfish, low desire,
      And keep my soul as thine, calm and divine.

    As some rare perfume in a vase of clay
      Pervades it with a fragrance not its own,
    So, when thou dwellest in a mortal soul,
      All heaven's own sweetness seems around it thrown.

    The soul alone, like a neglected harp,
      Grows out of tune, and needs a hand divine;
    Dwell thou within it, tune, and touch the chords,
      Till every note and string shall answer thine.

    Abide in me; there have been moments pure
      When I have seen thy face and felt thy power;
    Then evil lost its grasp, and passion, hushed,
      Owned the divine enchantment of the hour.

    These were but seasons beautiful and rare;
      "Abide in me,"--and they shall ever be;
    Fulfil at once thy precept and my prayer--
      Come and abide in me, and I in thee.

WHEN I AWAKE I AM STILL WITH THEE.

    Still, still with thee, when purple morning breaketh,
      When the bird waketh and the shadows flee;
    Fairer than morning, lovelier than the daylight,
      Dawns the sweet consciousness, I am with thee!

    Alone with thee, amid the mystic shadows,
      The solemn hush of nature newly born;
    Alone with thee in breathless adoration,
      In the calm dew and freshness of the morn.

    As in the dawning o'er the waveless ocean
      The image of the morning star doth rest,
    So in this stillness thou beholdest only
      Thine image in the waters of my breast.

    Still, still with thee! as to each new-born morning
      A fresh and solemn splendor still is given,
    So doth this blessed consciousness, awaking,
      Breathe, each day, nearness unto thee and heaven.

    When sinks the soul, subdued by toil, to slumber,
      Its closing eye looks up to thee in prayer,
    Sweet the repose beneath thy wings o'ershading,
      But sweeter still to wake and find thee there.

    So shall it be at last, in that bright morning
      When the soul waketh and life's shadows flee;
    O, in that hour, fairer than daylight dawning,
      Shall rise the glorious thought, I am with thee!

CHRIST'S VOICE IN THE SOUL.

     "Come ye yourselves into a desert place and rest a while; for there
     were many coming and going, so that they had no time so much as to
     eat."

    'Mid the mad whirl of life, its dim confusion,
      Its jarring discords and poor vanity,
    Breathing like music over troubled waters,
      What gentle voice, O Christian, speaks to thee?

    It is a stranger--not of earth or earthly;
      By the serene, deep fulness of that eye,--
    By the calm, pitying smile, the gesture lowly,--
      It is thy Savior as he passeth by.

    "Come, come," he saith, "into a desert place,
      Thou who art weary of life's lower sphere;
    Leave its low strifes, forget its babbling noise;
      Come thou with me--all shall be bright and clear.

    "Art thou bewildered by contesting voices,
      Sick to thy soul of party noise and strife?
    Come, leave it all, and seek that solitude
      Where thou shalt learn of me a purer life.

    "When far behind the world's great tumult dieth,
      Thou shalt look back and wonder at its roar;
    But its far voice shall seem to thee a dream,
      Its power to vex thy holier life be o'er.

    "There shalt thou learn the secret of a power,
      Mine to bestow, which heals the ills of living;
    To overcome by love, to live by prayer,
      To conquer man's worst evils by forgiving."

THE END.