MRS. RAFFLES

Being the Adventures of an Amateur Crackswoman

Narrated by Bunny

Edited by

JOHN KENDRICK BANGS

Illustrated by Albert Levering

New York and London Harper & Brothers Publishers 1905

Copyright, 1905, by Harper & Brothers. All rights reserved. Published October, 1905.

Contents

  CHAPTER                                                           PAGE

     I. THE ADVENTURE OF THE HERALD PERSONAL                         1

    II. THE ADVENTURE OF THE NEWPORT VILLA                            14

   III. THE ADVENTURE OF MRS. GASTER'S MAID                           28

    IV. THE PEARL ROPE OF MRS. GUSHINGTON-ANDREWS                     42

     V. THE ADVENTURE OF THE STEEL BONDS                              56

    VI. THE ADVENTURE OF THE FRESH-AIR FUND                           69

   VII. THE ADVENTURE OF MRS. ROCKERBILT'S TIARA                      84

  VIII. THE ADVENTURE OF THE CARNEGIE LIBRARY                         99

    IX. THE ADVENTURE OF THE HOLD-UP                                 115

     X. THE ADVENTURE OF MRS. SHADD'S MUSICALE                       132

    XI. THE ADVENTURE OF MRS. INNITT'S COOK                          150

   XII. THE LAST ADVENTURE                                           165

Illustrations

  "'IT'S FINE, BUNNY,' SHE CRIED"                         Frontispiece

  "THIS I WOULD SELL TO THE SUFFERING POOR"               Facing p.  4

  "THE WHOLE CONTENTS AND THE PLATTER AS WELL FELL AT MY FEET"        13

  "HER SLIGHT LITTLE FIGURE CONVULSED WITH GRIEF"                     40

  "AND THEN THERE CAME A RIPPING SOUND"                               52

  "I, OF COURSE, DID NOT TELL HENRIETTA OF EIGHT BEAUTIES I HAD
  KEPT OUT"                                                           54

  "'AFTER WHICH HE WILL COME TO NEWPORT'"                             62

  "MR. BOLIVAR WAS DULY IMPRESSED WITH THE EXTENT OF HENRIETTE'S
  FORTUNE"                                                            66

  ONE OF THE BENEFICIARIES AT PALM BEACH                              82

  "IT WAS NOT ALWAYS EASY TO GET THE RIGHT LIGHT"                     90

  "ALL WAS AS HENRIETTE HAD FORETOLD"                                 94

  "'IF YOU WANTED A LAKE, MR. HIGGINBOTHAM, I--'"                    110

  "AS KEEN AND HIGH-HANDED A PERFORMANCE AS I EVER WITNESSED"        124

  "ON HER WAY TO EARLY CHURCH I WAYLAID NORAH"                       162

  "HENRIETTE WAS TESTING THE FIFTY-THOUSAND-DOLLAR PIANO"            172

  "MY MISERY IS DEEP BUT I AM BUOYED UP BY ONE GREAT HOPE"           178

Mrs. Raffles

I

THE ADVENTURE OF THE HERALD PERSONAL

That I was in a hard case is best attested by the fact that when I had paid for my Sunday Herald
there was left in my purse just one tuppence-ha'penny stamp and two copper cents, one dated
1873, the other 1894. The mere incident that at this hour eighteen months later I can recall
the dates of these coins should be proof, if any were needed, of the importance of the coppers
in my eyes, and therefore of the relative scarcity of funds in my possession. Raffles was dead--killed
as you may remember at the battle of Spion Kop--and I, his companion, who had never known want
while his deft fingers were able to carry out the plans of that insinuating and marvellous
mind of his, was now, in the vernacular of the American, up against it. I had come to the United
States, not because I had any liking for that country or its people, who, to tell the truth,
are too sharp for an ordinary burglar like myself, but because with the war at an end I had
to go somewhere, and English soil was not safely to be trod by one who was required for professional
reasons to evade the eagle eye of Scotland Yard until the Statute of Limitations began to have
some bearing upon his case. That last affair of Raffles and mine, wherein we had successfully
got away with the diamond stomacher of the duchess of Herringdale, was still a live matter
in British detective circles, and the very audacity of the crime had definitely fastened the
responsibility for it upon our shoulders. Hence it was America for me, where one could be as
English as one pleased without being subject to the laws of his Majesty, King Edward VII.,
of Great Britain and Ireland and sundry other possessions upon which the sun rarely if ever
sets. For two years I had led a precarious existence, not finding in the land of silk and money
quite as many of those opportunities to add to the sum of my prosperity as the American War
Correspondent I had met in the Transvaal led me to expect. Indeed, after six months of successful
lecturing on the subject of the Boers before various lyceums in the country, I was reduced
to a state of penury which actually drove me to thievery of the pettiest and most vulgar sort.
There was little in the way of mean theft that I did not commit. During the coal famine, for
instance, every day passing the coal-yards to and fro, I would appropriate a single piece of
the precious anthracite until I had come into possession of a scuttleful, and this I would
sell to the suffering poor at prices varying from three shillings to two dollars and a half--a
precarious living indeed. The only respite I received for six months was in the rape of the
hansom-cab, which I successfully carried through one bitter cold night in January. I hired
the vehicle at Madison Square and drove to a small tavern on the Boston Post Road, where the
icy cold of the day gave me an excuse for getting my cabby drunk in the guise of kindness.
Him safely disposed of in a drunken stupor, I drove his jaded steed back to town, earned fifteen
dollars with him before daybreak, and then, leaving the cab in the Central Park, sold the horse
for eighteen dollars to a snow-removal contractor over on the East Side. It was humiliating
to me, a gentleman born, and a partner of so illustrious a person as the late A. J. Raffles,
to have to stoop to such miserable doings to keep body and soul together, but I was forced
to confess that, whatever Raffles had left to me in the way of example, I was not his equal
either in the conception of crime or in the nerve to carry a great enterprise through. My biggest
coups had a way of failing at their very beginning--which was about the only blessing I enjoyed,
since none of them progressed far enough to imperil my freedom, and, lacking confederates,
I was of course unable to carry through the profitable series of abductions in the world of
High Finance that I had contemplated. Hence my misfortunes, and now on this beautiful Sunday
morning, penniless but for the coppers and the postage-stamp, with no breakfast in sight, and,
fortunately enough, not even an appetite, I turned to my morning paper for my solace.

Running my eye up and down the personal column, which has for years been my favorite reading
of Sunday mornings, I found the usual assortment of matrimonial enterprises recorded: pathetic
appeals from P. D. to meet Q. on the corner of Twenty-third Street at three; imploring requests
from J. A. K. to return at once to "His Only Mother," who promises to ask no questions; and
finally--could I believe my eyes now riveted upon the word?--my own sobriquet, printed as boldly
and as plainly as though I were some patent cure for all known human ailments. It seemed incredible,
but there it was beyond all peradventure:

     "WANTED.--A Butler. BUNNY preferred. Apply to Mrs. A. J. Van
     Raffles, Bolivar Lodge, Newport, R.I."

To whom could that refer if not to myself, and what could it mean? Who was this Mrs. A. J.
Van Raffles?--a name so like that of my dead friend that it seemed almost identical. My curiosity
was roused to concert pitch. If this strange advertiser should be-- But no, she would not send
for me after that stormy interview in which she cast me over to take the hand of Raffles: the
brilliant, fascinating Raffles, who would have won his Isabella from Ferdinand, Chloe from
her Corydon, Pierrette from Pierrot--ay, even Heloise from Abelard. I never could find it in
my heart to blame Henriette for losing her heart to him, even though she had already promised
it to me, for I myself could not resist the fascination of the man at whose side I faithfully
worked even after he had stolen from me this dearest treasure of my heart. And yet who else
could it be if not the lovely Henriette? Surely the combination of Raffles, with or without
the Van, and Bunny was not so usual as to permit of so remarkable a coincidence.

"I will go to Newport at once," I cried, rising and pacing the floor excitedly, for I had many
times, in cursing my loneliness, dreamed of Henriette, and had oftener and oftener of late
found myself wondering what had become of her, and then the helplessness of my position burst
upon me with full force. How should I, the penniless wanderer in New York, get to Bolivar Lodge
at Newport? It takes money in this sordid country to get about, even as it does in Britain--in
sorry truth, things in detail differ little whether one lives under a king or a president;
poverty is quite as hard to bear, and free passes on the railroad are just as scarce.

"Curses on these plutocrats!" I muttered, as I thought of the railway directors rolling in
wealth, running trains filled with empty seats to and from the spot that might contain my fortune,
and I unable to avail myself of them for the lack of a paltry dollar or two. But suddenly the
thought flashed over me--telegraph collect. If it is she, she will respond at once.

And so it was that an hour later the following message was ticked over the wires:

     "Personal to-day's Herald received. Telegraph railway fare and I
     will go to you instantly.

  (Signed),
  BUNNY."

For three mortal hours I paced the streets feverishly awaiting the reply, and at two-thirty
it came, disconcerting enough in all conscience:

     "If you are not a bogus Bunny you will know how to raise the cash.
     If you are a bogus Bunny I don't want you."

It was simple, direct, and convincing, and my heart fluttered like the drum-beat's morning
call to action the moment I read it.

"By Jove!" I cried. "The woman is right, of course. It must be Henriette, and I'll go to her
if I have to rob a nickel-in-the-slot machine."

It was as of old. Faint-hearted I always was until some one gave me a bit of encouragement.
A word of praise or cheer from Raffles in the old days and I was ready to batter down Gibraltar,
a bit of discouragement and a rag was armor-plate beside me.

"'If you are not a bogus Bunny you will know,'" I read, spreading the message out before me.
"That is to say, she believes that if I am really myself I can surmount the insurmountable.
Gad! I'll do it." And I set off hot-foot up Fifth Avenue, hoping to discover, or by cogitation
in the balmy air of the spring-time afternoon, to conceive of some plan to relieve my necessities.
But, somehow or other, it wouldn't come. There were no pockets about to be picked in the ordinary
way. I hadn't the fare for a ride on the surface or elevated cars, where I might have found
an opportunity to relieve some traveller of his purse, and as for snatching such a thing from
some shopper, it was Sunday and the women who would have been an easy prey on a bargain-day
carried neither purse nor side-bag with them. I was in despair, and then the pealing bells
of St. Jondy's, the spiritual home of the multi-millionaires of New York, rang out the call
to afternoon service. It was like an invitation--the way was clear. My plan was laid in an
instant, and it worked beyond my most hopeful anticipations. Entering the church, I was ushered
to a pew about halfway up the centre aisle--despite my poverty, I had managed to keep myself
always well-groomed, and no one would have guessed, to look at my faultless frock-coat and
neatly creased trousers, at my finely gloved hand and polished top-hat, that my pockets held
scarcely a brass farthing. The service proceeded. A good sermon on the Vanity of Riches found
lodgment in my ears, and then the supreme moment came. The collection-plate was passed, and,
gripping my two pennies in my hand, I made as if to place them in the salver, but with studied
awkwardness I knocked the alms-platter from the hands of the gentleman who passed it. The whole
contents and the platter as well fell at my feet, and from my lips in reverent whispers poured
forth no end of most abject apologies. Of course I assisted in recovering the fallen bills
and coins, and in less time than it takes to tell it the vestryman was proceeding on his way
up the aisle, gathering in the contributions from other generously disposed persons as he went,
as unconsciously as though the contretemps had never occurred, and happily unaware that out
of the moneys cast to the floor by my awkward act two yellow-backed fifty-dollar bills, five
half-dollars, and a dime remained behind under the hassock at my feet, whither I had managed
to push them with my toe while offering my apologies.

An hour later, having dined heartily at Delsherrico's, I was comfortably napping in a Pullman
car on my way to the Social Capital of the United States.

II

THE ADVENTURE OF THE NEWPORT VILLA

There is little need for me to describe in detail the story of my railway journey from New
York to Newport. It was uneventful and unproductive save as to the latter end of it, when,
on the arrival of the train at Wickford, observing that the prosperous-looking gentleman bound
for Boston who occupied the seat next mine in the Pullman car was sleeping soundly, I exchanged
my well-worn covert coat for his richly made, sable-lined surtout, and made off as well with
his suit-case on the chance of its holding something that might later serve some one of my
many purposes. I mention this in passing only because the suit-case, containing as it did all
the essential features of a gentleman's evening attire, even to three superb pearl studs in
the bosom of an immaculately white shirt, all of them, marvellously enough, as perfectly fitting
as though they had been made for me, with a hundred unregistered first-mortgage bonds of the
United States Steel Company--of which securities there will be more anon--enabled me later
to appear before Mrs. Van Raffles in a guise so prosperous as to win an immediate renewal of
her favor.

"We shall be almost as great a combination as the original Bunny," she cried, enthusiastically,
when I told her of this coup. "With my brains and your blind luck nothing can stop us."

My own feelings as I drove up to Bolivar Lodge were mixed. I still loved Henriette madly, but
the contrast between her present luxury and my recent misery grated harshly upon me. I could
not rid myself of the notion that Raffles had told her of the secret hiding-place of the diamond
stomacher of the duchess of Herringdale, and that she had appropriated to her own use all the
proceeds of its sale, leaving me, who had risked my liberty to obtain it, without a penny's
worth of dividend for my pains. It did not seem quite a level thing to do, and I must confess
that I greeted the lady in a reproachful spirit. It was, indeed, she, and more radiantly beautiful
than ever--a trifle thinner perhaps, and her eyes more coldly piercing than seductively winning
as of yore, but still Henriette whom I had once so madly loved and who had jilted me for a
better man.

"Dear old Bunny!" she murmured, holding out both hands in welcome. "Just to think that after
all these years and in a strange land and under such circumstances we should meet again!"

"It is strange," said I, my eye roving about the drawing-room, which from the point of view
of its appointments and decoration was about the richest thing I had ever seen either by light
of day or in the mysterious glimpses one gets with a dark lantern of the houses of the moneyed
classes. "It seems more than strange," I added, significantly, "to see you surrounded by such
luxury. A so-called lodge built of the finest grade of Italian marble; gardens fit for the
palace of a king; a retinue of servants such as one scarcely finds on the ducal estates of
the proudest families of England and a mansion that is furnished with treasures of art, any
one of which is worth a queen's ransom."

"I do not wonder you are surprised," she replied, looking about the room with a smile of satisfaction
that did little to soothe my growing wrath.

"It certainly leaves room for explanation," I retorted, coldly. "Of course, if Raffles told
you where the Herringdale jewels were hid and you have disposed of them, some of all this could
be accounted for; but what of me? Did it ever occur to you that I was entitled to some part
of the swag?"

"Oh, you poor, suspicious old Bunny," she rippled. "Haven't I sent for you to give you some
share of this--although truly you don't deserve it, for this is all mine. I haven't any more
notion what became of the Herringdale jewels than the duchess of Herringdale herself."

"What?" I cried. "Then these surroundings--"

"Are self-furnishing," she said, with a merry little laugh, "and all through a plan of my own,
Bunny. This house, as you may not be aware, is the late residence of Mr. and Mrs. Constant
Scrappe--"

"Who are suing each other for divorce," I put in, for I knew of the Constant Scrappes in social
life, as who did not, since a good third of the society items of the day concerned themselves
with the matrimonial difficulties of this notable couple.

"Precisely," said Henriette. "Now Mrs. Scrappe is in South Dakota establishing a residence,
and Colonel Scrappe is at Monte Carlo circulating his money with the aid of a wheel and a small
ball. Bolivar Lodge, with its fine collection of old furniture, its splendid jades, its marvellous
Oriental potteries, paintings, and innumerable small silver articles, is left here at Newport
and for rent. What more natural, dear, than that I, needing a residence whose occupancy would
in itself be an assurance of my social position, should snap it up with an eagerness which
in this Newport atmosphere amounted nearly to a betrayal of plebeian origin?"

"But it must cost a fortune!" I cried, gazing about me at the splendors of the room, which
even to a cursory inspection revealed themselves as of priceless value. "That cloisonné jar
over by the fireplace is worth two hundred pounds alone."

"That is just the reason why I wanted this particular house, Bunny. It is also why I need your
assistance in maintaining it," Mrs. Raffles returned.

"Woman is ever a mystery," I responded, with a harsh laugh. "Why in Heaven's name you think
I can help you to pay your rent--"

"It is only twenty-five hundred dollars a month, Bunny," she said.

My answer was a roar of derisive laughter.

"Hear her!" I cried, addressing the empty air. "Only twenty-five hundred dollars a month! Why,
my dear Henriette, if it were twenty-five hundred clam-shells a century I couldn't help you
pay a day's rental, I am that strapped. Until this afternoon I hadn't seen thirty cents all
at once for nigh on to six months. I have been so poor that I've had to take my morning coffee
at midnight from the coffee-wagons of the New York, Boston, and Chicago sporting papers. In
eight months I have not tasted a table-d'hôte dinner that an expert would value at fifteen
cents net, and yet you ask me to help you pay twenty-five hundred dollars a month rent for
a Newport palace! You must be mad."

"You are the same loquacious old Bunny that you used to be," said Mrs. Raffles, sharply, yet
with a touch of affection in her voice. "You can't keep your trap shut for a second, can you?
Do you know, Bunny, what dear old A. J. said to me just before he went to South Africa? It
was that if you were as devoted to business as you were to words you'd be a wonder. His exact
remark was that we would both have to look out for you for fear you would queer the whole business.
Raffles estimated that your habit of writing-up full accounts of his various burglaries for
the London magazines had made the risks one hundred per cent. bigger and the available swag
a thousand per cent. harder to get hold of. 'Harry,' said he the night before he sailed, 'if
I die over in the Transvaal and you decide to continue the business, get along as long as you
can without a press-agent. If you go on the stage, surround yourself with 'em, but in the burglary
trade they are a nuisance.'"

My answer was a sulky shrug of the shoulders.

"You haven't given me a chance to explain how you are to help me. I don't ask you for money,
Bunny. Four dollars' worth of obedience is all I want," she continued. "The portable property
in this mansion is worth about half a million dollars, my lad, and I want you to be--well,
my official porter. I took immediate possession of this house, and my first month's rent was
paid with the proceeds of a sale of three old bedsteads I found on the top floor, six pieces
of Sèvres china from the southeast bedroom on the floor above this, and a Satsuma vase which
I discovered in a hall-closet on the third floor."

A light began to dawn on me.

"Before coming here I eked out a miserable existence in New York as buyer for an antique dealer
on Fourth Avenue," she explained. "He thinks I am still working for him, travelling about the
country in search of bargains in high-boys, mahogany desks, antique tables, wardrobes, bedsteads--in
short, valuable junk generally. Now do you see?"

"As Mrs. Raffles--or Van Raffles, as you have it now?" I demanded.

"Oh, Bunny, Bunny, Bunny! What a stupid you are! Never! As Miss Pratt-Robinson," she replied.
"From this I earn fifteen dollars a week. The sources of the material I send him--well--do
you see now, Bunny?"

"It is growing clearer," said I. "You contemplate paying the rent of this house with its contents,
is that it?"

"What beautiful intelligence you have, Bunny!" she laughed, airily. "You know a hawk from a
hand-saw. Nobody can pass a motor-car off on you for a horse, can they, Bunny dear? Not while
you have that eagle eye of yours wide open. Yes, sir. That is the scheme. I am going to pay
the rental of this mansion with its contents. Half a million dollars' worth of contents means
how long at twenty-five hundred dollars a month? Eh?"

"Gad! Henriette," I cried. "You are worthy of Raffles, I swear it. You can be easy about your
rent for sixteen years."

"That is about the size of it, as these Newport people have it," said Mrs. Raffles, beaming
upon me.

"I'm still in the dark as to where I come in," said I.

"Promise to obey my directions implicitly," said Henriette "and you will receive your share
of the booty."

"Henriette--" I cried, passionately, seizing her hand.

"No--Bunny--not now," she remonstrated, gently. "This is no time for sentiment. Just promise
to obey, the love and honor business may come later."

"I will," said I.

"Well, then," she resumed, her color mounting high, and speaking rapidly, "you are to return
at once to New York, taking with you three trunks which I have already packed, containing one
of the most beautiful collections of jade ornaments that has ever been gathered together. You
will rent a furnished apartment in some aristocratic quarter. Spread these articles throughout
your rooms as though you were a connoisseur, and on Thursday next when Mr. Harold Van Gilt
calls upon you to see your collection you will sell it to him for not less than eight thousand
dollars."

"Aha!" said I. "I see the scheme."

"This you will immediately remit to me here," she continued, excitedly. "Mr. Van Gilt will
pay cash."

I laughed. "Why eight thousand?" I demanded. "Are you living beyond your--ah--income?"

"No," she answered, "but next month's rent is due Tuesday, and I owe my servants and tradesmen
twenty-five hundred dollars more."

"Even then there will be three thousand dollars over," I put in.

"True, Bunny, true. But I shall need it all, dear. I am invited to the P. J. D. Gasters on
Sunday afternoon to play bridge," Henriette explained. "We must prepare for emergencies."

I returned to New York on the boat that night, and by Wednesday was safely ensconced in very
beautifully furnished bachelor quarters near Gramercy Square, where on Thursday Mr. Harold
Van Gilt called to see my collection of jades which I was selling because of a contemplated
five-year journey into the East. On Friday Mr. Van Gilt took possession of the collection,
and that night a check for eight thousand dollars went to Mrs. Van Raffles at Newport. Incidentally,
I passed two thousand dollars to my own credit. As I figured it out, if Van Gilt was willing
to pay ten thousand dollars for the stuff, and Henriette was willing to take eight thousand
dollars for it, nobody was the loser by my pocketing two thousand dollars--unless, perhaps,
it was Mr. and Mrs. Constant Scrappe who owned the goods. But that was none of my affair. I
played straight with the others, and that was all there was to it as far as I was concerned.

III

THE ADVENTURE OF MRS. GASTER'S MAID

Two days after my bargain with Mr. Harold Van Gilt, in which he acquired possession of the
Scrappe jades and Mrs. Van Raffles and I shared the proceeds of the ten thousand dollars check,
I was installed at Bolivar Lodge as head-butler and steward, my salary to consist of what I
could make out of it on the side, plus ten per cent. of the winnings of my mistress. It was
not long before I discovered that the job was a lucrative one. From various tradesmen of the
town I received presents of no little value in the form sometimes of diamond scarf-pins, gold
link sleeve-buttons, cases of fine wines for my own use, and in one or two instances checks
of substantial value. There was also what was called a steward's rebate on the monthly bills,
which in circles where lavish entertainment is the order of the day amounted to a tidy little
income in itself. My only embarrassment lay in the contact into which I was necessarily brought
with other butlers, with whom I was perforce required to associate. This went very much against
the grain at first, for, although I am scarcely more than a thief after all, I am an artistic
one, and still retain the prejudice against inferior associations which an English gentleman
whatever the vicissitudes of his career can never quite rid himself of. I had to join their
club--an exclusive organization of butlers and "gentlemen's gentlemen"--otherwise valets--and
in order to quiet all suspicion of my real status in the Van Raffles household I was compelled
to act the part in a fashion which revolted me. Otherwise the position was pleasant, and, as
I have intimated, more than lucrative.

It did not take me many days to discover that Henriette was a worthy successor to her late
husband. Few opportunities for personal profit escaped her eye, and I was able to observe as
time went on and I noted the accumulation of spoons, forks, nutcrackers, and gimcracks generally
that she brought home with her after her calls upon or dinners with ladies of fashion that
she had that quality of true genius which never overlooks the smallest details.

The first big coup after my arrival, as the result of her genius, was in the affair of Mrs.
Gaster's maid. Henriette had been to a bridge afternoon at Mrs. Gaster's and upon her return
manifested an extraordinary degree of excitement. Her color was high, and when she spoke her
voice was tremulous. Her disturbed condition was so evident that my heart sank into my boots,
for in our business nerve is a sine qua non of success, and it looked to me as if Henriette
was losing hers. She has probably lost at cards to-day, I thought, and it has affected her
usual calmness. I must do something to warn her against this momentary weakness. With this
idea in mind, when the opportunity presented itself later I spoke.

"You lost at bridge to-day, Henriette," I said.

"Yes," she replied. "Twenty-five hundred dollars in two hours. How did you guess?"

"By your manner," said I. "You are as nervous as a young girl at a commencement celebration.
This won't do, Henriette. Nerves will prove your ruin, and if you can't stand your losses at
bridge, what will you do in the face of the greater crisis which in our profession is likely
to confront us in the shape of an unexpected visit of police at any moment?"

Her answer was a ringing laugh.

"You absurd old rabbit," she murmured. "As if I cared about my losses at bridge! Why, my dear
Bunny, I lost that money on purpose. You don't suppose that I am going to risk my popularity
with these Newport ladies by winning, do you? Not I, my boy. I plan too far ahead for that.
For the good of our cause it is my task to lose steadily and with good grace. This establishes
my credit, proves my amiability, and confirms my popularity."

"But you are very much excited by something, Henriette," said I. "You cannot deny that."

"I don't--but it is the prospect of future gain, not the reality of present losses, that has
taken me off my poise," she said. "Whom do you suppose I saw at Mrs. Gaster's to-day?"

"No detectives, I hope," I replied, paling at the thought.

"No, sir," she laughed. "Mrs. Gaster's maid. We must get her, Bunny."

"Oh, tush!" I ejaculated. "All this powwow over another woman's maid!"

"You don't understand," said Henriette. "It wasn't the maid so much as the woman that startled
me, Bunny. You can't guess who she was."

"How should I?" I demanded.

"She was Fiametta de Belleville, one of the most expert hands in our business. Poor old Raffles
used to say that she diminished his income a good ten thousand pounds a year by getting in
her fine work ahead of his," explained Henriette. "He pointed her out to me in Piccadilly once
and I have never forgotten her face."

"I hope she did not recognize you," I observed.

"No, indeed--she never saw me before, so how could she? But I knew her the minute she took
my cloak," said Henriette. "She's dyed her hair, but her eyes were the same as ever, and that
peculiar twist of the lip that Raffles had spoken of as constituting one of her fascinations
remained unchanged. Moreover, just to prove myself right, I left my lace handkerchief and a
five hundred dollar bill in the cloak pocket. When I got the cloak back both were gone. Oh,
she's Fiametta de Belleville all right, and we must get her."

"What for--to rob you?"

"No," returned Henrietta, "rather that we--but there, there, Bunny, I'll manage this little
thing myself. It's a trifle too subtle for a man's intellect--especially when that man is you."

"What do you suppose she is doing here?" I asked.

"You silly boy," laughed Henriette.

"Doing? Why, Mrs. Gaster, of course. She is after the Gaster jewels."

"Humph!" I said, gloomily. "That cuts us out, doesn't it?"

"Does it?" asked Henriette, enigmatically.

It was about ten weeks later that the newspapers of the whole country were ringing with the
startling news of the mysterious disappearance of Mrs. Gaster's jewels. The lady had been robbed
of three hundred and sixty-eight thousand dollars worth of gems, and there was apparently no
clew even to the thief. Henriette and I, of course, knew that Fiametta de Belleville had accomplished
her mission, but apparently no one else knew it. True, she had been accused, and had been subjected
to a most rigid examination by the Newport police and the New York Central Office, but no proof
of any kind establishing her guilt could be adduced, and after a week of suspicion she was
to all intents and purposes relieved of all odium.

"She'll skip now," said I.

"Not she," said Henriette. "To disappear now would be a confession of guilt. If Fiametta de
Belleville is the woman I take her for she'll stay right here as if nothing had happened, but
of course not at Mrs. Gaster's."

"Where then?" I asked.

"With Mrs. A. J. Van Raffles," replied Henriette. "The fact is," she added, "I have already
engaged her. She has acted her part well, and has seemed so prostrated by the unjust suspicion
of the world that even Mrs. Gaster is disturbed over her condition. She has asked her to remain,
but Fiametta has refused. 'I couldn't, madam,' she said when Mrs. Gaster asked her to stay.
'You have accused me of a fearful crime--a crime of which I am innocent--and--I'd rather work
in a factory, or become a shop-girl in a department store, than stay longer in a house where
such painful things have happened.' Result, next Tuesday Fiametta de Belleville comes to me
as my maid."

"Well, Henriette," said I, "I presume you know your own business, but why you lay yourself
open to being robbed yourself and to having the profits of your own business diminished I can't
see. Please remember that I warned you against this foolish act."

"All right, Bunny, I'll remember," smiled Mrs. Van Raffles, and there the matter was dropped
for the moment.

The following Tuesday Fiametta de Belleville was installed in the Van Raffles household as
the maid of Mrs. A. J. Van Raffles. To her eagle eye it was another promising field for profit,
for Henriette had spared neither pains nor money to impress Fiametta with the idea that next
to Mrs. Gaster she was about as lavish and financially capable a householder as could be found
in the Social Capital of the United States. As for me, I was the picture of gloom. The woman's
presence in our household could not be but a source of danger to our peace of mind as well
as to our profits, and for the life of me I could not see why Henriette should want her there.
But I was not long in finding out.

A week after Fiametta's arrival Mrs. Raffles rang hurriedly for me.

"Yes, madam," I said, responding immediately to her call.

"Bunny," she said, her hand trembling a little, "the hour for action has arrived. I have just
sent Fiametta on an errand to Providence. She will be gone three hours."

"Yes!" said I. "What of it?"

"I want you during her absence to go with me to her room--"

The situation began to dawn on me.

"Yes!" I cried, breathlessly. "And search her trunks?"

"No, Bunny, no--the eaves," whispered Henriette. "I gave her that room in the wing because
it has so many odd cubby-holes where she could conceal things. I am inclined to think--well,
the moment she leaves the city let me know. Follow her to the station, and don't return till
you know she is safely out of town and on her way to Providence. Then our turn will come."

Oh, that woman! If I had not adored her before I--but enough. This is no place for sentiment.
The story is the thing, and I must tell it briefly.

I followed out Henriette's instructions to the letter, and an hour later returned with the
information that Fiametta was, indeed, safely on her way.

"Good," said Mrs. Raffles. "And now, Bunny, for the Gaster jewels."

Mounting the stairs rapidly, taking care, of course, that there were none of the other servants
about to spy upon us, we came to the maid's room. Everything in it betokened a high mind and
a good character. There were religious pictures upon the bureau, prayer-books, and some volumes
of essays of a spiritual nature were scattered about--nothing was there to indicate that the
occupant was anything but a simple, sweet child of innocence except--

Well, Henriette was right--except the Gaster jewels. Even as my mistress had suspected, they
were cached under the eaves, snuggled close against the huge dormer-window looking out upon
the gardens; laid by for a convenient moment to get them out of Newport, and then--back to
England for Fiametta. And what a gorgeous collection they were! Dog-collars of diamonds, yards
of pearl rope, necklaces of rubies of the most lustrous color and of the size of pigeons' eggs,
rings, brooches, tiaras--everything in the way of jewelled ornament the soul of woman could
desire--all packed closely away in a tin box that I now remembered Fiametta had brought with
her in her hand the day of her arrival. And now all these things were ours--Henriette's and
mine--without our having had to stir out-of-doors to get them. An hour later they were in the
safety-deposit vault of Mrs. A. J. Van Raffles in the sturdy cellars of the Tiverton Trust
Company, as secure against intrusion as though they were locked in the heart of Gibraltar itself.

And Fiametta? Well--a week later she left Newport suddenly, her eyes red with weeping and her
slight little figure convulsed with grief. Her favorite aunt had just died, she said, and she
was going back to England to bury her.

IV

THE PEARL ROPE OF MRS. GUSHINGTON-ANDREWS

"Bunny," said Henrietta one morning, shortly after we had come into possession of the Gaster
jewels, "how is your nerve? Are you ready for a coup requiring a lot of it?"

"Well," I replied, pluming myself a bit, "I don't wish to boast, Henriette, but I think it
is pretty good. I managed to raise twenty-seven hundred dollars on my own account by the use
of it last night."

"Indeed?" said Henriette, with a slight frown. "How, Bunny? You know you are likely to complicate
matters for all of us if you work on the side. What, pray, did you do last night?"

And then I unfolded to her the incidents of the night before when, by assuming at a moment's
notice the position of valet to young Robertson de Pelt, the frisky young favorite of the inner
set, I had relieved that high-flying young bachelor of fifteen hundred dollars in cash and
some twelve hundred dollars worth of jewels as well.

"I was spending the evening at the Gentlemen's Gentlemen's Club," I explained, "when word came
over the telephone to Digby, Mr. de Pelt's valet, that Mr. de Pelt was at the Rockerbilts'
and in no condition to go home alone. It happened that it was I who took the message, and observing
that Digby was engaged in a game of billiards, and likely to remain so for some time to come,
I decided to go after the gentleman myself without saying anything to Digby about it. Muffling
myself up so that no one could recognize me, I hired a cab and drove out to the Rockerbilt
mansion, sent in word that Mr. de Pelt's man was waiting for him, and in ten minutes had the
young gentleman in my possession. I took him to his apartment, dismissed the cab, and, letting
ourselves into his room with his own latch-key, put him to bed. His clothes I took, as a well-ordered
valet should, from his bed-chamber into an adjoining room, where, after removing the contents
of his pockets, I hung them neatly over a chair and departed, taking with me, of course, everything
of value the young gentleman had about him, even down to the two brilliant rubies he wore in
his garter buckles. This consisted of two handfuls of crumpled twenty-dollar bills from his
trousers, three rolls of one-hundred-dollar bills from his waistcoat, and sundry other lots
of currency, both paper and specie, that I found stowed away in his overcoat and dinner-coat
pockets. There were also ten twenty-dollar gold pieces in a little silver chain-bag he carried
on his wrist. As I say, there was about fifteen hundred dollars of this loose change, and I
reckon up the value of his studs, garter rubies, and finger-rings at about twelve hundred dollars
more, or a twenty-seven hundred dollars pull in all. Eh?"

"Mercy, Bunny, that was a terribly risky thing. Suppose he had recognized you?" cried Henriette.

"Oh, he did--or at least he thought he did," I replied, smiling broadly at the recollection.
"On the way home in the cab he wept on my shoulder and said I was the best friend he ever had,
and told me he loved me like a brother. There wasn't anything he wouldn't do for me, and if
ever I wanted an automobile or a grand-piano all I had to do was to ask him for it. He was
very genial."

"Well, Bunny," said Henriette, "you are very clever at times, but do be careful. I am delighted
to have you show your nerve now and then, but please don't take any serious chances. If Mr.
de Pelt ever recognizes you--and he dines here next Wednesday--you'll get us both into awful
trouble."

Again I laughed. "He won't," said I, with a conviction born of experience. "His geniality was
of the kind that leaves the mind a blank the following morning. I don't believe Mr. de Pelt
remembers now that he was at the Rockerbilts' last night, and even if he does, you know that
I was in this house at eleven o'clock."

"I, Bunny? Why, I haven't seen you since dinner," she demurred.

"Nevertheless, Henriette, you know that I was in the house at eleven o'clock last night--or,
rather, you will know it if you are ever questioned on the subject, which you won't be," said
I. "So, now that I have shown you in just what shape my nerve is, what is the demand you are
going to put upon it?"

"You will have to bring to the enterprise all that ability which used to characterize your
efforts as an amateur actor, Bunny," she replied. "Summon all your sang-froid to your aid;
act with deliberation, courtesy, and, above all, without the slightest manifestation of nervousness,
and we should win, not a petty little twenty-seven hundred dollars, but as many thousands.
You know Mrs. Gushington-Andrews?"

"Yes," said I. "She is the lady who asked me for the olives at your last dinner."

"Precisely," observed Henriette. "You possibly observed also that wherever she goes she wears
about sixty-nine yards of pearl rope upon her person."

"Rope?" I laughed. "I shouldn't call that rope. Cable, yes--frankly, when she came into the
dining-room the other night I thought it was a feather-boa she had on."

"All pearls, Bunny, of the finest water," said Henriette, enthusiastically. "There isn't one
of the thousands that isn't worth anywhere from five hundred to twenty-five hundred."

"And I am to land a yard or two of the stuff for you in some mysterious way?" I demanded. "How
is it to be--by kidnapping the lady, the snatch and run game, or how?"

"Sarcasm does not suit your complexion, Bunny," retorted Henriette. "Your best method is to
follow implicitly the directions of wiser brains. You are a first-class tool, but as a principal--well--well,
never mind. You do what I tell you and some of those pearls will be ours. Mrs. Gushington-Andrews,
as you may have noticed, is one of those exceedingly effusive ladies who go into ecstasies
over everything and everybody. She is what Raffles used to call a palaverer. Where most people
nod she describes a complete circle with her head. When a cold, formal handshake is necessary
she perpetrates an embrace, and that is where we come in. At my next Tuesday tea she will be
present. She will wear her pearls--she'll be strung with them from head to foot. A rope-walk
won't be in it with her, and every single little jewel will be worth a small fortune. You,
Bunny, will be in the room to announce her when she arrives. She will rush to my arms, throw
her own about my neck, the ornaments of my corsage will catch the rope at two or more points,
sever the thread in several places, pearls will rain down upon the floor by dozens, and then--"

"I'm to snatch 'em and dive through the window, eh?" I interrupted.

"No, Bunny--you will behave like a gentleman, that is all," she responded, haughtily; "or rather
like a butler with the instincts of a gentleman. At my cry of dismay over the accident--"

"Better call it the incident," I put in.

"Hush! At my cry of dismay over the accident," Henriette repeated, "you will spring forward,
go down upon your knees, and gather up the jewels by the handful. You will pour them back into
Mrs. Gushington-Andrews's hands and retire. Now, do you see?"

"H'm--yes," said I. "But how do you get the pearls if I pour them back into her hands? Am I
to slide some of them under the rugs, or flick them with my thumb-nail under the piano--or what?"

"Nothing of the sort, Bunny; just do as I tell you--only bring your gloves to me just before
the guests arrive, that is all," said Henriette. "Instinct will carry you through the rest of it."

And then the conspiracy stopped for the moment.

The following Tuesday at five the second of Mrs. Van Raffles's Tuesday afternoons began. Fortune
favored us in that it was a beautiful day and the number of guests was large. Henriette was
charming in her new gown specially imported from Paris--a gown of Oriental design with row
upon row of brilliantly shining, crescent-shaped ornaments firmly affixed to the front of it
and every one of them as sharp as a steel knife. I could see at a glance that even if so little
as one of these fastened its talons upon the pearl rope of Mrs. Gushington-Andrews nothing
under heaven could save it from laceration.

What a marvellous mind there lay behind those exquisite, childlike eyes of the wonderful Henriette!

"Remember, Bunny--calm deliberation--your gloves now," were her last words to me.

"Count on me, Henriette; but I still don't see--" I began.

"Hush! Just watch me," she replied.

Whereupon this wonderful creature, taking my white gloves, deliberately smeared their palms
and inner sides of the fingers with a milk-hued paste of her own making, composed of talcum
powder and liquid honey. Nothing more innocent-appearing yet more villainously sticky have
I ever before encountered.

"There!" she said--and at last I understood.

An hour later our victim arrived and scarce an inch of her but shone like a snow-clad hill
with the pearls she wore. I stood at the portière and announced Mrs. Gushington-Andrews in
my most blasé but butlerian tones. The lady fairly rushed by me, and in a moment her arms were
about Henriette's neck.

"You dear, sweet thing!" cried Mrs. Gushington-Andrews. "And you look so exquisitely charming
to-day--"

And then there came a ripping sound. The two women started to draw away from each other; five
of the crescents catching in the rope, in the impulsive jerking back of Mrs. Gushington-Andrews
in order that she might gaze into Henrietta's eyes, cut through the marvellous cords of the
exquisite jewels. There was a cry of dismay both from Henriette and her guest, and the rug
beneath their feet was simply white with riches. In a moment I was upon my knees scooping them
up by the handful.

"Oh, dear, how very unfortunate!" cried Henriette. "Here, dear," she added, holding out a pair
of teacups. "Let James pour them into this," and James, otherwise myself, did so to the extent
of five teacups full of them and then he discreetly retired.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well, Bunny," said Henriette, breathlessly, two hours later when her last guest had gone.
"Tell me quickly--what was the result?"

"These, madam," said I, handing her a small plush bag into which I had poured the "salvage"
taken from my sticky palms. "A good afternoon's work," I added.

And, egad, it was: seventeen pearls of a value of twelve hundred dollars each, fifteen worth
scarcely less than nine hundred dollars apiece, and some twenty-seven or eight smaller ones
that we held to be worth in the neighborhood of five hundred dollars each.

"Splendid!" cried Henrietta "Roughly speaking, Bunny, we've pulled in between forty and fifty
thousand dollars to-day."

"About that," said I, with an inward chuckle, for I, of course, did not tell Henriette of eight
beauties I had kept out of the returns for myself. "But what are we going to do when Mrs. Gushington-Andrews
finds out that they are gone?"

"I shall provide for that," said this wonderful woman. "I shall throw her off the scent by
sending you over to her at once with sixteen of these assorted. I hate to give them up, but
I think it advisable to pay that much as a sort of insurance against suspicion. Even then we'll
be thirty-five thousand dollars to the good. And, by-the-way, Bunny, I want to congratulate
you on one thing."

"Ah! What's that--my sang-froid, my nerve?" I asked, airily.

"No, the size of your hands," said Henriette. "The superficial area of those palms of yours
has been worth ten thousand dollars to us to-day."

V

THE ADVENTURE OF THE STEEL BONDS

"Excuse me, Henriette," said I one morning, after I had been in Mrs. Van Raffles's employ for
about three months and had begun to calculate as to my share of the profits. "What are you
doing with all this money we are gradually accumulating? There must be pretty near a million
in hand by this time--eh?"

"One million two hundred and eighty-seven thousand five hundred and twenty-eight dollars and
thirty-six cents," replied Henriette instantly. "It's a tidy little sum."

"Almost enough to retire on," I suggested.

"Now, Bunny, stop that!" retorted Henriette. "Either stop it or else retire yourself. I am
not what they call a quitter in this country, and I do not propose at the very height of my
career to give up a business which I have struggled for years to establish."

"That is all very well, Henriette," said I. "But the pitcher that goes to the bat too often
strikes out at last." (I had become a baseball fiend during my sojourn in the States.) "A million
dollars is a pot of money, and it's my advice to you to get away with it as soon as you can."

"Excuse me, Bunny, but when did I ever employ you to give advice?" demanded Henriette. "It
is quite evident that you don't understand me. Do you suppose for an instant that I am robbing
these people here in Newport merely for the vulgar purpose of acquiring money? If you do you
have a woful misconception of the purposes which actuate an artist."

"You certainly are an artist, Henriette," I answered, desirous of placating her.

"Then you should know better than to intimate that I am in this business for the sordid dollars
and cents there are to be got out of it," pouted my mistress. "Mr. Vauxhall Bean doesn't chase
the aniseseed bag because he loves to shed the aniseseed or hungers for bags as an article
of food. He does it for the excitement of the hunt; because he loves to feel the movement of
the hunter that he sits so well between his knees; because he is enamoured of the baying of
the hounds, the winding of the horn, and welcomes the element of personal danger that enters
into the sport when he and his charger have to take an unusual fence or an extra broad watercourse.
So with me. In separating these people here from their money and their jewels, it is not the
money and the jewels that I care for so much as the delicious risks I incur in getting them.
What the high fence is to the hunter, the barriers separating me from Mrs. Gaster's jewel-case
are to me; what the watchful farmer armed with a shot-gun for the protection of his crops is
to the master of the hounds, the police are to me. The game of circumventing the latter and
surmounting the former are the joy of my life, and while my eyes flash and sparkle with appetite
every time I see a necklace or a tiara or a roll of hundred-dollar bills in the course of my
social duties, it is not avarice that makes them glitter, but the call to action which they sound."

I felt like saying that if that were the case I should esteem it a privilege to be made permanent
custodian of the balance in hand, but it was quite evident from Henriette's manner that she
was in no mood for badinage, so I held my peace.

"To prove to you that I am not out for the money, Bunny, I'll give you a check this morning
for two hundred and fifty thousand dollars to pay you for those steel bonds you picked up on
the train when you came up here from New York. That's two-and-a-half times what they are worth,"
said Henriette. "Is it a bargain?"

"Certainly, ma'am," I replied, delighted with the proposition. "But what are you going to do
with the bonds?"

"Borrow a million and a half on 'em," said Henriette.

"What!" I cried. "A million and a half on a hundred thousand security?"

"Certainly," replied Henriette, "only it will require a little manipulation. For the past six
months I have been depositing the moneys I have received in seventeen national banks in Ohio,
each account being opened in a different name. The balances in each bank have averaged about
three hundred thousand dollars, thanks to a circular system of checks in an endless chain that
I have devised. Naturally the size of these accounts has hugely interested the bank officials,
and they all regard me as a most desirable customer, and I think I can manage matters so that
two or three of them, anyhow, will lend me all the money I want on those bonds and this certificate
of trust which I shall ask you to sign."

"Me?" I laughed. "Surely you are joking. What value will my signature have?"

"It will be good as gold after you have deposited that check for two hundred and fifty thousand
dollars in your New York bank," said Henriette. "I shall go to the president of the Ohoolihan
National Bank at Oshkosh, Ohio, where I have at present three hundred and sixty-eight thousand
three hundred and forty-three dollars and eighteen cents on deposit and tell him that the Hon.
John Warrington Bunny, of New York, is my trustee for an estate of thirteen million dollars
in funds set apart for me by a famous relative of mine who is not proud of the connection.
He will communicate with you and ask you if this is true. You will respond by sending him a
certified copy of the trust certificate, and refer him as to your own responsibility to the
New York bank where our two hundred and fifty thousand dollars is on deposit. I will then swap
checks with you for three hundred thousand dollars, mine to you going into your New York account
and yours to me as trustee going into my account with the Ohoolihan National. The New York
bank will naturally speak well of your balance, and the Ohoolihan people, finding the three-hundred-thousand-dollar
check good, will never think of questioning your credit. This arranged, we will start in to
wash those steel bonds up to the limit."

"That's a very simple little plan of yours, Henriette," said I, "and the first part of it will
work easily I have no doubt; but how the deuce are you going to wash those bonds up to fifteen
times their value?"

"Easiest thing in the world, Bunny," laughed Henriette. "There will be two million dollars
of the bonds before I get through."

"Heavens--no counterfeiting, I hope?" I cried.

"Nothing so vulgar," said Henriette. "Just a little management--that's all. And, by-the-way,
Bunny, when you get a chance, please hire twenty safe-deposit boxes for me in as many different
trust companies here and in New York--and don't have 'em too near together. That's all for
the present."

Three weeks later, having followed out Henriette's instructions to the letter, I received at
my New York office a communication from the president of the Ohoolihan National Bank, of Oshkosh,
Ohio, inquiring as to the Van Raffles trust fund. I replied with a certified copy of the original
which Henriette had already placed in the president's hands. I incidentally referred the inquirer
as to my own standing to the Delancy Trust Company, of New York. The three-hundred-thousand-dollar
checks were exchanged by Henriette and myself--hers, by-the-way, was on the Seventy-Sixth National
Bank, of Brookline, Massachusetts, and was signed by a fictitious male name, which shows how
carefully she had covered her tracks. Both went through without question, and then the steel
bonds came into play. Henriette applied for a loan of one million five hundred thousand dollars,
offering the trust certificate for security. The president of the Ohoolihan National wished
to see some of her other securities, if she had any, to which Henriette cordially replied that
if he would come to New York she would gladly show them to him, and intimated that if the loan
went through she wouldn't mind paying the bank a bonus of one hundred thousand dollars for
the accommodation. The response was immediate. Mr. Bolivar would come on at once, and he did.

"Now, Bunny," said Mrs. Van Raffles on the morning of his arrival, "all you have to do is to
put the one hundred bonds first in the vault of the Amalgamated Trust Company, of West Virginia,
on Wall Street. Mr. Bolivar and I will go there and I will show them to him. We will then depart.
Immediately after our departure you will get the bonds and take them to the vaults of the Trans-Missouri
and Continental Trust Company, of New Jersey, on Broadway. You will go on foot, we in a hansom,
so that you will get there first. I will take Mr. Bolivar in and show him the bonds again.
Then you will take them to the vaults of the Riverside Coal Trust Company, of Pennsylvania,
on Broad Street, where five minutes later I will show them for the third time to Mr. Bolivar--and
so on. We will repeat this operation eighteen times in New York so that our visitor will fancy
he has seen one million eight hundred thousand dollars' worth of bonds in all, after which
he will come to Newport, where I will show them to him twice more--making a two-million-dollar
show-down. See?"

I toppled back into a chair in sheer amazement.

"By Jingo! but you are a wonder," I cried. "If it only works."

       *       *       *       *       *

It worked. Mr. Bolivar was duly impressed with the extent of Henriette's fortune in tangible
assets, not to mention her evident standing in the community of her residence. He was charmingly
entertained and never for an instant guessed when at dinner where Henriette had no less personages
than the Rockerbilts, Mrs. Gaster, Mrs. Gushington-Andrews, Tommy Dare, and various other social
lights to meet him, that the butler who passed him his soup and helped him liberally to wine
was the Hon. John Warrington Bunny, trustee.

"Well," said Henriette, as she gazed delightedly at the president's certified check for one
million four hundred thousand dollars--the amount of the loan less the bonus--"that was the
best sport yet. Even aside from the size of the check, Bunny, it was great chasing the old
man to cover. What do you think he said to me when he left, the poor, dear old innocent?"

"Give it up--what?"

"He said that I ought to be very careful in my dealings with men, who might impose upon my
simplicity," laughed Henriette.

"Simplicity?" I roared. "What ever gave him the idea that you were simple?"

"Oh--I don't know," said Henriette, demurely. "I guess it was because I told him I kept those
bonds in twenty safe-deposit vaults instead of in one, to protect myself in case of loss by
fire--I didn't want to have too many eggs in one basket."

"H'm!" said I. "What did he say to that?"

Henriette laughed long and loud at the recollection of the aged bank president's reply.

"He squeezed my hand and answered, 'What a child it is, indeed!'" said Henriette.

VI

THE ADVENTURE OF THE FRESH-AIR FUND

It was a bright, sunny morning in the early summer when Henriette, gazing out of the dining-room
windows across the lawns adjoining the Rockerbilt place, caught sight of a number of ragamuffins
at play there.

"Who are those little tatterdemalions, Bunny?" she asked, with a suggestion of a frown upon
her brow. "They have been playing on the lawns since seven o'clock this morning, and I've lost
quite two hours' sleep because of their chatter."

"They are children from Mrs. Rockerbilt's Fresh-Air Society," I explained, for I, too, had
been annoyed by the loud pranks of the youngsters and had made inquiries as to their identity.
"Every summer, Digby, Mr. de Pelt's valet, tells me, Mrs. Rockerbilt gives a tea for the benefit
of the Fresh-Air Fund, and she always has a dozen of the children from town for a week beforehand
so as to get them in shape for the function."

"Get them in shape for the function, Bunny?" asked Henriette.

"Yes; one of the features of the tea is the presence of the youngsters, and they have to be
pretty well rehearsed before Mrs. Rockerbilt dares let them loose among her guests," said I,
for Digby had explained the scheme in detail to me. "You see, their ideas of fun are rather
primitive, and if they were suddenly introduced into polite society without any previous training
the results might prove unpleasant."

"Ah!" said Henriette, gazing abstractedly out of the window in the manner of one suddenly seized
with an idea.

"Yes," I went on. "You see, the street gamin loves nothing better in the way of diversion than
throwing things at somebody, particularly if that somebody is what is known to his vernacular
as a Willie-boy. As between eating an over-ripe peach and throwing it at the pot-hat of a Willie-boy,
the ragamuffin would deny even the cravings of his stomach for that tender morsel. It is his
delight, too, to heave tin cans, wash-boilers, flat-irons, pies--anything he can lay his hands
on--at the automobilly-boys, if I may use the term, of all of which, before he is turned loose
in the highest social circles of the land, it is desirable that he shall be cured."

"I see," said Henriette. "And so Mrs. Rockerbilt has them here on a ten days' probation during
which time they acquire that degree of savoir-faire and veneer of etiquette which alone makes
it possible for her to exhibit them at her tea."

"Precisely," said I. "She lets them sleep in the big box-stalls of her stable where the extra
coach-horses were kept before the motor-car craze came in. They receive four square meals a
day, are rubbed down and curry-combed before each meal, and are bathed night and morning in
violet water until the fateful occasion, after which they are returned to New York cleaner
if not wiser children."

"It is a great charity," said Henrietta dreamily. "Does Mrs. Rockerbilt make any charge for
admission to these teas--you say they are for the benefit of the Fresh-Air Fund?"

"Oh no, indeed," said I. "It is purely a private charity. The youngsters get their ten days
in the country, learn good manners, and Newport society has a pleasant afternoon--all at Mrs.
Rockerbilt's expense."

"H'm!" said Henriette, pensively. "H'm! I think there is a better method. Ah-- I want you to
run down to New York for a few days shortly, Bunny. I have a letter I wish you to mail."

Nothing more was said on the subject until the following Tuesday, when I was despatched to
New York with instructions to organize myself into a Winter Fresh-Air Society, to have letter-heads
printed, with the names of some of the most prominent ladies in society as patronesses--Henriette
had secured permission from Mrs. Gaster, Mrs. Sloyd-Jinks, Mrs. Rockerbilt, Mrs. Gushington-Andrews,
Mrs. R. U. Innitt, the duchess of Snarleyow, Mrs. Willie K. Van Pelt, and numerous others to
use their names in connection with the new enterprise--and to write her a letter asking if
she would not interest herself and her friends in the needs of the new society.

"It is quite as important," the letter ran, "that there should be a fund to take the little
sufferers of our dreadful winters away from the sleet and snow-burdened streets of the freezing
city as it is to give them their summer outing. This society is in great need of twenty-five
thousand dollars properly to prosecute its work during the coming winter, and we appeal to
you for aid."

Henriette's personal response to this request was a check for ten thousand dollars, which as
secretary and treasurer of the fund I acknowledged, and then, of course, returned to her, whereupon
her campaign began in earnest. Her own enthusiasm for the project, backed up by her most generous
contribution, proved contagious, and inside of two weeks, not counting Henriette's check, we
were in possession of over seventeen thousand dollars, one lady going so far as to give us
all her bridge winnings for a week.

"And now for the grand coup, Bunny," said Mrs. Van Raffles, when I had returned with the spoil.

"Great Scot!" I cried. "Haven't you got enough?"

"No, Bunny. Not a quarter enough," she replied. "These winter resorts are very expensive places,
and while seventeen thousand dollars would do very nicely for running a farm in summer, we
shall need quite a hundred thousand to send our beneficiaries to Palm Beach in proper style."

"Phe-e-w!" I whistled, in amazement. "Palm Beach, eh?"

"Yes," said Henriette. "Palm Beach. I have always wanted to go there."

"And the one hundred thousand dollars--how do you propose to get that?" I demanded.

"I shall give a lawn-fête and bazaar for the benefit of the fund. It will differ from Mrs.
Rockerbilt's tea in that I shall charge ten dollars admission, ten dollars to get out, and
we shall sell things besides. I have already spoken to Mrs. Gaster about it and she is delighted
with the idea. She has promised to stock the flower table with the cream of her conservatories.
Mrs. Rockerbilt has volunteered to take charge of the refreshments. The duchess of Snarleyow
is dressing a doll that is to be named by Senator Defew and raffled at five dollars a guess.
Mrs. Gushington-Andrews is to take entire control of the fancy knick-knack table, where we
shall sell gold match-boxes, solid silver automobile head-lights, cigar-cutters, cocktail-shakers,
and other necessities of life among the select. I don't see how the thing can fail, do you?"

"Not so far," said I.

"Each of the twelve lady patronesses has promised to be responsible for the sale of a hundred
tickets of admission at ten dollars apiece--that makes twelve thousand dollars in admissions.
It will cost each person ten dollars more to get out, which, if only half of the tickets are
used, will be six thousand dollars--or eighteen thousand dollars in entrance and exit fees alone."

"Henriette!" I cried, enthusiastically, "Madam Humbert was an amateur alongside of you."

Mrs. Van Raffles smiled. "Thank you, Bunny," said she. "If I'd only been a man--"

"Gad!" I ejaculated. "Wall Street would have been an infant in your hands."

Well, the fateful day came. Henriette, to do her justice, had herself spared no pains or expense
to make the thing a success. I doubt if the gardens of the Constant-Scrappes ever looked so
beautiful. There were flowers everywhere, and hanging from tree to tree from one end of their
twenty acres to the other were long and graceful garlands of multicolored electric lights that
when night came down upon the fête made the scene appear like a veritable glimpse of fairyland.
Everybody that is anybody was there, with a multitude of others who may always be counted upon
to pay well to see their names in print or to get a view of society at close range. Of course
there was music of an entrancing sort, the numbers being especially designed to touch the flintiest
of hearts, and Henriette was everywhere. No one, great or small, in that vast gathering but
received one of her gracious smiles, and it is no exaggeration to say that half of the flowers
purchased at rates that would make a Fifth Avenue tailor hang his head in shame, were bought
by the gallant gentlemen of Newport for presentation to the hostess of the day. These were
immediately placed on sale again so that on the flower account the receipts were perceptibly
swelled.

A more festal occasion has never been known even in this festal environment. The richest of
the land vied with one another in making the affair a vast financial success. The ever gallant
Tommy Dare left the scene twenty times for the mere privilege of paying his way in and out
that many times over at ten dollars each way. The doll which Senator Defew had named was also
the cause of much merriment, since when all was over and some thirteen thousand five hundred
dollars had been taken in for guesses, it was found that the senator had forgotten the name
he had given it. When the laughter over this incident had subsided, Henriette suggested that
it be put up at auction, which plan was immediately followed out, with the result that the
handiwork of the duchess of Snarleyow was knocked down for eight thousand six hundred and seventy-five
dollars to a Cincinnati brewer who had been trying for eight years to get his name into the
Social Register.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Thank goodness, that's over," said Henriette when the last guest had gone and the lights were
out. "It has been a very delightful affair, but towards the end it began to get on my nerves.
I am really appalled, Bunny, at the amount of money we have taken in."

"Did you get the full one hundred thousand dollars?" I asked.

"Full hundred thousand?" she cried, hysterically. "Listen to this." And she read the following
memorandum of the day's receipts:

  Flower Table       $36,000.00
  Doll                22,175.00
  Admissions          19,260.00
  Exits               17,500.00
  Candy Table         12,350.00
  Supper Table        43,060.00
  Knick-Knacks        17,380.00
  Book Table             123.30
  Coat Checks          3,340.00
                    -----------
  Total             $171,188.30

"Great Heavens, what a haul!" I cried. "But how much did you spend yourself?"

"Oh--about twenty thousand dollars, Bunny--I really felt I could afford it. We'll net not less
than one hundred and fifty thousand."

I was suddenly seized with a chill.

"The thing scares me, Henriette," I murmured. "Suppose these people ask you next winter for
a report?"

"Oh," laughed Henriette, "I shall immediately turn the money over to the fund. You can send
me a receipt and that will let us out. Later on you can return the money to me."

"Even then--" I began.

"Tush, Bunny," said she. "There isn't going to be any even then. Six months from now these
people will have forgotten all about it. It's a little way they have. Their memory for faces
and the money they spend is shorter than the purse of a bankrupt. Have no fear."

And, as usual, Henriette was right, for the next February when the beneficiaries of the Winter
Fresh-Air Fund spent a month at Palm Beach, enjoying the best that favored spot afforded in
the way of entertainment and diversion, not a word of criticism was advanced by anybody, although
the party consisted solely of Mrs. Van Raffles, her maid, and Bunny, her butler. In fact, the
contrary was the truth. The people we met while there, many of whom had contributed most largely
to the fund, welcomed us with open arms, little suspecting how intimately connected they were
with our sources of supply.

Mrs. Gaster, it is true, did ask Henriette how the Winter Fresh-Air Fund was doing and was
told the truth--that it was doing very well.

"The beneficiaries did very well here," said Henriette.

"I have seen nothing of them," observed Mrs. Gaster.

"Well--no," said Henriette. "The managers thought it was better to send them here before the
season was at its height. The moral influences of Palm Beach at the top of the season are--well--a
trifle strong for the young--don't you think?" she explained.

The tin-type I hand you will give you some idea of how much one of the beneficiaries enjoyed
himself. There is nothing finer in the world than surf bathing in winter.

VII

THE ADVENTURE OF MRS. ROCKERBILT'S TIARA

Henriette had been unwontedly reserved for a whole week, a fact which was beginning to get
sadly on my nerves when she broke an almost Sphinxlike silence with the extraordinary remark:

"Bunny, I am sorry, but I don't see any other way out of it. You must get married."

To say that I was shocked by the observation is putting it mildly. As you must by this time
have realized yourself, there was only one woman in the world that I could possibly bring myself
to think fondly of, and that woman was none other than Henriette herself. I could not believe,
however, that this was at all the notion she had in mind, and what little poise I had was completely
shattered by the suggestion.

I drew myself up with dignity, however, in a moment and answered her.

"Very well, dear," I said. "Whenever you are ready I am. You must have banked enough by this
time to be able to support me in the style to which I am accustomed."

"That is not what I meant, Bunny," she retorted, coldly, frowning at me.

"Well, it's what I mean," said I. "You are the only woman I ever loved--"

"But, Bunny dear, that can come later," said she, with a charming little blush. "What I meant,
my dear boy, was not a permanent affair but one of these Newport marriages. Not necessarily
for publication, but as a guarantee of good faith," she explained.

"I don't understand," said I, affecting denseness, for I understood only too well.

"Stupid!" cried Henriette. "I need a confidential maid, Bunny, to help us in our business,
and I don't want to take a third party in at random. If you had a wife I could trust her. You
could stay married as long as we needed her, and then, following the Newport plan, you could
get rid of her and marry me later--that is--er--provided I was willing to marry you at all,
and I am not so sure that I shall not be some day, when I am old and toothless."

"I fail to see the necessity for a maid of that kind," said I.

"That's because you are a man, Bunny," said Henriette. "There are splendid opportunities for
acquiring the gems these Newport ladies wear by one who may be stationed in the dressing-room.
There is Mrs. Rockerbilt's tiara, for instance. It is at present the finest thing of its kind
in existence and of priceless value. When she isn't wearing it it is kept in the vaults of
the Tiverton Trust Company, and how on earth we are to get it without the assistance of a maid
we can trust I don't see--except in the vulgar, commonplace way of sandbagging the lady and
brutally stealing it, and Newport society hasn't quite got to the point where you can do a
thing like that to a woman without causing talk, unless you are married to her."

"Well, I'll tell you one thing, Henriette," I returned, with more positiveness than I commonly
show, "I will not marry a lady's maid, and that's all there is about it. You forget that I
am a gentleman."

"It's only a temporary arrangement, Bunny," she pleaded. "It's done all the time in the smart set."

"Well, the morals of the smart set are not my morals," I retorted. "My father was a clergyman,
Henriette, and I'm something of a churchman myself, and I won't stoop to such baseness. Besides,
what's to prevent my wife from blabbing when we try to ship her?"

"H'm!" mused Henriette. "I hadn't thought of that--it would be dangerous, wouldn't it?"

"Very," said I. "The only safe way out of it would be to kill the young woman, and my religious
scruples are strongly against anything of the sort. You must remember, Henriette, that there
are one or two of the commandments that I hold in too high esteem to break them."

"Then what shall we do, Bunny?" demanded Mrs. Van Raffles. "I must have that tiara."

"Well, there's the old amateur theatrical method," said I. "Have a little play here, reproduce
Mrs. Rockerbilt's tiara in paste for one of the characters to wear, substitute the spurious
for the real, and there you are."

"That is a good idea," said Henriette; "only I hate amateur theatricals. I'll think it over."

A few days later my mistress summoned me again.

"Bunny, you used to make fairly good sketches, didn't you?" she asked.

"Pretty good," said I. "Chiefly architectural drawings, however--details of façades and ornamental
designs."

"Just the thing!" cried Henriette. "To-night Mrs. Rockerbilt gives a moonlight reception on
her lawns. They adjoin ours. She will wear her tiara, and I want you when she is in the gardens
to hide behind some convenient bit of shrubbery and make an exact detail sketch of the tiara.
Understand?"

"I do," said I.

"Don't you miss a ruby or a diamond or the teeniest bit of filigree, Bunny. Get the whole thing
to a carat," she commanded.

"And then?" I asked, excitedly.

"Bring it to me; I'll attend to the rest," said she.

You may be sure that when night came I went at the work in hand with alacrity. It was not always
easy to get the right light on the lady's tiara, but in several different quarters of the garden
I got her sufficiently well, though unconsciously, posed to accomplish my purpose. Once I nearly
yielded to the temptation to reach my hand through the shrubbery and snatch the superb ornament
from Mrs. Rockerbilt's head, for she was quite close enough to make this possible, but the
vulgarity of such an operation was so very evident that I put it aside almost as soon as thought
of. And I have always remembered dear old Raffles's remark, "Take everything in sight, Bunny,"
he used to say; "but, damn it, do it like a gentleman, not a professional."

The sketch made, I took it to my room and colored it, so that that night, when Henriette returned,
I had ready for her a perfect pictorial representation of the much-coveted bauble.

"It is simply perfect, Bunny," she cried, delightedly, as she looked at it. "You have even
got the sparkle of that incomparable ruby in the front."

Next morning we went to New York, and Henriette, taking my design to a theatrical property-man
we knew on Union Square, left an order for its exact reproduction in gilt and paste.

"I am going to a little fancy-dress dance, Mr. Sikes," she explained, "as Queen Catharine of
Russia, and this tiara is a copy of the very famous lost negligée crown of that unhappy queen.
Do you think you can let me have it by Tuesday next?"

"Easily, madam," said Sikes. "It is a beautiful thing and it will give me real pleasure to
reproduce it. I'll guarantee it will be so like the original that the queen herself couldn't
tell 'em apart. It will cost you forty-eight dollars.

"Agreed," said Henriette.

And Sikes was true to his word. The following Tuesday afternoon brought to my New York apartment--for
of course Mrs. Raffles did not give Sikes her right name--an absolutely faultless copy of Mrs.
Rockerbilt's chiefest glory. It was so like that none but an expert in gems could have told
the copy from the original, and when I bore the package back to Newport and displayed its contents
to my mistress she flew into an ecstasy of delight.

"We'll have the original in a week if you keep your nerve, Bunny," she cried.

"Theatricals?" said I.

"No, indeed," said Henriette. "If Mrs. Rockerbilt knew this copy was in existence she'd never
wear the other in public again as long as she lived without bringing a dozen detectives along
with her. No, indeed--a dinner. I want you to connect the electric lights of the dining-room
with the push-button at my foot, so that at any moment I can throw the dining-room into darkness.
Mrs. Rockerbilt will sit at my left--Tommy Dare to the right. She will wear her famous coiffure
surmounted by the tiara. At the moment you are passing the poisson I will throw the room into
darkness, and you--"

"I positively decline, Henriette, to substitute one tiara for another in the dark. Why, darn
it all, she'd scream the minute I tried it," I protested.

"Of course she would," said she, impatiently. "And that is why I don't propose any such idiotic
performance. You will merely stumble in the dark and manage your elbow so awkwardly that Mrs.
Rockerbilt's coiffure will be entirely disarranged by it. She will scream, of course, and I
will instantly restore the light, after which I will attend to the substitution. Now don't
fail me and the tiara will be ours."

I stand ready with affidavits to prove that that dinner was the most exciting affair of my
life. At one time it seemed to me that I could not possibly perform my share of the conspiracy
without detection, but a glance at Henriette, sitting calmly and coolly, and beautiful too,
by gad, at the head of the table, chatting as affably with the duke of Snarleyow and Tommy
Dare as though there was nothing in the wind, nerved me to action. The moment came, and instantly
as I leaned over Mrs. Rockerbilt's side with the fish platter in my hand out went the light;
crash went my elbow into the lady's stunning coiffure; her little, well-modulated scream of
surprise rent the air, and, flash, back came the lights again. All was as Henriette had foretold,
Mrs. Rockerbilt's lovely blond locks were frightfully demoralized, and the famous tiara with
it had slid aslant athwart her cheek.

"Dear me!" cried Henriette, rising hurriedly and full of warm sympathy. "How very awkward!"

"Oh, don't speak of it," laughed Mrs. Rockerbilt, amiably. "It is nothing, dear Mrs. Van Raffles.
These electric lights are so very uncertain these days, and I am sure James is not at all to
blame for hitting me as he has done; it's the most natural thing in the world, only--may I
please run up-stairs and fix my hair again?"

"You most certainly shall," said Henriette. "And I will go with you, my dear Emily. I am so
mortified that if you will let me do penance in that way I will myself restore order out of
this lovely chaos."

The little speech was received with the usual hilarious appreciation which follows anything
out of the usual course of events in high social circles. Tommy Dare gave three cheers for
Mrs. Van Raffles, and Mrs. Gramercy Van Pelt, clad in a gorgeous red costume, stood up on a
chair and toasted me in a bumper of champagne. Meanwhile Henriette and Mrs. Rockerbilt had
gone above.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Isn't it a beauty, Bunny," said Henriette the next morning, as she held up the tiara to my
admiring gaze, a flashing, coruscating bit of the jeweler's art that, I verily believe, would
have tempted the soul of honor itself into rascally ways.

"Magnificent!" I asserted. "But--which is this, the forty-eight-dollar one or the original?"

"The original," said Henriette, caressing the bauble. "You see, when we got to my room last
night and I had Mrs. Rockerbilt sitting before the mirror, and despite her protestations was
fixing her dishevelled locks with my own fair hands, I arranged to have the lights go out again
just as the tiara was laid on the dressing-table. The copy was in the table drawer, and while
my right hand was apparently engaged in manipulating the refractory light, and my voice was
laughingly calling down maledictions upon the electric lighting company for its wretched service,
my left hand was occupied with the busiest effort of its career in substituting the spurious
tiara for the other."

"And Mrs. Rockerbilt never even suspected?"

"No," said Henriette. "In fact, she placed the bogus affair in her hair herself. As far as
her knowledge goes, I never even touched the original."

"Well, you're a wonder, Henriette," said I, with a sigh. "Still, if Mrs. Rockerbilt should
ever discover--"

"She won't, Bunny," said Henriette. "She'll never have occasion to test the genuineness of
her tiara. These Newport people have other sources of income than the vulgar pawnshops."

But, alas! later on Henriette made a discovery herself that for the time being turned her eyes
red with weeping. The Rockerbilt tiara itself was as bogus as our own copy. There wasn't a
real stone in the whole outfit, and the worst part of it was that under the circumstances Henriette
could not tell anybody over the teacups that Mrs. Rockerbilt was, in vulgar parlance, "putting
up a shine" on high society.

VIII

THE ADVENTURE OF THE CARNEGIE LIBRARY

"Merciful Midas, Bunny," said Henriette one morning as I was removing the breakfast-tray from
her apartment. "Did you see the extent of Mr. Carnegie's benefactions in the published list
this morning?"

"I have not received my paper yet," said I. "Moreover, I doubt if it will contain any reference
to such matters when it does come. You know I read only the London Times, Mrs. Van Raffles.
I haven't been able to go the American newspapers."

"More fool you, then, Bunny," laughed my mistress. "Any man who wants to pursue crime as a
polite diversion and does not read the American newspapers fails to avail himself of one of
the most potent instruments for the attainment of the highest artistic results. You cannot
pick up a newspaper in any part of the land without discovering somewhere in its columns some
reference to a new variety of house-breaking, some new and highly artistic method of writing
another man's autograph so that when appended to a check and presented at his bank it will
bear the closest scrutiny to which the paying-teller will subject it, some truly Napoleonic
method of entirely novel design for the sudden parting of the rich from their possessions.
Any university which attempted to add a School of Peculation to its curriculum and ignored
the daily papers as a positive source of inspiration to the highest artistry in the profession
would fail as ignobly as though it should forget to teach the fundamental principles of high
finance."

"I was not aware of their proficiency in that direction," said I.

"You never will get on, Bunny," sighed Henriette, "because you are not quick to seize opportunities
that lie directly under your nose. How do you suppose I first learned of all this graft at
Newport? Why, by reading the newspaper accounts of their jewels in the Sunday and daily newspapers.
How do I know that if I want to sand-bag Mr. Rockerbilt and rifle his pockets all I have to
do is to station myself outside the Crackerbaker Club any dark opera night after twelve and
catch him on his way home with his fortune sticking out all over him? Because the newspapers
tell me that he is a regular habitué of the Crackerbaker and plays bridge there every night
after the opera. How do I know just how to walk from my hall bedroom in my little East Side
tenement up Fifth Avenue into Mrs. Gaster's dining-room, where she has a million in plate on
her buffet, with my eyes shut, without fear of stumbling over a step or a chair or even a footstool?
Because the newspapers have so repeatedly printed diagrams of the interior of the lady's residence
that its halls, passages, doorways, exits, twists, turns, and culs-de-sac are indelibly engraved
upon my mind. How did I acquire my wonderful knowledge of the exact number of pearls, rubies,
diamonds, opals, tiaras, bracelets, necklaces, stomachers, and other gorgeous jewels now in
the possession of the smart set? Only by an assiduous devotion to the contents of the daily
newspapers in their reports of the doings of the socially elect. I have a scrap-book, Bunny,
that has been two years in the making, and there hasn't been a novel burglary reported in all
that time that is not recorded in my book, not a gem that has appeared at the opera, the theatre,
the Charity Ball, the Horse Show, or a monkey dinner that has not been duly noted in this vademecum
of mine, fully described and in a sense located. If it wasn't for that knowledge I could not
hope for success any more than you could if you went hunting mountain-lions in the Desert of
Sahara, or tried to lure speckled-trout from the depths of an empty goldfish globe."

"I see," said I, meekly. "I have missed a great opportunity. I will subscribe to the Tribune
and Evening Post right away."

I have never understood why Henriette greeted this observation with a peal of silvery laughter
that fairly made the welkin ring. All I know is that it so irritated me that I left the room
to keep from making a retort that might seriously have disturbed our friendship. Later in the
day, Mrs. Van Raffles rang for me and I attended upon her orders.

"Bunny," said she, "I've made up my mind to it--I must have a Carnegie library, that is all
there is about it, and you must help. The iron-master has already spent thirty-nine million
dollars on that sort of thing, and I don't see why if other people can get 'em we can't."

"Possibly because we are not a city, town, or hamlet," I suggested, for I had been looking
over the daily papers since my morning's talk with the lady, and had observed just who had
been the beneficiaries of Mr. Carnegie's benefactions. "He don't give 'em to individuals, but
to communities."

"Of course not," she responded, quickly. "But what is to prevent our becoming a municipality?"

My answer was an amazed silence, for frankly I could not for the life of me guess how we were
to do any such thing.

"It's the easiest thing in the world," she continued. "All you have to do is to buy an abandoned
farm on Long Island with a bleak sea-front, divide it up into corner lots, advertise the lots
for sale on the instalment plan, elect your mayor, and Raffleshurst-by-the-Sea, swept by ocean
breezes, fifteen cents from the Battery, is a living, breathing reality."

"By the jumping Disraeli, Henriette, but you are a marvel!" I cried, with enthusiasm. "But,"
I added, my ardor cooling a little, "won't it cost money?"

"About fifteen hundred dollars," said Henriette. "I can win that at bridge in an hour."

"Well," said I, "you know you can command my services, Henriette. What shall I do?"

"Organize the city," she replied. "Here is fifty dollars. That will do for a starter. Go down
to Long Island, buy the farm, put up a few signs calling on people to own their own homes;
advertise the place in big capital letters in the Sunday papers as likely to be the port of
the future, consider yourself duly elected mayor, stop in at some photograph shop in New York
on your way back and get a few dozen pictures of street scenes in Binghamton, Oberlin, Kalamazoo,
and other well-populated cities, and then come back here for further instructions. Meanwhile
I will work out the other details of the scheme."

According to my habit I followed Henriette's instructions to the letter. A farm of five hundred
acres was secured within a week, the bleakest, coldest spot ever swept by ocean breezes anywhere.
It cost six hundred dollars in cash, with immediate possession. Three days later, with the
use of a ruler, I had mapped out about twelve thousand corner lots on the thing, and, thanks
to my knack at draughtsmanship, had all ready for anybody's inspection as fine a ground-plan
of Raffleshurst-by-the-Sea as ever was got up by a land-booming company in this or any other
country. I then secured the photographs desired by my mistress, advertised Raffleshurst in
three Sunday newspapers to the tune of a half-page each, and returned to Newport. I flattered
myself that the thing was well done, for on reading the advertisement nothing would do but
that Henriette should visit the place in person. The ads were so phrased, she said, as to be
irresistible.

"It's fine, Bunny," she cried, with an enthusiastic laugh as she gazed out over the broad acres
of Raffleshurst and noted how well I had fulfilled her orders. "Under proper direction you
are a most able workman. Nothing could be better. Nothing--absolutely nothing. And now for
Mr. Carnegie."

I still did not see how the thing was coming out, but such was my confidence in my leader that
I had no misgivings.

"Here is a letter from Mrs. Gaster introducing the Hon. Henry Higginbotham, mayor of Raffleshurst,
to Mr. Carnegie," said Henriette. "You will call at once on the iron-master. Present this letter,
keeping in mind of course that you are yourself the Hon. Henry Higginbotham. Show him these
photographs of the City Hall at Binghamton, of the public park at Oberlin, the high school
at Oswego, the battery walk at Charleston and other public improvements of various other cities,
when he asks you what sort of a place Raffleshurst is; then frankly and fearlessly put in your
application for a one-hundred-and-fifty-thousand-dollar library. One picture--this beautiful
photograph of the music-hall at the St. Louis Exhibition--you must seem to overlook always,
only contrive matters so that he will inquire what it is. You must then modestly remark that
it is nothing but a little two-hundred-thousand-dollar art gallery you have yourself presented
to the town. See?"

"H'm--yes, I see," said I. "But it is pretty risky business, Henriette. Suppose Mrs. Gaster
asks for further information about Mayor Higginbotham? I think it was unwise of you to connect
her with the enterprise."

"Don't bother about that, Bunny. I wrote that letter of introduction--I haven't studied penmanship
for nothing, you know. Mrs. Gaster will never know. So just put on your boldest front, remember
your name, and don't forget to be modest about your own two-hundred-thousand-dollar art gallery.
That will inspire him, I think."

It took me a week to get at the iron-master; but finally, thanks to Mrs. Gaster's letter of
introduction, I succeeded. Mr. Carnegie was as always in a most amiable frame of mind, and
received me cordially, even when he discovered my real business with him.

"I hadn't intended to give any more libraries this year," he said, as he glanced over the pictures.
"I am giving away lakes now," he added. "If you wanted a lake, Mr. Higginbotham, I--"

"We have such a large water-front already, Mr. Carnegie," said I, "and most of our residents
are young married couples with children not over three and five. I am afraid they would regard
a lake as a source of danger."

"That's a pretty playground," he suggested, glancing at the Oberlin Park. "Somehow or other,
it reminds me of something."

I thought it quite likely, but, of course, I didn't say so. I may be a fool but I have some tact.

"It's at the far corner of the park that we propose to put the library if you are good enough
to let us have it," was all I ventured.

"H'm!" he mused. "Well, do you know, I like to help people who help themselves--that's my system."

I assured him that we of Raffleshurst were accustomed to helping ourselves to everything we
could lay our hands on, a jest which even though it was only too true seemed to strike him
pleasantly.

"What is that handsome structure you always pass over?" he asked, as I contrived to push the
music-hall photograph aside for the fifth time.

I laughed deprecatingly. "Oh, that," I said, modestly--"that's only a little two-hundred-thousand-dollar
music-hall and art gallery I have built for the town myself."

Oh, that wonderful Henriette! How did she know that generosity even among the overgenerous
was infectious?

"Indeed!" said Mr. Carnegie, his face lighting up with real pleasure. "Well, Mr. Higginbotham,
I guess-- I guess I'll do it. I can't be outdone in generosity by you, sir, and--er-- I guess
you can count on the library. Do you think one hundred and fifty thousand dollars will be enough?"

"Well, of course--" I began.

"Why not make my contribution equal to yours and call it an even two hundred thousand dollars?"
he interrupted.

"You overwhelm me," said I. "Of course, if you wish to--"

"And the Raffleshurst common council will appropriate five per cent. of that amount annually
for its maintenance?" he inquired.

"Such a resolution has already been passed," said I, taking a paper from my pocket. "Here is
the ordinance, duly signed by myself as mayor and by the secretary of the council."

Again that extraordinary woman, to provide me with so necessary a document!

The millionaire rose with alacrity and with his own hand drew me the required check.

"Mr. Mayor," said he, "I like the quick, business-like way in which you do things. Pray present
my compliments to the citizens of Raffleshurst-by-the-Sea, and tell them I am only too glad
to help them. If you ever want a lake, sir, don't fail to call upon me." With which gracious
words the millionaire bowed me out.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Two hundred thousand dollars, Bunny?" cried Henriette when I handed her the check.

"Yep," said I.

"Well, that is a good day's sport!" she said, gazing at the slip. "Twice as much as I expected."

"Yes," said I. "But see here, Henrietta, suppose Mr. Carnegie should go down to Raffleshurst
to see the new building and find out what a bunco game we have played on him?"

"He's not likely to do that for two reasons, Bunny," she replied. "In the first place he suffers
acutely from lumbago in winter and can't travel, and in the second place he'd have to find
Raffleshurst-by-the-Sea before he could make the discovery that somebody'd put up a game on
him. I think by the time he is ready to start we can arrange matters to have Raffleshurst taken
off the map."

"Well, I think this is the cleverest trick you've turned yet, Henriette," said I.

"Nonsense, Bunny, nonsense," she replied. "Any idiot can get a Carnegie library these days.
That's why I put you on the job, dear," she added, affectionately.

IX

THE ADVENTURE OF THE HOLD-UP

Now that it is all over, I do not know whether she was really worn-out or by the expert use
of powder gave to her cheeks the pallid look which bore out Mrs. Van Raffles's statement to
me that she needed a rest. At any rate, one morning in mid-August, when the Newport season
was in full feather, Henriette, looking very pale and wan, tearfully confessed to me that business
had got on her nerves and that she was going away to a rest-cure on the Hudson for ten days.

"I just can't stand it for another minute, Bunny," she faltered, real tears coursing down her
cheeks. "I haven't slept a wink of natural sleep for five days, and yet when night comes it
is all I can do to keep my eyes open. At the Rockerbilt ball last night I dozed off four times
while talking with the Duchess of Snarleyow, and when the Chinese Ambassador asked me to sit
out the gavotte with him I'm told I actually snored in his face. A woman who can't keep awake
all night and sleep properly by day is not fit for Newport society, and I've simply got to
go away and get my nerve back again."

"You are very wise," I replied, "and I wholly approve of your course. There is no use of trying
to do too much and you have begun to show the strain to which you have been subjecting yourself.
Your failure last Friday night to land Mrs. Gollet's ruby dog-collar when her French poodle
sat in your lap all through the Gaster musicale is evidence to me that your mind is not as
alert as usual. By all means, go away and rest up. I'll take care of things around here."

"Thank you, dear," said she, with a grateful smile. "You need a change too, Bunny. What would
you say if I sent all the servants away too, so that you could have a week of absolute tranquillity?
It must be awful for a man of your refined sensibilities to have to associate so constantly
with the housemaids, the under-butlers and the footmen."

"Nothing would please me better," I returned with alacrity; for, to tell the truth, society
below stairs was rapidly becoming caviar to my taste. The housemaids were all right, and the
under-butlers, being properly subject to my control, I could wither when they grew too familiar,
but the footmen were intolerable guyers. On more than one occasion their quick Irish wit had
put me to my trumps to maintain my dignity, and I had noticed of late that their alleged fun
at my expense had made even the parlormaid giggle in a most irritating fashion. Henriette's
suggestion promised at least a week's immunity from this sort of thing, and as far as remaining
alone in the beautiful Bolivar Lodge was concerned, to a man of my literary and artistic tastes
nothing could be more desirable.

"I can put in a week of solitude here very comfortably," said I. "The Constant-Scrappes have
a very excellent library and a line of reading in Abstract Morals in full calf that I should
very much like to get at."

"So be it then," said Henriette, with a sigh of relief. "I will take my departure next Saturday
after the Innitt's clam-bake on Honk Island. The servants can go Saturday afternoon after the
house has been put in order. You can order a fresh supply of champagne and cigars for yourself,
and as for your meals--"

"Don't you bother about that," said I, with a laugh. "I lived for months on the chafing-dish
before I found you again. And I rather think the change from game birds and pâté de foie gras
to simple eggs and bread and butter will do me good."

And so the matter was arranged. The servants were notified that, owing to Mrs. Van Raffles's
illness, they might take a vacation on full pay for ten days, and Henriette herself prepared
society for her departure by fainting twice at the Innit's clam-bake on Honk Island.

No less a person than Mrs. Gaster herself brought her home at four o'clock in the morning and
her last words were an exhortation to her "dear Mrs. Van Raffles" to be careful of herself
"for all our sakes." Could I?--Durst I--?

What?--

He paused--

Speak!--

He laid the song upon the music-desk, and looked----No no--I will not attempt to tell you how!

Words
were needless; they could not petition with such eloquence--A barbarian could not have refused.
I rambled over the keys, hemmed, and endeavoured to collect myself. At last a sense of propriety,
of reason, of principle, came to my aid, and bade me be master of my mind. I began to sing,
but no effort could enable me to give that expression of which I had before found the words
so susceptible.

Could you think it, Louisa? Do you now foresee, do you forebode what happened?--Your brother came
in!--

To have stopped, to have used evasion, to have had recourse to falsehood
would have turned an act of virtue into contemptible vice.

I continued. Clifton came and looked over my shoulder. The music was on one sheet of paper,
the words were on another, in the writing of Frank. Your brother knew the hand.

When I had ended, Frank took both the papers, thanked me, and retired. I could perceive the eyes of Clifton
sparkle with emotion; I might almost say rage. He would have spoken, but could not; and I knew not
how safely to begin.

At length, a consciousness of not having done or at least intended to do wrong gave me courage. I
determined not to wait to be questioned: I asked him how he liked the song.

Oh! Exceedingly!--It was very fine!--Very fine!

The words are Mr. Henley's.

I imagined as much, madam.

I thought them expressive, and amused myself with putting a tune to them.

I am as good as a witch!

How did you like the subject?

What subject, madam?

Of the words.

I really don't know--I have forgotten--

Nay, you said you thought them very fine! Oh! Yes!--True!--Very fine!--All about love--I recollect.

Well,
and having so much faith in love, you do not think them the worse
for that.

Oh, by no means!--But I thought you had.

Love in a song may be pardonable.

Especially, madam, if the song be written by Mr. Henley.

Clifton!--You almost teach me to despair!--You do not know me!--Perhaps however I am more to blame
than you, at present. Timidity has given me some appearance of conscious guilt, which my heart disavows.
But, as there is scarcely any error more dangerous to felicity than suspicion, I own I am
sorry to see you so frequently its slave. Never think of that woman for a wife, in whom you cannot
confide. And ask yourself whether I ought to marry a man who cannot discover that I merit his
confidence?

I find, indeed, implicit faith to be as necessary in love as in religion--But
you know your power, madam.

An indifferent spectator would rather say you know yours.

You will not go, madam, and leave me thus?

I must.

In this misery?

I have letters to write, and visits to pay.

You cannot be so cruel?--By heaven, madam, this torment is more than nature can support!

Less impetuosity, Clifton; less raptures, and more reason.

You would have me rock, madam! Unfeeling marble!

I would have you a man; a rational, and, if possible, a wise one. Stay at least for a moment!--Hear
me!--Do not leave me in these doubts!

What doubts?--Do I not tell you the words are Mr. Henley's? The air is mine. If setting them were
any guilt, it is a guilt of which I am not conscious. Shew me that it is criminal and I will
instantly retract. We must either overcome these narrow, these selfish propensities, or we shall
hope in vain to be happy.

I--I--I make no accusation--

Do but examine before you accuse, and I will patiently hear and cheerfully answer to accusation.
If you think it wrong in me not to treat virtue and genius with neglect, bring me your proofs,
and if I cannot demonstrate their fallacy I will own my error.

Let me add, the accusation of reason is a duty; from which, though
painful, we ought not to shrink.

It is the mistaken accusation of the passions only at which justice
bids the heart revolt.

Here, Louisa, once again I left him, with struggles apparently more acute than the former. And
my own mind is so affected, so oppressed as it were by crowds of
ideas, that I do not yet know whether this were an accident to be
wished, or even whether I have entirely acted as I ought.

My mind will grow calmer, and I will then begin the scrutiny.

I am minute in relating these particulars, because I am very desirous of doing right. And who
is so capable of being my judge, or who so anxious I should not err,
as my dear Louisa, my friend, my sister?

All good be with you!

A. W. ST. IVES

LETTER LXXVII

Coke Clifton to Guy Fairfax

London, Dover-Street

Oh, Fairfax, if my choler rose when last I wrote, where shall I now find words hot enough to paint
the phrensy of my soul?--How could I rage and rave!--Is it come to this?--So barefaced!--So
fearless!--So unblushingly braved!--

Fairfax, I came upon them!--By surprise!--My alert and watchful spirit, an adept in such arts,
accustomed to them, and rendered suspicious by practice and experience, foreboded some such
possibility--My knock at the door was counterfeit. I strode up stairs to the drawing-room, three
steps at a time--Swiftly and suddenly--I opened the door--There they sat!--Alone!--She singing
a miserable ditty, a bead-roll of lamentable rhymes, strung together
by this Quidam!--This Henley!--Nay!--Oh!--Damnation!--Read and tremble!--Read
and aid me to curse!--Set by her!--Ay!--A ballad--A love complaint--A
most doleful woe-begone elegy; of sorrows, sufferings, fate, despair,
and death; scribbled by him, and set and sung by her!--By her!--For
his comfort, his solace, his pleasure, his diversion!--I caught them
at it!--Nay they defied me, despised the wrath that drank up the moisture
of my eyes, blazed in my blood, and scorched my very soul!--

And
after this will I blench?

Will I recant the denunciations which legitimate vengeance had pronounced?--

Fairfax--I am not certain that I do not hate her!--No!--Angelic sorceress!--It is not hatred,
neither--But it is a tumult, a congregate anarchy of feelings which I cannot unravel; except that
the first feature of them is revenge!--Roused and insulted as I am, not all her blandishments can dazzle, divert,
or melt me! Were mountains to be moved, dragons to be slain, or lakes of liquid fire to be traversed,
I would encounter all to attain my end!--Yes--My romance shall equal hers. No epic hero, not Orpheus,
Aeneas, or Milton's Lucifer himself, was ever more determined. I could plunge into Erebus, and
give battle to the legion phantoms of hell, to accomplish my fixed purpose!--Fixed!--Fixed!--Hoot
me, hiss at me, despise me if I turn recreant!

No--Then may all who ever heard the name of Coke Clifton make it their byword and their scoff;
and every idiot curl the nose and snuff me to scorn!

Recollect but the various affronts I have received, Fairfax, from her and [Oh patience!] Her
inamorato!

For is he not so?--Wrongs, some of which irritate most because they
could not be resented; insults, some petty some gigantic, which ages
could not obliterate; call these to mind, and then think whether my
resolves be not rock-built!

Insolent intrusion has been his part from the first moment to the last. The prince of upstarts,
man could not abash him, nor naked steel affright! On my first visit, entrance was denied by
him! Permission was asked of a gardener's son, and the gardener's son sturdily refused! I argued!
I threatened!--I!--And arguments and threats were so much hot breath,
but harmless!

Attempts to silence or to send him back to his native barn alike
were baffled; and I, who planned his removal, was constrained to petition
for his stay.

Yes, constrained!--It was do it, or!--Oh!--Be faithful to me, memory!--He was elected president
of opinions and disputes, past, present and to come.

Appeals must all be made to him, and his sentence was definitive. Law or gospel, physics or metaphysics;
himself alone superior to college, court, or convocation. Before him sunk scholiast and schools.
In his presence the doctors all must stand uncapped: the seraphic, the subtle, and the singular;
the illuminated, the angelic, and the irrefragable to him, were tyros all. Our censor in private,
and in public our familiar: like a malignant demon, no respect, no
place, no human barriers could exclude him.

On no side could the offended eye turn, and not find him there.

Disgraced by his company, counteracted by his arrogance, insulted by his sarcasms; obliged
to accept the first of favours, life, at his hands; his apparent
inferior in the moment of danger; my ministry rejected for his, nay
contemned, in a case where the gentleman, the man of the world, and
the man of honour merited undoubted preference; and, as the climax
of injury, wronged in my love!--Rivalled!--Furies!--

And she!--Has
she been less contumelious, less annoyant, less tormenting?--His advocate,
his abettor, his adulator, with me only she was scrupulous and severe.

I generously and almost instantly forgot all former resolves, and would have thrown myself into
her arms--Unconditionally--I, who had been accustomed to give the law, not to receive. I assumed
not the dictator.

I, whose family, courage, person, and parts have made me a favourite with the brave and fair,
though flushed with success, far from claiming superiority, I came to cast myself, my freedom,
and my trophies at her feet--Came, and was rejected!

Bargained with at least; put off with ifs and possibilities!

I must stop--Must think no more--Or the hurrying blood will burst my veins, or suffocate my swelling heart,
and impede just retribution for these and all my other thousand wrongs, which only can be avenged
by calm and subtle foresight--Yet think not that the smallest of
them is forgotten--Oh no!--

Well then, calm will I be; for I can
be, will be any thing rather than not attain this supreme of pleasures,
divine vengeance!

Yes, anger must be bridled: it has now a second time made me tread backward more than all the steps
I had taken in advance.

My brain is labouring for some certain and uniform plan, but is at present so disturbed that thought
can preserve no settled train.

Previous to this second childish overflow of passion [for if I would succeed childish it is]
I had played a master stroke, in which indeed I must own passion was for once my best ally.
With most ardent importunity, I with great difficulty wrested a promise from her to be mine.
These romancers, Fairfax, hold love promises to be binding and sacred. And this obtained I
thought a fair foundation for my fabric.

The current of my thoughts is now wholly turned to this subject.

A thousand manoeuvres crowding present themselves; nor can I say how many must be employed. I
have generally found my brain rich in expedients, and I think it will not fail me now. I recollect
having mentioned the maid, Laura: she is secured, and has been for some time past. The fondness
of the fool with one less expert would be dangerous; but I have taught her to rail at me occasionally
to her mistress, and to praise the favorite, who has never lately been any great favorite with
her, having as I guess overlooked her when she had kinder inclinations. She was tickled with the
contrivance, which promised to secure her so well from the suspicion
of her mistress, and she acts her part tolerably. In fact her mistress
seems a being without suspicion, superior to it, and holding it in
contempt--So much the better!

This fellow, this king of the cucumber-beds
must be removed. I know not yet the means, but they must be found.
Present he is dangerous; absent he may perhaps be taught to act his
part with safety and effect. My ideas are not yet methodised, but
I have a confused foresight of various modes by which this and much
more may and must be accomplished.

But no common efforts can be successful--Deep--Deep
must be the plot by which she is to be over-reached, the pit into
which she must fall: and deep it therefore shall be. There is no art
I will not practise, no restraint to which I will not submit, no desperate
expedient to which I will not have recourse to gratify my soul's longing--I
will be revenged!--The irrevocable decree is gone forth--I will be
revenged!--Fairfax, you soon shall hear of me and my proceedings.
Farewell. How easy it is to undertake; how difficult to overcome!
With what facility did I say to myself--Thus will I do, and thus--How
firmly did I promise! Truth appeared so beautiful, so captivating,
so omnipotent, that armed by her an infant could not but conquer.
Perseverance alone was requisite, and I could persevere. The solid
basis of the earth should almost shake ere I would waver!--Poor, vain
creature!--Surely, Louisa, we are not all so--Heaven forbid!--

Why
am I thus? Why does my heart faint within me? Indeed, Louisa, I begin
to fear I have vaunted of powers I do not possess; and prescribed
to myself duties too dignified, too mighty for me--And must I abandon
an enterprise I deemed so noble?--I have meditated on it, Louisa,
till I could weep--

I will not yet despair. At least one effort more,
and a strong one, I will make--Alas! I am weary of this promising.
My braggart strength is impotency, or little better. But I will do
my best; and truth, sincerity, and good intent must be my trust.

My
present determination is to relate to your brother all that has passed
between me and Frank. I will once more state my feelings, my principles,
and my plan. The purity of my heart must be my shield. To contend
thus is painful; yet most willingly would I contend, were it productive
of the good at which I aim. But instead of gaining ground I seem to
lose. Oh that I were more wise, that I better knew the human heart,
and that I well could wield the too gigantic weapons of truth! But
I fear they are above my force, and pity my own imbecility.

The hour
of appointment is come. Clifton will soon be here. I have been preparing
my mind, taxing my memory, and arranging my thoughts. Oh that this
effort may be more successful than the past! Did he but know all the
good I wish him, his heart would surely not feel anger--He shall not
die, said Frank!--Can I forget it?--How did my soul glow within me,
when, hopeless but the moment before, I beheld nature again struggling
for existence, and returning life once more stir in the convulsive
lip! How did my ears tingle with--'He shall not die!'--I saw a noble
quality exerted, and thought it was but to wish and to have, to imitate
and to succeed--The brother of my Louisa!--A mind too that might out-soar
the eagle, and gaze on the sun of truth!

There must be some cause
for my failure, if I fail--With true simplicity of heart I can say,
most earnestly do I wish to do right: most ardently would I endeavour
to prove myself a friend worthy of Louisa Clifton, and of Frank Henley!--Perhaps
the latter is the cause?--If I have done him wrong, Heaven forgive
me! For I think, were I convicted of it, I could not forgive myself!

The
servant has told me Clifton is below. I must take a few minutes to
breathe--I must collect myself. Oh for the tongues of mediating angels!
I almost despaired of the great task I had undertaken. I had likewise
an immediate duty, a disburthening of my soul, a kind of confession
of facts to make, from which education has falsely accustomed us to
shrink with pain, and my spirits were overclouded. This rigorous duty
is performed; hope again begins to brighten, and my eased heart now
feels more light and cheerful.

Not but it still is tremulous with
the sensations by which it has just been thrilled. I seem to have
risen from one of the most interesting and I believe I may add awful
scenes, in which I have ever been engaged. The recesses of the soul
have been searched; that no retrospective accusation of want of absolute
and perfect candour might, as of late it too often has done, rise
to assault me.

This I handed to Bunderby and he made off. On my return Henriette was dressed for travel.

"I must take the first train for New York," she said, excitedly. "You will have the music-room
prepared at once, Bunny. Mrs. Shadd's musicale will be given here. I am going myself to make
all the necessary arrangements at the New York end. All you have to do is to get things ready
and rely on your ignorance for everything else. See?"

I could only reflect that if a successful issue were dependent upon my ignorance I had a plentiful
supply of it to fall back on. Henriette made off at once for Providence by motor-car, and got
the midnight train out of Boston for the city where, from what I learned afterwards, she must
have put in a strenuous day on Thursday. At any rate, a great sensation was sprung on Newport
on Friday morning. Every member of the smart set in the ten-o'clock mail received a little
engraved card stating that owing to sudden illness in the Shadd family the Shadd musicale for
that evening would be held at Bolivar Lodge instead of in the Onyx House ballroom. Friday afternoon
Jockobinski's private and particular piano arrived at the Lodge and was set up promptly in
the music-room, and later when the caterers arrived with the supper for the four hundred odd
guests bidden to the feast all was in readiness for them. Everything was running smoothly,
and, although Henriette had not yet arrived, I felt easy and secure of mind until nearing five-thirty
o'clock when Mrs. Shadd herself drove up to the front-door. Her color was unusually high, and
had she been any but a lady of the grande monde I should have said that she was flustered.

She demanded rather than asked to see my mistress, with a hauteur born of the arctic snow.

"Mrs. Van Raffles went to New York Wednesday evening," said I, "and has not yet returned. I
am expecting her every minute, madame. She must be here for the musicale. Won't you wait?"

"Indeed I will," said she, abruptly. "The musicale, indeed! Humph!" And she plumped herself
down in one of the drawing-room chairs so hard that it was as much as I could do to keep from
showing some very unbutlerian concern for the safety of the furniture.

I must say I did not envy Henriette the meeting that was in prospect, for it was quite evident
that Mrs. Shadd was mad all through. In spite of my stupidity I rather thought I could divine
the cause too. She was not kept long in waiting, for ten minutes later the automobile, with
Henriette in it, came thundering up the drive. I tried as I let her in to give her a hint of
what awaited her, but Mrs. Shadd forestalled me, only however to be forestalled herself.

"Oh, my dear Pauline!" Henriette cried, as she espied her waiting visitor. "It is so good of
you to come over. I'm pretty well fagged out with all the arrangements for the night and I
do hope your son is better."

"My son is not ill, Mrs. Van Raffles," said Mrs. Shadd, coldly. "I have come to ask you what--"

"Not ill?" cried Henriette, interrupting her. "Not ill, Pauline? Why,"--breathlessly--"that's
the most extraordinary thing I ever heard of. Why am I giving the musicale to-night then, instead
of you?"

"That is precisely what I have come to find out," said Mrs. Shadd.

"Why--well, of all queer things," said Henriette, flopping down in a chair. "Surely, you got
my note saying that I would let Jockobinski play here to-night instead of--"

"I did receive a very peculiar note from you saying that you would gladly do as I wished,"
said Mrs. Shadd, beginning herself to look less angry and more puzzled.

"In reply to your note of Wednesday evening," said Henriette. "Certainly you wrote to me Wednesday
evening? It was delivered by your own man, Blunderby I think his name is? About half-past seven
o'clock it was--Wednesday."

"Yes, Bunderby did carry a note to you from me on Wednesday," said Mrs. Shadd. "But--"

"And in it you said that you were called to Boston by an accident to your son Willie in his
automobile: that you might not be able to get back in time for to-night's affair and wouldn't
I take it over," protested Mrs. Van Raffles, vehemently.

"I?" said Mrs. Shadd, showing more surprise than was compatible with her high social position.

"And attend to all the details--your very words, my dear Pauline," said Henriette, with an
admirably timed break in her voice. "And I did, and I told you I would. I immediately put on
my travelling gown, motored to Providence, had an all-night ride to New York on a very uncomfortable
sleeper, went at once to Herr Jockobinski's agent and arranged the change, notified Sherry
to send the supper to my house instead of yours, drove to Tiffany's and had the cards rushed
through and mailed to everybody on your list--you know you kindly gave me your list when I
first came to Newport--and attended to the whole thing, and now I come back to find it all
a--er--a mistake! Why, Pauline, it's positively awful! What can we do?"

Henriette was a perfect picture of despair. "I don't suppose we can do anything now," said
Mrs. Shadd, ruefully. "It's too late. The cards have gone to everybody. You have all the supper--not
a sandwich has come to my house--and I presume all of Mr. Jockobinski's instruments as well
have come here."

Henriette turned to me.

"All, madame," said I, briefly.

"Well," said Mrs. Shadd, tapping the floor nervously with her toe. "I don't understand it.
I never wrote that note."

"Oh, but Mrs. Shadd--I have it here," said Henriette, opening her purse and extracting the
paper. "You can read it for yourself. What else could I do after that?"

Innocence on a monument could have appeared no freer of guile than Henriette at that moment.
She handed the note to Mrs. Shadd, who perused it with growing amazement.

"Isn't that your handwriting--and your crest and your paper?" asked Henriette, appealingly.

"It certainly looks like it," said Mrs. Shadd. "If I didn't know I hadn't written it I would
have sworn I had. Where could it have come from?"

"I supposed it came from Onyx House," said Henriette simply, glancing at the envelope.

"Well--it's a very mysterious affair," said Mrs. Shadd, rising, "and I--oh, well, my dear woman,
I--I can't blame you--indeed, after all you have done I ought to be--and really am--very much
obliged to you. Only--"

"Whom did you have at dinner Wednesday night, dear?" asked Henriette.

"Only the Duke and Duchess of Snarleyow and--mercy! I wonder if he could have done it!"

"Who?" asked Henriette.

"Tommy Dare!" ejaculated Mrs. Shadd, her eyes beginning to twinkle. "Do you suppose this is
one of Tommy Dare's jokes?"

"H'm!" mused Henriette, and then she laughed. "It wouldn't be unlike him, would it?"

"Not a bit, the naughty boy!" cried Mrs. Shadd. "That's it, Mrs. Van Raffles, as certainly
as we stand here. Suppose, just to worry him, we never let on that anything out of the ordinary
has happened, eh?"

"Splendid!" said Henriette, with enthusiasm. "Let's act as if all turned out just as we expected,
and, best of all, never even mention it to him, or to Bunderby his confederate, neither of us, eh?"

"Never!" said Mrs. Shadd, rising and kissing Henriette good-bye. "That's the best way out of
it. If we did we'd be the laughing-stock of all Newport. But some day in the distant future
Tommy Dare would better look out for Pauline Shadd, Mrs. Van Raffles."

And so it was agreed, and Henriette successfully landed Mrs. Shadd's musicale.

Incidentally, Jockobinski was very affable and the function went off well. Everybody was there
and no one would for a moment have thought that there was anything strange in the transfer
of the scene from Onyx House to Bolivar Lodge.

"Who wrote that letter, Henriette?" I asked late in the evening when the last guest had gone.

"Who do you suppose, Bunny, my boy?" she asked with a grin. "Bunderby?"

"No," said I.

"You've guessed right," said Henriette.

As a postscript let me say that until he reads this I don't believe Tommy Dare ever guessed
what a successful joke he perpetrated upon Mrs. Shadd and the fair Henriette. Even then I doubt
if he realizes what a good one it was on--everybody.

XI

THE ADVENTURE OF MRS. INNITT'S COOK

"It is curious, Bunny," said Henriette the other morning after an unusually late breakfast,
"to observe by what qualities certain of these Newport families have arrived, as the saying
is. The Gasters of course belong at the top by patent right. Having invented American society,
or at least the machine that at present controls it, they are entitled to all the royalties
it brings in. The Rockerbilts got there all of a sudden by the sheer lavishness of their entertainment
and their ability to give bonds to keep it up. The Van Varick Shadds flowed in through their
unquestioned affiliation with the ever-popular Delaware Shadds and the Roe-Shadds of the Hudson,
two of the oldest and most respected families of the United States, reinforced by the Napoleonic
qualities of the present Mrs. Shadd in the doing of unexpected things. The Gullets, thanks
to the fact that Mrs. Gullet is the acknowledged mother-in-law of three British dukes, two
Italian counts, and a French marquis, are safely anchored in the social haven where they would
be, and the rumor that Mrs. Gushington-Andrews has written a book that is a trifle risque fixes
her firmly in the social constellation--but the Innitts with only eighty thousand dollars per
annum, the Dedbroke-Hickses with nothing a year, the Oliver-Sloshingtons with an income of
judgments, the study of their arrival is mighty interesting."

"It doesn't interest me much," quoth I. "Indeed, this American smart set don't appeal to me
either for its smartness or its setness."

"Bunny!" cried Henriette, with a silvery ripple of laughter. "Do be careful. An epigram from
you? My dear boy, you'll be down with brain-fever if you don't watch out."

"Humph!" said I, with a shrug of my shoulders. "Neither you nor my dear old friend Raffles
ever gave me credit for any brains. I have a few, however, which I use when occasion demands,"
I drawled.

"Well, don't waste them here, Bunny," laughed Henriette. "Save 'em for some place where they'll
be appreciated. Maybe in your old age you'll be back in dear old London contributing to Punch
if you are careful of your wits. But how do you suppose the Oliver-Sloshingtons ever got in here?"

"He holds the divorce record I believe," said I. "He's been married to four social leaders
already, hasn't he?"

"Yes--"

"Well, he got into the swim with each marriage--so he's got a four-ply grip," said I.

"And the Dedbroke-Hickses?" asked Henriette. "How do you account for them?"

"Most attractive diners and weekenders," said I. "They got all the laughs at your dinner to
the Archbishop of Decanterbury, and their man Smathers tells me they're the swellest things
going at week-end parties because of his ingenuity at cotillion leading and her undeniable
charms as a flirt. By Jove! she's that easy with men that even I tremble with anxiety whenever
she comes into the house."

"But how do they live?--they haven't a cent to their names," said Henriette.

"Simplicity itself," said I. "He is dressed by his tailors and she by her dressmaker; and as
for food, they take home a suit-case full of it from every house-party they attend. They're
so gracious to the servants that they don't have to think of tips; and as for Smathers, and
Mrs. Dedbroke-Hicks's maid, they're paid reporters on the staff of The Town Tattler and are
willing to serve for nothing for the opportunities for items the connection gives them."

"Well--I don't envy them in the least," said Henriette. "Poor things--to be always taking and
never giving must be an awful strain, though to be sure their little trolley party out to Tiverton
and back was delightful--"

"Exactly; and with car-fare and sandwiches, and the champagne supplied free by the importers,
for the advertisement, it cost them exactly twelve dollars and was set down as the jolliest
affair of the season," said I. "I call that genius of a pretty high order. I wouldn't pity
them if I were you. They're happy."

"Mrs. Innitt, though--I envy her," said Henriette; "that is, in a way. She has no conversation
at all, but her little dinners are the swellest things of the season. Never more than ten people
at a time and everything cooked to a turn."

"That's just it," said I. "I hear enough at the club to know just what cinches Mrs. Innitt's
position. It's her cook, that's what does it. If she lost her cook she'd be Mrs. Outofit. There
never were such pancakes, such purées, such made dishes as that woman gets up. She turns hash
into a confection and liver and bacon into a delicacy. Corned-beef in her hands is a discovery
and her sauces are such that a bit of roast rhinoceros hide tastes like the tenderest of squab
when served by her. No wonder Mrs. Innitt holds her own. A woman with a cook like Norah Sullivan
could rule an empire."

A moment later I was sorry I had spoken, for my words electrified her.

"I must have her!" cried Henriette.

"What, Mrs. Innitt?" I asked.

"No--her cook," said Henriette.

I stood aghast. Full of sympathy as I had always been with the projects of Mrs. Van Raffles,
and never in the least objecting on moral grounds to any of her schemes of acquisition, I could
not but think that this time she proposed to go too far. To rob a millionaire of his bonds,
a national bank of its surplus, a philanthropist of a library, or a Metropolitan Boxholder
of a diamond stomacher, all that seemed reasonable to me and proper according to my way of
looking at it, but to rob a neighbor of her cook--if there is any worse social crime than that
I don't know what it is.

"You'd better think twice on that proposition, Henriette," I advised with a gloomy shake of
the head. "It is not only a mean crime, but a dangerous one to boot. Success would in itself
bring ruin. Mrs. Innitt would never forgive you, and society at large--"

"Society at large would dine with me instead of with Mrs. Innitt, that's all," said Henriette.
"I mean to have her before the season's over."

"Well, I draw the line at stealing a cook," said I, coldly. "I've robbed churches and I've
made way with fresh-air funds, and I've helped you in many another legitimate scheme, but in
this, Mrs. Van Raffles, you'll have to go it alone."

"Oh, don't you be afraid, Bunny," she answered. "I'm not going to use your charms as a bait
to lure this culinary Phyllis into the Arcadia in which you with your Strephonlike form disport
yourself."

"You oughtn't to do it at all," said I, gruffly. "It's worse than murder, for it is prohibited
twice in the decalogue, while murder is only mentioned once."

"What!" cried Henrietta "What, pray, does the decalogue say about cooks, I'd like to know?"

"First, thou shalt not steal. You propose to steal this woman. Second, thou shalt not covet
thy neighbor's maid-servant. How many times does that make?" I asked.

"Dear me, Bunny," said Henriette, "but you are a little tuppenny Puritan, aren't you? Anybody'd
know you were the son of a clergyman! Well, let me tell you, I sha'n't steal the woman, and
I sha'n't covet her. I'm just going to get her, that's all."

It was two weeks later that Norah Sullivan left the employ of Mrs. Innitt and was installed
in our kitchen; and, strange to relate, she came as a matter of charity on Henriette's part--having
been discharged by Mrs. Innitt.

The Friday before Norah's arrival Henriette requested me to get her a rusty nail, a piece of
gravel from the drive, two hair-pins, and a steel nut from the automobile.

"What on earth--" I began, but she shut me off with an imperious gesture.

"Do as I tell you," she commanded. "You are not in on this venture." And then apparently she
relented. "But I'm willing to tell you just one thing, Bunny"--here her eyes began to twinkle
joyously--"I'm going to Mrs. Innitt's to dinner to-morrow night--so look out for Norah by Monday."

I turned sulkily away.

"You know how I feel on that subject," said I. "This business of going into another person's
house as a guest and inducing their servants to leave is an infraction of the laws of hospitality.
How would you like it if Mrs. Gaster stole me away from you?"

Henriette's answer was a puzzling smile. "You are free to better your condition, Bunny," she
said. "But I am not going to rob Mrs. Innitt, as I told you once before. She will discharge
Norah and I will take her, that's all; so do be a good boy and bring me the nail and gravel
and the hair-pins and the automobile nut."

I secured the desired articles for my mistress, and the next evening she went to Mrs. Innitt's
little dinner to Miss Gullet and her fiancé, Lord Dullpate, eldest son of the Duke of Lackshingles,
who had come over to America to avoid the scrutiny of the Bankruptcy Court, taking the absurd
objects with her. Upon her return at 2 A.M. she was radiant and triumphant.

"I won out, Bunny--I won out!" she cried.

"How?" I inquired.

"Mrs. Innitt has discharged Norah, though I begged her not to," she fairly sang.

"On what grounds?"

"Several," said Henriette, unfastening her glove. "To begin with, there was a rusty nail in
my clam cocktail, and it nearly choked me to death. I tried hard to keep Mrs. Innitt from seeing
what had happened, but she is watchful if not brainy, and all my efforts went for naught. She
was much mortified of course and apologized profusely. All went well until the fish, when one
of the two hair-pins turned up in the pompano to the supreme disgust of my hostess, who was
now beginning to look worried. Hair-pin number two made its début in my timbale. This was too
much for the watchful Mrs. Innitt, self-poised though she always is, and despite my remonstrances
she excused herself from the table for a moment, and I judge from the flushed appearance of
her cheeks when she returned five minutes later that somebody had had the riot act read to
her somewhere.

"'I don't understand it at all, Mrs. Van Raffles,' she said with a sheepish smile. 'Cook's
perfectly sober. If anything of the kind ever happens again she shall go.'"

"Even as Mrs. Innitt spoke I conveyed a luscious morsel of filet mignon with mushrooms to my
mouth and nearly broke my tooth on a piece of gravel that went with it, and Norah was doomed,
for although we all laughed heartily, the thing had come to be such a joke, it was plain from
the expression of Mrs. Innitt's countenance that she was very, very angry.

"'Forgive her this time for my sake, Mrs. Innitt,' I pleaded. 'After all it is the little surprises
that give zest to life.'"

"And you didn't have to use the automobile nut?" I asked, deeply impressed with the woman's
ingenuity.

"Oh yes," said Henriette. "As dinner progressed I thought it wise to use it to keep Mrs. Innitt
from weakening; so when the salad was passed I managed, without anybody's observing it, to
drop the automobile nut into the bowl. The Duke of Snarleyow got it and the climax was capped.
Mrs. Innitt burst into a flood of tears and--well, to-morrow, Bunny, Norah leaves. You will
take her this ten-dollar bill from me, and tell her that I am sorry she got into so much trouble
on my account. Say that if I can be of any assistance to her all she has to do is to call here
and I will do what I can to get her another place."

With this Henriette retired and the next morning on her way to early church I waylaid Norah.
Her eyes were red with weeping, but a more indignant woman never lived. Her discharge was unrighteous;
Mrs. Innitt was no lady; the butler was in a conspiracy to ruin her--and all that; indeed,
her mood was most receptive to the furtherance of Henriette's plans. But I comfort myself with
reflecting that, after the battle is won, the rashness of the attack is never remembered; or, if
it be, it is always applauded; and that all generals, great or small,
confide in their own plans, till defeat has proved them to be abortive.



She called that night, and two days later was installed in the Van Raffles's kitchen.

A new treasure was added to the stores of our loot, but somehow or other I have never been
happy over the successful issue of the enterprise. I can't quite make up my mind that it was
a lady-like thing for Henriette to do even in Newport.

XII

THE LAST ADVENTURE

I am bathed in tears. I have tried to write of my sensations, to tell the story of the Last
Adventure of Mrs. Van Raffles, in lucid terms, but though my pen runs fast over the paper the
ink makes no record of the facts. My woe is so great and so deep that my tears, falling into
the ink-pot, turn it into a fluid so thin it will not mark the paper, and when I try the pencil
the words are scarce put down before they're blotted out. And yet with all this woe I find
myself a multi-millionaire--possessed of sums so far beyond my wildest dreams of fortune that
my eye can scarce take in the breadth of all the figures. My dollars coined into silver, placed
on top of one another, would form a bullion tower that would reach higher into the air than
fifteen superimposed domes of St. Peter's placed on top of seventeen spires of Trinity on the
summit of Mont Blanc. In five-pound notes laid side by side they'd suffice to paper every scrap
of bedroom wall in all the Astor houses in the world, and invested in Amalgamated Copper they
would turn the system green with envy--and yet I am not happy. My well-beloved Henriette's
last adventure has turned my fortune into bitterest gall, and plain unvarnished wormwood forms
the finish of my interior, for she is gone! I, amid the splendor of my new-found possessions,
able to keep not one but a hundred motor-cars, and to pay the chauffeur's fines, to endow chairs
in universities, to build libraries in every hamlet in the land from Podunk to Richard Mansfield,
to eat three meals a day and lodge at the St. Regicide, and to evade my taxes without exciting
suspicion, am desolate and forlorn, for, I repeat, Henriette has gone! The very nature of her
last adventure by a successful issue has blown out the light of my life.

She has stolen Constant-Scrappe!

If I could be light of heart in this tragic hour I would call this story the Adventure of the
Lifted Fiancé, but that would be so out of key with my emotions that I cannot bring myself
to do it. I must content myself with a narration of the simple facts of the lengths to which
my beloved's ambition led her, without frivolity and with a heavy heart.

Of course you know what all Newport has known for months, that the Constant-Scrappes were seeking
divorce, not that they loved one another less, but that both parties to the South Dakota suit
loved some one else more. Colonel Scrappe had long been the most ardent admirer of Mrs. Gushington-Andrews,
and Mrs. Constant-Scrappe's devotion to young Harry de Lakwitz had been at least for two seasons
evident to any observer with half an eye. Gushington-Andrews had considerately taken himself
out of the way by eloping to South Africa with Tottie Dimpleton of the Frivolity Burlesquers,
and Harry de Lakwitz's only recorded marriage had been annulled by the courts because at the
time of his wedding to the forty-year-old housemaid of the Belleville Boarding-School for Boys
at Skidgeway, Rhode Island, he was only fifteen years of age. Consequently, they both were
eligible, and provided the Constant-Scrappes could be so operated on by the laws of South Dakota
as to free them from one another, there were no valid reasons why the yearnings of these ardent
souls should not all be gratified. I do not deny it. But either they are an unjust satire upon
the world in general, or it is a vile world. I half suspect, indeed, it is not quite what it
ought to be.

In addition to all this, I have been obliged to receive a sum equal to that which I thought it my
duty to bestow. This is the second time; and perhaps thou wilt tell me I am not difficult
to persuade. Read the following dialogue, which passed between me and the most angelic of Heaven's
creatures, and judge for thyself. She is really a prodigy! I never
knew another mind of such uncommon powers! So clear, so collected,
so certain of choosing the side of truth, and so secure of victory!

I
am an ass! I am talking Arabic to thee. I ought to have begun with
informing thee of a circumstance which is in itself odd enough. He turned out to be a most charming man, and it didn't require a much more
keen perception than my own to take in the fact that he had made a great impression upon Henriette,
though she never mentioned it to me until the final blow came. I merely noticed a growing preoccupation
in her manner and in her attitude towards me, which changed perceptibly.

"I think, Bunny," she said to me one morning as I brought her marmalade and toast, "that considering
our relations to each other you should not call me Henrietta. After all, you know, you are
here primarily as my butler, and there are some proprieties that should be observed even in
this Newport atmosphere."

"But," I protested, "am I no more than that? I am your partner, am I not?"

"You are my business partner--not my social, Bunny," she said. "We must not mix society and
business. In this house I am mistress of the situation; you are the butler--that is the precise
condition, and I think it well that hereafter you should recognize the real truth and avoid
over-familiarity by addressing me as Mrs. Van Raffles. If we should ever open an office for
our Burglary Company in New York or elsewhere you may call me anything you please there. Here,
however, you must be governed by the etiquette of your environment. Let it be Mrs. Van Raffles
hereafter."

"And is it to be Mr. Bunny?" I inquired, sarcastically.

Her response was a cold glance of the eye and a majestic sweep from the room.

That evening Colonel Scrappe called, ostensibly to look over the house and as landlord to see
if there was anything he could do to make it more comfortable, and I, blind fool that I was
for the moment, believed that that was his real errand, and ventured to remind Henriette of
the leak in the roof, at which they both, I thought, exchanged amused glances, and he gravely
mounted the stairs to the top of the house to look at it. On our return, Henriette dismissed
me and told me that she would not require my services again during the evening. Even then my
suspicions were not aroused, although there was a dull, disturbed feeling about my heart whose
precise causes I could not define. I went to the club and put in a miserable evening, returning
home about midnight to discover that Colonel Scrappe was still there. He was apparently giving
the house and its contents a thorough inspection, for when I arrived, Henriette was testing
the fifty-thousand-dollar piano in the drawing-room for him with a brilliant rendering of "O
Promise Me." What decision they reached as to its tone and quality I never knew, for in spite
of my hints on the subject, Henriette never spoke of the matter to me. I suppose I should have
begun to guess what was happening under my very nose then, but thank Heaven I am not of a suspicious
nature, and although I didn't like the looks of things, the inevitable meaning of their strange
behavior never even dawned upon my mind. Even when two nights later Colonel Scrappe escorted
Henriette home at midnight from a lecture on the Inscrutability of Sartor Resartus at Mrs.
Gushington-Andrews's it did not strike me as unusual, although, instead of going home immediately,
as most escorts do under the circumstances, he remained about two hours testing that infernal
piano again, and with the same old tune.

Then the automobile rides began, and pretty nearly every morning, long before polite society
was awake, Colonel Scrappe and Henriette took long runs together through the country in her
Mercedes machine, for what purpose I snever knew, for whatever interest the colonel might have
had in our welfare as a landlord I could not for the life of me guess how it could be extended
to our automobiles. One thing I did notice, however, was a growing coldness between Henriette
and Mrs. Gushington-Andrews. The latter came to a card-party at Bolivar Lodge one afternoon
about two weeks after Colonel Scrappe's return, and her greeting to her hostess instead of
having the old-time effusiveness was frigid to a degree. In fact, when they clasped hands I
doubt if more than the tips of their fingers touched. Moreover, Mrs. Gushington-Andrews, hitherto
considered one of the best fists at bridge or hearts in the 400, actually won the booby prize,
which I saw her throw into the street when she departed. It was evident something had happened
to disturb her equanimity.

My eyes were finally opened by a remark made at the club by Digby, Reggie de Pelt's valet,
who asked me how I liked my new boss, and whose explanation of the question led to a complete
revelation of the true facts in the case. Everybody knew, he said, that from the moment she
had met him Mrs. Van Raffles had set her cap for Colonel Scrappe, and that meeting her for
the first time he had fallen head over heels in love with her even in the presence of his fiancée.
Of course I hotly denied Digby's insinuations, and we got so warm over the discussion that
when I returned home that night I had two badly discolored eyes, and Digby--well, Digby didn't
go home at all. And the wearisome right lined road, that you never lose sight of; not for a moment,
Aby! No lucky turning. No intervening hill.

Oh that I were but the Grand Monarch!

What improvements would I make! What a scope for invention, Aby!
A kingdom!

A revenue of four hundred millions of livres, and a standing army of three hundred thousand men!
All which, if the king were a wise man, it is very evident, Abimelech,
he might employ in improvements; and heaven knows there is a want
of them.



"What do you mean?" she demanded, her face flushing hotly.

"You know well enough what I mean," I retorted, angrily. "Your goings on with Colonel Scrappe
are the talk of the town, and I got these eyes in a little discussion of your matrimonial intentions.
That's all."

"Leave the room instantly!" she cried, rising and haughtily pointing to the door. "You are
insufferable."

But the color in her cheeks showed that I had hit home far harder than she was willing to admit.
There was nothing for me to do but to obey meekly, but my blood was up, and instead of moping
in my room I started out to see if I could find Constant-Scrappe. My love for Henriette was
too deep to permit of my sitting quietly by and seeing another walk away with the one truly
coveted prize of my life, and I was ready on sight to take the colonel by the collar--he was
only a governor's-staff colonel anyhow, and, consequently no great shakes as a fighter--and
throw him into the harbor, but my quest was a vain one. He was to be found in none of his familiar
haunts, and I returned to Bolivar Lodge. And then came the shock. As I approached the house
I saw the colonel assisting Henriette into the motor-car, and in response to the chauffeur's
"Where to, sir," I heard Scrappe reply in an excited undertone:

"To New York--and damn the speed laws."

In a moment they had rushed by me like the flash of a lightning express, and Henriette was gone!

You must know the rest. The papers the next day were full of the elopement in high life. They
told how the Scrappe divorce had been granted at five o'clock in the afternoon the day before,
how Colonel Scrappe and Mrs. Van Raffles had sped to New York in the automobile and been quietly
married at the Little Church Around the Corner, and were now sailing down the bay on the Hydrostatic,
bound for foreign climes. They likewise intimated that a very attractive lady of more than
usual effusiveness of manner, whose nuptials were expected soon to be published for the second
time, had gone to a sanitarium in Philadelphia to be treated for a sudden and overwhelming
attack of nervous hysteria.

It was all too true, that tale. Henriette's final coup had been successful, and she had at
one stroke stolen her landlord, her landlady's husband, and her neighbor's fiancé. To console
me she left this note, written on board of the steamer and mailed by the pilot.

  ON BOARD THE HYDROSTATIC.
  OFF SANDY HOOK, September 10, 1904.

     DEAR BUNNY,--I couldn't help it. The minute I saw him I felt that
     I must have him. It's the most successful haul yet and is the
     last adventure I shall ever have. He's worth forty million
     dollars. Volumes could not repeat how much!--But surely neither
     of us said any thing to the other's disadvantage.
     
     Oh! The bliss to perceive myself understood and not reproved! To
     meet such emanations of mind! Ecstasy is a poor word!
      Good-bye, dear Bunny, I shall never
     forget you, and I wish you all the happiness in the world. With
     the funds now in your possession why not retire--go home to
     England and renew your studies for the ministry? The Church is a
     noble profession.

  Sincerely yours,
  HENRIETTE VAN RAFFLES-SCRAPPE.

I have gathered together these meagre possessions--rich in bullion value, but meagre in happiness,
considering all that might have been, and to-morrow I sail for London. There, following Henriette's
advice, I shall enter the study of the ministry, and when I am ordained shall buy a living
somewhere and settle down to the serene existence of the preacher, the pastor of a flock of
human sheep.

My misery is deep but I am buoyed up by one great hope in every thought.

These Newport marriages are so seldom for life that I yet have hope that some day Henriette
will be restored to me without its necessarily involving any serious accident to her husband
the colonel.

