By sunrise the boys are off, and the O.W. has the camp to himself. He takes it leisurely, gets
up a neat breakfast of trout, bread, butter, and coffee, cleans and puts away his dishes, has
a smoke, and picks up the camp axe. Selecting a bushy hemlock fifteen inches across, he lets
it down in as many minutes, trims it to the very tip, piles the limbs in a heap, and cuts three
lengths of six feet each from the butt. This insures browse and back logs for some time ahead.
Two strong stakes are cut and sharpened.

Four small logs, two of eight and two of nine feet in length, are prepared, plenty of night
wood is made ready, a supply of bright, dry hemlock bark is carried to camp, and the O.W. rests
from his labors, resuming his favorite pastime of sitting on a log and smoking navy plug.

Finally it occurs to him that he is there partly as guide and mentor to the younger men, and
that they need a lesson on cleanliness. He brings out the frying pans and finds a filthy looking
mess of grease in each one, wherein ants, flies, and other insects have contrived to get mixed.
Does he heat some water, and clean and scour the pans? Not if he knows himself. If he did it
once he might keep on doing it. He is cautious about establishing precedents, and he has a
taste for entomology. He places the pans in the sun where the grease will soften and goes skirmishing
for ants and doodle bugs. They are not far to seek, and he soon has a score of large black
ants, with a few bugs and spiders, pretty equally distributed among the frying pans. To give
the thing a plausible look a few flies are added, and the two largest pans are finished off,
one with a large earwig, the other with a thousand-legged worm. The pans are replaced in the
shanty, the embers are leveled and nearly covered with bits of dry hemlock bark, and the O.W.
resumes his pipe and log.

Before noon the boys are all in, and as the catch is twice as numerous and twice as large as
on the previous evening, and as the weather is all that could be asked of the longest days
in June, they are in excellent spirits. The boxes are brought out, pork is sliced, a can of
Indian meal comes to the front, and they go for the frying pans.

"Holy Moses! Look here. Just see the ants and bugs."

Second Man.--"Well, I should say! I can see your ants and bugs, and go you an earwig better."

Third Man (inverting his pan spitefully over the fire).--"Damn 'em. I'll roast the beggars."

Bush D. (who is something of a cook and woodsman) "Boys, I'll take the pot. I've got a thousand-legged
worm at the head of a pismire flush, and it serves us right, for a lot of slovens. Dishes should
be cleaned as often as they are used. Now let's scour our pans and commence right."

Hot water, ashes, and soap soon restore the pans to pristine brightness; three frying pans
are filled with trout well rolled in meal; a fourth is used for cooking a can of tomatoes;
the coffee is strong, and everything comes out without being smoked or scorched. The captain
and Paul rushed to his assistance and found him bleeding profusely from knife wounds in the breast
and abdomen, while the port watch with drawn knives stood sullen and determined looking in
the forecastle. This sight staggered the captain who exclaimed:

"Mutiny by the eternal!" and called loudly for the steward to bring him his revolver.

Paul ordered some of his watch to carry the mate, who was groaning, aft, then advancing to the
forecastle door said:

"Boys, this is not right. This must not be.
Put up those knives. If you have any grievances come out like men
and give them to the captain."

"Oh, we have nothing to say against
you or the captain," responded the leader, "but we have determined
to die before we turn to under that man again."

The old woodsman, who has been rather silent up to this time, knocks the ashes leisurely from
his pipe, and gets on his feet for a few remarks. He says, "Boys, a bumblebee is biggest when
it's first born. You've learned more than you think in the last twenty-four hours."

"Well, as how? Explain yourself," says Bush D.

O.W.--"In the first place, you have learned better than to stick your cooking-kit into a tumbled
down heap of knots, mulch and wet bark, only to upset and melt down the pots, and scorch or
smoke everything in the pans, until a starving hound wouldn't eat the mess. And you have found
that it doesn't take a log heap to boil a pot of coffee or fry a pan of trout. Also, that a
level bed of live coals makes an excellent cooking fire, though I will show you a better. Yesterday
you cooked the worst meal I ever saw in the woods. Today you get up a really good, plain dinner;
you have learned that much in one day. Oh, you improve some. And I think you have taken a lesson
in cleanliness today."

"Yes; but we learned that of the ant--and bug," says number two.

O.W.--"Just so. And did you think all the ants and doodle-bugs blundered into that grease in
one morning? I put 'em in myself--to give you a 'kink.'"

Bush D. (disgusted).--"You blasted, dirty old sinner."

Second Man.--"Oh, you miserable old swamp savage; I shan't get over that earwig in a month."

Third Man (plaintively).--"This life in the woods isn't what it's cracked up to be; I don't
relish bugs and spiders. I wish I were home. The boat refused to rise.

The oxygen became rapidly exhausted and the lights grew dim.

Even the valve supplying fresh air for the nostrils of the occupants of the boat would not work
and the situation grew more desperate with the flight of every second. As the atmosphere became
oppressively heavy, Boyton wanted to knock the valve off with a hammer;
but the engineer showed him if that were done, they would be drowned.

It began to dawn on the minds of the three men that they were doomed.

They sat and looked into one another's pale faces. Paul consulted his watch and estimated that
twelve more minutes must elapse before those above would haul up. He felt that it would be impossible
for them to last so long for already they were beginning to gasp for lack of air. They became
weak; but again tried the valves to no purpose. The least exertion exhausted them. One of
the lanterns flickered out and the other was very dim.

At last Paul seized a hammer and going up the little iron ladder, struck three or four blows on the cover
of the man-hole, under the impression that those above might hear. The effort was too much for
him and he fell to the floor where he laid in an almost unconscious
condition.

He dimly remembered hearing the straining of chains, then the man-hole was opened and a voice
inquired: "How is it?"

There was no answer to the inquiry and the rescuers only found out
how it was when they entered the boat and dragged the three unconscious
men out to light and air where they quickly recovered.

The inventor of the boat made an examination of her machinery and
found that the valves had been tampered with and rendered useless.

It was fortunate that Boyton had taken the precaution of swinging the boat to chains, for otherwise
they would have died like rats in a trap and remained in their iron coffin at the bottom of the
bay.

The inventor went to Lima to report the occurrence and that night
Boyton received a message warning him to keep a sharp look out as
there was a Chilean spy among the crew and it was he who had tampered
with the valves. It should never be
cut, but pulled, stripped or broken. I have seen a Senator, ex-Governor, and a wealthy banker
enjoying themselves hugely at it, varying the occupation by hacking small timber with their
G.W. hatchets, like so many boys let loose from school. It may have looked a trifle undignified,
but I dare say they found their account in it. Newport or Long Branch would have been more
expensive, and much less healthful.

For an hour and a half tongues and fingers are busy around the hemlock tops; then a thin, long
volume of blue smoke rises near the spring, and the boys walk over to inspect the range. They
find it made as follows: Two logs six feet long and eight inches thick are laid parallel, but
seven inches apart at one end and only four at the other. They are bedded firmly and flattened
a little on the inside. On the upper sides the logs are carefully hewed and leveled until pots,
pans and kettles will sit firmly and evenly on them. A strong forked stake is driven at each
end of the space, and a cross-pole, two or three inches thick, laid on, for hanging kettles.
This completes the range; simple, but effective. (See illustration.) The broad end of the space
is for frying pans, and the potato kettle. The narrow end, for coffee pots and utensils of
lesser diameter. From six to eight dishes can be cooked at the same time. Soups, stews, and
beans are to be cooked in closely covered kettles hung from the cross-pole, the bottoms of
the kettles reaching within some two inches of the logs. With a moderate fire they may be left
to simmer for hours without care or attention.

The fire is of the first importance. Start it with fine kindling and clean, dry, hemlock bark.
When you have a bright, even fire from end to end of the space, keep it up with small fagots
of the sweetest and most wholesome woods in the forest. These are, in the order named, black
birch, hickory, sugar maple, yellow birch, and red beech. The sticks should be short, and not
over two inches across. Split wood is better than round. The outdoor range can be made by one
man in little more than an hour, and the camper-out, who once tries it, will never wish to
see a "portable camp-stove" again.

When the sun leaves the valley in the shade of Asaph Mountain, the boys have a fragrant bed
of elastic browse a foot deep in the shanty, with pillows improvised from stuffed boot legs,
cotton handkerchiefs, etc. They cook their suppers on the range, and vote it perfect, no melting
or heating handles too hot for use, and no smoking of dishes, or faces.

Just at dark--which means 9 P.M. in the last week of June--the fire is carefully made and chinked.
An hour later it is throwing its grateful warmth and light directly into camp, and nowhere
else. The camp turns in. Not to wriggle and quarrel with obdurate stubs, but to sleep. And
sleep they do. The sound, deep, restful sleep of healthy young manhood, inhaling pure mountain
air on the healthiest bed yet known to man.

When it is past midnight, and the fire burns low, and the chill night breeze drifts into camp,
they still do not rouse up, but only spoon closer, and sleep right on. Only the O.W. turns
out sleepily, at two bells in the middle watch, after the manner of hunters, trappers, and
sailors, the world over. He quietly rebuilds the fire, reduces a bit of navy plug to its lowest
denomination, and takes a solitary smoke--still holding down his favorite log. Quizzically
and quietly he regards the sleeping youngsters, and wonders if among them all there is one
who will do as he has done, i.e., relinquish all of what the world reckons as success, for
the love of nature and a free forest life. He hopes not. And yet, as he glances at the calm
yellow moon overhead, and listens to the low murmur of the little waterfall below the spring,
he has a faint notion that it is not all loss and dross.

Knocking the ashes from his pipe he prepares to turn in, murmuring to himself, half sadly,
half humorously, "I have been young, and now I am old; yet have I never seen the true woodsman
forsaken, or his seed begging bread--or anything else, so to speak--unless it might be a little
tobacco or a nip of whisky." And he creeps into his blanket-bag, backs softly out to the outside
man, and joins the snorers.

It is broad daylight when he again turns out, leaving the rest still sleeping soundly. He starts
a lively fire in the range, treats two coffee pots to a double handful of coffee and three
pints of water each, sets on the potato kettle, washes the potatoes, then sticks his head into
the camp, and rouses the party with a regular second mate's hail. "Star-a-ar-bo'lin's aho-o-o-y.
Turn out, you beggars. Come on deck and see it rain." And the boys do turn out. Not with wakeful
alacrity, but in a dazed, dreamy, sleepy way. They open wide eyes, when they see that the sun
is turning the sombre tops of pines and hemlocks to a soft orange yellow.

"I'd have sworn," says one, "that I hadn't slept over fifteen minutes by the watch."

"And I," says another, "was just watching the fire, when I dropped off in a doze. In about
five minutes I opened my eyes, and I'll be shot if it wasn't sunrise."

"As for me," says a third, "I don't know as I've slept at all. I remember seeing somebody poking
the fire last night. Next thing I knew, some lunatic was yelling around camp about 'starbolin's,'
and 'turning out.' Guess I'll lay down and have my nap out."

"Yes," says the O.W., "I would. If I was a healthy youngster, and couldn't get along with seven
hours and a half of solid sleep, I'd take the next forenoon for it. Just at present, I want
to remark that I've got the coffee and potato business underway, and I'll attend to them. If
you want anything else for breakfast, you'll have to cook it."

And the boys, rising to the occasion, go about the breakfast with willing hands. It is noticeable,
however, that only one pan of trout is cooked, two of the youngsters preferring to fall back
on broiled ham, remarking that brook trout is too rich and cloying for a steady diet. Which
is true. The appetite for trout has very sensibly subsided, and the boyish eagerness for trout
fishing has fallen off immensely. Only two of the party show any interest in the riffles. They
stroll down stream leisurely, to try their flies for an hour or two. The others elect to amuse
themselves about the camp, cutting small timber with their little hatchets, picking fresh browse,
or skirmishing the mountain side for wintergreen berries and sassafras. The fishermen return
in a couple of hours, with a score of fair-sized trout. They remark apologetically that it
is blazing hot--and there are plenty of trout ahead. Then they lean their rods against the
shanty, and lounge on the blankets, and smoke and doze.

It is less than forty-eight hours since the cross-pole was laid; and, using a little common
sense woodcraft, the camp has already attained to a systematic no-system of rest, freedom and
idleness. Every man is free to "loaf, and invite his soul." There is good trouting within an
hour's walk for those who choose, and there is some interest, with a little exercise, in cooking
and cutting night wood, slicking up, etc. But the whole party is stricken with "camp-fever,"
"Indian laziness," the dolce far niente. It is over and around every man, enveloping him as
with a roseate blanket from the Castle of Indolence. It is the perfect summer camp.

And it is no myth; but a literal resumé of a five days' outing at Poplar Spring, on Marsh Creek,
in Pennsylvania. Alas, for the beautiful valley, that once afforded the finest camping grounds
I have ever known.

Never any more
    Can it be
    Unto me (or anybody else)
As before.

A huge tannery, six miles above Poplar Spring, poisons and blackens the stream with chemicals,
bark and ooze. The land has been brought into market, and every acre eagerly bought up by actual
settlers. The once fine covers and thickets are converted into fields thickly dotted with blackened
stumps. And, to crown the desolation, heavy laden trains of "The Pine Creek and Jersey Shore
R.R." go thundering almost hourly over the very spot where stood our camp by Poplar Spring.

Of course, this is progress; but, whether backward or forward, had better be decided sixty
years hence. And, just what has happened to the obscure valley of Marsh Creek, is happening
today, on a larger scale, all over the land. It is the same old story of grab and greed. Let
us go on the "make" today, and "whack up" tomorrow; cheating each other as villainously as
we may, and posterity be damned. "What's all the w-u-u-rld to a man when his wife is a widdy?"

This is the moral: From Maine to Montana; from the Adirondacks to Alaska; from the Yosemite
to the Yellowstone, the trout-hog, the deer-wolf, the netter, the skin-hunter, each and all
have it their own way; and the law is a farce--only to be enforced where the game has vanished
forever. Perhaps the man-child is born who will live to write the moral of all this--when it
is too late.

IT is probably true that nothing connected with outdoor life in camp is so badly botched as
the cooking. It is not through any lack of the raw material, which may be had of excellent
quality in any country village. It is not from lack of intelligence or education, for the men
you meet in the woods, as outers or sportsmen, are rather over than under the average in these
respects. Perhaps it is because it has been dinned into our ears from early childhood, that
an appetite, a healthy longing for something good to eat, a tickling of the palate with wholesome,
appetizing food, is beneath the attention of an aesthetic, intellectual man. Forgetting that
the entire man, mental and physical, depends on proper aliment and the healthy assimilation
thereof; and that a thin, dyspeptic man can no more keep up in the struggle of life, than the
lightning express can make connections, drawn by a worn out locomotive. 

It was down there he painted the big picture of her a standin' by the big spring. We never thought
nothin' about her bein' with him so much. Country folks is that way, Mr. Howitt, 'though we
ought to knowed better; we sure ought to knowed better." The old giant paused and for some
time sat with his head bowed, his forgotten pipe on the floor.

"Well," he began again; "he stopped with us all that summer, and then
one day he went out as usual and didn't come back. In making up the rations for camping out, the first thing usually attended to
is bread. And if this be light, well-made bread, enough may be taken along to last four or
five days and this may be eked out with Boston crackers, or the best hardtack, for a couple
or three days more, without the least hardship. Also, there are few camps in which some one
is not going out to the clearings every few days for mail, small stores, etc. and a supply
of bread can be arranged for, with less trouble than it can be made. There are times however,
when this is not feasible, and there are men who prefer warm bread all the time. In this case
the usual resort, from Maine to Alaska, is the universal flapjack. I do not like it; I seldom
make it; it is not good. But it may be eaten, with maple syrup or sugar and butter. I prefer
a plain water Johnnycake, made as follows (supposing your tins are something like those described
in Chapter II): Put a little more than a pint of water in your kettle and bring it to a sharp
boil, adding a small teaspoon full of salt and two of sugar. Stir in slowly enough good corn
meal to make a rather stiff mush, let it cook a few minutes and set it off the fire; then grease
your largest tin dish and put the mush in it, smoothing it on top. Set the dish on the outdoor
range described in the previous chapter, with a lively bed of coal beneath--but no blaze. Invert
the second sized tin over the cake and cover the dish with bright live coals, that bottom and
top may bake evenly and give it from thirty-five to forty minutes for baking. It makes wholesome,
palatable bread, which gains on the taste with use.

Those who prefer wheat bread can make a passable article by using the best wheat flour with
baking powders, mixing three tablespoonfuls of the powders to a quart of flour. Mix and knead
thoroughly with warm water to a rather thin dough and bake as above. Use the same proportions
for pancake batter. When stopping in a permanent camp with plenty of time to cook, excellent
light bread may be made by using dry yeast cakes, though it is not necessary to "set" the sponge
as directed on the papers. Scrape and dissolve half a cake of the yeast in a gill of warm water
and mix it with the flour. Add warm water enough to make it pliable and not too stiff: set
in a warm place until it rises sufficiently and bake as directed above. He insisted on firing at
some blackbirds and the promise of a quarter to the negro, persuaded
that worthy to row him close in shore.

He took deliberate aim and fired into a tree that was covered with birds. Not one of them fell;
but a cow that had been drinking among the willows, ran wildly up the bank with her tail in
the air, bellowing mournfully. The darkey received the promise of another twenty-five cents
for pulling away from the scene as fast as he could.
 Then stick the sharpened end in the ground near the fire, leaning the
broad end toward a bed of live coals, where it will get screeching hot. While it is heating,
mix rather more than a half pint of best Minnesota flour with enough warm water to make a dough.
Add a half teaspoon full of salt and a teaspoon full of sugar and mould and pull the dough
until it becomes lively. Now, work it into a ribbon two inches wide and half an inch thick,
wind the ribbon spirally around the broad end of the club, stick the latter in front of the
fire so that the bread will bake evenly and quickly to a light brown and turn frequently until
done, which will be in about thirty minutes. When done take it from the fire, stand the club
firmly upright and pick the bread off in pieces as you want it to eat. It will keep hot a long
time and one soon becomes fond of it.

To make perfect coffee, just two ingredients are necessary, and only two. These are water and
coffee. It is owing to the bad management of the latter that we drink poor coffee.

