Of all the provinces Brabant raised its voice the loudest.  The states of this province appealed
to their great privilege, which protected their members from being brought before a foreign
court of justice. They spoke loudly of the oath by which the king had bound himself to observe
all their statutes, and of the conditions under which they alone had sworn allegiance to him.
Louvain, Antwerp, Brussels, and Herzogenbusch solemnly protested against the decrees, and transmitted
their protests in distinct memorials to the regent.  The latter, always hesitating and wavering,
too timid to obey the king, and far more afraid to disobey him, again summoned her council,
again listened to the arguments for and against the question, and at last again gave her assent
to the opinion which of all others was the most perilous for her to adopt.  A new reference
to the king in Spain was proposed; the next moment it was asserted that so urgent a crisis
did not admit of so dilatory a remedy; it was necessary for the regent to act on her own responsibility,
and either defy the threatening aspect of despair, or to yield to it by modifying or retracting
the royal ordinance.  She finally caused the annals of Brabant to be examined in order to discover
if possible a precedent for the present case in the instructions of the first inquisitor whom
Charles V. had appointed to the province.  These instructions indeed did not exactly correspond
with those now given; but had not the king declared that he introduced no innovation? Porson's
Imposition (Vol. i., p. 71.) is indeed, I believe, an imposition. The last line quoted (and I suppose
all the rest) can hardly be Porson's, for Mr. Langton amused Johnson, Boswell, and a dinner party
at General Oglethorpe's, on the 14th of April, 1778, with some macaronic Greek "by Joshua
Barnes, in which are to be found such comical Anglo-hellenisms as [Greek: klubboisin ebagchthae]
they were banged with clubs." Boswell's Johnson, last ed. p. 591.
  The
inquisitors, who had so recently been expressly urged to a more rigid execution of their duties
now saw themselves suddenly deserted by the secular arm, and robbed of all authority, while
in answer to their application for assistance the court could give them only empty promises.
The regent by thus endeavoring to satisfy all parties had displeased all.

During these negotiations between the court, the councils, and the states a universal spirit
of revolt pervaded the whole nation.  Men began to investigate the rights of the subject, and
to scrutinize the prerogative of kings.  "The Netherlanders were not so stupid," many were
heard to say with very little attempt at secrecy, "as not to know right well what was due from
the subject to the sovereign, and from the king to the subject; and that perhaps means would
yet be found to repel force with force, although at present there might be no appearance of
it." In Antwerp a placard was set up in several places calling upon the town council to accuse
the King of Spain before the supreme court at Spires of having broken his oath and violated
the liberties of the country, for, Brabant being a portion of the Burgundian circle, was included
in the religious peace of Passau and Augsburg.  About this time too the Calvinists published
their confession of faith, and in a preamble addressed to the king, declared that they, although
a hundred thousand strong, kept themselves nevertheless quiet, and like the rest of his subjects,
contributed to all the taxes of the country; from which it was evident, they added, that of
themselves they entertained no ideas of insurrection.  Bold and incendiary writings were publicly
disseminated, which depicted the Spanish tyranny in the most odious colors, and reminded the
nation of its privileges, and occasionally also of its powers. 

     In reply to the first of Mr. SIMPSON's Queries (Vol. ii., p. 72.)
     relative to the magnificent sequence Dies iræ, I beg to say that the
     author of it is utterly unknown. The following references may be sufficient:--Card.
     Bona, Rer.  Through this organ one restless spirit spoke to
     millions.  Besides the lampoons, which for the most part were
     composed with all the low scurrility and brutality which was the
     distinguishing character of most of the Protestant polemical
     writings of the time, works were occasionally published which
     defended religious liberty in the fullest sense of the word.]

The warlike preparations of Philip against the Porte, as well as those which, for no intelligible
reason, Eric, Duke of Brunswick, about this time made in the vicinity, contributed to strengthen
the general suspicion that the Inquisition was to be forcibly imposed on the Netherlands. 
Many of the most eminent merchants already spoke of quitting their houses and business to seek
in some other part of the world the liberty of which they were here deprived; others looked
about for a leader, and let fall hints of forcible resistance and of foreign aid.

That in this distressing position of affairs the regent might be left entirely without an adviser
and without support, she was now deserted by the only person who was at the present moment
indispensable to her, and who had contributed to plunge her into this embarrassment.  "Without
kindling a civil war," wrote to her William of Orange, "it was absolutely impossible to comply
now with the orders of the king. If, however, obedience was to be insisted upon, he must beg
that his place might be supplied by another who would better answer the expectations of his
majesty, and have more power than he had over the minds of the nation.  The zeal which on every
other occasion he had shown in the service of the crown, would, he hoped, secure his present
proceeding from misconstruction; for, as the case now stood, he had no alternative between
disobeying the king and injuring his country and himself." A place so called is situated in Butterworth,
Lancashire, and gave name to a family,--possibly extinct in the sixteenth century. A clergymam,
whose name partook both of the original and its corruption, was vicar
of Bradford, 1556, viz Dus Tho. Okden.  Egmont,
ever vacillating between the republic and the throne, ever wearying himself in the vain attempt
to unite the good citizen with the obedient subject--Egmont, who was less able than the rest
to dispense with the favor of the monarch, and to whom, therefore, it was less an object of
indifference, could not bring himself to abandon the bright prospects which were now opening
for him at the court of the regent.  The Prince of Orange had, by his supeirior intellect,
gained an influence over the regent--which great minds cannot fail to command from inferior
spirits.  His retirement had opened a void in her confidence which Count Egmont was now to
fill by virtue of that sympathy which so naturally subsists between timidity, weakness, and
good-nature. As she was as much afraid of exasperating the people by an exclusive confidence
in the adherents to the crown, as she was fearful of displeasing the king by too close an understanding
with the declared leaders of the faction, a better object for her confidence could now hardly
be presented than this very Count Egmont, of whom it could not be said that he belonged to
either of the two conflicting parties.