"Feef an' Meemuh," said Kitty Silver. "Them name don' suit me, an' them long-hair cats don'
suit me neither." Here she lifted the cover of the basket a little, and gazed nervously within.
"Look at there!" she said. "Look at the way they lookin' at me! Don't you look at me thataway,
you Feef an' Meemuh!" She clapped the lid down and fastened it. "Fixin' to jump out an' grab
me, was you?"

"I guess, maybe," said Florence, "maybe I better go ask Aunt Julia if I and Herbert can't wash
'em. I guess I better go ask her anyhow." And she ran up the steps and skipped into the house
by way of the kitchen. A moment later she appeared in the open doorway of a room upstairs.

CHAPTER TWO

It was a pretty room, lightly scented with the pink geraniums and blue lobelia and coral fuchsias
that poised, urgent with colour, in the window-boxes at the open windows. Sunshine paused delicately
just inside, where forms of pale-blue birds and lavender flowers curled up and down the cretonne
curtains; and a tempered, respectful light fell upon a cushioned chaise longue; for there fluffily
reclined, in garments of tender fabric and gentle colours, the prettiest twenty-year-old girl
in that creditably supplied town.

It must be said that no stranger would have taken Florence at first glance to be her niece,
though everybody admitted that Florence's hair was pretty. ("I'll say that for her," was the
family way of putting it.). Florence did not care for her hair herself; it was dark and thick
and long, like her Aunt Julia's; but Florence--even in the realistic presence of a mirror--preferred
to think of herself as an ashen blonde, and also as about a foot taller than she was. Persistence
kept this picture habitually in her mind, which, of course, helps to explain her feeling that
she was justified in wearing that manner of superciliousness deplored by her mother. More middle-aged
gentlemen than are suspected believe that they look like the waspen youths in the magazine
advertisements of clothes; and this impression of theirs accounts (as with Florence) for much
that is seemingly inexplicable in their behaviour.

Florence's Aunt Julia was reading an exquisitely made little book, which bore her initials
stamped in gold upon the cover; and it had evidently reached her by a recent delivery of the
mail, for wrappings bearing cancelled stamps lay upon the floor beside the chaise longue. It
was a special sort of book, since its interior was not printed, but all laboriously written
with pen and ink--poems, in truth, containing more references to a lady named Julia than have
appeared in any other poems since Herrick's. So warmly interested in the reading as to be rather
pink, though not always with entire approval, this Julia nevertheless, at the sound of footsteps,
closed the book and placed it beneath one of the cushions assisting the chaise longue to make
her position a comfortable one. Her greeting was not enthusiastic.

"What do you want, Florence?"

"I was going to ask you if Herbert and me--I mean: Was it Noble Dill gave you Fifi and Mimi,
Aunt Julia?"

"Noble Dill? No."

"I wish it was," Florence said. "I'd like these cats better if they were from Noble Dill."

"Why?" Julia inquired. "Why are you so partial to Mr. Noble Dill?"

"I think he's so much the most inter'sting looking of all that come to see you. Are you sure
it wasn't Noble Dill gave you these cats, Aunt Julia?"

A look of weariness became plainly visible upon Miss Julia Atwater's charming face. "I do wish
you'd hurry and grow up, Florence," she said.

"I do, too! What for, Aunt Julia?"

"So there'd be somebody else in the family of an eligible age. History does not teach me that they
have ever consumed much time in conventions and in passing resolutions about their rights; but they
have been very prompt to assert their rights, and to defend them too, and to take the consequences
of defeat.

Thus all history is full of startling examples of female heroism, which prove that woman's heart
is made of as stout a stuff and of as brave a mettle as that which beats within the ribs of
the coarser sex.

And if we were permitted to descend from this high plane of public
history into the private homes of the world, in which sex, think you,
should we there find the purest spirit of heroism?

Who suffers sorrow and pain with the most heroism of heart?
 Besides, if I let you go near them, the next thing Herbert
would be over here mussing around, and he can't go near anything without ruining it! It's just
in him; he can't help it."

Florence looked thoughtful for a brief moment; then she asked: "Did Newland Sanders send 'em
with the names already to them?"

"No," said Julia, emphasizing the patience of her tone somewhat. "I named them after they got
here. Mr. Sanders hasn't seen them yet. He had them shipped to me. He's coming this evening.
Anything more to-day, Florence?"

"Well, I was thinking," said Florence. "What do you think grandpa'll think about these cats?"

"I don't believe there'll be any more outrages," Julia returned, and her dark eyes showed a
moment's animation. "I told him at breakfast that the Reign of Terror was ended, and he and
everybody else had to keep away from Fifi and Mimi. Is that about all, Florence?"

"You let Kitty Silver go near 'em, though. She says she's fixing to wash 'em."

Julia smiled faintly. "I thought she would! I had to go so far as to tell her that as long
as I'm housekeeper in my father's house she'd do what I say or find some other place. She behaved
outrageously and pretended to believe the natural colour of Fifi and Mimi is gray!"

"I expect," said Florence, after pondering seriously for a little while--"I expect it would
take quite some time to dry them."

"No doubt. But I'd rather you didn't assist. I'd rather you weren't even around looking on,
Florence."

A shade fell upon her niece's face at this. "Why, Aunt Julia, I couldn't do any harm to Fifi
and Mimi just lookin' at 'em, could I?"

Julia laughed. "That's the trouble; you never do 'just look' at anything you're interested
in, and, if you don't mind my saying so, you've got rather a record, dear! Now, don't you care:
you can find lots of other pleasant things to do at home--or over at Herbert's, or Aunt Fanny's.
You run along now and----"

"Well----" Florence said, moving as if to depart.

"You might as well go out by the front door, child," Julia suggested, with a little watchful
urgency. "You come over some day when Fifi and Mimi have got used to the place, and you can
look at them all you want to."

"Well, I just----"

But as Florence seemed disposed still to linger, her aunt's manner became more severe, and
she half rose from her reclining position.

"No, I really mean it! Fifi and Mimi are royal-bred Persian cats with a wonderful pedigree,
and I don't know how much trouble and expense it cost Mr. Sanders to get them for me. They're
entirely different from ordinary cats; they're very fine and queer, and if anything happens
to them, after all the trouble papa's made over other presents I've had, I'll go straight to
a sanitarium! No, Florence, you keep away from the kitchen to-day, and I'd like to hear the
front door as you go out."

"Well," said Florence; "I do wish if these cats are as fine as all that, it was Noble Dill
that gave 'em to you. I'd like these cats lots better if he gave 'em to you, wouldn't you?"

"No, I wouldn't."

"Well----" Florence said again, and departed.

Twenty is an unsuspicious age, except when it fears that its dignity or grace may be threatened
from without; and it might have been a "bad sign" in revelation of Julia Atwater's character
if she had failed to accept the muffled metallic clash of the front door's closing as a token
that her niece had taken a complete departure for home. A supplemental confirmation came a
moment later, fainter but no less conclusive: the distant slamming of the front gate; and it
made a clear picture of an obedient Florence on her homeward way. Peace came upon Julia: she
read in her book, while at times she dropped a languid, graceful arm, and, with the pretty
hand at the slimmer end of it, groped in a dark shelter beneath her couch to make a selection,
merely by her well-experienced sense of touch, from a frilled white box that lay in concealment
there. Amen."

A doctor, had she consulted one just then, would probably have prescribed a blue pill.
There is a theory that the "Light" had been vouchsafed as the result
of a chance visit to Spurgeon's Tabernacle when she was last in England.
 Florence was no longer in her beautiful
relative's thoughts.

Florence was idly in the thoughts, however, of Mrs. Balche, the next-door neighbour to the
south. Happening to glance from a bay-window, she negligently marked how the child walked to
the front gate, opened it, paused for a moment's meditation, then hurled the gate to a vigorous
closure, herself remaining within its protection. "Odd!" Mrs. Balche murmured.

Having thus eloquently closed the gate, Florence slowly turned and moved toward the rear of
the house, quickening her steps as she went, until at a run she disappeared from the scope
of Mrs. Balche's gaze, cut off by the intervening foliage of Mr. Atwater's small orchard. Mrs.
Balche felt no great interest; nevertheless, she paused at the sound of a boy's voice, half
husky, half shrill, in an early stage of change. "What she say, Flor'nce? D'she say we could?"
But there came a warning "Hush up!" from Florence, and then, in a lowered tone, the boy's voice
said: "Look here; these are mighty funny-actin' cats. I think they're kind of crazy or somep'n.
Kitty Silver's fixed a washtub full o' suds for us."

Mrs. Balche was reminded of her own cat, and went to give it a little cream. Mrs. Balche was
a retired widow, without children, and too timid to like dogs; but after a suitable interval,
following the loss of her husband, she accepted from a friend the gift of a white kitten, and
named it Violet. It may be said that Mrs. Balche, having few interests in life, and being of
a sequestering nature, lived for Violet, and that so much devotion was not good for the latter's
health. In his youth, after having shown sufficient spirit to lose an eye during a sporting
absence of three nights and days, Violet was not again permitted enough freedom of action to
repeat this disloyalty; though, now, in his advanced middle-age, he had been fed to such a
state that he seldom cared to move, other than by a slow, sneering wavement of the tail when
friendly words were addressed to him; and consequently, as he seemed beyond all capacity or
desire to run away, or to run at all, Mrs. Balche allowed him complete liberty of action.

She found him asleep upon her "back porch," and placed beside him a saucer of cream, the second
since his luncheon. Then she watched him affectionately as he opened his eye, turned toward
the saucer his noble Henry-the-Eighth head with its great furred jowls, and began the process
of rising for more food, which was all that ever seemed even feebly to rouse his mind. When
he had risen, there was little space between him anywhere and the floor.

Violet took his cream without enthusiasm, pausing at times and turning his head away. In fact,
he persisted only out of an incorrigible sensuality, and finally withdrew a pace or two, leaving
creamy traces still upon the saucer. With a multitude of fond words his kind mistress drew
his attention to these, whereupon, making a visible effort, he returned and disposed of them.

"Dat's de 'itty darlin'," she said, stooping to stroke him. "Eat um all up nice clean. Dood
for ole sweet sin!" She continued to stroke him, and Violet half closed his eye, but not with
love or serenity, for he simultaneously gestured with his tail, meaning to say: "Oh, do take
your hands off o' me!" Then he opened the eye and paid a little attention to sounds from the
neighbouring yard. The meetings went on: some ten, twelve, fifteen occurred,--still no breach
of the peace, no disturbance. The language, indeed, became gradually more seditious--more daring
and ferocious: but, as an attempt to put down the first meeting by force would have been considered
a wanton act of oppression, and a direct interference with the subject's right to petition,
it became a very difficult practical question, at what moment any
legal notice could be taken by prosecution, or executive notice by
proclamation, to put down such meetings.



From beyond the fence came the murmurings of a boy and a girl in hushed but urgent conversation;
and with these sounds there mingled watery agitations, splashings and the like, as well as
those low vocalizings that Violet had recognized; but suddenly there were muffled explosions,
like fireworks choked in feather beds; and the human voices grew uncontrollably somewhat louder,
so that their import was distinguishable. "Ow!" "Hush up, can't you? You want to bring the
whole town to--ow!" "Hush up yourself!" "Oh, goodness!" "Look out! Don't let her----" "Well,
look what she's doin' to me, can't you?" "For Heavenses' sakes, catch holt and----Ow!"

Then came a husky voice, inevitably that of a horrified coloured person hastening from a distance:
"Oh, my soul!" There was a scurrying, and the girl was heard in furious yet hoarsely guarded
vehemence: "Bring the clo'es prop! Bring the clo'es prop! We can poke that one down from the
garage, anyway. Oh, my goodness, look at 'er go!"

Mrs. Balche shook her head. "Naughty children!" she said, as she picked up the saucer and went
to the kitchen door, which she held open for Violet to enter. "Want to come with mamma?"

But Violet had lost even the faint interest in life he had shown a few moments earlier. He
settled himself to another stupor in the sun.

"Well, well," Mrs. Balche said indulgently. "Afterwhile shall have some more nice keem."

       *       *       *       *       *

Sunset was beginning to be hinted, two hours later, when, in another quarter of the town, a
little girl of seven or eight, at play on the domestic side of an alley gate, became aware
of an older girl regarding her fixedly over the top of the gate. The little girl felt embarrassed
and paused in her gayeties, enfolding in her arms her pet and playmate. "Howdy' do," said the
stranger, in a serious tone. "What'll you take for that cat?"

The little girl made no reply, and the stranger, opening the gate, came into the yard. She
looked weary, rather bedraggled, yet hurried: her air was predominantly one of anxiety. "I'll
give you a quarter for that cat," she said. "I want an all-white cat, but this one's only got
that one gray spot over its eye, and I don't believe there's an all-white cat left in town,
leastways that anybody's willing to part with. I'll give you twenty-five cents for it. I haven't
got it with me, but I'll promise to give it to you day after to-morrow." 

We may, however, take this opportunity of expressing our opinion, that there is not a shadow of
foundation for the charges of blundering and incompetency which have
been so liberally brought against the Irish Attorney-General.



