Life hurried me on: glowing hours and months succeeded each other. In the autumn I fell in
love. I came to the consciousness of this, not gradually, but all in one instant. I had no
chance of drawing back, for it was already fully completed before I realised it. I came to
the realisation of it through a dream (sleep-dreams were always exceedingly rare with me):
on this occasion I dreamed a friend showed me the picture of a girl to whom she said this lover
(he had been my lover for a year) was engaged. I awoke, sobbing with anguish. I could not disguise
from myself the fact that I must be in love. When the time came to speak of it to my parents,
my mother would not hear of the marriage--there was no money: I must make another choice. Two
brilliant opportunities offered themselves--money--position; but I could not bring myself to
think of either. Love was everything: a prolonged secret engagement followed. I went into Society
just as before. At this time an aptitude for "fortune-telling" showed itself: it amused my
friends--I told fortunes both by palmistry, which I studied quite seriously, and by cards.
With both I went largely by inspiration. I found this "inspiration" varied with the individual.
There were many persons to whom I could give the most extraordinarily accurate details of past,
present, and future; others moderately so; others were a total blank, in which case I either
had to remain silent or "try to make up." I got such a reputation for this--I was so sought
after for it by even total strangers--that in a couple of years I pushed it all far away from
me as an intolerable nuisance.

V

The Faith that had been growing up in me was of a very different form from that which I had
had before: wider, purer, infinitely more powerful, and, though I did not like to remember
the pain of them, I felt that those struggling years of doubt and negation had been worth while--without
those struggles I felt I never could have had so powerful a faith as I now had. God was at
an indefinite and infinite distance, but His Existence was a thing of complete certainty for me.

Of the mode and means of Connection with Him I had no smallest knowledge or even conception.
I addressed Him with words from the brain and the lips. An insuperable wall perpetually separated
me from Him.

Now my father became ill with heart trouble. Doctors, nurses, all the dreaded paraphernalia
of sickness pervaded the house. During two terrible years he lingered on. Heart-broken at the
sight of his sufferings, I hardly left his bedside. Finally death released him. But my health,
which had always been good, was now completely broken down; I became a semi-invalid, always
suffering, too delicate to marry. Under pressure of this continued wretchedness I sank into
a nerveless condition of mere dumb endurance--a passive acceptance of the miseries of life
"as willed by God," I assured myself.

I entered a stagnant state of mere resignation, whereas accompanying the resignation there
should have been a forward-piercing endeavour to reach out and attain a higher spiritual level
through Jesus Christ: a persistent effort to light my lamp at the Spiritual Flame to which
each must bring his own lamp, for it is not lit for him by the mere outward ceremony of Baptism--that
ceremony is but the Invitation to come to the Light: for each one individually, in full consciousness
of desire, that lighting must be obtained from the Saviour. I had not obtained this light.
I did not comprehend that it was necessary. I understood nothing; I was a spiritual savage.
Vague, miserable thoughts, gloomy self-introspections, merely fatigue the vitality without
assisting the soul. What is required is a persistent endeavour to establish an inwardly felt
relationship first to the Man Jesus. His Personality, His Characteristics are to be drawn into
the secret places of the heart by means of the natural sympathy which plays between two hearts
that both know love and suffering, and hope and dejection. Sympathy established--love will
soon follow. Later, an iron energy to overcome will be required. The supreme necessity of the
soul before being filled with love is to maintain the will of the whole spiritual being in
conformity with the Will of God. In the achievement of this she is under incessant assistance:
in fact everything in the spiritual life is a gift--as in the physical: for who can produce
his own sight or his own growth? In the physical these are automatic--in the spiritual they
are accomplished only, as it were, "by request," and this request a deep all-pervading desire.

We cannot of our own will climb the spiritual heights, neither can we climb them without using
our will. It is Will flowing towards Will which carries us by the power of Jesus Christ to
the Goal.

VI

With recovered health, I married, and knew great happiness; but as a bride of four months I
had to part from my husband, who went to the South African War. Always, always this terrible
pain of love that must part. Always it was love that seemed to me the most beautiful thing
in life, and always it was love that hurt me most. He was away for fifteen months. I made no
spiritual advance whatever. Mystified by so much pain, I now began to regard God if not as
the actual Author of all pain, at any rate as the Permitter of all pain. More and more I fell
back in alarm at the discovery of the depths of my own capacities for suffering. A tremendous
fear of God now commenced to grow up in me, which so increased that after a few years I listened
with astonishment when I heard people say they were afraid of any person, even a burglar! I
could no longer understand feeling fear for anyone or anything save God. All my actions were
now governed solely by this sense of weighty, immediate fear of Him. This continued for some
ten years.

When my husband at last returned from the War we took up again our happy married life, and
we lived together without a cross word, in a wonderful world of our own, as lovers do. It was
remarkable that we were so happy, for we had no interests in common. My husband loved all sports
and all games, whereas interest in those things was frankly incomprehensible to me. In the
winter, when he was out in the hunting-field, I spent much time by myself; but I was never
dull, for I could walk out amongst Nature and indulge in my pastime, if the weather were fine:
and if not, I could observe and admire everything that grew and lived close at hand in the
hedgerows and fields, and I would work for hours with my needle, for then I could think; I
worked hard in the garden.

A dreadful question now often presented itself to me: Had I really a soul at all, or was I
merely a passing shadow, here momentarily for God's amusement? If I had an eternal soul, where
did it live--in my head with my brain as a higher part of my mind?

Men had souls, I was sure of that; and they asserted the possession of them very positively--but
women? I understood Mahomed grudgingly granted them a half-soul, and that only conditionally.
Scriptures spoke harshly of women; Paul was bitter against them; all the sins and troubles
of the world were laid upon their delicate and beautiful shoulders. In Revelation I found no
mention whatever of Woman in the life of the Resurrection.

All this hurt me. What profound injustice--to suffer so much and to receive no recognition
whatever whilst men walked off with all the joys after leading very questionable lives! Why
continue to struggle to please God when His interest in me would so soon be over? I went through
very real and great spiritual sufferings, and temptations to throw myself again solely into
world-interests, to console myself with the here and now, for I had the means: it was all to
my hand. I swayed to and fro: at one time I felt very hard towards God, terribly hurt by this
love-betrayal. But when I looked at the beauties of Nature and the glories of that endless
sky, ah, my heart melted with tenderness and admiration for the marvellous Maker of it all.
Truly, He was worthy of any sacrifice upon my part. If my poor, tiny, suffering life afforded
Him amusement, I was willing to have it so. After all--for what wretched, ugly, and miserable
men women frequently sacrificed themselves without getting any other reward for it than neglect
and indifference. How much better to sacrifice oneself to the All-Perfect, All-Beautiful God!

I finally resigned myself entirely and completely to this point of view, and, having done so,
I thus addressed, in all reverence and earnestness, the Deity:--

"Almighty God, if it is Thy Will to blot out Woman from Paradise I most humbly assure Thee
of this--Man will miss her sorely; and Thou Thyself, Almighty God, when Thou dost visit Paradise,
wilt miss her also!"

After this I seldom said any private prayers, for I was not of the Acceptable Sex. But I paid
a public respect to God in the church, where I worshipped Him with profound reverence and great
sadness. But I thought of Him in my heart constantly, with all those tender, loving, longing
thoughts which are the heart's bouquet held out to God.

Happiness for me, then, must be found entirely in this world, and I found it in my love for
my husband. Happiness was that which the whole world was looking for; but I could not fail
to notice more and more the ridiculous picture presented by Society in its pretences of being
the means of finding this happiness. None of its ardent devotees were "happy" people; they
were excited, egotistical, intensely vain and selfish, often bitter and disappointed, filled
with a demon of competition, jealous, and full of empty, insincere smiles. I perceived the
chagrins from which they secretly suffered--the tears behind the laughter. I was not in the
least deceived or impressed by any of them, but wondered how they managed to hang together
and deceive each other. More and more I looked for purely mental pleasures. Mind was everything.
I now began to despise my body--I almost hated it as an incubus! Social successes or failures
grew to be a matter of complete indifference to me, and social life resolved itself into being
solely the means of bringing mind into contact with mind. The question of fashionable environment
ceased to exist for me, but the question of how and where to meet with thinking minds was what
concerned me: it was not an easy one to solve in the usual conditions of country life, with
its sports and its human-animal interests.

Finally, total mental solitude closed around me. In spite of my doubt as to the existence of
a woman-soul, I still felt the same piercing desire and need for God--the acquisition of knowledge
in no way lessened this pain. What, after all, is knowledge by itself? The light of the highest
human intelligence seems hardly greater than the wan lamp of a diminutive glow-worm, surrounded
by the vastness of the night. In sorrow, in trouble, in pain, could knowledge or the mind do
so much more for me than the despised body? No, something more than the intelligence was needed
to give life any sense of adequacy: even human love was insufficient. God Himself was needed,
and the ever-recurring necessity would force itself upon me of the need for a personal direct
connection with God.

I continued to find it utterly impossible to achieve this. Mere faith by no means fulfilled
my requirements. God, then, remained inaccessible--the mind fell back from every attempt to
reach Him. He was unknowable, yet not unthinkable--that is to say, He was not unthinkable as
Being, but only in particularisation and in realisation. I could know Him to Be; but in that
alone where was any consolation?--I found it totally inadequate. It was some form of personal
Contact that was needed; but if my mind failed to reach this, with what else should I reach
it? Ah, I was infinitely too small for this terrible mystery; but, small as I was, how I could
suffer! Why this suffering? Why would He not show Himself? Harsh, rebellious, criticising thoughts
frequently invaded me: the whole scheme of Nature and of life at times appeared cruel, unreasonably
so. All the old ever-to-be-repeated cycle of bitter human thoughts had to be gone all through
again in my own individual atom. Here and there the bitterness might vary: as, for instance,
the collapse and corruption of the body with its hideous finale never caused me distress. I
had become too indifferent to the body; but I found that most persons clung to it with extraordinary
tenacity, indeed appeared to regard it as their most valuable possession! What I did resent,
and was deeply mystified by, was the capacity for suffering and pain which had no balance in
any corresponding joy. It was idle to say that the joy of festivities, even of human love,
equalled the anguish of grief over others, or the sufferings of physical ill-health. They did
not counterbalance it; sorrow was more weighty than joy, and far more durable. Later I became
convinced that there did exist a full equivalent of joy, as against pain, and that I merely
had no knowledge of how to find it.

Years succeeded each other in this way, bringing greater loosening of earth-ties, more abstraction,
certainly no improvement of character.

My husband's duties as a soldier took us to many parts of the world. During a visit to Africa
I was struck by lightning, and for ten days my sufferings were almost unendurable; every nerve
seemed electrocuted. It was long before I quite recovered. Whilst this illness lasted, though
it caused him no inconvenience and he led his life exactly as usual, I yet noticed a change
in my husband's love. I was deeply pained, almost horrified, by this revelation of the natural
imperfection of human love: profoundly saddened, I asked myself was it nothing but lust which
had inspired and dictated all the poems of the world? I thought more and more of Jesus' love;
I began to know that nothing less than His perfect love could satisfy me. In this illness I
was tremendously alone.

VII

I commenced to meditate upon the life and the character and the love of Jesus Christ. I was
now about thirty-six. Gradually He became for me a secret Mind-Companion. I began to rely upon
this companionship--though it appeared intensely one-sided, for at first it seemed always to
be I who gave! Nevertheless I found a growing calm arising from this apparently so one-sided
friendship. A subtle assistance and comfort came to me, it was impossible to say how, yet it
came from this companionship as it came from nothing else.

That Jesus Christ was God I knew to be the faith of the Church, but that He actually was so
I felt no conviction of whatever: indeed, it was incomprehensible to me. I thought of Him as
a Perfect Man, with divine powers. He was my Jesus. I denied nothing, for I was far too small
and ignorant to venture to do so: I kept a perfectly open mind and loved Him for Himself, as
the Man Jesus.

This went on for some years. In all my spiritual advancement I was incredibly slow!

