It was soon after her return to San Francisco that Mrs. Stevenson interested herself in the
story of a half-caste Samoan girl, a sort of modern Cinderella, of whom she had heard before
leaving the islands. This girl, who was an orphan, had been left a fortune in lands and money
in Samoa by her American father, and when she was five years of age had been sent to San Francisco
by her guardian to be educated. There, through a combination of circumstances, she disappeared,
and her property in Samoa lay unclaimed, while the rents went to the benefit of others. When
Mrs. Stevenson heard of this she determined to make a search for the girl, and as soon as she
reached San Francisco set out to do so. After the rounds of all the private schools and seminaries
had been made without success, her friend, Miss Chismore, thought of trying the charity orphan
asylums, and in one of these, a Catholic convent school for orphans, she found a girl bearing
a somewhat similar name to the lost one. Mrs. Stevenson, taking with her a Samoan basket and
some shells, immediately went out to see her. At the school a small, dark, shy girl was brought
by the sisters into the visitors' room, and at sight of the Samoan basket she gave a joyful
cry of recognition. The long-lost heiress was found, living as a pauper in a charity school!
The difficulty then was to prove her claim to the property and secure it for her. In her determination
to do this Mrs. Stevenson went to Washington, where, after seeing senators, priests of the
Catholic Church, and other persons in authority, she finally succeeded in having the girl's
lands, with some of the back rents, restored to her. All this was like a fairy story to the
kind sisters at the convent, and their joy was unbounded at seeing their little pauper pupil
thus romantically transformed into the rich princess. Meanwhile Mrs. Stevenson invited the
young lady to her house, gave a party in her honour, helped her buy clothing suitable to her
new station, and, when the time came for her triumphant departure to claim her island possessions,
went to see her off on the steamer. As long as this little Cinderella lived she never forgot
the fairy godmother who had worked this wonderful change in her life.

It was during this period that the regrettable incident of Mr. Henley's attack on the memory
of Stevenson occurred--an incident that attracted a great deal more attention in England than
in America, where it was forgotten almost as soon as it happened. Mrs. Stevenson herself always
ascribed this strange act on the part of her husband's old friend to his state of health, which
had never been good and was rapidly growing worse; and, because she believed he had become
embittered by his misfortunes, she bore no rancour. In referring to it she repeated one of
her favourite sayings, "To know all is to forgive all," and when, after Mr. Henley's death,
his widow wrote to her asking for letters to be published in his "life," she sent them with
a kind and affectionate note.

While the house in San Francisco was building, Mrs. Stevenson went away for a time, accompanied
only by her maid, for a camping trip in the Santa Cruz Mountains, down among the redwoods.
The delights of the place where they camped, in a shady little valley about ten miles from
Gilroy, soon won her heart completely, and she decided to purchase a small ranch there for
a permanent summer home. For the first season she lived there in true campers' fashion, which
she describes in a letter to her daughter: "At the ranch I have one tent with a curtain in
the middle. We sleep on one side of the curtain and sit on the other. I have only the most
primitive facilities for cooking, and the butcher is twelve miles away over a mountain road.
He is anything but dependable, and when I send for a piece of roast beef I may get a soup bone
of veal, or a small bit of liver, or a side of breakfast bacon, which I keep hung in a tree.
I cannot keep flour on a tree, so am dependent on the boarding-house [a small summer resort
about a quarter of a mile distant] for my bread, and if they are short I have no bread. If
I find I lack something essential I have to spend a whole day driving to town through the deep
dust to get it. But of course I am going to do all kinds of things by and by." The truth was
that this sort of life was exactly to her taste, and the wilder and rougher it was the better
it suited her. She was always, to the end of her days, the pioneer woman, and the greensward
of the woods went better to her feet than carpeted halls.

Afterwards tents were put up for the accommodation of her family, and every spring, after the
rains were over, they all moved down to take up a delightful out-of-door life such as can scarcely
be enjoyed anywhere in the world except in California. Cooking was done in the open air, and
meals were taken at a long table spread in a deep glen, where the trees were so thick that
it was pleasantly cool even on the hottest days.

As time went on the mistress of this sylvan paradise grew more and more attached to it, and
she at length decided to build more permanent quarters. First of all, she made a model of a
house out of match boxes, with pebbles for the foundation wall, all glued together, painted
and complete. Then she hired a country carpenter and built her house--a pleasant little dwelling,
with a wide veranda extending in country fashion around two sides of it.

In building the foundation wall boulders from the stream were used, and many were found bearing
bold imprints of fossil ferns, birds, and snakes. Mrs. Stevenson was delighted to have these
reminders of a past age for her wall, but, alas, during her absence the stones were all cemented
in place with the nice smooth sides outward and the fossils turned inward.

Although it was so different from the tropic island that had now become but a tender memory,
yet there was much about this place that recalled Vailima days--the sweet seclusion, the rich
greenery all about, the music of the little tinkling stream, and, above all, the morning song
of the multitudes of birds. It was for this, and perhaps to make a link between her California
home and that other far across the wide Pacific that she chose to call the little ranch in
the Santa Cruz Mountains Vanumanutagi, vale of the singing birds.

At Vanumanutagi Mrs. Stevenson led a simple life, spending most of her time out-of-doors and
occupying herself with plans for the planting and improvement of the land. The house was simply
furnished, and the country people were charmed with the gay chintz and bright wall-paper, the
brick fireplace, and the general appropriateness of it all. As it was not large, tents were
put up for the family and guests to sleep in.

Even this peaceful spot had its excitements, for in the autumn, when the undergrowth everywhere
was as dry as tinder, its quiet was sometimes disturbed by the outbreak of California's summer
terror--forest-fires. One of the worst of these happened when Mrs. Stevenson was at the ranch
with only her sister Elizabeth[70] and a maid. It came suddenly, and the first they knew of
it was the sight of what they took to be sea fog, rolling and tumbling over the tops of the
hills. They soon knew it for what it was when it came pouring down into the valley and they
began to choke with its acrid smell. Presently horsemen came galloping by on their way to warn
ranchers of the fire, and every little while a man would come out and report the progress made
in checking it. It was an oppressive, hidden danger, for nothing could be seen from the valley
of the actual flames through the thick suffocating curtain of smoke that hung over all. The
only avenue of escape was by way of the road to Gilroy, and the fire threatened momentarily
to cut this off. Not wishing to abandon the place to its fate, Mrs. Stevenson thought out a
plan for saving their lives in the last emergency by wrapping up in wet blankets and crouching
in a sort of hole or low place in an open field near the house. Fortunately the fire was stopped
before this became necessary.

              [Footnote 70: The late Mrs. E. E. Mitchell, of Nebraska
              City, Nebraska.]

It was while she was living at the ranch that Mrs. Stevenson began to write the introductions
to her husband's works in the biographical edition brought out by Charles Scribner's Sons.
As she had but a modest opinion of her abilities, she undertook this work with the greatest
reluctance, and in a letter to Mr. Scribner she remarks, "It appalls me to think of my temerity
in writing these introductions." Yet I believe that everyone who reads them will feel that
a new and personal interest has been added to each one of his books by her graphic story of
the circumstances of its writing.

Among the best loved of the infrequent guests who braved the long, hot, dusty drive from Gilroy
to the ranch was the young California writer, Frank Norris. During his visits there Mrs. Stevenson
became much attached to him, and he in turn was so charmed with the place and the life that
he determined to buy a ranch in the neighbourhood. As I have already said, when an opportunity
offered he bought the Douglas Sanders place, Quien Sabe Rancho, intending to spend all his
summers there. Writing to Mrs. Stevenson about his plans in his gay boyish fashion, he says:

"My dear Mrs. Stevenson:

"This is to tell you that our famous round-the-world trip has been curtailed to a modest little
excursion Samoa-wards and back, or mebbe we get as far as Sydney. We wont go to France, but
will come to Quien Sabe in February--FEBRUARY! We find in figuring up our stubs that we have
a whole lot more money than we thought, but the blame stuff has got to be transferred from
our New York bank to here, which (because we went about it wrong in the first place), can't
be done for another two weeks. We will make the first payment on Quien Sabe before October
1st--$250. Will you ask Lloyd to let us know--or I mean to bear us in mind--if he hears of
a horse for sale so we could buy the beast when we come up next February. Meanwhile will keep
you informed as to 'lightning change' programme we are giving these days.

          "Ever thine (I've clean forgot me nyme)."

The Norris cabin stands high on the mountain slope, and is reached by a steep winding road
leading up from Vanumanutagi Ranch.

To this ideal spot, this secluded little lodge in the wilderness, Frank Norris hoped to bring
his wife and little daughter and spend many happy and fruitful summers. Here he intended to
work on the last volume of his series of the wheat trilogy--the story of the hunger of the
people, which was to be called by the appropriate name of The Wolf. His joy in his new purchase
was unbounded, and many improvements to the cabin and ranch were projected. In all these plans
Mrs. Stevenson took a more than neighbourly interest, for she spent time and money in helping
to make the place comfortable and attractive. Among other things she built a curbing around
the well, using for the purpose boulders from the inexhaustible supply in the bed of the stream,
and, to have all complete, even sent to Boston for a real "old oaken bucket." At just the right
intervals along the steep road to the cabin, measured off by her own indefatigable feet, she
placed rustic seats, where the tired climber might rest.

But alas! All these pleasing hopes came to naught, for within a short time after buying the
ranch sudden death cut him off in the flower of his youth and the first unfolding of his genius.
This was a sad blow to Mrs. Stevenson, for she had become much attached to the brilliant and
lovable young writer. Sometime afterwards she thought of putting up a memorial to him on the
little ranch where he had hoped to spend many happy years. Having decided that it should take
the form of a stone seat, bearing a suitable inscription, she went to work in conjunction with
Gelett Burgess to make the design. The site chosen for the seat is upon a small level spot
a few yards below the cabin, at the side of the winding road leading up from the Stevenson
ranch. In carrying out this project she took a melancholy pleasure, as she writes in a letter
to Mr. Charles Scribner, dated 1902: "I am building a memorial seat to poor Frank Norris. With
the assistance of a couple of men I have gathered a lot of boulders from the bed of a stream,
and from these we have fashioned a bench to hold six or eight people, and set it where the
view is glorious. I have helped lay the stones, and have dabbled in mortar until I can hardly
use my hands to write. This sort of work is so much more interesting than scratching with a
pen. In the joy of even so poor a creation I forget the sad purpose of it, and am as happy
as one hopes to be who has lived as long as I."

Before these two friends--he in the springtime of his days, she in the mellow autumn of maturity--passed
away, they were persuaded to record their voices in a phonograph, but it was a useless effort,
for no one who loved them has ever been able to endure to listen to their spirit voices, as
it were, speaking from the other world.

CHAPTER XI

TRAVELS IN MEXICO AND EUROPE.

Eight years, divided between the house "like a fort on a cliff" in San Francisco and the sylvan
solitude of the little ranch tucked away in its corner in the mountains of the Holy Cross,
slipped by happily enough. Now and again the wandering mood came back, but, except for one
visit to France and England, Mrs. Stevenson confined her journeyings to the American continent.

One of these excursions led her to Mexico--a country that she found more interesting than any
she had ever visited in Europe. Sometimes I think this may have been because of some primitive
element in her own nature that responded to the traditions of that strange land--so aged in
history, so young in civilization--but, anyway, she told me that she felt a genuine thrill
there such as she had never experienced in any of the historic places of the Old World. At
the tomb of Napoleon she remained cold, but at the "tree of the sad night," where Cortés is
said to have wept bitter tears on that dark and rainy night away back in 1520, her imagination
was deeply touched. At the church of Guadalupe she looked at the pitifully crude paintings
and other thank-offerings of the simple devotees with deep and sympathetic interest.

Much more interesting than the city of Mexico she found the quaint and ancient town of Cuernavaca,
where Maximilian was wont to come with his Empress to enjoy the delights of the famous Borda
Gardens. These gardens, though fallen from their first high estate, were still very beautiful
at the time of Mrs. Stevenson's visit.

Of these pleasant days in Cuernavaca she writes in a letter to her daughter:

"I have a little plant from the garden where Carlota lived, which I think is a climbing syringa.
We go round nearly every evening to the palace built by Cortés, in one room of which he strangled
one of his mistresses.... I had always supposed Maximilian to be a most exemplary person, but
he seems to have lived in a palace some three miles from here with a beautiful Mexican girl,
while poor Carlota was left alone in town in the Borda Gardens.... Everybody goes barefoot
here, though all dressed up otherwise, and everybody wears the rebozo.[71] This morning I killed
a scorpion on the wall alongside the bed, and the other day I also assisted in the killing
of a tremendous tarantula in the middle of the road. We stood far off and threw stones at it.
None of mine hit the mark, but I threw like mad.... I hope you were not frightened by the news
of the earthquake here. We got a good shake but no harm done. Just a little south of us there
has been terrible damage--a whole town destroyed and people killed. Here all the people ran
into the streets, and kneeling, held out their hands towards the churches that contain their
miraculous images.... We have had a 'blessing of the animals' at the cathedral, where cats,
dogs, eagles, doves, cocks and hens, horses, colts, donkeys, cows and bulls, dyed every color
of the rainbow and wearing wreaths of artificial flowers round their necks, were brought to
receive this sacrament. I wanted to take Burney [her little Scotch terrier], but feared his
getting some contagion, so gave it up, and now my Burney has forever lost the chance of becoming
a holy, blessed dog.... The native people here are very abject, and seem almost entirely without
intellect; yet they are the only servants to be had unless one sends to California, and they
make life a desperate business. The only spirit I have seen in any of them was to-day, when
a native policeman tried to get up a fight between his own huge dog and my little Burney. Of
course Burney the valiant was ready for the fray and would probably have disposed of the big
dog had I not run up, closing and clubbing my parasol as I came. The policeman thought I was
going to strike him, and for one second stood up to me fiercely, saying 'No Señorita! No Señorita!'
Then his knees suddenly gave way and he and his dog and his friend who was standing by to see
fair play utterly collapsed."

              [Footnote 71: The rebozo is a scarf or shawl worn
              wound about the head and shoulders.]

Steeped as the country was in old tradition, and far removed as it seemed from all knowledge
of the outside world, the name of Robert Louis Stevenson had penetrated to its inmost recesses,
and its people were pleased to bestow honour upon his widow. With which commandment the Prince being
set (p. 362) all in a fury, all chafed and in a terrible manner came up to the place of judgment,
men thinking that he would have slain the Judge, or have done to him some damage; but the
Judge, sitting still without moving, declaring the majesty of the
King's place of judgment, and with an assured and bold countenance,
had to the Prince these words following: 'Sir, remember yourself:
I keep here the place of the King your sovereign lord and father,
to whom ye owe double obedience; wherefore eftsoons in his name I
charge you desist of your wilfulness and unlawful enterprise, and
from henceforth give good example to those which hereafter shall be
your proper subjects.

And now, for your contempt and disobedience, go you to the prison of the King's Bench, whereunto
I commit you; and remain ye there prisoner until the pleasure of the King your father be further
known.' With which words being abashed, and also wondering at the marvellous gravity of that
worshipful Justice, the noble Prince laying his weapon apart, doing reverence, departed; and
went to the King's Bench, as he was commanded.

Whereat his servants disdaining, came and showed the King all the whole affair. Whereat he awhile
studying, after as a man all ravished with gladness, holding his hands and eyes up towards heaven
abraided, saying with a loud voice, 'O merciful God, how much am I above other men bound to
your infinite goodness, specially that (p. 363) ye have given me a Judge who feareth not to
minister justice, and also a son who can suffer semblably, and obey justice!'"

Sir John Hawkins,[326] when he cites this passage as evidence of an
ebullition of wanton insolence and unrestrained impetuosity, in illustration
of the character of Henry, to whom he ascribes the unjustifiable suppression
of an act of parliament, lays himself open to blame in more points
than one.

In the first place, he ought not, as regards the suppression of an act of parliament, to have
charged upon Henry, as a self-willed act, what, to say the very least, was equally the act
of the whole Privy Council; and then he ought not to have endeavoured to brand him with disgrace
on the testimony of a witness who wrote nearly a century and a half after the asserted event.

[Footnote 326: Pleas of the crown.]

Hall, who wrote only at the commencement of the reign of Edward VI, (the first edition of his work
having appeared in 1548,) thus states the charge against Henry:

"For imprisonment of one[327] of his wanton mates and unthrifty playfaires,
he strake the Chief Justice with his fist on his face; for which offence
he was not only committed to streight prison, but also of his father
put out of the Privy Council and banished the (p. 364) court, and
his brother Thomas Duke of Clarence elected president of the King's
counsail, to his great displeasure and open reproach."

[Footnote 327: Shakspeare represents Henry as having given the Chief Justice the blow some time
before the expedition against the Archbishop of York.--2 Hen. IV. act i.]

Perhaps it might be argued without unfairness, that the great variation and discrepancy in the
traditions respecting this affair in the Prince's life would induce
us to believe that, at all events, something of the kind actually
took place; that, without some foundation in real fact, so extraordinary
a transaction could never have been invented; that, whatever difficulty
we may find in filling up the outline, the broad reality of an insolent
and violent bearing shown by the Prince to a Judge on the bench ought
to be admitted; and that any variation as to the person of the Judge,
or the court over which he presided, or the time at which the incident
might have taken place, or the degree of insult and personal violence
exhibited, is unessential, and proves only the inaccuracy in detail
of various accounts, all of which combine, independently of those
minute circumstances, to establish the main point.

To this argument it might also be added, that the very circumstance of an inspection of original
documents presenting names of real living persons, identically the same with those which Shakspeare
has given to the minor heroes of his drama, (such as Bardolf, Pistol, &c.) intimates a knowledge
on his part of the transactions of those times which entitles him to a higher degree of credit,
as seeming to imply that he might have had (p. 365) recourse to documents which are now lost:

"Sir, Here comes the nobleman who committed the Prince for striking him about BARDOLF."
 The climate is as nearly perfect as a climate
can be, and Mrs. Stevenson often said that if the world ever learned of the magic healing in
that country there would be a great rush to the peninsula, so long despised as a hopeless desert.

              [Footnote 72: Sausal (pronounced sowsál) is a Spanish
              word meaning willow grove.]

There was only a little cottage of a very humble sort on the ranch and supplies were hard to
get, but she loved it and was never better in health than when she was at Sausal. At this time
she returned to San Francisco, but the following winter she went back to take possession and
spent some time there. Writing to Mr. Charles Scribner, she says: "I am living in a sweet lost
spot known as the Rancho El Sausal, some six miles from Ensenada in Lower California. If I
had no family I should stop here forever; except for the birds, and the sea, and the wind,
it is so heavenly quiet, and I so love peace." Running through the place was a little stream,
the banks of which were thick with the scarlet "Christmas berry," so well known in the woods
of Upper California; multitudes of birds--canaries, linnets, larks, mocking-birds--all sang
together outside the door in an amazing chorus; and on the beach near by the sea beat its soft
rhythmic measure.

They were very close to nature at Sausal, but though its situation was so isolated they had
no fear, for the penalties for any sort of crime were terrific. Burglary, or even house-breaking,
were punished with death, and one could hardly frown at another without going to prison for
it. Sometimes they were surprised by the sudden appearance of a man, tired and dusty, dashing
up on a foam-covered horse and asking for food. To such an unfortunate they always gave meat
and drink, and when the rurales[73] presently galloped up and demanded to know whether they
had seen an escaped prisoner they swallowed their conscientious scruples and answered "No!"
Personally they met with nothing but the most punctilious courtesy from the Mexican officials.
When Mrs. Stevenson received a Christmas box from her daughter, the chivalric comandante at
Ensenada, in order to make sure that she should have it in time, sent it out to Sausal magnificently
conducted by three mounted policemen.

              [Footnote 73: Mexican mounted police.]

When she left this peaceful spot in the spring of 1906 to return to San Francisco she little
thought that she was moving towards one of the most dramatic incidents in her eventful life.
All went as usual on the journey until they had passed Santa Barbara on the morning of the
fateful day, April 18, when vague rumours of some great disaster began to circulate in a confused
way among the passengers. Soon they knew the dreadful truth, though in the swift running of
the train they themselves had not felt the earthquake, and it was not long before concrete
evidence confirmed the reports, for at Salinas they were halted by the broken Pajaro bridge.
At that place Mrs. Stevenson slept the night on the train, and the next day she hired a team
and drove by a roundabout way to Gilroy, near which, it will be remembered, her ranch, Vanumanutagi,
was situated. There they learned that San Francisco was burning, and while Mr. Field made his
way as best he could to the doomed city, she camped in a little hotel in Gilroy waiting for
news--a prey meanwhile to the most intense fears for the safety of various members of her family,
from whom she was entirely cut off.

While she waited as patiently as might be in the little country town, there were strenuous
times in the burning city, but, as telegraph wires were all down and no mails were going out,
she was compelled to remain in suspense until three days later, when the fire was subdued and
Mr. Field was able to get back to her with the news that her family were all safe and her house
unharmed. The story of the rescue of her house from the flames has been curiously contorted
by persons who have attempted to write about it without knowing the facts. The real saviors
of Mrs. Stevenson's house were her nephews and Mr. Field, and even they might have lost the
day had it not been for a providential wind that blew in strongly from the sea against the
advancing wall of flame. For three days and nights they looked down from their high post upon
the raging furnace below and anxiously watched the progress of the fire as it leaped from street
to street in its mad race up the hill, and when at last the two houses and a large wooden reservoir
immediately opposite went roaring up all hope seemed gone. In the end it was through a mere
trifle that the tide of fortune was turned in their favour. In the garden there was a small
cement pool, the home of a tiny fish answering to the name of Jack. When the water in the pool
was slopped over by the earthquake poor Jack was tossed some yards away upon the grass, whence
he was rescued, alive and wriggling, and restored to his own element, only to be killed later
by some thoughtless refugee who washed his hands in the water with soap. The half bucket or
so of water remaining in the pool helped to save the day, for the fire fighters dipped rugs
and sacks in it, and, climbing to the flat roof, took turns in dashing through the scorching
heat to beat the cornices when they began to smoke. Even so, the escape was so narrow that
at times it seemed hopeless, and the rescuers took the precaution to dig a hole in the garden
and bury the silverware, the St. Gaudens plaque, and other valuables.

When the three days' conflagration had finally worn itself out and the tired and smoke-begrimed
fighters could take account, they found the house and its contents safe, except for a huge
hole in the roof where the earthquake had thrown down a large heavy chimney, piling up the
bricks on the bed in the guest-chamber, fortunately not occupied at the time. But the outlook
was ghastly, for the house stood high on its clean-swept hill like a lonely outpost in a great
waste of cinders, half-fallen chimneys, and sagging walls. In two weeks' time, while they still
smoked, the ruins took on a strangely old look, and it was like standing in the midst of the
excavations of an ancient city. Around the solitary house on the hill the wind howled, making
a mournful moaning sound through the broken network of wires that hung everywhere in the streets.

Homeless refugees, running through the streets like wild creatures driven before a prairie
fire, came pouring past, and some stopped to build their lean-to shacks of pieces of board
and sacking against the sheltering wall of the house. Blankets and other things were passed
out to keep them warm, and when they finally went their way the blankets went with them, but
Mrs. Stevenson was glad that they should have them and said she would have done the same had
she been in their case.

All this while her son and daughter--the son in New York and the daughter in Italy--were in
a state of anguished suspense as to their mother's fate. By a strange coincidence the daughter
had herself been in some danger from the great eruption of Vesuvius, and had but just escaped
from that when she heard newsboys crying in the streets of Rome, "San Francisco tutta distrutta!"
Several days passed in intense anxiety before she received the telegram with the blessed words
"Mother safe!"

As it was quite impossible to live in the destroyed city until some sort of order should be
established, even water being unprocurable on the Hyde Street hill, Mrs. Stevenson decided
to take refuge for the time at Vanumanutagi Ranch near Gilroy. Even there she found a sorry
confusion, for the house chimneys were all wrecked and the stone wall around the enclosure
had been thrown down and scattered. There was plenty of good water, however, and the possibility
of getting provisions and living after a fashion, so she settled down to stay there until conditions
should improve in the city. It was an eerie place to stay in, too, for that section lies close
to the main earthquake fault, and the quivering earth was a long time settling down from its
great upheaval. For as long as a year afterwards small quakes came at frequent intervals, and
in the stillness of the night strange roaring sounds, like the approach of a railroad train,
and sudden exploding noises, like distant cannon shot, came to add their terrors to the creaking
and swaying of the little wooden house.

After some months Mrs. Stevenson went to San Francisco, but she found the discomfort still
so great and the sight of the ruined city so depressing that she finally yielded to the persuasions
of her son and Mr. Field to accompany them on a trip to Europe. They sailed from New York in
November, 1906, on the French steamer La Provence.

After a stay of only three or four days in Paris, they took the train for the south--an all-day
trip. As Mrs. Stevenson had always thought she would love Avignon, though she had never been
there, it was decided to go there first. In their compartment on the train there was a French
bishop, a Monseigneur Charmiton, and his sister, with whom they soon fell into conversation.
The bishop and his sister seemed appalled at the idea of anyone wanting to spend a winter in
Avignon. "By no means go there," they said, "but come down where we live. It is beautiful there."
The good people had a villa, it seemed, half-way between Nice and Monte Carlo. But Mrs. Stevenson
wanted to decide upon Avignon for herself, so they went on, and found it a most picturesque
place, but soon discovered the truth of the old saw, "Windy Avignon, liable to plague when
it has not the wind, and plagued with the wind when it has it." This wind swept strong and
cold down the Valley of the Rhone, making it so bleak and forbidding that they were forced
to cut their visit short.

They left next day for Marseilles, where they found, much to their delight, not only their
motor-car, which had been shipped from New York, but Monseigneur Charmiton and his sister,
who were on the point of leaving for their villa at Cap Ferrat. "And how did you like Avignon?"
were their first words. Although too polite to say "I told you so," they now insisted the Riviera
be given a fair trial. So, chance and friendly counsel prevailing, the Stevenson party motored
east through lovely Provence, passing swiftly through Hyères of haunting memory, and on to
Cannes, where they stopped the night; and so to an hotel in Beaulieu, where Monseigneur's sister
had engaged rooms for them till a villa was found to their liking. And soon a charming one
at St. Jean-sur-Mer, a little village near Beaulieu, was taken for the season.

The Villa Mes Rochers stood in a walled garden, which sloped gently to a terrace on the edge
of the sea--a place for tea in the afternoons when the mistral was not blowing. Here they settled
down for the winter.

It was a pleasant, easy life. There were friends in Nice and Monte Carlo; there was the daily
motor ride; there were books to read, letters to write, and recipes to be learned from the
French and set down in the famous cook book without which Mrs. Stevenson never travelled. Here
they lingered till April, and then set out in their motor for London.

Their route again lay through Provence. They stopped at Arles, famous alike for its beautiful
women and its sausages. The beautiful women were absent that day, but a sausage appeared at
table and was pronounced worthy of its niche in the sausage Hall of Fame. Further along, in
the Cevennes, they were enchanted with Le Puy, and the lovely, lovely country where Louis had
made his memorable journey with Modestine. And so they went on north, by Channel steamer to
Folkstone, up through Kent, and into London by the Old Kent Road; then to lodgings in Chelsea,
where old friends called and old ties were renewed.

After a month in London a house was taken in Chiddingfold, Surrey, to be near "the dear Favershams,"
as Mrs. Stevenson always called them. Mr. and Mrs. William Faversham, whom Mrs. Stevenson held
in great affection, owned The Old Manor in Chiddingfold, and they had found a place for her
near them--Fairfield, a charming old house in an old-world garden, and, best of all, not five
minutes' walk from The Old Manor.

Life at Fairfield, except for constant rain, was delightful. Graham Balfour, the well-beloved,
came for a visit; Austin Strong and his wife ran down from London; many an afternoon was spent
at Sir James Barrie's place near Farnham. Sir James loved Mrs. Stevenson--a dear, shy man who
had so little to say to so many, so much to say to her. Then there were the Williamsons (of
Lightning Conductor fame), whom she had met in Monte Carlo; they also had a house in Surrey.
And there were Sir Arthur and Lady Pinero, who lived only a mile or two from Fairfield. Mrs.
Stevenson considered the genial, witty, gently cynical Sir Arthur one of the most interesting
men she had ever met. Lady Pinero always called her husband "Pin," and Sir Arthur was enchanted
when, after looking at him with smiling eyes, Mrs. Stevenson one day turned to Lady Pinero
and remarked, "I've always doubted that old saying, 'It is a sin to steal a Pin,' but now I
understand it perfectly."

Katherine de Mattos, Stevenson's cousin, also honoured Fairfield with a visit, and Coggie Ferrier,
sister of Stevenson's boyhood friend, and the woman perhaps above all others in England whom
Mrs. Stevenson loved best, came frequently. And always there were the Favershams, who were
very dear to her heart. It was a memorable summer, full of pleasant companionship--and rain.
Towards the middle of August, on account of the never-ceasing rain, it was finally decided
to abandon Fairfield and return to France for a long motor trip.

The first night out from Chiddingfold was spent at Tunbridge Wells, and next day a stop was
made at Rye to call on Henry James. Never did travellers receive a more hearty or gracious
welcome. It is a quaint, lost place, Rye--one of the old Cinque Ports; to enter it one passes
under an ancient Roman arch; the nearest railroad is miles away. It is nice to think that after
giving him a cup of tea in her drawing-room in San Francisco two years before, Mrs. Stevenson
could see the house he lived in, admire his garden, drink tea in his drawing-room, and talk
long and pleasantly with this old and valued friend she was never to see again.

The second motor trip in France was an unqualified success. Keeping to the west and avoiding
Paris, this time their route lay through Blois, Tours, Angoulême, Libourne, Biarritz, till,
finally, several miles from Pau, they had a panne, as they say in France, and their motor,
which had behaved remarkably well until that moment, entered Pau ignominiously at the end of
a long tow-rope. As it took ten days to make the repairs necessary, they used the interval
of waiting to go by train to Lourdes. It was the particular time when pilgrims go to seek the
healing waters of the miraculous fountain, and they saw many sad and depressing sights--for
the lame, the halt, the blind, people afflicted with every sort of disease, and some even in
the last agonies, crowded the paths in a pitiful procession. Mrs. Stevenson afterwards said
that when she saw the blind come away from the sacred fount with apparently seeing eyes, and
the lame throw away their crutches and walk, she was, as King Agrippa said unto Paul, "almost
persuaded" to believe.

Gladly putting this picture behind them, they went on to Bagnères-de-Bigorre, a little village
nestling at the base of the Pyrenees. The weather there was perfect, and the whole atmosphere
of the place so sweetly simple and unsophisticated that Mrs. Stevenson loved it best of all.
After six pleasant days spent there, the motor now mended, they returned by train to Pau and
resumed their trip--due east to Carcassonne, that lovely, lovely city, with its mediæval ramparts
and towers, and then on to Cette on the Mediterranean, where they landed in a storm.

And so north, almost paralleling their first trip, they ran through Mende, Bourges, and Montargis,
and one rainy afternoon passed within sight of the village of Grez, where so many years before
Fanny Osbourne first met Louis Stevenson, but the memories that it brought were too poignant,
and she was only able to give one look as they sped swiftly by.

Arriving in Paris on October 3, after this leisurely journey through beautiful France, they
remained but a few days there and then went on to London, where they met the Favershams and
sailed in company with them for America on the Vaterland. With but a brief stop in New York
they hastened on to San Francisco to carry out a certain plan that had been formulated while
they were in France. Oddly enough, it was on the other side of the world that Mrs. Stevenson
first heard of beautiful Stonehedge, the place at Santa Barbara which became the home of her
last days. At Monte Carlo she met Mrs. Clarence Postley, of California, who dilated on the
charms of the Santa Barbara place--its fine old trees, its spring water, its romantic story
of being haunted by the ghost of a beautiful countess--until finally Mrs. Stevenson said that
if it was as charming as that she would buy it. After her return to California she went to
see it, and, finding it even more lovely than she had been told, the bargain was struck. It
had been evident for some time, too, that her health required a warmer climate than that of
San Francisco, and, above all, she longed for a place where she might live more in the open
than the winds and fogs of the bay city permitted. So, though she was very sad at leaving the
house on the heights where she had lived long enough for her heart-strings to take root, she
sold it in 1908 and removed to the southern place, there to enter on a new phase of her life.

The house at Hyde and Lombard Streets, following out the curious fatality that made everything
connected with her take on some romantic aspect, became for a time the abode of Carmelite Sisters,
the Roman Catholic Order whose strict rules require its devotees to live almost completely
cut off from the world. The long drawing-room, where Mrs. Stevenson had entertained so many
of the great people of the earth, became the chapel, and in place of the light laughter and
gay talk that once echoed from its walls only the low intoning of the mass was heard. At the
front door, where the Indian pagan idols had kept guard, a revolving cylinder was placed so
that the charitable might put in their donations without seeing the faces or hearing the voices
of the immured nuns. In the green garden where Mrs. Stevenson had so often walked and dreamed
of other days the gentle sisters knelt and prayed that the sins of the world might be forgiven.

CHAPTER XII

THE LAST DAYS AT SANTA BARBARA.

Of all the beautiful places of the earth where it was Fanny Stevenson's good fortune to set
up her household gods at various times, perhaps the loveliest of all was this spot on the peaceful
shore of the sunset sea, under the patronage of the noble lady, Saint Barbara. In the Samoan
gardens tropical flowers flamed under the hot rays of the vertical sun; in San Francisco geraniums
and fuchsias rejoiced and grew prodigiously in the salt sea fog; but at Santa Barbara, where
north and south meet, the plants of every land thrive as though native born. The scarlet hibiscus,
child of the tropics, grows side by side with the aster of northern climes; the bougainvillæa
flings out its purple sprays in close neighbourhood to the roses of old England; the sweet-william,
dear to the hearts of our grandmothers, blooms in rich profusion in the shade of the pomegranate;
and in brotherly companionship with the Norwegian pine the magnolia-tree unfolds its great
creamy cups.

In her garden at Stonehedge, situated in lovely Montecito, about six miles from Santa Barbara,
Fanny Stevenson found the chief solace of her declining years. Its extent of some seven acres
gave her full scope for the horticultural experiments in which she delighted. When she took
possession of the place it was in rather a neglected state, but that was all the better, for
it gave her a free field to develop it according to her own tastes. The house was a well-built
but old-fashioned affair of an unattractive type, with imitation towers and gingerbread trimmings,
and at first sight her friends assured her that nothing could be done with it. Architects,
when asked for advice, said the only thing was to tear it down and build a new house. But,
instead, she called in a carpenter from the town and set to work on alterations. When all was
done the house had a pleasant southern look that fitted in well with the luxuriant growth of
flowers and trees in which it stood, and its red roof made a cheerful note in the landscape.

In the grounds she worked out her plans, leisurely adding something year by year, a little
Dutch garden, sweeping walks and lawns, a wonderful terraced rose-garden with a stone pergola
at the upper end, where the creepers were never trimmed into smug stiffness, but grew in wild
luxuriance at their own sweet will, and soon they made a glorious tangle of sweet-smelling
blooms and glossy green leaves. From the living-room windows one looked out over a broad expanse
of mossy lawn; groups of vermilion-coloured hibiscus and poinsettias kept harmonious company;
dahlias made great masses of gorgeous colour among the green; tall hollyhocks were ranged along
the veranda in old-fashioned formalism; indeed, it would be like quoting from a florist's catalogue
to mention all the plants to be found in this garden.

Nor did she neglect the purely useful, for the most delicious fruits and vegetables--from the
lemons, oranges, and loquats of the south to the apricots, apples, and pears of the north--grew
to perfection under her fostering care. She was always on the lookout for new varieties, and
I find among her correspondence a letter from the distinguished horticulturist, Luther Burbank,
in answer to her request for strawberry plants:

                              "Santa Rosa, California, Feb. 21, 1911.

"Dear Mrs. Stevenson:

"I feel most highly honored and pleased with your kind order of the 15th instant for 25 Patagonian
strawberry plants, which were sent out yesterday.... You can never know the regard and love
in which Mr. Stevenson is held in thousands of hearts who have never expressed themselves to you.

                    "Sincerely yours,

                                        "Luther Burbank."

The story of Fanny Stevenson's life at Stonehedge is one of the still peace that she loved
more and more as time went on, almost its only excitements being the blooming of a new flower,
the digging of a well, or perhaps the trying out of an electric pump. The hurly-burly of the
world was far away from that quiet spot, and only the arrival of the daily mail by rural carrier,
or an infrequent visitor from some one of the country houses in the neighbourhood, broke the
sweet monotony of existence. Of the simple pleasures of her life here she writes to her husband's
cousin, Graham Balfour, in these words:

"As I write, my delightful Japanese boy, Yonida, brings me in a great bunch of violets in one
hand and quantities of yellow poppies in the other, while in front of me stands an immense
vase of sweet peas--all just plucked from my garden. I wish that you might share them with
me, and that you might hear the mocking-bird that is singing by my window. A mocking-bird is
not a night-in-gale, to be sure, but he has a fine song of his own. I have such a nice little
household; my two Japanese young men, who do gardening and such things; a most excellent, very
handsome, middle-aged cook named Kate Romero, who, in spite of her name is half Irish and half
English; and Mary Boyle, altogether Irish and altogether a most delightful creature. The most
important member of the family, however, is my cat; Kitson is a full-bred Siamese royal temple
cat, and is quite aware of his exalted pedigree. He exacts all and gives nothing. There are
times when I should prefer more affection and less hauteur. He's a proud cat, and loves no
one but Kitson."

