Technical progress during the war often unfortunately involved the loss of valuable lives,
as for instance those of Professor Hopkinson and Busk, to both of whom heavy debts of gratitude
are owed, but gradually obstacle after obstacle, problem after problem, was successfully tackled
by our designers and constructors. With a view to enlarging the field of observation, staggered
planes were introduced in the B.E.2c. This machine also proved that it was possible to calculate
the degree of stability and thus paved the way for the design of aeroplanes with indifference
to stability and increased man[oe]uvrability for fighting purposes, or with great inherent
stability for bombing. During 1915 the B.E.2c was used for all purposes, but the extra loading
involved by the increasing use of aeroplanes for bombing and fighting caused a decrease in
the rate of speed and climb, and our aeroplanes were temporarily inferior in fighting power
to the Fokker.

The necessity of preventing the enemy obtaining information soon led to the development of
air fighting. At the beginning of the war the sole armament of aeroplanes was the rifle or
revolver. The machine gun soon followed, but its use in tractor machines was impracticable
on account of the danger of hitting the airscrew. The first "fighters" were therefore two-seater
pushers, such as the "Short-horn" Maurice Farmans which, though not designed for fighting,
and too slow to chase enemy aircraft, were the first to be fitted with Lewis guns, and F.E.'s,
the first machine designed specifically for fighting, with the machine-gun operator in front
of the pilot. These "pusher" fighters had an excellent field of view and fire forwards, but
suffered from lack of speed and a large "blind" area to the rear. On the other hand, the single-seater
tractors were potentially the superior fighters, and in order to protect the blades of the
airscrew the French were the first to use deflector blades on them in tractor machines.

Our early single-seater tractors were fitted with a Lewis gun fixed so as to fire over or at
the side of the airscrew and actuated by a bowden wire, the most efficient, though not the
most numerous, fighting machines at the end of 1915 being the Bristol Scouts.

By the Summer of 1916, however, we had adapted the "synchronizing gear" to our machine guns,
enabling them to be fired through the propeller; while aircraft engines developed much greater
power and full allowance was made for all equipment carried. From that time the development
of our single-seater fighters was steadily progressive. One of the first of these was the Sopwith
"Pup," which had a speed of 106-1/2 miles an hour at 6,500 feet, climbed 10,000 feet in just
over 14 minutes, and could attain a ceiling of 17,500 feet. In 1917 appeared the Sopwith "Camel,"
a typical example of this type, which was simple, stable, easily controllable and possessed
two guns. It had a speed of 121 miles an hour at 10,000 feet, to which height it could climb
in under 10-1/2 minutes, and a ceiling of 23,000 feet. The Martinsyde F.4, embodying further
improvements, was not ready in time for active service.

While the single-seater tractor was developing for purely offensive action, the two-seater
fighter, of which the field of view, man[oe]uvrability and general performance were being improved,
retained its utility as a reconnaissance machine. In 1916 the "pusher" type was superseded
by the Sopwith "1-1/2 Strutter" armed with a synchronized Vickers gun, which for its 130 horse-power
was never surpassed. The pilot was close to the engine and had a good view of the ground, while
the gunner was placed behind him with a rotary Lewis gun turret. Early in 1917 these qualities
were further developed in the Bristol Fighter.

With the advent of these improved types the B.E.2c was relegated to the work of artillery co-operation,
until superseded by the B.E.2e. Towards the end of 1916 appeared the R.E.8 with a Vickers synchronized
gun and a Lewis gun, which after many vicissitudes became the standard machine for artillery work.

Systematic bombing was practised by nearly all types of machines, but real accuracy was never
obtained. Thus, the B.E.2c was first used in formations, but with a full load of bombs it could
not carry an observer, and its moderate speed left it an easy prey to hostile fighters. Early
in 1916 appeared the Martinsyde single-seater bomber with an endurance of 4-1/2 hours, and
in 1917 the D.H.4 which was much used for day-bombing. The F.E.2b pusher, discarded as a fighting
machine, became the principal night-bomber.

It was comparatively late in the war before special bombing machines were evolved. They were
then divided into day-bombers and night-bombers, the D.H.9 and 9a machines being typical of
the former and the Handley Page of 1917--a large twin-engine aeroplane, the first really effective
night-bomber, of considerable carrying power but low performance--of the latter. By November
8th, 1918, two super-Handley Pages were ready to start to Berlin. They possessed a maximum
range of 1,100 miles, a crew of seven, four 350 horse-power Rolls-Royce engines, arranged in
pairs, a tractor and a pusher in tandem on either side of the machine, and, as they would be
compelled to fly both by night and day, a gun defence system. The D.H.10a and the Vickers Vimy,
for day and night bombing respectively, were also being produced at the date of the Armistice.

In the early days of the war an aeroplane had little to fear above 4,000 feet. With the improvement
of the anti-aircraft gun there was, by the end of the war, no immunity at 20,000 feet. Very
low flying for attack was, however, being rapidly developed, and would have proved of great
effect in 1919. The aeroplane used for this purpose was the single-seater fighter, and the
Sopwith "Salamander," with two guns, a speed of 125 miles an hour, and 650 lb. of armoured
plates, was about to make its appearance at the Armistice.

I have previously mentioned how dependent the improvement of design and performance of aircraft
has been upon the less simple and tardier development of the engine. The invention of the light
motor made aviation possible, and development has synchronized with the evolution of lighter,
more powerful and more reliable engines. One of the most difficult problems still confronting
us is the production of a cheap, high-powered and reliable engine, but the existence at the
end of the war of machines weighing 15 tons indicates the progress achieved, while British
engines of 600 horse-power are now in use, and one of 1,000 horse-power will shortly be available.

TACTICS AND THE STRATEGIC AIR OFFENSIVE.

During the war there were three concurrent movements in process: the ratios of the various
forms of air tactics were constantly changing, and the components of our air forces varied
in accordance with the development of reconnaissance, artillery co-operation, bombing and fighting.
Secondly, their total strength was increasing rapidly; and, thirdly, it was increasing relatively
faster than the Army or Navy.

It was an evident and logical development and in accord with the shortage of national man power
and the consequent tendency to a reduction in the strength of the Army, that, the necessary
uses of aircraft with the Army and Navy being ensured, any available margin of air power should
be employed on an independent basis for definite strategic purposes. The difficulty was to
arrive at an agreement as to the minimum tactical and grand tactical requirements of the Army
and Navy. The British Army was not alone in asserting that there was no minimum and that it
wanted every available airman, and agreed with the French that anything which it could temporarily
spare should be lent to the French Army. It was argued that the Armies could as easily and
better arrange for strategic bombing. Fortunately in 1918, when I was Chief of the Air Staff,
we managed to secure a margin and formed the Independent Air Force in June of that year. It
was, of course, understood that, in the event of either the British or French Armies being
hard put to it, the Independent Air Force could temporarily come to their direct assistance
and act in close co-operation with them.

In 1915 in accordance with the old doctrine that offence is the best defence, the surest method
of protecting specialized machines on the battle front was found to be in the attack of enemy
aircraft by fighting machines. In 1918 it was decided that raids on the centres of German war
industry would not only cripple the enemy's output of material essential to victory, but also
relieve the pressure on the Western Front, the vital point of the war. The Germans had had
the same intention in the many raids which started over Dover on December 21st, 1914.

Long-range bombing had, however, been carried out spasmodically before 1918. In addition to
its taste for bombing in general, the Royal Naval Air Service were keenly bent from the outset
on long-range bombing in particular. The question of forming an Allied squadron to bomb German
munition factories was first raised in 1915 at one of the monthly meetings between the French
and British Aviation departments; and in February, 1916, a small squadron of Sopwith "1-1/2
Strutters" was formed at Detling for the purpose of bombing Essen and Dusseldorf from England,
but the Army in France, being short of machines, asked that they should be sent to the front,
and therefore the scheme did not mature; neither, for similar reasons, did one for the co-operation
in 1916 of British and French bombing squadrons, operating from Luxeuil.

It was not until October, 1917, that the first striking force, consisting of three squadrons,
was formed under the Army with Ochey as its base. It was mainly used in raids against the ironworks
in the Alsace-Lorraine Basin and the chemical industry in the neighbourhood of Mannheim. As
I have said, a definite offensive policy by means of an independent strategic force was later
decided upon, and the "Independent" Air Force was brought into existence. It originally comprised
two day-bomber and two night-bomber squadrons. During the summer additional squadrons were
allotted to it, including D.H.9's and Handley Pages. Day-bombing squadrons had to fight their
way to objectives in close formation, and the problems connected with navigation, calculation
of petrol supply, action of wind and ceiling, were all accentuated. Casualties were heavy,
with the result that a squadron of Fighters, composed of Sopwith "Camels," was incorporated
for the purpose of protection. Thus we see the beginnings of an air fleet analogous to the
naval fleet with its capital ships and protective craft.

The main objectives were the centre of the chemical industry at Mannheim and Frankfort; the
iron and steel works at Briey and Longwy and the Saar Basin; the machine shops in the Westphalian
district and the magneto works at Stuttgart; the submarine bases at Wilhelmshaven, Bremerhaven,
Cuxhaven, and Hamburg, and the accumulator factories at Hagen and Berlin.

It will be seen from a map that three of the main industrial centres were situated near the
west frontier of Germany; and, therefore, one portion of the striking force was based at Ochey,
which lies within a few miles of the Saar Basin, within 180 miles of Essen, and within 150
miles of Frankfurt. Another portion was based on Norfolk, where a group of super-Handley Page
machines were established for the specific purpose of attacking Berlin, a distance of 540 miles,
and the naval bases within 400 miles. It was obvious that though aircraft from England would
have to cover greater distances, they would not expose themselves to the strong hostile defences
in rear of the battle front.

Three instances of the Independent Air Force's action may be cited. On the night of August
21st/22nd, two Handley Page machines dropped over one ton of bombs on Cologne Station, the
raid occupying seven hours. On the night of August 25th/26th two Handley Pages attacked the
Badische Aniline und Soda Fabrik of Mannheim; bombs were dropped from a height of 200 feet,
direct hits being obtained in every case; and the machines then remained over the town, which
they swept with machine-gun fire. On August 12th the first attack was made on Frankfurt by
twelve D.H.4 day-bombers, every machine reaching the objective and returning safely in spite
of being attacked, over Mannheim and throughout the return journey, by some forty hostile fighters.

During the five months of its existence the Independent Air Force dropped 550 tons of bombs,
160 by day and 390 by night. Of these 200 tons were dropped on aerodromes, largely by the short-distance
F.E.2b's, as a result of which, hostile attacks on Allied aerodromes became practically negligible.
Theoretically, machines of the Independent Air Force should not have been utilized for attacking
purely military objectives in the Army zone, such as aerodromes, and their co-operation with
the Army for this purpose shows that their true rôle was either not appreciated or not favoured
by the French and other Commands.

There is ample testimony to the spirit of demoralization which pervaded the civil population
of the towns attacked.

    "My eyes won't keep open whilst I am writing," reads one captured
    letter. "In the night twice into the cellar and then again this
    morning. One feels as if one were no longer a human being. One air
    raid after another. In my opinion this is no longer war but murder.
    Finally, in time, one becomes horribly cold, and one is daily, nay,
    hourly, prepared for the worst." "Yesterday afternoon," says
    another, "it rained so much and was so cloudy that no one thought it
    was possible for them to come. It is horrible; one has no rest day
    or night."

Although, for reasons into which it is not necessary to enter here, only a comparatively small
percentage of the efforts of the Independent Force were directed against the industrial targets
for which the force had been created, yet by the end of the war the strategic conception of
air power was bearing fruit, and the Air Ministry had in hand measures for bombing which would
have gone far to shatter German munitionment. The defence measures forced upon the Germans
within their own country were reacting on their offensive action at the front, which was at
the same time denuded of fighting aircraft at various points to meet the menace of our strategic
force at Ochey.

ORGANIZATION.

As in peace on a small, so in war on a large scale, the history of the organization of aircraft,
while we were fighting for our national existence and competing with similar enemy expansion,
is one of continuous development, of decentralization of command and co-ordination of duties.
Headquarters, the Squadron and the Aircraft Park, as originally conceived in peace, though
subject to variations in size, remained the basis of our organization. For instance, the original
eighteen machines of our squadron were increased to twenty-four for single-seater fighters
and reduced to six in the case of the super-Handley Page bombers. The four squadrons originally
operated directly under Headquarters, were soon allocated to Corps for tactical reconnaissance
and artillery co-operation, while a unit remained at Headquarters for strategical and long-distance
reconnaissance and a few special duties. The next step was in November, 1914, when two Wings,
composed originally of two, and later, of five squadrons each, were formed, R.F.C. Headquarters
retaining one squadron and the wireless flight for G.H.Q. requirements. The Wing Headquarters
co-ordinated the work of the squadrons which were allocated to Army Corps.

A further development, in 1916, was the formation for each of the three Armies of a Brigade,
consisting of two Wings and an Aircraft Park. One--the Corps Wing--carried out artillery co-operation
and close reconnaissance (including photography) with Army Corps, the other--the Army Wing--carried
out more distant reconnaissance and fighting patrols under Army Headquarters. Our air superiority
at the Battle of the Somme in 1916 led us to expect German counter-measures in 1917, and our
programme for the following winter contemplated a proportion of two fighting squadrons to each
Corps Squadron. By 1917 there were five British Armies in France and Belgium and our air forces
were increased to provide a Brigade for each of the two new Armies. The Headquarters of the
flying force in the field (except in the case of the Independent Air Force, which was responsible
to the Supreme War Council and the Air Ministry in London) remained attached to G.H.Q. throughout
the war.

The main difficulty in the higher organization was the lack of co-operation between the Royal
Flying Corps and the Royal Naval Air Service and their competition for the supply of men and
machines--the demands of both being urgent and insatiable. As a first step to overcome this,
an Air Board was formed in May, 1916, to discuss general air policy, especially the combined
operation of the Naval and Military Air Services, to make recommendations on the types of machines
required by each, and to co-ordinate the supply of material. The Air Board was an improvement,
but not a remedy, and, therefore, in 1917 it was decided to form an Air Ministry responsible
for war aviation in all its branches and to amalgamate the Naval and Military Air Services
as the Royal Air Force. This was carried into effect early in 1918, with Lord Rothermere as
Secretary of State for Air with a seat in the Cabinet, and the air became the third service
of the Crown, with an independent Government department permeated with a knowledge of air navigation,
machinery, and weather, and closely allied to the industrial world for the initiation, guidance,
and active supervision of research and experimental work.

I will mention later some of the many arguments for and against the retention of an independent
Air Ministry and autonomous Air Force in peace. The amalgamation was certainly advantageous
in war. It effected the correlation of a number of hitherto independent services according
to a uniform policy and prevented overlapping by centralizing administration. Under single
control it was possible to carry out, on a carefully co-ordinated plan, recruiting and training,
to supply men and material, to organize air power according to the strategic situation in each
of the various theatres of war, and to form the correct ratio between the air forces in the
field and the reserves in training at home. The difficulty was that the amalgamation had to
be carried out during the most intensive period of air effort, but by the end of the war most
of these objects had been attained without jeopardizing the close co-operation with the Army
and Navy. Co-operation with the Naval and General Staffs and with naval and military formations
was, in fact, improved, independent action was beginning to bear fruit, and we possessed an
Air Force without rival.

CHAPTER III

PEACE

THE FUTURE OF AERIAL DEFENCE.

