'And ye come frae the College!' sneered Uncle Gordon.  'Gude kens what they learn folk there;
it's no muckle service onyway.  Do ye think, man, that there's naething in a' yon saut wilderness
o' a world oot wast there, wi' the sea grasses growin', an' the sea beasts fechtin', an' the
sun glintin' down into it, day by day?  Na; the sea's like the land, but fearsomer.  If there's
folk ashore, there's folk in the sea--deid they may be, but they're folk whatever; and as for
deils, there's nane that's like the sea deils.  There's no sae muckle harm in the land deils,
when a's said and done.  Lang syne, when I was a callant in the south country, I mind there
was an auld, bald bogle in the Peewie Moss.  I got a glisk o' him mysel', sittin' on his hunkers
in a hag, as gray's a tombstane. An', troth, he was a fearsome-like taed.  But he steered naebody.
Nae doobt, if ane that was a reprobate, ane the Lord hated, had gane by there wi' his sin still
upon his stamach, nae doobt the creature would hae lowped upo' the likes o' him.  But there's
deils in the deep sea would yoke on a communicant!  Eh, sirs, if ye had gane doon wi' the puir
lads in the Christ-Anna, ye would ken by now the mercy o' the seas.  If ye had sailed it for
as lang as me, ye would hate the thocht of it as I do. If ye had but used the een God gave
ye, ye would hae learned the wickedness o' that fause, saut, cauld, bullering creature, and
of a' that's in it by the Lord's permission: labsters an' partans, an' sic like, howking in
the deid; muckle, gutsy, blawing whales; an' fish--the hale clan o' them--cauld-wamed, blind-eed
uncanny ferlies.  O, sirs,' he cried, 'the horror--the horror o' the sea!'

We were all somewhat staggered by this outburst; and the speaker himself, after that last hoarse
apostrophe, appeared to sink gloomily into his own thoughts.  But Rorie, who was greedy of
superstitious lore, recalled him to the subject by a question.

'You will not ever have seen a teevil of the sea?' he asked.

'No clearly,' replied the other.  'I misdoobt if a mere man could see ane clearly and conteenue
in the body.  I hae sailed wi' a lad--they ca'd him Sandy Gabart; he saw ane, shure eneueh,
an' shure eneueh it was the end of him.  We were seeven days oot frae the Clyde--a sair wark
we had had--gaun north wi' seeds an' braws an' things for the Macleod.  We had got in ower
near under the Cutchull'ns, an' had just gane about by soa, an' were off on a lang tack, we
thocht would maybe hauld as far's Copnahow.  I mind the nicht weel; a mune smoored wi' mist;
a fine gaun breeze upon the water, but no steedy; an'--what nane o' us likit to hear--anither
wund gurlin' owerheid, amang thae fearsome, auld stane craigs o' the Cutchull'ns.  Weel, Sandy
was forrit wi' the jib sheet; we couldnae see him for the mains'l, that had just begude to
draw, when a' at ance he gied a skirl.  I luffed for my life, for I thocht we were ower near
Soa; but na, it wasnae that, it was puir Sandy Gabart's deid skreigh, or near hand, for he
was deid in half an hour. The substance is, as in nearly all these cases, Arabian Nights rehashed;
but the hashing is not seldom done secundum artem, and they have, with the Les Sultanes de Gujerate
and Nouveaux Contes Orientaux, which follow them, the faculty of letting themselves be read.

The
best of these[237] (except the French translation of the so-called Sir Charles Morell's (really
James Ridley's) Tales of the Genii (see above)) is perhaps, on the whole, Les Sultanes de Gujerate,
where not only are some of the separate tales good, but the frame-story
is far more artistically worked in and round and out than is usually
the case.

But taking them all together, there is one general and obvious, as
well as another local and particular objection to them.

Although the sub-title (v. sup. again) lets them in, the main one regards them with, at best,
an oblique countenance.

The differences between the Western fairy and the Eastern peri, dive,
djin, or whatever one chooses to call her, him, or it, though not
at all easy to define, are exceedingly easy to feel.

The magicians and enchanters of the two kinds are nearer to each other, but still not the same.
On the other hand, it is impossible for any one who has once felt
the strange charm of the Arabian Nights not to feel the immense inferiority
of these rehashes and croquettes and rissoles, and so forth, of the
noble old haunch or sirloin.

Yet again, from the special point of view of this book, though they cannot be simply passed over,
they supply practically nothing which marks, or causes, or even promises an advance in the
general development of fiction.

They may be said to be simply a continuation of, or a relapse upon, the pure romance of adventure,
with different dress, manners, and nomenclature.

There is hardly a single touch of character in any one; their very morals (and no shame to them)
are arch-known; and they do not possess style enough to confer distinction
of the kind open to such things.

If you take Les Quatre Facardins, before most of them, and Vathek[238] (itself, remember, originally
French in language), after them all, the want of any kind of genius in their composers becomes
almost disgustingly apparent. Yet even these masterpieces are masterpieces outside the main
run of the novel.

[Sidenote: Caylus.]

Although, therefore, it would be very ungrateful not to acknowledge
that they do sometimes comply with the demands of that sensible tyrant
already mentioned, Sultan Hudgiadge, and "either amuse us or send
us to sleep," it must be admitted to be with some relief that one
turns once more, at about the five and twentieth volume, to something
like the fairy tale proper, if to a somewhat artificial and sophisticated
form of it.

The Comte de Caylus was a scholar and a man of unusual brains; Moncrif showed his mixture of
Scotch and French blood in a corresponding blend of quaintness and esprit; others, such as Voisenon
in one sex and Voltaire's pet Mlle. de Lubert in the other, whatever they were, were at any rate
not stupid.

[Sidenote: Prince Courtebotte et Princesse Zibeline.]

To Anne Claude Philippe de Tubières de Grimoard de Pestels de Lévi, Comte de Caylus, one owes particular
thanks, at least when one comes to the history of Le Prince Courtebotte, after wrestling with
the macédoine of orientalities just discussed. It is not, of course, Perrault, and it is not
the best Madame D'Aulnoy. But you are never "put out" by it; the hero, if rather a hero of Scott
in the uniform propriety of his conduct, or of Virgil in his success,
is not like Waverley, partly a simpleton, nor like Aeneas, wholly
a cad.

One likes the Princess Zibeline both before she had a heart and afterwards; it can be very agreeable
to know a nice girl in both states.

Perhaps it was not quite cricket of the good fairy to play that trick[239]
on the ambassador of King Brandatimor, but it was washed out in fair
fight; and King Biby and his people of poodles are delightful.

One wonders whether Dickens, who was better read in this kind of literature than in most, consciously
or unconsciously borrowed from Caylus one of his not least known
touches.[240]

[Sidenote: Rosanie.]

In the next of the Caylus stories
there is an Idea--the capital seems due because the Count was a man
of Science, as science (perhaps better) went then, and because one
or his other tales (not the best) is actually called Le Palais des
Idées.

The idea of Rosanie is questionable, though the carrying of it out
is all right.

Two fairies are fighting for the (fairy) crown, and the test is who shall produce the most perfect
specimen of the special fairy art of education of mortals. (I may, as a ci-devant member of this
craft, be permitted to regret that the business has been so largely
taken over by persons who are neither fairies in one sex, though there
may be some exceptions here, nor enchanters in the other, where exceptions
are very rare indeed.) The tutoress of the Princess Rosanie pursues
her task, and pursues it triumphantly, by dividing the child into
twelve interim personalities, each of whom has a special characteristic--beauty,
gentleness, vivacity, discretion, and what not.

At the close of the prescribed period they are reunited, and their
fortunate lover, who has hitherto been distracted between the twelve
eidola, is blessed with the compound Rosanie.

Although it is well known to be the rashest of things for a man to say anything about women--although
certainly sillier things have been said by men about women than about
any other subject, except, of course, education itself--I venture
to demur to the fairy method.

Both a priori and from experience, I should say that unmixed Beauty would become intolerably
vain; that Discretion would grow into a hypocritical and unpleasant
prude; that Vivacity would develop into Vulgarity; and that the reincarnation
of the twelve would be one of the most intolerable creatures ever
known, if it were not that the impossibility of the concentrated essences
being united in one person, after separation in several, would save
the situation by annihilating her.

[Sidenote: Prince Muguet et Princesse Zaza.]

Caylus, however, makes up in the third tale, Le Prince Muguet et la
Princesse Zaza, where, though the principal fairy, she of the Hêtre,
is rather silly for one of the kind, Muguet is a not quite intolerable
coxcomb, and Zaza is positively charming.

Her sufferings with a wicked old woman are common; but her distress when the fairy makes her
seem ugly to the Prince, who has actually fallen in love with her true portrait, and the scenes
where the two meet under this spell, are among the best in the whole Cabinet--which is a bold
word. The others, though naturally unequal, never or very seldom lack charm, for the reason
that Caylus knew what one has ventured to call the secret of Fairyland--that it is the land
of the attained Wish--and that he has the art of scattering rememberable and generative phrases
and fancies. Tourlou et Rirette, one of the lightest of all, may not impossibly--indeed probably--have
suggested Jean Ingelow's great single-speech poem of Divided; the Princesses Pimprenelle and Lumineuse
are the right sort of Princesses; Nonchalante et Papillon, Bleuette et Coquelicot come and take their
places unpretentiously but certainly; Mignonette and Minutieuse are not "out." Caylus is not
Hamilton by a long way; but he has something that Hamilton has not. He is still less Perrault
or Madame d'Aulnoy, but he has a sufficient difference from either. With these predecessors he
makes the select quartette of the fairy-tale tellers of France.

After him one expects--and meets--a drop. No reasonable person would look for a really great fairy
tale from Jean Jacques, because you must forget yourself to write
one; and La Reine Fantasque, though not bad, is not good.

Madame de Villeneuve may, for ought I know, have been an excellent
person in other ways, but she deserves one of the worst bolgias in
the Inferno of literature for lengthening, muddling, and altogether
spoiling the ever-beloved "Beauty and the Beast."

Mlle. de Lussan, they say,[241] was too fond of eating, and died of indigestion. A more indigestible
thing than her own Les Veillées de Thessalie, which figure here (she wrote a great deal more),
the present writer has never come across.

And as for Prince Titi, which fills a volume and a half, it might have been passed without any
remark at all if it had not become famous in connection with the Battle of Croker and Macaulay
over the body of Boswell's Johnson.[242]

A break takes place at the thirtieth volume of the Cabinet, and a fresh instalment, later than the first
batch, follows, with more particulars about authors. Here we find the attributions of the very
large series of imitative Eastern tales already noticed, and to be followed in this new parcel
by Soirées Bretonnes, to Thomas Simon Gueulette. The thirty-first opens with the Funestine
of Beauchamps[243]--an ingenious title and heroine-name, for it avoids
the unnatural sounds so common, is a quite possible feminine appellation,
and though a "speaking" one, is only so to those who understand the
learned languages, and so deserve to be spoken to.

Moreover, the idea, though not startlingly original or a mark of genius, is good--that of
an unlucky child who attracts the malignity of all fairies, and is
ugly, stupid, ill-natured, and everything that is detestable.

Her reformation by the genie Clair-Obscur would not be bad if it were cut a great deal shorter.

It
is followed by a series of short tales, beginning with The Little Green Frog, and not of the
first class, which in turn are succeeded by two (or, as the latter is in two parts, three) longer
stories, sometimes attributed to Caylus--Le Loup Galeux and Bellinette
et Belline.

The Soirées Bretonnes themselves, though apparently the earliest, are not the happiest of
Gueulette's pastiches; the speaking names[244] especially are irritating. A certain Madame de
Lintot, who does not seem to have had anything to do with the hero of Pope's famous "Ride with
a Bookseller," is what may be called "neutral," with Timandre et Bleuette and others; nor does
a fresh instalment of Moncrif's efforts show the historian of cats
at his best.

But in vol. xxxiii. Mlle. de Lubert, glanced at before, raises the standard. She should have
cut her tales down; it is the mischief of these later things that they extend too much. But Lionnette
et Coquérico is good; Le Prince Glacé et la Princesse Etincelante is not bad; and La Princesse
Camion attracts, by dint of extravagance in the literal sense.

Fairy trials had gone far; but the necessity of either marrying a beautiful sort of mermaid or else
of flaying her, and the subsequent trial, not of flaying, but braying her in a mortar as a shrimp,
show at least a lively fancy. Nor is the anonymous Nourjahad--an extremely moral but not dull
tale, which follows--at all contemptible.

The French Bar, inexhaustible in such things, gave another tale-teller in one Pajon, who, besides
the obligatory polissonneries, not included in the Cabinet, composed not a few harmless things
of some merit. The first, Eritzine et Paretin, is perhaps the best. Nor is the complement of vol.
xxxiv., the Bibliothèque des Fées et des Génies (the title of which was that of a larger collection,
containing much the same matter as the Cabinet, and probably in Johnson's
mind when he jotted down Prince Titi), quite barren.

La Princesse Minon-Minette et le Prince Souci, Apranor et Bellanire,
Grisdelin et Charmante, are none of them unreadable.

The next volume, too, is better as a whole than any we have had for a long time. Mme. Fagnan's
Minet Bleu et Louvette contains, in its fifteen pages, a good situation by no means ill-treated.
The pair are under the same spell--that of being ugly and witty for part of the week, handsome,
stupid, and disagreeable for the other part, and of having the times so arranged that each sees
the other at his or her most repulsive to her or his actual state. The way in which "Love
unconquered in battle" proves, though not without fairy assistance, victorious here also, is
very ingeniously managed.

One of the cleverest of all the later fairy tales is the Acajou et Zirphile of Duclos, who, indeed,
had sufficient wits to do anything well, and was a novelist, though not a very distinguished
one, on a larger scale. The tale itself (which is said to have been written "up to" illustrations
of Boucher designed for something else) has, indeed, a smatch of vulgarity, but a purely superfluous
and easily removable one. It is almost as cleverly written as any thing of Voltaire's: and the final
situation, where the hero, who has gone through all the mischiefs and triumphs of one of Crébillon's,
recovers his only real love, Zirphile, in a torment and tornado of heads separated from bodies
and hands separated from arms, is rather capital.

Not much less so, in the different way of a pretty sentimentality, is the Aglaé ou Naboline of the
painter Coypel; while the batch of short stories from Mme.

Le Prince de Beaumont's Magasin des Enfants have had a curious fate. They are rather pooh-poohed
by French editors and critics, and they are certainly very moral, too much so, in fact, as has
been already objected to one of them, Le Prince Chéri. But allowances have been allowed even
there, and, somehow or other, Fatal et Fortuné, Le Prince Charmant, Joliette, and the rest have
recovered more of the root of the matter than most others, and have established a just popularity
in translation.

And then comes the shortest, I think, of all the stories in the one and forty volumes; the
silliest as a composition; the most contemptibly thought--but by the accidents of fate endowed
later with a tragic-satiric moralitas almost if not quite unrivalled
in literature.

Its author was a certain M. Selis, apparently a very respectable schoolmaster, professor, and bookmaker
of not the lowest class--employments and occupations in respect of all of which not a few of
us have earned our bread and paid our income-tax. Unluckily for him, there was born in his
time a Dauphin, and he wrote a little adulatory tale of the birth, and the editors of the
Cabinet Appendix thanked him much for giving it them. It is not four pages long; it tells how
an ancestral genie--a great king named Louis--blessed the child, and said that he would be
called "the father of his people," and another followed suit with "the father of letters," and
a third swore Ventre Saint Gris! and named the baby's uncle as "Joseph," and a still greater
Louis said other things, and a fairy named Maria Theresa crowned the blessings. Then came an ogre
mounted on a leopard and eating raw meat, who was of Albion, and said he was king of the country,
and observed "God ham" [sic], and was told that he would be beaten and made to lay down his arms
by the child.

And the Dauphin, unless this signalement is strangely delusive, lived to know the worst ogres in
the world (their chief was named Simon), who were of his own people, and to die the most unhappy
prince or king in that world. And he of the Leopard who said God ham, would have saved that Dauphin
if he could, and did slay many of his less guiltless relations and subjects, and beat the rest
"thorough and thorough," and restored (could they have had the will and wit to profit by it) the race
of Louis and Francis, and of the genie who said "Ventre Saint Gris!"
to their throne.

And this was the end of the vaticinations of M. Selis, and such are the tears of things.

The rest of this volume is occupied by a baker's dozen of Contes Choisis, the first of which,
Les Trois Epreuves, seems to imitate Voltaire, and is smartly written, while some of the others
are not bad.

Volume xxxvi. is occupied (not too appositely, though inoffensively in itself) by a translation
of Wieland's Don Silvia de Rosalva, which is a German Sir Launcelot Greaves or Spiritual Quixote,
with fairy tales substituted for romances of chivalry. The author of Oberon was seldom, if ever,
unreadable, and he is not so here; but the thing is neither a tale proper (seeing that it fills
a whole volume), nor a real fairy tale, nor French, so we may let it alone.

Then this curious collection once more comes to an end, which is not an end, with a very useful
though not too absolutely trustworthy volume of Notices des Auteurs, containing not only "bio-bibliographical"
articles on the actual writers collected, but references to others,
great and small, from Marivaux, Lesage, Prévost, and Voltaire downwards,
and glances, sometimes with actual comptes rendus, at pieces of the
class not included.

That it is conducted on the somewhat irresponsible and indolent principles of its time might be anticipated
from previous things, such as the clause in the Preface to Wieland's just noticed book, that the
author had "gone to Weimar, where perhaps he is still," an observation which, from the context,
seems not to be so much an attempt at persiflage as a pure piece of lazy naïveté. The volume,
however, contains a great deal of information such as it is; some sketches, ingeniously draped
or Bowdlerised, of the "naughty" tales excluded from the collection itself, and a few amusing
stories.[245]

As, however, has been said, there was to be still another joint to this crocodile, and the
four last volumes, xxxviii. to xli.

(not, as is wrongly said by some, xxxvii. to xl.), contain a somewhat rash continuation of
the Arabian Nights themselves, with which Cazotte[246] appears to have had a good deal to do,
though an actual Arab monk of the name of Chavis is said to have been mainly concerned. They are
not bad reading; but even less of fairy tales than Gueulette's orientalities.

* * * * *

Sad sea-feelings, scraps of my uncle's superstitions, thoughts of the dead, of the grave, of
the old broken ships, drifted through my mind.  But the strong sun upon my shoulders warmed
me to the heart, and I stooped forward and plunged into the sea.

It was all that I could do to catch a trail of the sea-tangle that grew so thickly on the terrace;
but once so far anchored I secured myself by grasping a whole armful of these thick and slimy
stalks, and, planting my feet against the edge, I looked around me.  On all sides the clear
sand stretched forth unbroken; it came to the foot of the rocks, scoured into the likeness
of an alley in a garden by the action of the tides; and before me, for as far as I could see,
nothing was visible but the same many-folded sand upon the sun-bright bottom of the bay.  Yet
the terrace to which I was then holding was as thick with strong sea-growths as a tuft of heather,
and the cliff from which it bulged hung draped below the water-line with brown lianas.  In
this complexity of forms, all swaying together in the current, things were hard to be distinguished;
and I was still uncertain whether my feet were pressed upon the natural rock or upon the timbers
of the Armada treasure-ship, when the whole tuft of tangle came away in my hand, and in an
instant I was on the surface, and the shores of the bay and the bright water swam before my
eyes in a glory of crimson.

I clambered back upon the rocks, and threw the plant of tangle at my feet.  Something at the
same moment rang sharply, like a falling coin.  I stooped, and there, sure enough, crusted
with the red rust, there lay an iron shoe-buckle.  The sight of this poor human relic thrilled
me to the heart, but not with hope nor fear, only with a desolate melancholy.  I held it in
my hand, and the thought of its owner appeared before me like the presence of an actual man.
His weather-beaten face, his sailor's hands, his sea-voice hoarse with singing at the capstan,
the very foot that had once worn that buckle and trod so much along the swerving decks--the
whole human fact of him, as a creature like myself, with hair and blood and seeing eyes, haunted
me in that sunny, solitary place, not like a spectre, but like some friend whom I had basely
injured.  Was the great treasure ship indeed below there, with her guns and chain and treasure,
as she had sailed from Spain; her decks a garden for the seaweed, her cabin a breeding place
for fish, soundless but for the dredging water, motionless but for the waving of the tangle
upon her battlements--that old, populous, sea-riding castle, now a reef in Sandag Bay?  Or,
as I thought it likelier, was this a waif from the disaster of the foreign brig--was this shoe-buckle
bought but the other day and worn by a man of my own period in the world's history, hearing
the same news from day to day, thinking the same thoughts, praying, perhaps, in the same temple
with myself?  However it was, I was assailed with dreary thoughts; my uncle's words, 'the dead
are down there,' echoed in my ears; and though I determined to dive once more, it was with
a strong repugnance that I stepped forward to the margin of the rocks.

A great change passed at that moment over the appearance of the bay.  It was no more that clear,
visible interior, like a house roofed with glass, where the green, submarine sunshine slept
so stilly.  A breeze, I suppose, had flawed the surface, and a sort of trouble and blackness
filled its bosom, where flashes of light and clouds of shadow tossed confusedly together. 
Even the terrace below obscurely rocked and quivered.  It seemed a graver thing to venture
on this place of ambushes; and when I leaped into the sea the second time it was with a quaking
in my soul.

I secured myself as at first, and groped among the waving tangle.  All that met my touch was
cold and soft and gluey.  The thicket was alive with crabs and lobsters, trundling to and fro
lopsidedly, and I had to harden my heart against the horror of their carrion neighbourhood.
On all sides I could feel the grain and the clefts of hard, living stone; no planks, no iron,
not a sign of any wreck; the Espirito Santo was not there.  I remember I had almost a sense
of relief in my disappointment, and I was about ready to leave go, when something happened
that sent me to the surface with my heart in my mouth.  I had already stayed somewhat late
over my explorations; the current was freshening with the change of the tide, and Sandag Bay
was no longer a safe place for a single swimmer. Well, just at the last moment there came a
sudden flush of current, dredging through the tangles like a wave.  I lost one hold, was flung
sprawling on my side, and, instinctively grasping for a fresh support, my fingers closed on
something hard and cold.  I think I knew at that moment what it was.  At least I instantly
left hold of the tangle, leaped for the surface, and clambered out next moment on the friendly
rocks with the bone of a man's leg in my grasp.

Mankind is a material creature, slow to think and dull to perceive connections.  The grave,
the wreck of the brig, and the rusty shoe-buckle were surely plain advertisements.  A child
might have read their dismal story, and yet it was not until I touched that actual piece of
mankind that the full horror of the charnel ocean burst upon my spirit.  I laid the bone beside
the buckle, picked up my clothes, and ran as I was along the rocks towards the human shore.
I could not be far enough from the spot; no fortune was vast enough to tempt me back again.
The bones of the drowned dead should henceforth roll undisturbed by me, whether on tangle or
minted gold.  But as soon as I trod the good earth again, and had covered my nakedness against
the sun, I knelt down over against the ruins of the brig, and out of the fulness of my heart
prayed long and passionately for all poor souls upon the sea.  The horror, at least, was lifted
from my mind; I could look with calm of spirit on that great bright creature, God's ocean;
and as I set off homeward up the rough sides of Aros, nothing remained of my concern beyond
a deep determination to meddle no more with the spoils of wrecked vessels or the treasures
of the dead.

I was already some way up the hill before I paused to breathe and look behind me.  The sight
that met my eyes was doubly strange.

For, first, the storm that I had foreseen was now advancing with almost tropical rapidity.
The whole surface of the sea had been dulled from its conspicuous brightness to an ugly hue
of corrugated lead; already in the distance the white waves, the 'skipper's daughters,' had
begun to flee before a breeze that was still insensible on Aros; and already along the curve
of Sandag Bay there was a splashing run of sea that I could hear from where I stood.  The change
upon the sky was even more remarkable. There had begun to arise out of the south-west a huge
and solid continent of scowling cloud; here and there, through rents in its contexture, the
sun still poured a sheaf of spreading rays; and here and there, from all its edges, vast inky
streamers lay forth along the yet unclouded sky.  The menace was express and imminent.  Even
as I gazed, the sun was blotted out.  At any moment the tempest might fall upon Aros in its might.

The suddenness of this change of weather so fixed my eyes on heaven that it was some seconds
before they alighted on the bay, mapped out below my feet, and robbed a moment later of the
sun.  The knoll which I had just surmounted overflanked a little amphitheatre of lower hillocks
sloping towards the sea, and beyond that the yellow arc of beach and the whole extent of Sandag
Bay.  It was a scene on which I had often looked down, but where I had never before beheld
a human figure.  I had but just turned my back upon it and left it empty, and my wonder may
be fancied when I saw a boat and several men in that deserted spot.  The boat was lying by
the rocks.  A pair of fellows, bareheaded, with their sleeves rolled up, and one with a boathook,
kept her with difficulty to her moorings for the current was growing brisker every moment.
A little way off upon the ledge two men in black clothes, whom I judged to be superior in rank,
laid their heads together over some task which at first I did not understand, but a second
after I had made it out--they were taking bearings with the compass; and just then I saw one
of them unroll a sheet of paper and lay his finger down, as though identifying features in
a map.  Meanwhile a third was walking to and fro, polling among the rocks and peering over
the edge into the water.  While I was still watching them with the stupefaction of surprise,
my mind hardly yet able to work on what my eyes reported, this third person suddenly stooped
and summoned his companions with a cry so loud that it reached my ears upon the hill. The others
ran to him, even dropping the compass in their hurry, and I could see the bone and the shoe-buckle
going from hand to hand, causing the most unusual gesticulations of surprise and interest.
Just then I could hear the seamen crying from the boat, and saw them point westward to that
cloud continent which was ever the more rapidly unfurling its blackness over heaven.  The others
seemed to consult; but the danger was too pressing to be braved, and they bundled into the
boat carrying my relies with them, and set forth out of the bay with all speed of oars.

I made no more ado about the matter, but turned and ran for the house. Whoever these men were,
it was fit my uncle should be instantly informed. It was not then altogether too late in the
day for a descent of the Jacobites; and may be Prince Charlie, whom I knew my uncle to detest,
was one of the three superiors whom I had seen upon the rock.  Yet as I ran, leaping from rock
to rock, and turned the matter loosely in my mind, this theory grew ever the longer the less
welcome to my reason.  The compass, the map, the interest awakened by the buckle, and the conduct
of that one among the strangers who had looked so often below him in the water, all seemed
to point to a different explanation of their presence on that outlying, obscure islet of the
western sea.  The Madrid historian, the search instituted by Dr. Robertson, the bearded stranger
with the rings, my own fruitless search that very morning in the deep water of Sandag Bay,
ran together, piece by piece, in my memory, and I made sure that these strangers must be Spaniards
in quest of ancient treasure and the lost ship of the Armada.  But the people living in outlying
islands, such as Aros, are answerable for their own security; there is none near by to protect
or even to help them; and the presence in such a spot of a crew of foreign adventurers--poor,
greedy, and most likely lawless--filled me with apprehensions for my uncle's money, and even
for the safety of his daughter.  I was still wondering how we were to get rid of them when
I came, all breathless, to the top of Aros.  The whole world was shadowed over; only in the
extreme east, on a hill of the mainland, one last gleam of sunshine lingered like a jewel;
rain had begun to fall, not heavily, but in great drops; the sea was rising with each moment,
and already a band of white encircled Aros and the nearer coasts of Grisapol.  The boat was
still pulling seaward, but I now became aware of what had been hidden from me lower down--a
large, heavily sparred, handsome schooner, lying to at the south end of Aros.  Since I had
not seen her in the morning when I had looked around so closely at the signs of the weather,
and upon these lone waters where a sail was rarely visible, it was clear she must have lain
last night behind the uninhabited Eilean Gour, and this proved conclusively that she was manned
by strangers to our coast, for that anchorage, though good enough to look at, is little better
than a trap for ships.  With such ignorant sailors upon so wild a coast, the coming gale was
not unlikely to bring death upon its wings.

CHAPTER IV.  THE GALE.

I found my uncle at the gable end, watching the signs of the weather, with a pipe in his fingers.

'Uncle,' said I, 'there were men ashore at Sandag Bay--'

I had no time to go further; indeed, I not only forgot my words, but even my weariness, so
strange was the effect on Uncle Gordon.  He dropped his pipe and fell back against the end
of the house with his jaw fallen, his eyes staring, and his long face as white as paper.  We
must have looked at one another silently for a quarter of a minute, before he made answer in
this extraordinary fashion: 'Had he a hair kep on?'

I knew as well as if I had been there that the man who now lay buried at Sandag had worn a
hairy cap, and that he had come ashore alive.  For the first and only time I lost toleration
for the man who was my benefactor and the father of the woman I hoped to call my wife.

'These were living men,' said I, 'perhaps Jacobites, perhaps the French, perhaps pirates, perhaps
adventurers come here to seek the Spanish treasure ship; but, whatever they may be, dangerous
at least to your daughter and my cousin.  As for your own guilty terrors, man, the dead sleeps
well where you have laid him.  I stood this morning by his grave; he will not wake before the
trump of doom.'

My kinsman looked upon me, blinking, while I spoke; then he fixed his eyes for a little on
the ground, and pulled his fingers foolishly; but it was plain that he was past the power of
speech.

'Come,' said I.  'You must think for others.  You must come up the hill with me, and see this
ship.'

He obeyed without a word or a look, following slowly after my impatient strides.  The spring
seemed to have gone out of his body, and he scrambled heavily up and down the rocks, instead
of leaping, as he was wont, from one to another.  Nor could I, for all my cries, induce him
to make better haste.  Only once he replied to me complainingly, and like one in bodily pain:
'Ay, ay, man, I'm coming.'  Long before we had reached the top, I had no other thought for
him but pity.  If the crime had been monstrous the punishment was in proportion.

At last we emerged above the sky-line of the hill, and could see around us.  All was black
and stormy to the eye; the last gleam of sun had vanished; a wind had sprung up, not yet high,
but gusty and unsteady to the point; the rain, on the other hand, had ceased.  Short as was
the interval, the sea already ran vastly higher than when I had stood there last; already it
had begun to break over some of the outward reefs, and already it moaned aloud in the sea-caves
of Aros.  I looked, at first, in vain for the schooner.

'There she is,' I said at last.  But her new position, and the course she was now lying, puzzled
me.  'They cannot mean to beat to sea,' I cried.

'That's what they mean,' said my uncle, with something like joy; and just then the schooner
went about and stood upon another tack, which put the question beyond the reach of doubt. 
These strangers, seeing a gale on hand, had thought first of sea-room.  With the wind that
threatened, in these reef-sown waters and contending against so violent a stream of tide, their
course was certain death.

'Good God!' said I, 'they are all lost.'

'Ay,' returned my uncle, 'a'--a' lost.  They hadnae a chance but to rin for Kyle Dona.  The
gate they're gaun the noo, they couldnae win through an the muckle deil were there to pilot
them.  Eh, man,' he continued, touching me on the sleeve, 'it's a braw nicht for a shipwreck!
Twa in ae twalmonth!  Eh, but the Merry Men'll dance bonny!'

I looked at him, and it was then that I began to fancy him no longer in his right mind.  He
was peering up to me, as if for sympathy, a timid joy in his eyes.  All that had passed between
us was already forgotten in the prospect of this fresh disaster.

'If it were not too late,' I cried with indignation, 'I would take the coble and go out to
warn them.'

'Na, na,' he protested, 'ye maunnae interfere; ye maunnae meddle wi' the like o' that.  It's
His'--doffing his bonnet--'His wull.  And, eh, man! but it's a braw nicht for't!'

Something like fear began to creep into my soul and, reminding him that I had not yet dined,
I proposed we should return to the house.  But no; nothing would tear him from his place of
outlook.

'I maun see the hail thing, man, Cherlie,' he explained--and then as the schooner went about
a second time, 'Eh, but they han'le her bonny!' he cried.  'The Christ-Anna was naething to this.'

Already the men on board the schooner must have begun to realise some part, but not yet the
twentieth, of the dangers that environed their doomed ship.  At every lull of the capricious
wind they must have seen how fast the current swept them back.  Each tack was made shorter,
as they saw how little it prevailed.  Every moment the rising swell began to boom and foam
upon another sunken reef; and ever and again a breaker would fall in sounding ruin under the
very bows of her, and the brown reef and streaming tangle appear in the hollow of the wave.
I tell you, they had to stand to their tackle: there was no idle men aboard that ship, God
knows.  It was upon the progress of a scene so horrible to any human-hearted man that my misguided
uncle now pored and gloated like a connoisseur.  As I turned to go down the hill, he was lying
on his belly on the summit, with his hands stretched forth and clutching in the heather.  He
seemed rejuvenated, mind and body.

When I got back to the house already dismally affected, I was still more sadly downcast at
the sight of Mary.  She had her sleeves rolled up over her strong arms, and was quietly making
bread.  I got a bannock from the dresser and sat down to eat it in silence.

'Are ye wearied, lad?' she asked after a while.

'I am not so much wearied, Mary,' I replied, getting on my feet, 'as I am weary of delay, and
perhaps of Aros too.  You know me well enough to judge me fairly, say what I like.  Well, Mary,
you may be sure of this: you had better be anywhere but here.'

'I'll be sure of one thing,' she returned: 'I'll be where my duty is.'

'You forget, you have a duty to yourself,' I said.

'Ay, man?' she replied, pounding at the dough; 'will you have found that in the Bible, now?'

'Mary,' I said solemnly, 'you must not laugh at me just now.  God knows I am in no heart for
laughing.  If we could get your father with us, it would be best; but with him or without him,
I want you far away from here, my girl; for your own sake, and for mine, ay, and for your father's
too, I want you far--far away from here.  I came with other thoughts; I came here as a man
comes home; now it is all changed, and I have no desire nor hope but to flee--for that's the
word--flee, like a bird out of the fowler's snare, from this accursed island.'

She had stopped her work by this time.

'And do you think, now,' said she, 'do you think, now, I have neither eyes nor ears?  Do ye
think I havenae broken my heart to have these braws (as he calls them, God forgive him!) thrown
into the sea?  Do ye think I have lived with him, day in, day out, and not seen what you saw
in an hour or two?  No,' she said, 'I know there's wrong in it; what wrong, I neither know
nor want to know.  There was never an ill thing made better by meddling, that I could hear
of.  But, my lad, you must never ask me to leave my father.  While the breath is in his body,
I'll be with him.  And he's not long for here, either: that I can tell you, Charlie--he's not
long for here.  The mark is on his brow; and better so--maybe better so.'

I was a while silent, not knowing what to say; and when I roused my head at last to speak,
she got before me.

'Charlie,' she said, 'what's right for me, neednae be right for you. There's sin upon this
house and trouble; you are a stranger; take your things upon your back and go your ways to
better places and to better folk, and if you were ever minded to come back, though it were
twenty years syne, you would find me aye waiting.'

'Mary Ellen,' I said, 'I asked you to be my wife, and you said as good as yes.  That's done
for good.  Wherever you are, I am; as I shall answer to my God.'

As I said the words, the wind suddenly burst out raving, and then seemed to stand still and
shudder round the house of Aros.  It was the first squall, or prologue, of the coming tempest,
and as we started and looked about us, we found that a gloom, like the approach of evening,
had settled round the house.

'God pity all poor folks at sea!' she said.  'We'll see no more of my father till the morrow's
morning.'

And then she told me, as we sat by the fire and hearkened to the rising gusts, of how this
change had fallen upon my uncle.  All last winter he had been dark and fitful in his mind.
Whenever the Roost ran high, or, as Mary said, whenever the Merry Men were dancing, he would
lie out for hours together on the Head, if it were at night, or on the top of Aros by day,
watching the tumult of the sea, and sweeping the horizon for a sail. After February the tenth,
when the wealth-bringing wreck was cast ashore at Sandag, he had been at first unnaturally
gay, and his excitement had never fallen in degree, but only changed in kind from dark to darker.
He neglected his work, and kept Rorie idle.  They two would speak together by the hour at the
gable end, in guarded tones and with an air of secrecy and almost of guilt; and if she questioned
either, as at first she sometimes did, her inquiries were put aside with confusion.  Since
Rorie had first remarked the fish that hung about the ferry, his master had never set foot
but once upon the mainland of the Ross.  That once--it was in the height of the springs--he
had passed dryshod while the tide was out; but, having lingered overlong on the far side, found
himself cut off from Aros by the returning waters.  It was with a shriek of agony that he had
leaped across the gut, and he had reached home thereafter in a fever- fit of fear.  A fear
of the sea, a constant haunting thought of the sea, appeared in his talk and devotions, and
even in his looks when he was silent.

Rorie alone came in to supper; but a little later my uncle appeared, took a bottle under his
arm, put some bread in his pocket, and set forth again to his outlook, followed this time by
Rorie.  I heard that the schooner was losing ground, but the crew were still fighting every
inch with hopeless ingenuity and course; and the news filled my mind with blackness.

A little after sundown the full fury of the gale broke forth, such a gale as I have never seen
in summer, nor, seeing how swiftly it had come, even in winter.  Mary and I sat in silence,
the house quaking overhead, the tempest howling without, the fire between us sputtering with
raindrops. Our thoughts were far away with the poor fellows on the schooner, or my not less
unhappy uncle, houseless on the promontory; and yet ever and again we were startled back to
ourselves, when the wind would rise and strike the gable like a solid body, or suddenly fall
and draw away, so that the fire leaped into flame and our hearts bounded in our sides.  Now
the storm in its might would seize and shake the four corners of the roof, roaring like Leviathan
in anger.  Anon, in a lull, cold eddies of tempest moved shudderingly in the room, lifting
the hair upon our heads and passing between us as we sat.  And again the wind would break forth
in a chorus of melancholy sounds, hooting low in the chimney, wailing with flutelike softness
round the house.

It was perhaps eight o'clock when Rorie came in and pulled me mysteriously to the door.  My
uncle, it appeared, had frightened even his constant comrade; and Rorie, uneasy at his extravagance,
prayed me to come out and share the watch.  I hastened to do as I was asked; the more readily
as, what with fear and horror, and the electrical tension of the night, I was myself restless
and disposed for action.  I told Mary to be under no alarm, for I should be a safeguard on
her father; and wrapping myself warmly in a plaid, I followed Rorie into the open air.

Arm in arm, and staggering against the wind, Rorie and I won every yard of ground with conscious
effort.  We slipped on the wet sod, we fell together sprawling on the rocks.  Bruised, drenched,
beaten, and breathless, it must have taken us near half an hour to get from the house down
to the Head that overlooks the Roost.  There, it seemed, was my uncle's favourite observatory.
Right in the face of it, where the cliff is highest and most sheer, a hump of earth, like a
parapet, makes a place of shelter from the common winds, where a man may sit in quiet and see
the tide and the mad billows contending at his feet.  As he might look down from the window
of a house upon some street disturbance, so, from this post, he looks down upon the tumbling
of the Merry Men.  On such a night, of course, he peers upon a world of blackness, where the
waters wheel and boil, where the waves joust together with the noise of an explosion, and the
foam towers and vanishes in the twinkling of an eye. Never before had I seen the Merry Men
thus violent.  The fury, height, and transiency of their spoutings was a thing to be seen and
not recounted.  High over our heads on the cliff rose their white columns in the darkness;
and the same instant, like phantoms, they were gone. Sometimes three at a time would thus aspire
and vanish; sometimes a gust took them, and the spray would fall about us, heavy as a wave.
And yet the spectacle was rather maddening in its levity than impressive by its force.  Thought
was beaten down by the confounding uproar--a gleeful vacancy possessed the brains of men, a
state akin to madness; and I found myself at times following the dance of the Merry Men as
it were a tune upon a jigging instrument.

I first caught sight of my uncle when we were still some yards away in one of the flying glimpses
of twilight that chequered the pitch darkness of the night.  He was standing up behind the
parapet, his head thrown back and the bottle to his mouth.  As he put it down, he saw and recognised
us with a toss of one hand fleeringly above his head.

'Has he been drinking?' shouted I to Rorie.

'He will aye be drunk when the wind blaws,' returned Rorie in the same high key, and it was
all that I could do to hear him.

'Then--was he so--in February?' I inquired.

Rorie's 'Ay' was a cause of joy to me.  The murder, then, had not sprung in cold blood from
calculation; it was an act of madness no more to be condemned than to be pardoned.  My uncle
was a dangerous madman, if you will, but he was not cruel and base as I had feared.  Yet what
a scene for a carouse, what an incredible vice, was this that the poor man had chosen!  I have
always thought drunkenness a wild and almost fearful pleasure, rather demoniacal than human;
but drunkenness, out here in the roaring blackness, on the edge of a cliff above that hell
of waters, the man's head spinning like the Roost, his foot tottering on the edge of death,
his ear watching for the signs of ship-wreck, surely that, if it were credible in any one,
was morally impossible in a man like my uncle, whose mind was set upon a damnatory creed and
haunted by the darkest superstitions.  Yet so it was; and, as we reached the bight of shelter
and could breathe again, I saw the man's eyes shining in the night with an unholy glimmer.

'Eh, Charlie, man, it's grand!' he cried.  'See to them!' he continued, dragging me to the
edge of the abyss from whence arose that deafening clamour and those clouds of spray; 'see
to them dancin', man!  Is that no wicked?'

He pronounced the word with gusto, and I thought it suited with the scene.

'They're yowlin' for thon schooner,' he went on, his thin, insane voice clearly audible in
the shelter of the bank, 'an' she's comin' aye nearer, aye nearer, aye nearer an' nearer an'
nearer; an' they ken't, the folk kens it, they ken wool it's by wi' them.  Charlie, lad, they're
a' drunk in yon schooner, a' dozened wi' drink.  They were a' drunk in the Christ- Anna, at
the hinder end.  There's nane could droon at sea wantin' the brandy.  Hoot awa, what do you
ken?' with a sudden blast of anger.  'I tell ye, it cannae be; they droon withoot it.  Ha'e,'
holding out the bottle, 'tak' a sowp.'

I was about to refuse, but Rorie touched me as if in warning; and indeed I had already thought
better of the movement.  I took the bottle, therefore, and not only drank freely myself, but
contrived to spill even more as I was doing so.  It was pure spirit, and almost strangled me
to swallow.  My kinsman did not observe the loss, but, once more throwing back his head, drained
the remainder to the dregs.  Then, with a loud laugh, he cast the bottle forth among the Merry
Men, who seemed to leap up, shouting to receive it.

'Ha'e, bairns!' he cried, 'there's your han'sel.  Ye'll get bonnier nor that, or morning.'

Suddenly, out in the black night before us, and not two hundred yards away, we heard, at a
moment when the wind was silent, the clear note of a human voice.  Instantly the wind swept
howling down upon the Head, and the Roost bellowed, and churned, and danced with a new fury.
But we had heard the sound, and we knew, with agony, that this was the doomed ship now close
on ruin, and that what we had heard was the voice of her master issuing his last command. 
Crouching together on the edge, we waited, straining every sense, for the inevitable end. 
It was long, however, and to us it seemed like ages, ere the schooner suddenly appeared for
one brief instant, relieved against a tower of glimmering foam.  I still see her reefed mainsail
flapping loose, as the boom fell heavily across the deck; I still see the black outline of
the hull, and still think I can distinguish the figure of a man stretched upon the tiller.
Yet the whole sight we had of her passed swifter than lightning; the very wave that disclosed
her fell burying her for ever; the mingled cry of many voices at the point of death rose and
was quenched in the roaring of the Merry Men.  And with that the tragedy was at an end.  The
strong ship, with all her gear, and the lamp perhaps still burning in the cabin, the lives
of so many men, precious surely to others, dear, at least, as heaven to themselves, had all,
in that one moment, gone down into the surging waters.  They were gone like a dream.  And the
wind still ran and shouted, and the senseless waters in the Roost still leaped and tumbled
as before.

How long we lay there together, we three, speechless and motionless, is more than I can tell,
but it must have been for long.  At length, one by one, and almost mechanically, we crawled
back into the shelter of the bank.  As I lay against the parapet, wholly wretched and not entirely
master of my mind, I could hear my kinsman maundering to himself in an altered and melancholy
mood.  Now he would repeat to himself with maudlin iteration, 'Sic a fecht as they had--sic
a sair fecht as they had, puir lads, puir lads!' and anon he would bewail that 'a' the gear
was as gude's tint,' because the ship had gone down among the Merry Men instead of stranding
on the shore; and throughout, the name--the Christ-Anna--would come and go in his divagations,
pronounced with shuddering awe.  The storm all this time was rapidly abating.  In half an hour
the wind had fallen to a breeze, and the change was accompanied or caused by a heavy, cold,
and plumping rain.  I must then have fallen asleep, and when I came to myself, drenched, stiff,
and unrefreshed, day had already broken, grey, wet, discomfortable day; the wind blew in faint
and shifting capfuls, the tide was out, the Roost was at its lowest, and only the strong beating
surf round all the coasts of Aros remained to witness of the furies of the night.

CHAPTER V.  A MAN OUT OF THE SEA.

Rorie set out for the house in search of warmth and breakfast; but my uncle was bent upon examining
the shores of Aros, and I felt it a part of duty to accompany him throughout.  He was now docile
and quiet, but tremulous and weak in mind and body; and it was with the eagerness of a child
that he pursued his exploration.  He climbed far down upon the rocks; on the beaches, he pursued
the retreating breakers.  The merest broken plank or rag of cordage was a treasure in his eyes
to be secured at the peril of his life.  To see him, with weak and stumbling footsteps, expose
himself to the pursuit of the surf, or the snares and pitfalls of the weedy rock, kept me in
a perpetual terror.  My arm was ready to support him, my hand clutched him by the skirt, I
helped him to draw his pitiful discoveries beyond the reach of the returning wave; a nurse
accompanying a child of seven would have had no different experience.

Yet, weakened as he was by the reaction from his madness of the night before, the passions
that smouldered in his nature were those of a strong man.  His terror of the sea, although
conquered for the moment, was still undiminished; had the sea been a lake of living flames,
he could not have shrunk more panically from its touch; and once, when his foot slipped and
he plunged to the midleg into a pool of water, the shriek that came up out of his soul was
like the cry of death.  He sat still for a while, panting like a dog, after that; but his desire
for the spoils of shipwreck triumphed once more over his fears; once more he tottered among
the curded foam; once more he crawled upon the rocks among the bursting bubbles; once more
his whole heart seemed to be set on driftwood, fit, if it was fit for anything, to throw upon
the fire.  Pleased as he was with what he found, he still incessantly grumbled at his ill-fortune.

'Aros,' he said, 'is no a place for wrecks ava'--no ava'.  A' the years I've dwalt here, this
ane maks the second; and the best o' the gear clean tint!'

'Uncle,' said I, for we were now on a stretch of open sand, where there was nothing to divert
his mind, 'I saw you last night, as I never thought to see you--you were drunk.'

'Na, na,' he said, 'no as bad as that.  I had been drinking, though.  And to tell ye the God's
truth, it's a thing I cannae mend.  There's nae soberer man than me in my ordnar; but when
I hear the wind blaw in my lug, it's my belief that I gang gyte.'

'You are a religious man,' I replied, 'and this is sin'.

'Ou,' he returned, 'if it wasnae sin, I dinnae ken that I would care for't.  Ye see, man, it's
defiance.  There's a sair spang o' the auld sin o' the warld in you sea; it's an unchristian
business at the best o't; an' whiles when it gets up, an' the wind skreights--the wind an'
her are a kind of sib, I'm thinkin'--an' thae Merry Men, the daft callants, blawin' and lauchin',
and puir souls in the deid thraws warstlin' the leelang nicht wi' their bit ships--weel, it
comes ower me like a glamour. I'm a deil, I ken't.  But I think naething o' the puir sailor
lads; I'm wi' the sea, I'm just like ane o' her ain Merry Men.'

I thought I should touch him in a joint of his harness.  I turned me towards the sea; the surf
was running gaily, wave after wave, with their manes blowing behind them, riding one after
another up the beach, towering, curving, falling one upon another on the trampled sand. Without,
the salt air, the scared gulls, the widespread army of the sea- chargers, neighing to each
other, as they gathered together to the assault of Aros; and close before us, that line on
the flat sands that, with all their number and their fury, they might never pass.

'Thus far shalt thou go,' said I, 'and no farther.'  And then I quoted as solemnly as I was
able a verse that I had often before fitted to the chorus of the breakers:--

   But yet the Lord that is on high,
      Is more of might by far,
   Than noise of many waters is,
      As great sea billows are.

'Ay,' said my kinsinan, 'at the hinder end, the Lord will triumph; I dinnae misdoobt that.
But here on earth, even silly men-folk daur Him to His face.  It is nae wise; I am nae sayin'
that it's wise; but it's the pride of the eye, and it's the lust o' life, an' it's the wale
o' pleesures.'

I said no more, for we had now begun to cross a neck of land that lay between us and Sandag;
and I withheld my last appeal to the man's better reason till we should stand upon the spot
associated with his crime.  Nor did he pursue the subject; but he walked beside me with a firmer
step. The call that I had made upon his mind acted like a stimulant, and I could see that he
had forgotten his search for worthless jetsam, in a profound, gloomy, and yet stirring train
of thought.  In three or four minutes we had topped the brae and begun to go down upon Sandag.
The wreck had been roughly handled by the sea; the stem had been spun round and dragged a little
lower down; and perhaps the stern had been forced a little higher, for the two parts now lay
entirely separate on the beach. When we came to the grave I stopped, uncovered my head in the
thick rain, and, looking my kinsman in the face, addressed him.

'A man,' said I, 'was in God's providence suffered to escape from mortal dangers; he was poor,
he was naked, he was wet, he was weary, he was a stranger; he had every claim upon the bowels
of your compassion; it may be that he was the salt of the earth, holy, helpful, and kind; it
may be he was a man laden with iniquities to whom death was the beginning of torment.  I ask
you in the sight of heaven: Gordon Darnaway, where is the man for whom Christ died?'

He started visibly at the last words; but there came no answer, and his face expressed no feeling
but a vague alarm.

'You were my father's brother,' I continued; 'You, have taught me to count your house as if
it were my father's house; and we are both sinful men walking before the Lord among the sins
and dangers of this life.  It is by our evil that God leads us into good; we sin, I dare not
say by His temptation, but I must say with His consent; and to any but the brutish man his
sins are the beginning of wisdom.  God has warned you by this crime; He warns you still by
the bloody grave between our feet; and if there shall follow no repentance, no improvement,
no return to Him, what can we look for but the following of some memorable judgment?'

Even as I spoke the words, the eyes of my uncle wandered from my face.  A change fell upon
his looks that cannot be described; his features seemed to dwindle in size, the colour faded
from his cheeks, one hand rose waveringly and pointed over my shoulder into the distance, and
the oft- repeated name fell once more from his lips: 'The Christ-Anna!'

I turned; and if I was not appalled to the same degree, as I return thanks to Heaven that I
had not the cause, I was still startled by the sight that met my eyes.  The form of a man stood
upright on the cabin- hutch of the wrecked ship; his back was towards us; he appeared to be
scanning the offing with shaded eyes, and his figure was relieved to its full height, which
was plainly very great, against the sea and sky.  I have said a thousand times that I am not
superstitious; but at that moment, with my mind running upon death and sin, the unexplained
appearance of a stranger on that sea-girt, solitary island filled me with a surprise that bordered
close on terror. Les Voyages de Zulma, again an incomplete thing which actually tails off towards
its failure of an end, shows some ingenuity in its conception, but suffers, even in the beginning,
from that mixing of kinds which has been pointed out and reprobated. An attempt is made to systematise
the fairy idea by representing these gracious creatures as offspring of Destiny and the Earth,
with a cruel brother Time, and an offset of mischievous sisters who
exactly correspond to the good ones--Disgracieuse to Gracieuse, and
so on--and have a queen Laide-des-Laides, who answers to the good
fairy princess, Belle-des-Belles.

A mortal--Zulma--is, for paternal rather than personal merits, chosen by Destiny to enjoy the
privilege of entering and understanding the fairy world, and Gracieuse is the fairy assigned
as his guide. The idea is, as has been said, rather ingenious; but it is too systematic, and
like other things in other parts of the collection, "loses the grace and liberty of the composition"
in system. Moreover, the morality, as is rather the wont of these imitators when they are not (as
a few of the partly non-cabinetted ones are) deliberately naughty, is much too scrupulous.[235]
It is clear that Zulma is in love with Gracieuse, that she responds
to some extent, and that Her Majesty Queen Belle-des-Belles is a little
jealous and inclined to cut Gracieuse out.

But nothing in the finished part of the story gives us any of the
nice love-making that we want.

[Sidenote: Fénelon.]

Madame le Marchand's Boca is a story which begins in Peru but finishes in an "Isle of Ebony,"
where the names of Zobeide and Abdelazis seem rather more at home; it is not without merit. As for
the fables and stories which Fénelon composed for that imperfect
Marcellus, the Duke of Burgundy, they have all the merits of style,
sense, and good feeling which they might be expected to have, and
it would be absurd to ask of them qualities which, in the circumstances,
they could not display.

The Chinese Tales are about as little Chinese as may be, consisting
of accounts of his punitive metempsychoses by the Mandarin Fum Hoam
(a name afterwards borrowed in better known work), who seems to have
been excluded from the knowledge of anything particularly Celestial.[236]
But they are rather smartly told.

On the other hand, Florine ou la Belle Italienne, which is included in the same volume with the
sham Chinoiseries, is one of the worst instances of the confusion of kinds noted above. It honestly
prepares one for what is coming by a reference in the Preface to Fénelon; but a list of dramatis
(or fabulae) personae, which follows, would have tried the saintliness even of him of Cambrai
almost as much as a German occupation of his archiepiscopal see. "Agatonphisie," for a personage
who represents, we are told, "Le Bon Sens," might break the heart of Clenardus, if not the head
of Priscian.

The Thousand and One Quarter Hours, or Contes Tartares, have as little of the Tartar as those
above mentioned of the Chinese, but if somewhat verbose, they are not wholly devoid of literary
quality.

Thereupon I signed to him to follow me, which he did readily and with a grave obeisance like
a fallen king; all the while there had come no shade of alteration in his face, neither of
anxiety while he was still waiting, nor of relief now that he was reassured; if he were a slave,
as I supposed, I could not but judge he must have fallen from some high place in his own country,
and fallen as he was, I could not but admire his bearing.  As we passed the grave, I paused
and raised my hands and eyes to heaven in token of respect and sorrow for the dead; and he,
as if in answer, bowed low and spread his hands abroad; it was a strange motion, but done like
a thing of common custom; and I supposed it was ceremonial in the land from which he came.
At the same time he pointed to my uncle, whom we could just see perched upon a knoll, and touched
his head to indicate that he was mad.

We took the long way round the shore, for I feared to excite my uncle if we struck across the
island; and as we walked, I had time enough to mature the little dramatic exhibition by which
I hoped to satisfy my doubts.  Accordingly, pausing on a rock, I proceeded to imitate before
the negro the action of the man whom I had seen the day before taking bearings with the compass
at Sandag.  He understood me at once, and, taking the imitation out of my hands, showed me
where the boat was, pointed out seaward as if to indicate the position of the schooner, and
then down along the edge of the rock with the words 'Espirito Santo,' strangely pronounced,
but clear enough for recognition.  I had thus been right in my conjecture; the pretended historical
inquiry had been but a cloak for treasure-hunting; the man who had played on Dr. Robertson
was the same as the foreigner who visited Grisapol in spring, and now, with many others, lay
dead under the Roost of Aros: there had their greed brought them, there should their bones
be tossed for evermore.  In the meantime the black continued his imitation of the scene, now
looking up skyward as though watching the approach of the storm now, in the character of a
seaman, waving the rest to come aboard; now as an officer, running along the rock and entering
the boat; and anon bending over imaginary oars with the air of a hurried boatman; but all with
the same solemnity of manner, so that I was never even moved to smile.  Lastly, he indicated
to me, by a pantomime not to be described in words, how he himself had gone up to examine the
stranded wreck, and, to his grief and indignation, had been deserted by his comrades; and thereupon
folded his arms once more, and stooped his head, like one accepting fate.

The mystery of his presence being thus solved for me, I explained to him by means of a sketch
the fate of the vessel and of all aboard her.  He showed no surprise nor sorrow, and, with
a sudden lifting of his open hand, seemed to dismiss his former friends or masters (whichever
they had been) into God's pleasure.  Respect came upon me and grew stronger, the more I observed
him; I saw he had a powerful mind and a sober and severe character, such as I loved to commune
with; and before we reached the house of Aros I had almost forgotten, and wholly forgiven him,
his uncanny colour.

To Mary I told all that had passed without suppression, though I own my heart failed me; but
I did wrong to doubt her sense of justice.

'You did the right,' she said.  'God's will be done.'  And she set out meat for us at once.

As soon as I was satisfied, I bade Rorie keep an eye upon the castaway, who was still eating,
and set forth again myself to find my uncle.  I had not gone far before I saw him sitting in
the same place, upon the very topmost knoll, and seemingly in the same attitude as when I had
last observed him.  From that point, as I have said, the most of Aros and the neighbouring
Ross would be spread below him like a map; and it was plain that he kept a bright look-out
in all directions, for my head had scarcely risen above the summit of the first ascent before
he had leaped to his feet and turned as if to face me.  I hailed him at once, as well as I
was able, in the same tones and words as I had often used before, when I had come to summon
him to dinner.  He made not so much as a movement in reply.  I passed on a little farther,
and again tried parley, with the same result.  But when I began a second time to advance, his
insane fears blazed up again, and still in dead silence, but with incredible speed, he began
to flee from before me along the rocky summit of the hill.  An hour before, he had been dead
weary, and I had been comparatively active.  But now his strength was recruited by the fervour
of insanity, and it would have been vain for me to dream of pursuit.  Nay, the very attempt,
I thought, might have inflamed his terrors, and thus increased the miseries of our position.
And I had nothing left but to turn homeward and make my sad report to Mary.

She heard it, as she had heard the first, with a concerned composure, and, bidding me lie down
and take that rest of which I stood so much in need, set forth herself in quest of her misguided
father.  At that age it would have been a strange thing that put me from either meat or sleep;
I slept long and deep; and it was already long past noon before I awoke and came downstairs
into the kitchen.  Mary, Rorie, and the black castaway were seated about the fire in silence;
and I could see that Mary had been weeping.  There was cause enough, as I soon learned, for
tears.  First she, and then Rorie, had been forth to seek my uncle; each in turn had found
him perched upon the hill-top, and from each in turn he had silently and swiftly fled.  Rorie
had tried to chase him, but in vain; madness lent a new vigour to his bounds; he sprang from
rock to rock over the widest gullies; he scoured like the wind along the hill-tops; he doubled
and twisted like a hare before the dogs; and Rorie at length gave in; and the last that he
saw, my uncle was seated as before upon the crest of Aros.  Even during the hottest excitement
of the chase, even when the fleet-footed servant had come, for a moment, very near to capture
him, the poor lunatic had uttered not a sound.  He fled, and he was silent, like a beast; and
this silence had terrified his pursuer.

There was something heart-breaking in the situation.  How to capture the madman, how to feed
him in the meanwhile, and what to do with him when he was captured, were the three difficulties
that we had to solve.

'The black,' said I, 'is the cause of this attack.  It may even be his presence in the house
that keeps my uncle on the hill.  We have done the fair thing; he has been fed and warmed under
this roof; now I propose that Rorie put him across the bay in the coble, and take him through
the Ross as far as Grisapol.'

In this proposal Mary heartily concurred; and bidding the black follow us, we all three descended
to the pier.  Certainly, Heaven's will was declared against Gordon Darnaway; a thing had happened,
never paralleled before in Aros; during the storm, the coble had broken loose, and, striking
on the rough splinters of the pier, now lay in four feet of water with one side stove in. 
Three days of work at least would be required to make her float.  But I was not to be beaten.
I led the whole party round to where the gut was narrowest, swam to the other side, and called
to the black to follow me.  He signed, with the same clearness and quiet as before, that he
knew not the art; and there was truth apparent in his signals, it would have occurred to none
of us to doubt his truth; and that hope being over, we must all go back even as we came to
the house of Aros, the negro walking in our midst without embarrassment.

All we could do that day was to make one more attempt to communicate with the unhappy madman.
Again he was visible on his perch; again he fled in silence.  But food and a great cloak were
at least left for his comfort; the rain, besides, had cleared away, and the night promised
to be even warm.  We might compose ourselves, we thought, until the morrow; rest was the chief
requisite, that we might be strengthened for unusual exertions; and as none cared to talk,
we separated at an early hour.

I lay long awake, planning a campaign for the morrow.  I was to place the black on the side
of Sandag, whence he should head my uncle towards the house; Rorie in the west, I on the east,
were to complete the cordon, as best we might.  It seemed to me, the more I recalled the configuration
of the island, that it should be possible, though hard, to force him down upon the low ground
along Aros Bay; and once there, even with the strength of his madness, ultimate escape was
hardly to be feared.  It was on his terror of the black that I relied; for I made sure, however
he might run, it would not be in the direction of the man whom he supposed to have returned
from the dead, and thus one point of the compass at least would be secure.

When at length I fell asleep, it was to be awakened shortly after by a dream of wrecks, black
men, and submarine adventure; and I found myself so shaken and fevered that I arose, descended
the stair, and stepped out before the house.  Within, Rorie and the black were asleep together
in the kitchen; outside was a wonderful clear night of stars, with here and there a cloud still
hanging, last stragglers of the tempest.  It was near the top of the flood, and the Merry Men
were roaring in the windless quiet of the night.  Never, not even in the height of the tempest,
had I heard their song with greater awe.  Now, when the winds were gathered home, when the
deep was dandling itself back into its summer slumber, and when the stars rained their gentle
light over land and sea, the voice of these tide-breakers was still raised for havoc.  They
seemed, indeed, to be a part of the world's evil and the tragic side of life.  Nor were their
meaningless vociferations the only sounds that broke the silence of the night.  For I could
hear, now shrill and thrilling and now almost drowned, the note of a human voice that accompanied
the uproar of the Roost.  I knew it for my kinsman's; and a great fear fell upon me of God's
judgments, and the evil in the world.  I went back again into the darkness of the house as
into a place of shelter, and lay long upon my bed, pondering these mysteries.

It was late when I again woke, and I leaped into my clothes and hurried to the kitchen.  No
one was there; Rorie and the black had both stealthily departed long before; and my heart stood
still at the discovery.  I could rely on Rorie's heart, but I placed no trust in his discretion.
If he had thus set out without a word, he was plainly bent upon some service to my uncle. 
But what service could he hope to render even alone, far less in the company of the man in
whom my uncle found his fears incarnated?  Even if I were not already too late to prevent some
deadly mischief, it was plain I must delay no longer.  With the thought I was out of the house;
and often as I have run on the rough sides of Aros, I never ran as I did that fatal morning.
I do not believe I put twelve minutes to the whole ascent.

My uncle was gone from his perch.  The basket had indeed been torn open and the meat scattered
on the turf; but, as we found afterwards, no mouthful had been tasted; and there was not another
trace of human existence in that wide field of view.  Day had already filled the clear heavens;
the sun already lighted in a rosy bloom upon the crest of Ben Kyaw; but all below me the rude
knolls of Aros and the shield of sea lay steeped in the clear darkling twilight of the dawn.

'Rorie!' I cried; and again 'Rorie!'  My voice died in the silence, but there came no answer
back.  If there were indeed an enterprise afoot to catch my uncle, it was plainly not in fleetness
of foot, but in dexterity of stalking, that the hunters placed their trust.  I ran on farther,
keeping the higher spurs, and looking right and left, nor did I pause again till I was on the
mount above Sandag.  I could see the wreck, the uncovered belt of sand, the waves idly beating,
the long ledge of rocks, and on either hand the tumbled knolls, boulders, and gullies of the
island.  But still no human thing.

At a stride the sunshine fell on Aros, and the shadows and colours leaped into being.  Not
half a moment later, below me to the west, sheep began to scatter as in a panic.  There came
a cry.  I saw my uncle running.  I saw the black jump up in hot pursuit; and before I had time
to understand, Rorie also had appeared, calling directions in Gaelic as to a dog herding sheep.

I took to my heels to interfere, and perhaps I had done better to have waited where I was,
for I was the means of cutting off the madman's last escape.  There was nothing before him
from that moment but the grave, the wreck, and the sea in Sandag Bay.  And yet Heaven knows
that what I did was for the best.

My uncle Gordon saw in what direction, horrible to him, the chase was driving him.  He doubled,
darting to the right and left; but high as the fever ran in his veins, the black was still
the swifter.  Turn where he would, he was still forestalled, still driven toward the scene
of his crime.  Suddenly he began to shriek aloud, so that the coast re-echoed; and now both
I and Rorie were calling on the black to stop.  But all was vain, for it was written otherwise.
The pursuer still ran, the chase still sped before him screaming; they avoided the grave, and
skimmed close past the timbers of the wreck; in a breath they had cleared the sand; and still
my kinsman did not pause, but dashed straight into the surf; and the black, now almost within
reach, still followed swiftly behind him.  Rorie and I both stopped, for the thing was now
beyond the hands of men, and these were the decrees of God that came to pass before our eyes.
There was never a sharper ending.  On that steep beach they were beyond their depth at a bound;
neither could swim; the black rose once for a moment with a throttling cry; but the current
had them, racing seaward; and if ever they came up again, which God alone can tell, it would
be ten minutes after, at the far end of Aros Roost, where the seabirds hover fishing.

WILL O' THE MILL.

CHAPTER I.  THE PLAIN AND THE STARS.

The Mill here Will lived with his adopted parents stood in a falling valley between pinewoods
and great mountains.  Above, hill after hill, soared upwards until they soared out of the depth
of the hardiest timber, and stood naked against the sky.  Some way up, a long grey village
lay like a seam or a ray of vapour on a wooded hillside; and when the wind was favourable,
the sound of the church bells would drop down, thin and silvery, to Will.  Below, the valley
grew ever steeper and steeper, and at the same time widened out on either hand; and from an
eminence beside the mill it was possible to see its whole length and away beyond it over a
wide plain, where the river turned and shone, and moved on from city to city on its voyage
towards the sea.  It chanced that over this valley there lay a pass into a neighbouring kingdom;
so that, quiet and rural as it was, the road that ran along beside the river was a high thoroughfare
between two splendid and powerful societies.  All through the summer, travelling-carriages
came crawling up, or went plunging briskly downwards past the mill; and as it happened that
the other side was very much easier of ascent, the path was not much frequented, except by
people going in one direction; and of all the carriages that Will saw go by, five-sixths were
plunging briskly downwards and only one-sixth crawling up.  Much more was this the case with
foot-passengers.  All the light- footed tourists, all the pedlars laden with strange wares,
were tending downward like the river that accompanied their path.  Nor was this all; for when
Will was yet a child a disastrous war arose over a great part of the world.  The newspapers
were full of defeats and victories, the earth rang with cavalry hoofs, and often for days together
and for miles around the coil of battle terrified good people from their labours in the field.
Of all this, nothing was heard for a long time in the valley; but at last one of the commanders
pushed an army over the pass by forced marches, and for three days horse and foot, cannon and
tumbril, drum and standard, kept pouring downward past the mill.  All day the child stood and
watched them on their passage--the rhythmical stride, the pale, unshaven faces tanned about
the eyes, the discoloured regimentals and the tattered flags, filled him with a sense of weariness,
pity, and wonder; and all night long, after he was in bed, he could hear the cannon pounding
and the feet trampling, and the great armament sweeping onward and downward past the mill.
No one in the valley ever heard the fate of the expedition, for they lay out of the way of
gossip in those troublous times; but Will saw one thing plainly, that not a man returned. 
Whither had they all gone?  Whither went all the tourists and pedlars with strange wares? whither
all the brisk barouches with servants in the dicky? whither the water of the stream, ever coursing
downward and ever renewed from above?  Even the wind blew oftener down the valley, and carried
the dead leaves along with it in the fall.  It seemed like a great conspiracy of things animate
and inanimate; they all went downward, fleetly and gaily downward, and only he, it seemed,
remained behind, like a stock upon the wayside.  It sometimes made him glad when he noticed
how the fishes kept their heads up stream.  They, at least, stood faithfully by him, while
all else were posting downward to the unknown world.

One evening he asked the miller where the river went.

'It goes down the valley,' answered he, 'and turns a power of mills--six score mills, they
say, from here to Unterdeck--and is none the wearier after all.  And then it goes out into
the lowlands, and waters the great corn country, and runs through a sight of fine cities (so
they say) where kings live all alone in great palaces, with a sentry walling up and down before
the door.  And it goes under bridges with stone men upon them, looking down and smiling so
curious it the water, and living folks leaning their elbows on the wall and looking over too.
And then it goes on and on, and down through marshes and sands, until at last it falls into
the sea, where the ships are that bring parrots and tobacco from the Indies.  Ay, it has a
long trot before it as it goes singing over our weir, bless its heart!'

'And what is the sea?' asked Will.

'The sea!' cried the miller.  'Lord help us all, it is the greatest thing God made!  That is
where all the water in the world runs down into a great salt lake.  There it lies, as flat
as my hand and as innocent-like as a child; but they do say when the wind blows it gets up
into water- mountains bigger than any of ours, and swallows down great ships bigger than our
mill, and makes such a roaring that you can hear it miles away upon the land.  There are great
fish in it five times bigger than a bull, and one old serpent as lone as our river and as old
as all the world, with whiskers like a man, and a crown of silver on her head.'

Will thought he had never heard anything like this, and he kept on asking question after question
about the world that lay away down the river, with all its perils and marvels, until the old
miller became quite interested himself, and at last took him by the hand and led him to the
hilltop that overlooks the valley and the plain.  The sun was near setting, and hung low down
in a cloudless sky.  Everything was defined and glorified in golden light.  Will had never
seen so great an expanse of country in his life; he stood and gazed with all his eyes.  He
could see the cities, and the woods and fields, and the bright curves of the river, and far
away to where the rim of the plain trenched along the shining heavens.  An over-mastering emotion
seized upon the boy, soul and body; his heart beat so thickly that he could not breathe; the
scene swam before his eyes; the sun seemed to wheel round and round, and throw off, as it turned,
strange shapes which disappeared with the rapidity of thought, and were succeeded by others.
Will covered his face with his hands, and burst into a violent fit of tears; and the poor miller,
sadly disappointed and perplexed, saw nothing better for it than to take him up in his arms
and carry him home in silence.

From that day forward Will was full of new hopes and longings.  Something kept tugging at his
heart-strings; the running water carried his desires along with it as he dreamed over its fleeting
surface; the wind, as it ran over innumerable tree-tops, hailed him with encouraging words;
branches beckoned downward; the open road, as it shouldered round the angles and went turning
and vanishing fast and faster down the valley, tortured him with its solicitations.  He spent
long whiles on the eminence, looking down the rivershed and abroad on the fat lowlands, and
watched the clouds that travelled forth upon the sluggish wind and trailed their purple shadows
on the plain; or he would linger by the wayside, and follow the carriages with his eyes as
they rattled downward by the river.  It did not matter what it was; everything that went that
way, were it cloud or carriage, bird or brown water in the stream, he felt his heart flow out
after it in an ecstasy of longing.

We are told by men of science that all the ventures of mariners on the sea, all that counter-marching
of tribes and races that confounds old history with its dust and rumour, sprang from nothing
more abstruse than the laws of supply and demand, and a certain natural instinct for cheap
rations.  To any one thinking deeply, this will seem a dull and pitiful explanation.  The tribes
that came swarming out of the North and East, if they were indeed pressed onward from behind
by others, were drawn at the same time by the magnetic influence of the South and West.  There
is one legend which profoundly represents their spirit, of how a flying party of these wanderers
encountered a very old man shod with iron.  The old man asked them whither they were going;
and they answered with one voice: 'To the Eternal City!'  He looked upon them gravely.  'I
have sought it,' he said, 'over the most part of the world.  Three such pairs as I now carry
on my feet have I worn out upon this pilgrimage, and now the fourth is growing slender underneath
my steps.  And all this while I have not found the city.'  And he turned and went his own way
alone, leaving them astonished.

And yet this would scarcely parallel the intensity of Will's feeling for the plain.  If he
could only go far enough out there, he felt as if his eyesight would be purged and clarified,
as if his hearing would grow more delicate, and his very breath would come and go with luxury.
He was transplanted and withering where he was; he lay in a strange country and was sick for
home.  Bit by bit, he pieced together broken notions of the world below: of the river, ever
moving and growing until it sailed forth into the majestic ocean; of the cities, full of brisk
and beautiful people, playing fountains, bands of music and marble palaces, and lighted up
at night from end to end with artificial stars of gold; of the great churches, wise universities,
brave armies, and untold money lying stored in vaults; of the high-flying vice that moved in
the sunshine, and the stealth and swiftness of midnight murder.  I have said he was sick as
if for home: the figure halts.  He was like some one lying in twilit, formless preexistence,
and stretching out his hands lovingly towards many- coloured, many-sounding life.  It was no
wonder he was unhappy, he would go and tell the fish: they were made for their life, wished
for no more than worms and running water, and a hole below a falling bank; but he was differently
designed, full of desires and aspirations, itching at the fingers, lusting with the eyes, whom
the whole variegated world could not satisfy with aspects.  The true life, the true bright
sunshine, lay far out upon the plain.  And O! to see this sunlight once before he died! to
move with a jocund spirit in a golden land! to hear the trained singers and sweet church bells,
and see the holiday gardens!  'And O fish!' he would cry, 'if you would only turn your noses
down stream, you could swim so easily into the fabled waters and see the vast ships passing
over your head like clouds, and hear the great water-hills making music over you all day long!'
But the fish kept looking patiently in their own direction, until Will hardly knew whether
to laugh or cry.

Hitherto the traffic on the road had passed by Will, like something seen in a picture: he had
perhaps exchanged salutations with a tourist, or caught sight of an old gentleman in a travelling
cap at a carriage window; but for the most part it had been a mere symbol, which he contemplated
from apart and with something of a superstitious feeling.  A time came at last when this was
to be changed.  The miller, who was a greedy man in his way, and never forewent an opportunity
of honest profit, turned the mill-house into a little wayside inn, and, several pieces of good
fortune falling in opportunely, built stables and got the position of post master on the road.
It now became Will's duty to wait upon people, as they sat to break their fasts in the little
arbour at the top of the mill garden; and you may be sure that he kept his ears open, and learned
many new things about the outside world as he brought the omelette or the wine.  Nay, he would
often get into conversation with single guests, and by adroit questions and polite attention,
not only gratify his own curiosity, but win the goodwill of the travellers.  Many complimented
the old couple on their serving-boy; and a professor was eager to take him away with him, and
have him properly educated in the plain.  The miller and his wife were mightily astonished
and even more pleased.  They thought it a very good thing that they should have opened their
inn.  'You see,' the old man would remark, 'he has a kind of talent for a publican; he never
would have made anything else!'  And so life wagged on in the valley, with high satisfaction
to all concerned but Will.  Every carriage that left the inn-door seemed to take a part of
him away with it; and when people jestingly offered him a lift, he could with difficulty command
his emotion.  Night after night he would dream that he was awakened by flustered servants,
and that a splendid equipage waited at the door to carry him down into the plain; night after
night; until the dream, which had seemed all jollity to him at first, began to take on a colour
of gravity, and the nocturnal summons and waiting equipage occupied a place in his mind as
something to be both feared and hoped for.

One day, when Will was about sixteen, a fat young man arrived at sunset to pass the night.
He was a contented-looking fellow, with a jolly eye, and carried a knapsack.  While dinner
was preparing, he sat in the arbour to read a book; but as soon as he had begun to observe
Will, the book was laid aside; he was plainly one of those who prefer living people to people
made of ink and paper.  Will, on his part, although he had not been much interested in the
stranger at first sight, soon began to take a great deal of pleasure in his talk, which was
full of good nature and good sense, and at last conceived a great respect for his character
and wisdom.  They sat far into the night; and about two in the morning Will opened his heart
to the young man, and told him how he longed to leave the valley and what bright hopes he had
connected with the cities of the plain.  The young man whistled, and then broke into a smile.

'My young friend,' he remarked, 'you are a very curious little fellow to be sure, and wish
a great many things which you will never get.  Why, you would feel quite ashamed if you knew
how the little fellows in these fairy cities of yours are all after the same sort of nonsense,
and keep breaking their hearts to get up into the mountains.  And let me tell you, those who
go down into the plains are a very short while there before they wish themselves heartily back
again.  The air is not so light nor so pure; nor is the sun any brighter.  As for the beautiful
men and women, you would see many of them in rags and many of them deformed with horrible disorders;
and a city is so hard a place for people who are poor and sensitive that many choose to die
by their own hand.'

'You must think me very simple,' answered Will.  'Although I have never been out of this valley,
believe me, I have used my eyes.  I know how one thing lives on another; for instance, how
the fish hangs in the eddy to catch his fellows; and the shepherd, who makes so pretty a picture
carrying home the lamb, is only carrying it home for dinner.  I do not expect to find all things
right in your cities.  That is not what troubles me; it might have been that once upon a time;
but although I live here always, I have asked many questions and learned a great deal in these
last years, and certainly enough to cure me of my old fancies.  But you would not have me die
like a dog and not see all that is to be seen, and do all that a man can do, let it be good
or evil? you would not have me spend all my days between this road here and the river, and
not so much as make a motion to be up and live my life?--I would rather die out of hand,' he
cried, 'than linger on as I am doing.'

'Thousands of people,' said the young man, 'live and die like you, and are none the less happy.'

'Ah!' said Will, 'if there are thousands who would like, why should not one of them have my place?'

It was quite dark; there was a hanging lamp in the arbour which lit up the table and the faces
of the speakers; and along the arch, the leaves upon the trellis stood out illuminated against
the night sky, a pattern of transparent green upon a dusky purple.  The fat young man rose,
and, taking Will by the arm, led him out under the open heavens.

'Did you ever look at the stars?' he asked, pointing upwards.

'Often and often,' answered Will.

'And do you know what they are?'

'I have fancied many things.'

'They are worlds like ours,' said the young man.  'Some of them less; many of them a million
times greater; and some of the least sparkles that you see are not only worlds, but whole clusters
of worlds turning about each other in the midst of space.  We do not know what there may be
in any of them; perhaps the answer to all our difficulties or the cure of all our sufferings:
and yet we can never reach them; not all the skill of the craftiest of men can fit out a ship
for the nearest of these our neighbours, nor would the life of the most aged suffice for such
a journey.  When a great battle has been lost or a dear friend is dead, when we are hipped
or in high spirits, there they are unweariedly shining overhead.  We may stand down here, a
whole army of us together, and shout until we break our hearts, and not a whisper reaches them.
We may climb the highest mountain, and we are no nearer them.  All we can do is to stand down
here in the garden and take off our hats; the starshine lights upon our heads, and where mine
is a little bald, I dare say you can see it glisten in the darkness.  The mountain and the
mouse.  That is like to be all we shall ever have to do with Arcturus or Aldebaran.  Can you
apply a parable?' he added, laying his hand upon Will's shoulder.  'It is not the same thing
as a reason, but usually vastly more convincing.'

Will hung his head a little, and then raised it once more to heaven.  The stars seemed to expand
and emit a sharper brilliancy; and as he kept turning his eyes higher and higher, they seemed
to increase in multitude under his gaze.

'I see,' he said, turning to the young man.  'We are in a rat-trap.'

'Something of that size.  Did you ever see a squirrel turning in a cage? and another squirrel
sitting philosophically over his nuts?  I needn't ask you which of them looked more of a fool.'

CHAPTER II.  THE PARSON'S MARJORY.

After some years the old people died, both in one winter, very carefully tended by their adopted
son, and very quietly mourned when they were gone.  People who had heard of his roving fancies
supposed he would hasten to sell the property, and go down the river to push his fortunes. 16.
"Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained; let us walk by the same rule; let us mind
the same thing."

Yet as our fathers had reason to complain, "that the profane, loose, and insolent carriage of
many in their armies, who went to the assistance of their brethren in England, and the tampering
and unstraight dealings of some commissioners and others of our nation, in London, the Isle
of Wight, and other places, had proved great lets to the work of reformation and settling of kirk
government there, whereby error and schism in the land had been greatly
increased, and sectaries hardened in their way;" so much more during
the time of the late persecution, the offensive carriage of many who
went to England is to be bewailed, who proved very stumbling to the
Sectarians there.

There hath been little zeal or endeavour for such a uniformity, little praying for it, or mourning
over the obstructions of it; but, upon the contrary, a toleration was embraced, introductive
of a sectarian multiformity of religion without a testimony against
the toleration even of Popery itself, under the usurper James, Duke
of York; and since the Revolution the land hath done exceeding much
to harden them.

1st, By accepting such persons to the royal dignity over this realm as had sworn to maintain
the Antichristian hierarchy of Prelacy, with all the superstitions and ceremonies of the Church
of England, and who countenance a multiformity in the worship of God and government of the church,
and do not suppress such as are unsound and heterodox in the fundamental articles of the Christian
faith. And, next, to put a full stop to all endeavours of uniformity and union in the Lord's
way, and to bring the nation under an indespensible necessity of covenant breaking, this nation
hath entered into an incorporating union with England in such terms, and upon such conditions
as formally and explicitly established Prelacy as the Church-government there to all succeeding
generations; and that while, in the meantime, all manner of Sectarian errors are there encouraged,
maintained, and supported by means of a toleration. By the concluding of which union, this
land hath said upon the matter that there is no obligation upon us to tender the advancement of
religion in that nation, or to study such means and methods as might tend to bring them to a
sense of their breach of covenant, or reduce them to a performance of the duties whereunto they
are engaged; and thus this land hath hardened them in their sinful ways and courses, contrary to
this Solemn League, and given them ground to think that we look upon the obligation thereof to
be loosed.

This land hath been wanting in compassion to them as brethren, in not labouring to show them
their sin and danger, while persisting in a professed violation of their vows, and refusing them help
in their need, when supplication was made by some of them to the first Assembly after the Revolution
for ministers to preach the gospel. And though this land hath sought out methods how to entertain
amity and friendship with them, yet have they not endeavoured to have it such as that the Lord
should, upon that account, delight to dwell amongst us: nay, upon the contrary, unless these
methods be repented of and forsaken, it is impossible that reformation should ever amount to
that degree of perfection in these kingdoms, to which, through the mercy of God, it once arrived;
so that instead of living together in peace and love, we and our posterity after us, are like
to live in a joint defection from our covenant engagements made to the Most High God. And in the
National Covenant to abhor and detest the Antichristian wicked Hierarchy," &c. According to the Scriptures.

Exod.
xxiii. 32, 33. "Thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor with their gods. They shall not dwell in
thy land, lest they make thee sin against me: for if thou serve their gods, it surely will be
a snare unto thee." Exod. xxxiv. 12, 13. Deut. xiii. chapter throughout. Judges ii. 2. "And ye
shall make no league with the inhabitants of this land; you shall throw down their altars," &c.
Zech. xiii. 2, 3.

"And it shall come to pass in that day saith the Lord of Hosts, that I will cut off the names
of idols out of the land, and also I will cause the prophets and the unclean spirits to pass
out of the land. And it shall come to pass, that when any shall yet prophesy, then his father
and his mother that begat him, shall say unto him, Thou shalt not live; for thou speakest
lies in the name of the Lord: and his father, and his mother, that begat him, shall thrust
him through, when he prophesieth." I Tim. iv. 1, 2, 3. Rev. xvii. 5. Compared with Rev. xviii.
4, 5, 6.

Yet, alas! so far has the land been defective in this, that upon the contrary, it hath been polluted
with idolatrous masses; altars, and other monuments of idolatry were suffered again to be
erected; the penal statutes were disabled, stopped, and suspended
by an absolute arbitrary power by means of a toleration in its own
nature tending, and in its design intending to introduce Popery and
slavery, which yet was accepted and addressed for by many backslidden
ministers, who to this day have made no public acknowledgement of
the sin of so doing, notwithstanding all the reformation which is
bragged of, and was countenanced, complied, and concurred with by
many people without a testimony or endeavour to withstand it.

Yea, the administration of the government and the greatest offices of power and trust were committed
into, and permitted to abide in the hands of Papists; and the head of them and great pillar and
promoter of Popery, James the VII, was owned as King, contrary to the laws of God and man and
covenant obligations, without respect of persons to extirpate Popery and Papists; and few during that
time evinced any just zeal or indignation against, or fear of the manifest appearances of the
coming in of Popery and intended establishment of it in the land. And not only then, but even
to this day, there is too much conniving at Papists; the laws are not put in execution against
them in their full extent and latitude: And albeit this land, yea, whole Britain and Ireland,
were purged of Popery, yet cannot we be said to have made conscience of performing this part
of the oath of God, while there is a confederating with Papists abroad and fighting in their
quarrel, and that, whilst in the meantime they are persecuting, with the height of rigour and
severity, all such as profess any thing of the reformed religion in their dominions.

Matt. xx. 25, 26. Luke xxii. 25, 26. "And he said unto them the Kings of the Gentiles exercise
lordship over them," &c. Acts xx: 17.

"And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and called the elders of the church." Compared with verse
28. "Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the flock, over which the Holy Ghost hath
made you observers (bishops) to feed the church of God, which he hath purchased with his own
blood." I Peter v. 3. "Neither as being lords over God's heritage: but being ensamples to the
flock." 3 John verse 9.

"I wrote unto the church; but Diotrepehes, who loveth to have the
pre-eminence among them, receiveth us not."

And these breaches of it were not only made during the tunes of persecution, when Charles the
II. by an arbitrary power, granted him by a parasitical Parliament, did overturn Presbyterian
government, and introduce Prelacy, to which change the greatest part of the ministry did perfidiously
yield, and became vassals to the bishops; such as were not willing to conform, were pressed
to it by confinement, banishment, imprisonment, confiscation of goods,
all manner of tortures, and, finally, death itself.

During which hour and power of darkness, many complied with the enemy, by taking oaths and bonds,
indulgencies and toleration, and because so remiss in this matter,
that it was all one to them which government had the ascendant, so
they might enjoy their worldly accommodations.

And not only then, while Satan was let loose in his members and emissaries
to persecute and waste the Church of Christ, but since peace and quietness
are obtained, this duty continues to be greatly slighted; yea, in
place of extirpating Prelacy, have there not been courses taken effectually
to establish it?

To instance a few--the accepting of William and Mary, and after them the present possessor of the
Crown, to be supreme Magistrates, while they are knownly and professedly
Prelatical in their judgment, and engaged by oath at their coronation
to maintain the same; the swearing oaths of allegiance to them without
security for their preserving of the true reformed religion--yea,
without any limitation or qualification whatsoever; as also, the taking
an oath of adjuration, wherein, by consequence, the takers engaged
to do to the utmost of their power to procure that the Kings or Queens
of these kingdoms shall be of the communion of the Prelatical Church,
and so that they shall contribute to the support of Prelacy.

Again, the Episcopal clergy who subjected to it during the time of
its legal establishment, have not been therefore prosecuted by the
discipline of the church; but such as did, and yet do profess it as
their principle, are allowed equal encouragement with the Presbyterians,
only providing they evidence good affection to the civil government.

And now, since the late incorporating union with England, we of this
nation have consented that Prelacy shall be established there to all
succeeding generations, (as was observed in the first article); and,
moreover, have given into the hands of the Prelatics in England, the
power of making laws which must become binding upon this land, they
being members of the British Parliament and council; which power has
been already improved, to establish a liberty and protection for the
whole rabble of the Episcopal Clergy in the free exercise of the Popish
ceremonies of the Church of England, without any provision against
the grossest heretical opinions that they please to broach, excepting
only the denying of the doctrine of the blessed Trinity.

Where, then, are our endeavours for the extirpation of the wicked hierarchy?--where is the
abhorrence and detestation of it, sworn and engaged to in these Covenants?--Do not many who profess
themselves to be Presbyterians show themselves so indifferent in this point, that they can
join with either, as may suit their interest?--instance the Sacramental Testers. Few mourn over
and pray earnestly for the subversion of that hierarchy. Few doctrinally discover the evils
of such a government, and how contrary it is to God's Word--or labour to bring their hearers
into a dislike and detestation of it, and the sad fruits which result from it. Few study to
convince others of the evil of such a principle, and following such a course by the Apostle's
rule, avoiding all unnecessary company with them, that they may be ashamed; but, upon the contrary,
many Presbyterians too familiar and unnecessary converse with them, encourage and harden them;
and, particularly, ministers are to be blamed herein, who preach one half of the Lord's day
in the church, and allow the curate the other half. Few impartially reprove and warn them
of their sin and danger; but, upon the other hand, many professed Presbyterians, by their untender
and unchristian walk and conversation, or by their lukewarmness and indifferency in Christ's
matters, now called moderation, and by their walking contrary to covenant engagements, do exceedingly
harden them in their evil way, and scandalize them at their duty.

Instead of endeavours to extirpate superstition and heresy, as we are bound by the same article
of the Solemn League, and by the "National Covenant to detest all
superstition and heresy, without or against the Word of God, and doctrine
of this reformed kirk, according to the Scripture."

Duet. xii. Thou shalt not do so unto the Lord thy God; for every abomination to the Lord which he
hateth, have they done unto their gods: for even their sons and their
daughters they have burnt in the fire to their gods.

What thing soever I command you, observe to do it: thou shalt not
add thereto nor diminish from it."

Acts xvii. Gal. iv. 10--"Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years." Col. ii. Tit. iii.
10--"A man that is an heretic, after the first and second admonition,
reject."

Yet, in the darkness of the times of persecution, many dregs of Popish superstition were observed,
many omens and freets too much looked to; Popish festival days--as
Pasche, Yule, Fastings-even, &c, have been kept by many; and Prelatical
anniversary days, and festivities devised of their own heart, appointed
for commemorating the King's and Queen's birthdays, (as May 29th,
October 13th, February 6th,) who were born as a scourge to this realm,
were complied with by many.

Yes, some have superstitiously made use of the Scriptures as a fortune book, looking to that
which first cast up to them, or to impressions borne in upon their minds from such and such
places of Scripture as Divine responses, without a due search of them as the Lord hath commanded.
And many wavering and unstable souls have been seduced unto damnable and pernicious heresies,
as Quakers, and delirious delusions, as those that followed John Gib. All which have been breaches
of Covenant, as well as of Divine commands. Yea, even to this very day, the same superstitions
are observed and practised, as abstaining from labouring upon the foresaid festivities, and
observing presages of good or tad fortune (as it is called,) upon
them and other times; as likewise, many practisers of enchantments
and users of charms--yea, such as are in actual compact with the devil,
are not carefully sought out, nor accurately tried, in order to be
brought to punishment, but overlooked and protected.

There has been also since the revolution, as well as before, a great deluge of errors through
these covenanted lands, which, to this day, continue and increase: that might be sufficient to
convince us that there have not been proper measures taken to suppress them, as this article
obliges us to do;--nay, instead thereof, they are tolerated, maintained, and protected by authority,
as appears both from the late Act of Parliament, and from the liberty allowed to that pestilent
generation of Quakers, who keep their general meetings yearly in Edinburgh, being guarded by
a company of the town guards. And as the state do not prosecute the promoters and abettors of
these heresies with civil pains, as is the duty of such as call themselves God's vicegerents,
and own themselves to be intrusted with keeping of both tables of the law; so the church is
nothing speedier or more active in drawing out their ecclesiastical sword to cut off these
luxurant branches, and to take the little foxes which spoil the wines. Many whose duty, by
virtue of their office, is to give warning from Zion's walls, as watchmen entrusted with the
city of God, neglect to discover, and from the scriptures to confute these errors, or to show
their flocks by doctrine or writing the danger of being tainted with
them.

And as suitable endeavours have been wanting effectually to extirpate
heresy and error, so schism, its inseparable companion, and necessary
consequent, has exceedingly grown and increased, to the great damage
of the church of Christ in these kingdoms, and utter subversion of
that most pleasant fabric of uniformity in religion, which the League
and Covenant binds us to endeavour.

The word of God makes schism a very great sin, as is evident from Rom. xvi. 17; 1 Cor. xi. 18,
xii. 25; Heb. x. 25; Jude 19.

And all the nation are to be reputed guilty of it who depart from the doctrine and laudable constitutions
delivered by Christ and his apostles, and adhered unto by the church
of Scotland in her purest times of Reformation.

And if we consider schism under this notion, as we ought to do, then will we find that the
greatest part of the land is guilty of it. Few are firmly and constantly adhering to the attained
Reformation; but many upon the left hand, have turned aside to compliance
with Prelacy and Erastianism, and so have by their defection broken
the church's beauty and bands, order and union, in making a faction
repugnant to her established order, and, censurable by all her standing
acts, in bringing innovations in the government, and making a rent
in the bowels of the church; by causing divisions and offences contrary
to the doctrine of the church; whereby they have made themselves guilty
of schism; and some have fallen into delusions and dotages upon the
right hand, who, in seeking to be religious above what is commanded,
have come short of the truth of religion, and made a faction repugnant
to this covenant.

Some, being private persons, have pretended an immediate commission to preach the word, and administer
the sacraments. Others, being stumbled with the defection of the time, have turned aside to independency.
"Some upon slender and insufficient grounds, have and do separate
both from faithful ministers and Christian societies and families,
because of difference in judgment and incident debates, wherein the
testimony of Christ is not much concerned; or because of personal
offences easily removed, not observing the rules of Christ for removing
of them, not having respect to his great commands of charity, forbearance,
forgiving one another, or condescendency.

And among divided parties, which in our day have been long biting and devouring one another,
there hath been too much both of sinful union and confederacy in terms prejudicial to truth;
as our joinings in the Angus regiment, at the Revolution, and our guarding and supplicating that
corrupt Convention of Estates, which consisted mostly of such as had been directly or indirectly
guilty of the murder of the Lord's people; and upon the other hand, there hath been too much
of sinful heats, animosities, and jealousies, pride, passion, and prejudice, grieving the Spirit
of the Lord, and eating out the power and life, and much hindering the holy practice and spiritual
exercise of religion."

We have been so far from endeavouring to extirpate profaneness, another evil engaged against
in the covenant, and condemned in the Word of God.
  But
Will had been observing closely, and was well aware of her dexterity and resolution.  When
he found himself alone he had a great many curious matters to turn over in his mind.  He was
very sad and solitary, to begin with.  All the interest had gone out of his life, and he might
look up at the stars as long as he pleased, he somehow failed to find support or consolation.
And then he was in such a turmoil of spirit about Marjory. He had been puzzled and irritated
at her behaviour, and yet he could not keep himself from admiring it.  He thought he recognised
a fine, perverse angel in that still soul which he had never hitherto suspected; and though
he saw it was an influence that would fit but ill with his own life of artificial calm, he
could not keep himself from ardently desiring to possess it.  Like a man who has lived among
shadows and now meets the sun, he was both pained and delighted.

As the days went forward he passed from one extreme to another; now pluming himself on the
strength of his determination, now despising his timid and silly caution.  The former was,
perhaps, the true thought of his heart, and represented the regular tenor of the man's reflections;
but the latter burst forth from time to time with an unruly violence, and then he would forget
all consideration, and go up and down his house and garden or walk among the fir-woods like
one who is beside himself with remorse.  To equable, steady-minded Will this state of matters
was intolerable; and he determined, at whatever cost, to bring it to an end. So, one warm summer
afternoon he put on his best clothes, took a thorn switch in his hand, and set out down the
valley by the river.  As soon as he had taken his determination, he had regained at a bound
his customary peace of heart, and he enjoyed the bright weather and the variety of the scene
without any admixture of alarm or unpleasant eagerness.  It was nearly the same to him how
the matter turned out.  If she accepted him he would have to marry her this time, which perhaps
was, all for the best. If she refused him, he would have done his utmost, and might follow
his own way in the future with an untroubled conscience.  He hoped, on the whole, she would
refuse him; and then, again, as he saw the brown roof which sheltered her, peeping through
some willows at an angle of the stream, he was half inclined to reverse the wish, and more
than half ashamed of himself for this infirmity of purpose.

Marjory seemed glad to see him, and gave him her hand without affectation or delay.

'I have been thinking about this marriage,' he began.

'So have I,' she answered.  'And I respect you more and more for a very wise man.  You understood
me better than I understood myself; and I am now quite certain that things are all for the
best as they are.'

'At the same time--,' ventured Will.

'You must be tired,' she interrupted.  'Take a seat and let me fetch you a glass of wine. 
The afternoon is so warm; and I wish you not to be displeased with your visit.  You must come
quite often; once a week, if you can spare the time; I am always so glad to see my friends.'

'O, very well,' thought Will to himself.  'It appears I was right after all.'  And he paid
a very agreeable visit, walked home again in capital spirits, and gave himself no further concern
about the matter.

For nearly three years Will and Marjory continued on these terms, seeing each other once or
twice a week without any word of love between them; and for all that time I believe Will was
nearly as happy as a man can be. He rather stinted himself the pleasure of seeing her; and
he would often walk half-way over to the parsonage, and then back again, as if to whet his
appetite.  Indeed there was one corner of the road, whence he could see the church-spire wedged
into a crevice of the valley between sloping firwoods, with a triangular snatch of plain by
way of background, which he greatly affected as a place to sit and moralise in before returning
homewards; and the peasants got so much into the habit of finding him there in the twilight
that they gave it the name of 'Will o' the Mill's Corner.'

At the end of the three years Marjory played him a sad trick by suddenly marrying somebody
else.  Will kept his countenance bravely, and merely remarked that, for as little as he knew
of women, he had acted very prudently in not marrying her himself three years before.  She
plainly knew very little of her own mind, and, in spite of a deceptive manner, was as fickle
and flighty as the rest of them.  He had to congratulate himself on an escape, he said, and
would take a higher opinion of his own wisdom in consequence.  But at heart, he was reasonably
displeased, moped a good deal for a month or two, and fell away in flesh, to the astonishment
of his serving-lads.

It was perhaps a year after this marriage that Will was awakened late one night by the sound
of a horse galloping on the road, followed by precipitate knocking at the inn-door.  He opened
his window and saw a farm servant, mounted and holding a led horse by the bridle, who told
him to make what haste he could and go along with him; for Marjory was dying, and had sent
urgently to fetch him to her bedside.  Will was no horseman, and made so little speed upon
the way that the poor young wife was very near her end before he arrived.  But they had some
minutes' talk in private, and he was present and wept very bitterly while she breathed her last.

CHAPTER III.  DEATH

Year after year went away into nothing, with great explosions and outcries in the cities on
the plain: red revolt springing up and being suppressed in blood, battle swaying hither and
thither, patient astronomers in observatory towers picking out and christening new stars, plays
being performed in lighted theatres, people being carried into hospital on stretchers, and
all the usual turmoil and agitation of men's lives in crowded centres.  Up in Will's valley
only the winds and seasons made an epoch; the fish hung in the swift stream, the birds circled
overhead, the pine-tops rustled underneath the stars, the tall hills stood over all; and Will
went to and fro, minding his wayside inn, until the snow began to thicken on his head.  His
heart was young and vigorous; and if his pulses kept a sober time, they still beat strong and
steady in his wrists.  He carried a ruddy stain on either cheek, like a ripe apple; he stooped
a little, but his step was still firm; and his sinewy hands were reached out to all men with
a friendly pressure.  His face was covered with those wrinkles which are got in open air, and
which rightly looked at, are no more than a sort of permanent sunburning; such wrinkles heighten
the stupidity of stupid faces; but to a person like Will, with his clear eyes and smiling mouth,
only give another charm by testifying to a simple and easy life.  His talk was full of wise
sayings.  He had a taste for other people; and other people had a taste for him.  When the
valley was full of tourists in the season, there were merry nights in Will's arbour; and his
views, which seemed whimsical to his neighbours, were often enough admired by learned people
out of towns and colleges. Indeed, he had a very noble old age, and grew daily better known;
so that his fame was heard of in the cities of the plain; and young men who had been summer
travellers spoke together in cafes of Will o' the Mill and his rough philosophy.  Many and
many an invitation, you may be sure, he had; but nothing could tempt him from his upland valley.
He would shake his head and smile over his tobacco-pipe with a deal of meaning.  'You come
too late,' he would answer.  'I am a dead man now: I have lived and died already.  Fifty years
ago you would have brought my heart into my mouth; and now you do not even tempt me.  But that
is the object of long living, that man should cease to care about life.'  And again: 'There
is only one difference between a long life and a good dinner: that, in the dinner, the sweets
come last.'  Or once more: 'When I was a boy, I was a bit puzzled, and hardly knew whether
it was myself or the world that was curious and worth looking into.  Now, I know it is myself,
and stick to that.'

He never showed any symptom of frailty, but kept stalwart and firm to the last; but they say
he grew less talkative towards the end, and would listen to other people by the hour in an
amused and sympathetic silence. Only, when he did speak, it was more to the point and more
charged with old experience.  He drank a bottle of wine gladly; above all, at sunset on the
hill-top or quite late at night under the stars in the arbour.  The sight of something attractive
and unatttainable seasoned his enjoyment, he would say; and he professed he had lived long
enough to admire a candle all the more when he could compare it with a planet.

One night, in his seventy-second year, he awoke in bed in such uneasiness of body and mind
that he arose and dressed himself and went out to meditate in the arbour.  It was pitch dark,
without a star; the river was swollen, and the wet woods and meadows loaded the air with perfume.
It had thundered during the day, and it promised more thunder for the morrow.  A murky, stifling
night for a man of seventy-two!  Whether it was the weather or the wakefulness, or some little
touch of fever in his old limbs, Will's mind was besieged by tumultuous and crying memories.
His boyhood, the night with the fat young man, the death of his adopted parents, the summer
days with Marjory, and many of those small circumstances, which seem nothing to another, and
are yet the very gist of a man's own life to himself--things seen, words heard, looks misconstrued--arose
from their forgotten corners and usurped his attention.  The dead themselves were with him,
not merely taking part in this thin show of memory that defiled before his brain, but revisiting
his bodily senses as they do in profound and vivid dreams.  The fat young man leaned his elbows
on the table opposite; Marjory came and went with an apronful of flowers between the garden
and the arbour; he could hear the old parson knocking out his pipe or blowing his resonant
nose.  The tide of his consciousness ebbed and flowed: he was sometimes half-asleep and drowned
in his recollections of the past; and sometimes he was broad awake, wondering at himself. 
But about the middle of the night he was startled by the voice of the dead miller calling to
him out of the house as he used to do on the arrival of custom.  The hallucination was so perfect
that Will sprang from his seat and stood listening for the summons to be repeated; and as he
listened he became conscious of another noise besides the brawling of the river and the ringing
in his feverish ears.  It was like the stir of horses and the creaking of harness, as though
a carriage with an impatient team had been brought up upon the road before the courtyard gate.
At such an hour, upon this rough and dangerous pass, the supposition was no better than absurd;
and Will dismissed it from his mind, and resumed his seat upon the arbour chair; and sleep
closed over him again like running water.  He was once again awakened by the dead miller's
call, thinner and more spectral than before; and once again he heard the noise of an equipage
upon the road. And so thrice and four times, the same dream, or the same fancy, presented itself
to his senses: until at length, smiling to himself as when one humours a nervous child, he
proceeded towards the gate to set his uncertainty at rest.

From the arbour to the gate was no great distance, and yet it took Will some time; it seemed
as if the dead thickened around him in the court, and crossed his path at every step.  For,
first, he was suddenly surprised by an overpowering sweetness of heliotropes; it was as if
his garden had been planted with this flower from end to end, and the hot, damp night had drawn
forth all their perfumes in a breath.  Now the heliotrope had been Marjory's favourite flower,
and since her death not one of them had ever been planted in Will's ground.

'I must be going crazy,' he thought.  'Poor Marjory and her heliotropes!'

And with that he raised his eyes towards the window that had once been hers.  If he had been
bewildered before, he was now almost terrified; for there was a light in the room; the window
was an orange oblong as of yore; and the corner of the blind was lifted and let fall as on
the night when he stood and shouted to the stars in his perplexity.  The illusion only endured
an instant; but it left him somewhat unmanned, rubbing his eyes and staring at the outline
of the house and the black night behind it.  While he thus stood, and it seemed as if he must
have stood there quite a long time, there came a renewal of the noises on the road: and he
turned in time to meet a stranger, who was advancing to meet him across the court.  There was
something like the outline of a great carriage discernible on the road behind the stranger,
and, above that, a few black pine-tops, like so many plumes.

'Master Will?' asked the new-comer, in brief military fashion.

'That same, sir,' answered Will.  'Can I do anything to serve you?'

'I have heard you much spoken of, Master Will,' returned the other; 'much spoken of, and well.
And though I have both hands full of business, I wish to drink a bottle of wine with you in
your arbour.  Before I go, I shall introduce myself.'

Will led the way to the trellis, and got a lamp lighted and a bottle uncorked.  He was not
altogether unused to such complimentary interviews, and hoped little enough from this one,
being schooled by many disappointments.  A sort of cloud had settled on his wits and prevented
him from remembering the strangeness of the hour.  He moved like a person in his sleep; and
it seemed as if the lamp caught fire and the bottle came uncorked with the facility of thought.
Still, he had some curiosity about the appearance of his visitor, and tried in vain to turn
the light into his face; either he handled the lamp clumsily, or there was a dimness over his
eyes; but he could make out little more than a shadow at table with him.  He stared and stared
at this shadow, as he wiped out the glasses, and began to feel cold and strange about the heart.
The silence weighed upon him, for he could hear nothing now, not even the river, but the drumming
of his own arteries in his ears.

'Here's to you,' said the stranger, roughly.

'Here is my service, sir,' replied Will, sipping his wine, which somehow tasted oddly.

'I understand you are a very positive fellow,' pursued the stranger.

Will made answer with a smile of some satisfaction and a little nod.

'So am I,' continued the other; 'and it is the delight of my heart to tramp on people's corns.
I will have nobody positive but myself; not one.  I have crossed the whims, in my time, of
kings and generals and great artists.  And what would you say,' he went on, 'if I had come
up here on purpose to cross yours?'

Will had it on his tongue to make a sharp rejoinder; but the politeness of an old innkeeper
prevailed; and he held his peace and made answer with a civil gesture of the hand.

'I have,' said the stranger.  'And if I did not hold you in a particular esteem, I should make
no words about the matter.  It appears you pride yourself on staying where you are.  You mean
to stick by your inn.  Now I mean you shall come for a turn with me in my barouche; and before
this bottle's empty, so you shall.'

'That would be an odd thing, to be sure,' replied Will, with a chuckle. 'Why, sir, I have grown
here like an old oak-tree; the Devil himself could hardly root me up: and for all I perceive
you are a very entertaining old gentleman, I would wager you another bottle you lose your pains
with me.'

The dimness of Will's eyesight had been increasing all this while; but he was somehow conscious
of a sharp and chilling scrutiny which irritated and yet overmastered him.

'You need not think,' he broke out suddenly, in an explosive, febrile manner that startled
and alarmed himself, 'that I am a stay-at-home, because I fear anything under God.  God knows
I am tired enough of it all; and when the time comes for a longer journey than ever you dream
of, I reckon I shall find myself prepared.'

The stranger emptied his glass and pushed it away from him.  He looked down for a little, and
then, leaning over the table, tapped Will three times upon the forearm with a single finger.
'The time has come!' he said solemnly.

An ugly thrill spread from the spot he touched.  The tones of his voice were dull and startling,
and echoed strangely in Will's heart.

'I beg your pardon,' he said, with some discomposure.  'What do you mean?'

'Look at me, and you will find your eyesight swim.  Raise your hand; it is dead-heavy.  This
is your last bottle of wine, Master Will, and your last night upon the earth.'

'You are a doctor?' quavered Will.

'The best that ever was,' replied the other; 'for I cure both mind and body with the same prescription.
I take away all plain and I forgive all sins; and where my patients have gone wrong in life,
I smooth out all complications and set them free again upon their feet.'

'I have no need of you,' said Will.

'A time comes for all men, Master Will,' replied the doctor, 'when the helm is taken out of
their hands.  For you, because you were prudent and quiet, it has been long of coming, and
you have had long to discipline yourself for its reception.  You have seen what is to be seen
about your mill; you have sat close all your days like a hare in its form; but now that is
at an end; and,' added the doctor, getting on his feet, 'you must arise and come with me.'

'You are a strange physician,' said Will, looking steadfastly upon his guest.

'I am a natural law,' he replied, 'and people call me Death.'

'Why did you not tell me so at first?' cried Will.  'I have been waiting for you these many
years.  Give me your hand, and welcome.'

'Lean upon my arm,' said the stranger, 'for already your strength abates. Lean on me as heavily
as you need; for though I am old, I am very strong. It is but three steps to my carriage, and
there all your trouble ends. Why, Will,' he added, 'I have been yearning for you as if you
were my own son; and of all the men that ever I came for in my long days, I have come for you
most gladly.  I am caustic, and sometimes offend people at first sight; but I am a good friend
at heart to such as you.'

'Since Marjory was taken,' returned Will, 'I declare before God you were the only friend I
had to look for.'  So the pair went arm-in-arm across the courtyard.

One of the servants awoke about this time and heard the noise of horses pawing before he dropped
asleep again; all down the valley that night there was a rushing as of a smooth and steady
wind descending towards the plain; and when the world rose next morning, sure enough Will o'
the Mill had gone at last upon his travels.

MARKHEIM

'Yes,' said the dealer, 'our windfalls are of various kinds.  Some customers are ignorant,
and then I touch a dividend on my superior knowledge.  Some are dishonest,' and here he held
up the candle, so that the light fell strongly on his visitor, 'and in that case,' he continued,
'I profit by my virtue.'

Markheim had but just entered from the daylight streets, and his eyes had not yet grown familiar
with the mingled shine and darkness in the shop. At these pointed words, and before the near
presence of the flame, he blinked painfully and looked aside.

The dealer chuckled.  'You come to me on Christmas Day,' he resumed, 'when you know that I
am alone in my house, put up my shutters, and make a point of refusing business.  Well, you
will have to pay for that; you will have to pay for my loss of time, when I should be balancing
my books; you will have to pay, besides, for a kind of manner that I remark in you to-day very
strongly.  I am the essence of discretion, and ask no awkward questions; but when a customer
cannot look me in the eye, he has to pay for it.'  The dealer once more chuckled; and then,
changing to his usual business voice, though still with a note of irony, 'You can give, as
usual, a clear account of how you came into the possession of the object?' he continued.  'Still
your uncle's cabinet?  A remarkable collector, sir!'

And the little pale, round-shouldered dealer stood almost on tip-toe, looking over the top
of his gold spectacles, and nodding his head with every mark of disbelief.  Markheim returned
his gaze with one of infinite pity, and a touch of horror.

'This time,' said he, 'you are in error.  I have not come to sell, but to buy.  I have no curios
to dispose of; my uncle's cabinet is bare to the wainscot; even were it still intact, I have
done well on the Stock Exchange, and should more likely add to it than otherwise, and my errand
to-day is simplicity itself.  I seek a Christmas present for a lady,' he continued, waxing
more fluent as he struck into the speech he had prepared; 'and certainly I owe you every excuse
for thus disturbing you upon so small a matter.  But the thing was neglected yesterday; I must
produce my little compliment at dinner; and, as you very well know, a rich marriage is not
a thing to be neglected.'

There followed a pause, during which the dealer seemed to weigh this statement incredulously.
The ticking of many clocks among the curious lumber of the shop, and the faint rushing of the
cabs in a near thoroughfare, filled up the interval of silence.

'Well, sir,' said the dealer, 'be it so.  You are an old customer after all; and if, as you
say, you have the chance of a good marriage, far be it from me to be an obstacle.  Here is
a nice thing for a lady now,' he went on, 'this hand glass--fifteenth century, warranted; comes
from a good collection, too; but I reserve the name, in the interests of my customer, who was
just like yourself, my dear sir, the nephew and sole heir of a remarkable collector.'

The dealer, while he thus ran on in his dry and biting voice, had stooped to take the object
from its place; and, as he had done so, a shock had passed through Markheim, a start both of
hand and foot, a sudden leap of many tumultuous passions to the face.  It passed as swiftly
as it came, and left no trace beyond a certain trembling of the hand that now received the glass.

'A glass,' he said hoarsely, and then paused, and repeated it more clearly.  'A glass?  For
Christmas?  Surely not?'

'And why not?' cried the dealer.  'Why not a glass?'

Markheim was looking upon him with an indefinable expression.  'You ask me why not?' he said.
'Why, look here--look in it--look at yourself!  Do you like to see it?  No! nor I--nor any man.'

The little man had jumped back when Markheim had so suddenly confronted him with the mirror;
but now, perceiving there was nothing worse on hand, he chuckled.  'Your future lady, sir,
must be pretty hard favoured,' said he.

'I ask you,' said Markheim, 'for a Christmas present, and you give me this--this damned reminder
of years, and sins and follies--this hand-conscience!  Did you mean it?  Had you a thought
in your mind?  Tell me.  It will be better for you if you do.  Come, tell me about yourself.
I hazard a guess now, that you are in secret a very charitable man?'

The dealer looked closely at his companion.  It was very odd, Markheim did not appear to be
laughing; there was something in his face like an eager sparkle of hope, but nothing of mirth.

'What are you driving at?' the dealer asked.

'Not charitable?' returned the other, gloomily.  Not charitable; not pious; not scrupulous;
unloving, unbeloved; a hand to get money, a safe to keep it.  Is that all?  Dear God, man,
is that all?'

'I will tell you what it is,' began the dealer, with some sharpness, and then broke off again
into a chuckle.  'But I see this is a love match of yours, and you have been drinking the lady's
health.'

'Ah!' cried Markheim, with a strange curiosity.  'Ah, have you been in love?  Tell me about that.'

'I,' cried the dealer.  'I in love!  I never had the time, nor have I the time to-day for all
this nonsense.  Will you take the glass?'

'Where is the hurry?' returned Markheim.  'It is very pleasant to stand here talking; and life
is so short and insecure that I would not hurry away from any pleasure--no, not even from so
mild a one as this.  We should rather cling, cling to what little we can get, like a man at
a cliff's edge.  Every second is a cliff, if you think upon it--a cliff a mile high--high enough,
if we fall, to dash us out of every feature of humanity.  Hence it is best to talk pleasantly.
Let us talk of each other: why should we wear this mask?  Let us be confidential.  Who knows,
we might become friends?'

'I have just one word to say to you,' said the dealer.  'Either make your purchase, or walk
out of my shop!'

'True true,' said Markheim.  'Enough, fooling.  To business.  Show me something else.'

The dealer stooped once more, this time to replace the glass upon the shelf, his thin blond
hair falling over his eyes as he did so.  Markheim moved a little nearer, with one hand in
the pocket of his greatcoat; he drew himself up and filled his lungs; at the same time many
different emotions were depicted together on his face--terror, horror, and resolve, fascination
and a physical repulsion; and through a haggard lift of his upper lip, his teeth looked out.

'This, perhaps, may suit,' observed the dealer: and then, as he began to re-arise, Markheim
bounded from behind upon his victim.  The long, skewerlike dagger flashed and fell.  The dealer
struggled like a hen, striking his temple on the shelf, and then tumbled on the floor in a heap.

Time had some score of small voices in that shop, some stately and slow as was becoming to
their great age; others garrulous and hurried.  All these told out the seconds in an intricate,
chorus of tickings.  Then the passage of a lad's feet, heavily running on the pavement, broke
in upon these smaller voices and startled Markheim into the consciousness of his surroundings.
He looked about him awfully.  The candle stood on the counter, its flame solemnly wagging in
a draught; and by that inconsiderable movement, the whole room was filled with noiseless bustle
and kept heaving like a sea: the tall shadows nodding, the gross blots of darkness swelling
and dwindling as with respiration, the faces of the portraits and the china gods changing and
wavering like images in water. The inner door stood ajar, and peered into that leaguer of shadows
with a long slit of daylight like a pointing finger.

From these fear-stricken rovings, Markheim's eyes returned to the body of his victim, where
it lay both humped and sprawling, incredibly small and strangely meaner than in life.  In these
poor, miserly clothes, in that ungainly attitude, the dealer lay like so much sawdust.  Markheim
had feared to see it, and, lo! it was nothing.  And yet, as he gazed, this bundle of old clothes
and pool of blood began to find eloquent voices. There it must lie; there was none to work
the cunning hinges or direct the miracle of locomotion--there it must lie till it was found.
Found! ay, and then?  Then would this dead flesh lift up a cry that would ring over England,
and fill the world with the echoes of pursuit.  Ay, dead or not, this was still the enemy.
'Time was that when the brains were out,' he thought; and the first word struck into his mind.
Time, now that the deed was accomplished--time, which had closed for the victim, had become
instant and momentous for the slayer.

The thought was yet in his mind, when, first one and then another, with every variety of pace
and voice--one deep as the bell from a cathedral turret, another ringing on its treble notes
the prelude of a waltz-the clocks began to strike the hour of three in the afternoon.

The sudden outbreak of so many tongues in that dumb chamber staggered him.  He began to bestir
himself, going to and fro with the candle, beleaguered by moving shadows, and startled to the
soul by chance reflections.  In many rich mirrors, some of home design, some from Venice or
Amsterdam, he saw his face repeated and repeated, as it were an army of spies; his own eyes
met and detected him; and the sound of his own steps, lightly as they fell, vexed the surrounding
quiet.  And still, as he continued to fill his pockets, his mind accused him with a sickening
iteration, of the thousand faults of his design.  He should have chosen a more quiet hour;
he should have prepared an alibi; he should not have used a knife; he should have been more
cautious, and only bound and gagged the dealer, and not killed him; he should have been more
bold, and killed the servant also; he should have done all things otherwise: poignant regrets,
weary, incessant toiling of the mind to change what was unchangeable, to plan what was now
useless, to be the architect of the irrevocable past.  Meanwhile, and behind all this activity,
brute terrors, like the scurrying of rats in a deserted attic, filled the more remote chambers
of his brain with riot; the hand of the constable would fall heavy on his shoulder, and his
nerves would jerk like a hooked fish; or he beheld, in galloping defile, the dock, the prison,
the gallows, and the black coffin.

Terror of the people in the street sat down before his mind like a besieging army.  It was
impossible, he thought, but that some rumour of the struggle must have reached their ears and
set on edge their curiosity; and now, in all the neighbouring houses, he divined them sitting
motionless and with uplifted ear--solitary people, condemned to spend Christmas dwelling alone
on memories of the past, and now startingly recalled from that tender exercise; happy family
parties struck into silence round the table, the mother still with raised finger: every degree
and age and humour, but all, by their own hearths, prying and hearkening and weaving the rope
that was to hang him.  Sometimes it seemed to him he could not move too softly; the clink of
the tall Bohemian goblets rang out loudly like a bell; and alarmed by the bigness of the ticking,
he was tempted to stop the clocks.  And then, again, with a swift transition of his terrors,
the very silence of the place appeared a source of peril, and a thing to strike and freeze
the passer-by; and he would step more boldly, and bustle aloud among the contents of the shop,
and imitate, with elaborate bravado, the movements of a busy man at ease in his own house.

But he was now so pulled about by different alarms that, while one portion of his mind was
still alert and cunning, another trembled on the brink of lunacy.  One hallucination in particular
took a strong hold on his credulity.  The neighbour hearkening with white face beside his window,
the passer-by arrested by a horrible surmise on the pavement--these could at worst suspect,
they could not know; through the brick walls and shuttered windows only sounds could penetrate.
But here, within the house, was he alone?  He knew he was; he had watched the servant set forth
sweet-hearting, in her poor best, 'out for the day' written in every ribbon and smile.  Yes,
he was alone, of course; and yet, in the bulk of empty house above him, he could surely hear
a stir of delicate footing--he was surely conscious, inexplicably conscious of some presence.
Ay, surely; to every room and corner of the house his imagination followed it; and now it was
a faceless thing, and yet had eyes to see with; and again it was a shadow of himself; and yet
again behold the image of the dead dealer, reinspired with cunning and hatred.

At times, with a strong effort, he would glance at the open door which still seemed to repel
his eyes.  The house was tall, the skylight small and dirty, the day blind with fog; and the
light that filtered down to the ground story was exceedingly faint, and showed dimly on the
threshold of the shop.  And yet, in that strip of doubtful brightness, did there not hang wavering
a shadow?

Suddenly, from the street outside, a very jovial gentleman began to beat with a staff on the
shop-door, accompanying his blows with shouts and railleries in which the dealer was continually
called upon by name. Markheim, smitten into ice, glanced at the dead man.  But no! he lay quite
still; he was fled away far beyond earshot of these blows and shoutings; he was sunk beneath
seas of silence; and his name, which would once have caught his notice above the howling of
a storm, had become an empty sound.  And presently the jovial gentleman desisted from his knocking,
and departed.

Here was a broad hint to hurry what remained to be done, to get forth from this accusing neighbourhood,
to plunge into a bath of London multitudes, and to reach, on the other side of day, that haven
of safety and apparent innocence--his bed.  One visitor had come: at any moment another might
follow and be more obstinate.  To have done the deed, and yet not to reap the profit, would
be too abhorrent a failure.  The money, that was now Markheim's concern; and as a means to
that, the keys.

He glanced over his shoulder at the open door, where the shadow was still lingering and shivering;
and with no conscious repugnance of the mind, yet with a tremor of the belly, he drew near
the body of his victim.  The human character had quite departed.  Like a suit half-stuffed
with bran, the limbs lay scattered, the trunk doubled, on the floor; and yet the thing repelled
him.  Although so dingy and inconsiderable to the eye, he feared it might have more significance
to the touch.  He took the body by the shoulders, and turned it on its back.  It was strangely
light and supple, and the limbs, as if they had been broken, fell into the oddest postures.
The face was robbed of all expression; but it was as pale as wax, and shockingly smeared with
blood about one temple.  That was, for Markheim, the one displeasing circumstance.  It carried
him back, upon the instant, to a certain fair-day in a fishers' village: a gray day, a piping
wind, a crowd upon the street, the blare of brasses, the booming of drums, the nasal voice
of a ballad singer; and a boy going to and fro, buried over head in the crowd and divided between
interest and fear, until, coming out upon the chief place of concourse, he beheld a booth and
a great screen with pictures, dismally designed, garishly coloured: Brown-rigg with her apprentice;
the Mannings with their murdered guest; Weare in the death-grip of Thurtell; and a score besides
of famous crimes.  The thing was as clear as an illusion; he was once again that little boy;
he was looking once again, and with the same sense of physical revolt, at these vile pictures;
he was still stunned by the thumping of the drums.  A bar of that day's music returned upon
his memory; and at that, for the first time, a qualm came over him, a breath of nausea, a sudden
weakness of the joints, which he must instantly resist and conquer.

He judged it more prudent to confront than to flee from these considerations; looking the more
hardily in the dead face, bending his mind to realise the nature and greatness of his crime.
So little a while ago that face had moved with every change of sentiment, that pale mouth had
spoken, that body had been all on fire with governable energies; and now, and by his act, that
piece of life had been arrested, as the horologist, with interjected finger, arrests the beating
of the clock.  So he reasoned in vain; he could rise to no more remorseful consciousness; the
same heart which had shuddered before the painted effigies of crime, looked on its reality
unmoved.  At best, he felt a gleam of pity for one who had been endowed in vain with all those
faculties that can make the world a garden of enchantment, one who had never lived and who
was now dead.  But of penitence, no, not a tremor.

With that, shaking himself clear of these considerations, he found the keys and advanced towards
the open door of the shop.  Outside, it had begun to rain smartly; and the sound of the shower
upon the roof had banished silence.  Like some dripping cavern, the chambers of the house were
haunted by an incessant echoing, which filled the ear and mingled with the ticking of the clocks.
And, as Markheim approached the door, he seemed to hear, in answer to his own cautious tread,
the steps of another foot withdrawing up the stair.  The shadow still palpitated loosely on
the threshold.  He threw a ton's weight of resolve upon his muscles, and drew back the door.

The faint, foggy daylight glimmered dimly on the bare floor and stairs; on the bright suit
of armour posted, halbert in hand, upon the landing; and on the dark wood-carvings, and framed
pictures that hung against the yellow panels of the wainscot.  So loud was the beating of the
rain through all the house that, in Markheim's ears, it began to be distinguished into many
different sounds.  Footsteps and sighs, the tread of regiments marching in the distance, the
chink of money in the counting, and the creaking of doors held stealthily ajar, appeared to
mingle with the patter of the drops upon the cupola and the gushing of the water in the pipes.
The sense that he was not alone grew upon him to the verge of madness.  On every side he was
haunted and begirt by presences.  He heard them moving in the upper chambers; from the shop,
he heard the dead man getting to his legs; and as he began with a great effort to mount the
stairs, feet fled quietly before him and followed stealthily behind.  If he were but deaf,
he thought, how tranquilly he would possess his soul!  And then again, and hearkening with
ever fresh attention, he blessed himself for that unresting sense which held the outposts and
stood a trusty sentinel upon his life.  His head turned continually on his neck; his eyes,
which seemed starting from their orbits, scouted on every side, and on every side were half-rewarded
as with the tail of something nameless vanishing.  The four-and-twenty steps to the first floor
were four-and-twenty agonies.

On that first storey, the doors stood ajar, three of them like three ambushes, shaking his
nerves like the throats of cannon.  He could never again, he felt, be sufficiently immured
and fortified from men's observing eyes, he longed to be home, girt in by walls, buried among
bedclothes, and invisible to all but God.  And at that thought he wondered a little, recollecting
tales of other murderers and the fear they were said to entertain of heavenly avengers.  It
was not so, at least, with him.  He feared the laws of nature, lest, in their callous and immutable
procedure, they should preserve some damning evidence of his crime.  He feared tenfold more,
with a slavish, superstitions terror, some scission in the continuity of man's experience,
some wilful illegality of nature.  He played a game of skill, depending on the rules, calculating
consequence from cause; and what if nature, as the defeated tyrant overthrew the chess-board,
should break the mould of their succession?  The like had befallen Napoleon (so writers said)
when the winter changed the time of its appearance.  The like might befall Markheim: the solid
walls might become transparent and reveal his doings like those of bees in a glass hive; the
stout planks might yield under his foot like quicksands and detain him in their clutch; ay,
and there were soberer accidents that might destroy him: if, for instance, the house should
fall and imprison him beside the body of his victim; or the house next door should fly on fire,
and the firemen invade him from all sides.  These things he feared; and, in a sense, these
things might be called the hands of God reached forth against sin.  But about God himself he
was at ease; his act was doubtless exceptional, but so were his excuses, which God knew; it
was there, and not among men, that he felt sure of justice.

When he had got safe into the drawing-room, and shut the door behind him, he was aware of a
respite from alarms.  The room was quite dismantled, uncarpeted besides, and strewn with packing
cases and incongruous furniture; several great pier-glasses, in which he beheld himself at
various angles, like an actor on a stage; many pictures, framed and unframed, standing, with
their faces to the wall; a fine Sheraton sideboard, a cabinet of marquetry, and a great old
bed, with tapestry hangings.  The windows opened to the floor; but by great good fortune the
lower part of the shutters had been closed, and this concealed him from the neighbours.  Here,
then, Markheim drew in a packing case before the cabinet, and began to search among the keys.
It was a long business, for there were many; and it was irksome, besides; for, after all, there
might be nothing in the cabinet, and time was on the wing.  But the closeness of the occupation
sobered him.

Fear held Markheim in a vice.  What to expect he knew not, whether the dead man walking, or
the official ministers of human justice, or some chance witness blindly stumbling in to consign
him to the gallows.  But when a face was thrust into the aperture, glanced round the room,
looked at him, nodded and smiled as if in friendly recognition, and then withdrew again, and
the door closed behind it, his fear broke loose from his control in a hoarse cry.  At the sound
of this the visitant returned.

'Did you call me?' he asked, pleasantly, and with that he entered the room and closed the door
behind him.

Markheim stood and gazed at him with all his eyes.  Perhaps there was a film upon his sight,
but the outlines of the new comer seemed to change and waver like those of the idols in the
wavering candle-light of the shop; and at times he thought he knew him; and at times he thought
he bore a likeness to himself; and always, like a lump of living terror, there lay in his bosom
the conviction that this thing was not of the earth and not of God.

And yet the creature had a strange air of the commonplace, as he stood looking on Markheim
with a smile; and when he added: 'You are looking for the money, I believe?' it was in the
tones of everyday politeness.

Markheim made no answer.

'I should warn you,' resumed the other, 'that the maid has left her sweetheart earlier than
usual and will soon be here.  If Mr. Markheim be found in this house, I need not describe to
him the consequences.'

'You know me?' cried the murderer.

The visitor smiled.  'You have long been a favourite of mine,' he said; 'and I have long observed
and often sought to help you.'

'What are you?' cried Markheim: 'the devil?'

'What I may be,' returned the other, 'cannot affect the service I propose to render you.'

'It can,' cried Markheim; 'it does!  Be helped by you?  No, never; not by you!  You do not
know me yet; thank God, you do not know me!'

'I know you,' replied the visitant, with a sort of kind severity or rather firmness.  'I know
you to the soul.'

'Know me!' cried Markheim.  'Who can do so?  My life is but a travesty and slander on myself.
I have lived to belie my nature.  All men do; all men are better than this disguise that grows
about and stifles them.  You see each dragged away by life, like one whom bravos have seized
and muffled in a cloak.  If they had their own control--if you could see their faces, they
would be altogether different, they would shine out for heroes and saints!  I am worse than
most; myself is more overlaid; my excuse is known to me and God.  But, had I the time, I could
disclose myself.'

'To me?' inquired the visitant.

'To you before all,' returned the murderer.  'I supposed you were intelligent.  I thought--since
you exist--you would prove a reader of the heart.  And yet you would propose to judge me by
my acts!  Think of it; my acts!  I was born and I have lived in a land of giants; giants have
dragged me by the wrists since I was born out of my mother--the giants of circumstance.  And
you would judge me by my acts!  But can you not look within?  Can you not understand that evil
is hateful to me?  Can you not see within me the clear writing of conscience, never blurred
by any wilful sophistry, although too often disregarded?  Can you not read me for a thing that
surely must be common as humanity--the unwilling sinner?'

'All this is very feelingly expressed,' was the reply, 'but it regards me not.  These points
of consistency are beyond my province, and I care not in the least by what compulsion you may
have been dragged away, so as you are but carried in the right direction.  But time flies;
the servant delays, looking in the faces of the crowd and at the pictures on the hoardings,
but still she keeps moving nearer; and remember, it is as if the gallows itself was striding
towards you through the Christmas streets!  Shall I help you; I, who know all?  Shall I tell
you where to find the money?'

'For what price?' asked Markheim.

'I offer you the service for a Christmas gift,' returned the other.

Markheim could not refrain from smiling with a kind of bitter triumph. 'No,' said he, 'I will
take nothing at your hands; if I were dying of thirst, and it was your hand that put the pitcher
to my lips, I should find the courage to refuse.  It may be credulous, but I will do nothing
to commit myself to evil.'

'I have no objection to a death-bed repentance,' observed the visitant.

'Because you disbelieve their efficacy!' Markheim cried.

'I do not say so,' returned the other; 'but I look on these things from a different side, and
when the life is done my interest falls.  The man has lived to serve me, to spread black looks
under colour of religion, or to sow tares in the wheat-field, as you do, in a course of weak
compliance with desire.  Now that he draws so near to his deliverance, he can add but one act
of service--to repent, to die smiling, and thus to build up in confidence and hope the more
timorous of my surviving followers.  I am not so hard a master.  Try me.  Accept my help. 
Please yourself in life as you have done hitherto; please yourself more amply, spread your
elbows at the board; and when the night begins to fall and the curtains to be drawn, I tell
you, for your greater comfort, that you will find it even easy to compound your quarrel with
your conscience, and to make a truckling peace with God. "Grey, oh, no; Mr. Stanley's hair was in
perfect colour when he died; I remember him distinctly, seeing him as often as I did," said the
lady. "The hair of the Stanley family is generally auburn," she added.

"What do you call auburn?" said the doctor.

"A dark, rich brown, like William Stanley's."

"Now I call Mr. Robert Hazlehurst's hair auburn."

"My brother's hair! Why that is sometimes pronounced sandy, and even red, occasionally," said
Harry.

"Not red; Lawson's hair is red."

"Mr. Lawson's hair is more of a flaxen shade," said the wife, a little quickly.

Despairing of settling the particular shade of the hair, Harry then inquired if there was any strongly
marked peculiarity of face or person about William Stanley?

Here both agreed that they had never remarked anything of the kind; it appeared that the young
man was made more like the rest of the world, than became the hero of such a singular career.

"Do
you think you should know him, if you were to see him again, after such a long interval?"

"Well, I don't know," said the doctor; "some people change very much, from boys to middle-aged
manhood, others alter but little."

"I have no doubt that I could tell in a moment, if this person is William Stanley or an impostor,"
said Mrs. Lawson. "Think how much we were together, as children; for ten years of his life,
he was half the time at our house. I am sure if this sailor were William Stanley, he would
have come to see some of us, long since."

"Did he visit you when he was last at Greatwood?"

"No, he did not come at that time; but I saw him very often in the
village, and riding about."

"Do you remember his stuttering at all?"

"No; I never heard him that I know of; I don't believe he ever stuttered."

"He did stutter once in a while, Sophia, when he was in a passion."

"I never heard him."

"Young Stanley had one good quality, Mr. Hazlehurst, with all his
faults; he spoke the truth--you could believe what he said."

"My good brother, you are mistaken there, I can assure you. Time and again have I known him tell
falsehoods when he got into a scrape; many is the time he has coaxed and teased, till he got
us children into mischief--he was a great tease, you know--"

"Not more so than most boys," interposed the doctor.

"And after he had got us into trouble, I remember perfectly, that
he would not acknowledge it was his fault.

Oh, no; you could not by any means depend upon what he said."

"Was he much of a talker?"

"No, rather silent."

"Quite silent:" both brother and sister were in unison here, at last.

"He was good-looking, you think, Mrs. Lawson?"

"Oh, yes, good-looking, certainly," replied the lady.

"Rather good-looking; but when he was last at home, his features had grown somewhat coarse, and
his expression was altered for the worse," said the doctor.

"He was free with his money, I believe?"

"Very extravagant," said Mrs. Lawson.

"He didn't care a fig for money, unless it was refused him," said the doctor.

"Was there anything particular about his teeth?"

"He had fine teeth," said Mrs. Lawson; "but he did not show them much."

"A good set of teeth, if I remember right," added the doctor.

"His complexion was rather dark, I believe?" said Harry.

"More sallow than dark," said the lady.

"Not so very sallow," said the gentleman.

"You asked just now about his eyes, Mr. Hazlehurst; it strikes me
they were much the colour of yours."

"But mine are grey," said Harry.

"More of a hazel, I think."

"Oh, no; William Stanley's eyes were as different as possible from Mr. Hazlehurst's, in colour
and shape!" exclaimed the lady.

The conversation continued some time longer, but the specimen just given will suffice to show its
character; nothing of importance was elicited, and not one point decidedly settled, which had
not been already known to Harry. He continued his round of visits throughout the day, with
much the same result. The memories of the people about Greatwood seemed to be playing at cross-purposes;
and yet there was no doubt, that all those persons to whom Hazlehurst applied, had known young
Stanley for years; and there was every reason to believe they were well disposed to give all
the evidence in their power.

>From Mrs. Lawson's, Harry went to the house of another acquaintance, a Captain Johnson; and
the following is the amount of what he gathered here, as it was hastily entered in his note-book:

"Eyes
grey; hair black; rather stout for his age; sullen temper; very dull; bad company cause of his ruin;
not cold-hearted; stuttered a little when excited; expression good when a boy, but much changed
when first came home from sea; Billings the cause of his ruin."

So much for Captain Johnson. The next stopping-place was at a man's, by the name of Hill, who
had been coachman at Mr. Stanley's for several years; his account
follows:

"Hill says: 'Would get in a passion when couldn't have his
own way; have heard him stutter; always in some scrape or other after
first went to college; eyes blue; hair brown; sharp enough when he
pleased, but always heard he hated books; short for his age when first
went to sea, and thin; had grown three or four inches when he came
back; should have thought him five feet eight or nine, when last saw
him; face grown fuller and red, when came home.'"

>From Hill's, Harry
went to see Mr. Anderson, who had kept the principal tavern at Franklin
Cross-Roads, during William Stanley's boyhood; but he was not at home.

He then called at Judge Stone's: "Mrs. S. thought him handsome young man; judge, quite ugly;
husband says eyes a greenish colour; wife thinks were dark brown; height about my own, said
judge; not near so tall, says Mrs. S.: both agreed he was morose in temper, and dull at learning."

At
several other places where Harry called, he found that William Stanley had been merely known
by sight. Others related capital stories of scrapes, in which they had been implicated with
the boy, but could tell Harry very little to the purpose, where it came to particular questions.
Three individuals pronounced him tall, four thought he was middle sized, two declared he was short.
Two inferences, however, might be drawn from all that had been said:
William Stanley must have been of an unpleasant temper; while general
evidence pronounced him rather more dull than most boys.

With these two facts at least sufficiently well established, while his head was filled with
contradictory visions, of hair, eyes, and complexion, of various shades and colours, Harry returned
in the evening, quite jaded and worn-out with his day's exertions;
not the least of which had been, to reconcile totally opposite accounts
on a dozen different points.

Mrs. Stanley was awaiting his return with much anxiety; and while Harry was drinking an excellent
cup of tea--the most refreshing thing in the world to a person who is fatigued, even in warm
weather--he reported his day's work. His friend seemed to think the account anything but encouraging;
though Harry declared, that it was well worth the labour and vexation to establish the two
facts, regarding the young man's capacity and temper, in which respects he certainly differed
from the claimant.

"What miserable hypocrites both this man and his lawyer must be!"
exclaimed Mrs. Stanley.

"Hypocrisy figures often enough in courts of justice, ma'am, and is only too often successful for a
time."

"I am afraid, my dear Harry, they will give you a great deal of trouble!"

"I have no doubt of it," replied Hazlehurst; "but still I hope to defeat them, and in the end,
to punish their vile conspiracy."

"A defeat would he distressing to both Mr. Wyllys and myself; but to you, my dear young friend, it would
be serious indeed!" she observed, with feeling.

"We shall yet gain the day, I trust," said Harry. "The consequences of defeat would indeed be
very serious to me," he added. "In such a case I should lose everything, and a little more,
as Paddy would say.

I made a deliberate calculation the other day, and I find, after everything I own has been given
up, that there would still be a debt of some thirty thousand dollars to pay off."

"It is wise, I suppose, to be prepared for the worst," said Mrs. Stanley, sadly; "but in such
a case, Harry, you must look to your friends. Remember, that I should consider it a duty to assist
you, in any pecuniary difficulties which might result from a defeat."

"You are very good, ma'am; I am grateful for the offer. In case of our failure, I should certainly
apply to my immediate friends, for I could never bear the thought of being in debt to those rascals.
But if the affair turns out in that way, I must stay at home and work hard, to clear myself entirely.
I am young, and if we fail to repel this claim, still I shall hope by industry and prudence,
to discharge all obligations before I am many years older."

"I have never doubted, Harry, that in either case you would do what is just and honourable; but
I mourn that there should be any danger of such a sacrifice."

"It would be a sacrifice, indeed; including much that I have valued heretofore--tastes, habits,
partialities, prospects, fortune, hopes--all must undergo a change, all must he sacrificed."

"And
hopes are often a precious part of a young man's portion," said Mrs. Stanley.

Hazlehurst happened to raise his eyes as she spoke, and, from the expression of her face, he fancied
that she was thinking of Mrs. Creighton. He changed colour, and remained silent a moment.

"You
would be compelled to give up your connexion with Mr. Henley," she
observed, by way of renewing the conversation.

"Yes, of course; I should have to abandon that, I could not afford it; I should have to devote
myself to my profession.

I have no notion, however, of striking my colours to these land-pirates
until after a hard battle, I assure you," he said, more cheerfully.

"Great generals always prepare for a retreat, and so shall I, but only as the last extremity.
Indeed, I think our affairs look more encouraging just now.

It seems next to impossible, for such a plot to hold together in all its parts; we shall be
able probably, to find out more than one weak point which will not bear an attack."

"It is certainly important to establish the difference in temper and capacity, between the claimant
and William Stanley," said Mrs. Stanley.

"Highly important; Ellsworth is hard at work, too, in tracing the past life of the sailor, and by
his last letters, I find he had written to young Stanley's school-master, and to the family
physician. He had seen the sailor, and in addition to Mr. Wyllys's remarks upon his gait,
which is different from that of William when a boy, Ellsworth writes, that he was very much
struck with the shape of the man's limbs, so different from those of the portrait of Mr. Stanley's
son, when a lad, which they have at Wyllys-Roof; he thinks the family physician may help him there;
fortunately, he is still living."

"It is a great pity the nurse's faculties should have failed!" exclaimed Mrs. Stanley.

"Yes, it's a pity, indeed; her evidence would have been very important.

But we shall do without her, I hope."

"Are you going to Wyllys-Roof again, before the trial?"

"No; I shall have too much to do, here and in Philadelphia. Mr. Wyllys has kindly asked me,
however, to go there, as soon as the matter is settled, whether for good or for evil."

"I thought I heard you talking over with Mr. de Vaux, some boating excursion, to take place in
August, from Longbridge; has it been given up?"

"Not given up; but de Vaux very good-naturedly proposed postponing it, until after my affairs were
settled. It is to take place as soon as I am ready; whether I shall join it with flying colours, or
as a worsted man, time alone can decide."

The mail was just then brought in; as usual there was a letter for Harry, from Ellsworth.

"Wyllys-Roof, August, 183-.

"Our application to the family physician proves entirely successful, my dear Hazlehurst; my physiological
propensities were not at fault.

I had a letter last evening from Dr. H-----, who now lives in Baltimore, and he professes himself
ready to swear to the formation of young Stanley's hands and feet, which he says resembled those
of Mr. Stanley, the father, and the three children, who died before William S. grew up. His
account agrees entirely with the portrait of the boy, as it now exists at Wyllys-Roof; the
arms and hands are long, the fingers slender, nails elongated; as
you well know, Mr. Clapp's client is the very reverse of this--his
hands are short and thick, his fingers what, in common parlance, would
be called dumpy. I was struck with the fact when I first saw him in
the street. Now, what stronger evidence could we have? A slender lad
of seventeen may become a heavy, corpulent man of forty, but to change
the formation of hands, fingers, and nails, is beyond the reach of
even Clapp's cunning. We are much obliged to the artist, for his accuracy
in representing the hands of the boy exactly as they were. This testimony
I look upon as quite conclusive. As to the Rev. Mr. G-----, whose
pupil young Stanley was for several years, we find that he is no longer
living; but I have obtained the names of several of the young's man's
companions, who will be able to confirm the fact of his dullness;
several of the professors at the University are also living, and will
no doubt be able to assist us. I have written a dozen letters on these
points, but received no answers as yet. So far so good; we shall succeed,
I trust. Mr. Wyllys bids you not forget to find out if Clapp has really
been at Greatwood, as we suspected. The ladies send you many kind
and encouraging messages. Josephine, as usual, sympathizes in all
our movements. She says: 'Give Mr. Hazlehurst all sorts of kind greetings
from me; anything you please short of my love, which would not be
proper, I suppose.' I had a charming row on the river last evening,
with the ladies. I never managed a law-suit in such agreeable quarters
before.

"Faithfully yours,

"F. E."

CHAPTER XVII. {XL}

"What say
you, can you love this gentleman?" Romeo and Juliet.

{William Shakespeare,
"Romeo and Juliet", I.iii.79}

JANE'S strength and spirits were gradually
improving. She had been persuaded to take a daily airing and had consented
to see one or two of the ladies in her room. Mr. Wyllys always passed
half an hour with her, every afternoon; and at length she came down
stairs, and joined the family in the drawing-room, for a short time
in the evening. Mr. and Mrs. Robert Hazlehurst, who came from Philadelphia
to pass a day or two with her, found her much better than they had
expected.

Charlie Hubbard returned to the grey cottage, with his
portfolio full of sketches, intending to pass several months at home,
in finishing his pictures of Lake George; the school-room having been
converted into a painting-room for his use. Miss Patsey's little flock
were dispersed for a time; and Charlie was even in hopes of persuading
his mother and sister to accompany him to New York, where Mary Hubbard,
the youngest sister, was now engaged in giving music lessons. He felt
himself quite a rich man, and drew up a plausible plan for hiring
a small house in some cheap situation, where they might all live together;
but Miss Patsey shook her head, she thought they could not afford
it. Still, it was delightful to her, to listen to plans devised by
Charlie's warm heart; she seemed to love him more than ever, since
he had even sacrificed his moustaches to his mother's prejudice against
such foreign fashions.

"Keep your money, Charles; we can make out
very well in the old cottage; more comfortably than we have ever done
before. You will want all you can make one of these days, when you
marry," said Miss Patsey.

To her surprise, Charlie showed some emotion
at this allusion to his marrying, and remained perfectly silent for
an instant, instead of giving the playful answer that his sister had
expected to hear.

Mrs. Hubbard then observed, that she should not
wish to move; she hoped to end her life in the old grey cottage. They
had lived so long in the neighbourhood of Longbridge, that a new place
would not seem like home to Patsey and herself. Charlie must come
to see them as often as he could; perhaps he would be able to spend
his summers there.

"Well, we shall see, mother; at any rate, Mary
and I together, we shall be able to make your life easy, I trust."

Mrs.
Hubbard observed, that although they had been poor for the last seventeen
years, yet they had never really seemed to feel the weight of poverty;
they had met with so much kindness, from so many relations and friends.

"But
kindness from our own children, mother, is the most blessed of all,"
said Patsey.

Charlie did not give up his plan, however, but he forbore
to press it for the present, as he was engaged to drive his sister,
Mrs. Clapp, to her own house at Longbridge. Hubbard had kept aloof
from his brother-in-law whenever he could, since the Stanley suit
had been commenced; any allusion to this affair was painful to him;
he had never respected Mr. Clapp, and now strongly suspected him of
unfair dealing. He pitied his sister Kate from the bottom of his heart;
but it seemed pity quite thrown away. To judge from her conversation,
as Charlie was driving her home, she had implicit confidence in her
husband; if she had at first doubted the identity of the sailor, she
had never for a second supposed, that William himself was not firmly
convinced of it. On the other hand, she began to have some misgivings
as to the character and integrity of Mr. Wyllys, whom hitherto, all
her life long, she had been used to consider as the model of a gentleman,
and an upright man. She soon got up quite a prejudice against Mrs.
Stanley; and as for Hazlehurst, he fell very low indeed in her estimation.

"You
don't know what trouble poor William has with this suit," she said
to her brother. "I am sometimes afraid it will make him sick. It does
seem very strange, that Mr. Stanley's executors should be so obstinate
in refusing to acknowledge his son. At first it was natural they should
hesitate; I mistrusted this sailor at first, myself; but now that
William has made everything so clear, they cannot have any excuse
for their conduct."

Charlie whipped the flies from his horse, without
answering this remark.

"I hope William will come home to-night. He
and Mr. Stanley have gone off together, to get possession of some
very important papers; they received a letter offering these papers,
only the night before last, and William says they will establish Mr.
Stanley's claim, beyond the possibility of a denial. Mr. Wyllys and
Mr. Hazlehurst will feel very badly, I should think, when they find
that after all, they have been keeping their friend's son from his
rights."

"They believe they are doing their duty," said Charlie,
laconically.

"It seems a strange view of duty, to act as they do."

"Strange
views of duty are very common," said Charlie, glad to take refuge
in generalities.

"Common sense and common honesty will help us all
to do our duty," observed Kate.

"No doubt; but both are more uncommon
qualities than one would think, among rational beings," said Charlie.

"Well,
you know, Charles, Patsey used to tell us when we were children, that
a plain, honest heart, and plain, good sense were the best things
in the world."

"That is the reason, I suppose, why we love our sister
Patsey so much, because she has so much of those best things in the
world," said Charlie, warmly.  By the light of this I was able to perceive a great arched doorway of
a Moorish character: it was closed by iron-studded gates, in one of the leaves of which Felipe
opened a wicket. The peasant carried off the cart to some out-building; but my guide and I
passed through the wicket, which was closed again behind us; and by the glimmer of the candle,
passed through a court, up a stone stair, along a section of an open gallery, and up more stairs
again, until we came at last to the door of a great and somewhat bare apartment.  This room,
which I understood was to be mine, was pierced by three windows, lined with some lustrous wood
disposed in panels, and carpeted with the skins of many savage animals.  A bright fire burned
in the chimney, and shed abroad a changeful flicker; close up to the blaze there was drawn
a table, laid for supper; and in the far end a bed stood ready.  I was pleased by these preparations,
and said so to Felipe; and he, with the same simplicity of disposition that I held already
remarked in him, warmly re-echoed my praises.  'A fine room,' he said; 'a very fine room. And
fire, too; fire is good; it melts out the pleasure in your bones.  And the bed,' he continued,
carrying over the candle in that direction--'see what fine sheets--how soft, how smooth, smooth;'
and he passed his hand again and again over their texture, and then laid down his head and
rubbed his cheeks among them with a grossness of content that somehow offended me.  I took
the candle from his hand (for I feared he would set the bed on fire) and walked back to the
supper-table, where, perceiving a measure of wine, I poured out a cup and called to him to
come and drink of it.  He started to his feet at once and ran to me with a strong expression
of hope; but when he saw the wine, he visibly shuddered.

'Oh, no,' he said, 'not that; that is for you.  I hate it.'

'Very well, Senor,' said I; 'then I will drink to your good health, and to the prosperity of
your house and family.  Speaking of which,' I added, after I had drunk, 'shall I not have the
pleasure of laying my salutations in person at the feet of the Senora, your mother?'

But at these words all the childishness passed out of his face, and was succeeded by a look
of indescribable cunning and secrecy.  He backed away from me at the same time, as though I
were an animal about to leap or some dangerous fellow with a weapon, and when he had got near
the door, glowered at me sullenly with contracted pupils.  'No,' he said at last, and the next
moment was gone noiselessly out of the room; and I heard his footing die away downstairs as
light as rainfall, and silence closed over the house.

After I had supped I drew up the table nearer to the bed and began to prepare for rest; but
in the new position of the light, I was struck by a picture on the wall.  It represented a
woman, still young.  To judge by her costume and the mellow unity which reigned over the canvas,
she had long been dead; to judge by the vivacity of the attitude, the eyes and the features,
I might have been beholding in a mirror the image of life. Her figure was very slim and strong,
and of a just proportion; red tresses lay like a crown over her brow; her eyes, of a very golden
brown, held mine with a look; and her face, which was perfectly shaped, was yet marred by a
cruel, sullen, and sensual expression.  Something in both face and figure, something exquisitely
intangible, like the echo of an echo, suggested the features and bearing of my guide; and I
stood awhile, unpleasantly attracted and wondering at the oddity of the resemblance. The common,
carnal stock of that race, which had been originally designed for such high dames as the one
now looking on me from the canvas, had fallen to baser uses, wearing country clothes, sitting
on the shaft and holding the reins of a mule cart, to bring home a lodger.  Perhaps an actual
link subsisted; perhaps some scruple of the delicate flesh that was once clothed upon with
the satin and brocade of the dead lady, now winced at the rude contact of Felipe's frieze.

The first light of the morning shone full upon the portrait, and, as I lay awake, my eyes continued
to dwell upon it with growing complacency; its beauty crept about my heart insidiously, silencing
my scruples one after another; and while I knew that to love such a woman were to sign and
seal one's own sentence of degeneration, I still knew that, if she were alive, I should love
her.  Day after day the double knowledge of her wickedness and of my weakness grew clearer.
She came to be the heroine of many day-dreams, in which her eyes led on to, and sufficiently
rewarded, crimes.  She cast a dark shadow on my fancy; and when I was out in the free air of
heaven, taking vigorous exercise and healthily renewing the current of my blood, it was often
a glad thought to me that my enchantress was safe in the grave, her wand of beauty broken,
her lips closed in silence, her philtre spilt.  And yet I had a half-lingering terror that
she might not be dead after all, but re-arisen in the body of some descendant.

Felipe served my meals in my own apartment; and his resemblance to the portrait haunted me.
At times it was not; at times, upon some change of attitude or flash of expression, it would
leap out upon me like a ghost. It was above all in his ill tempers that the likeness triumphed.
He certainly liked me; he was proud of my notice, which he sought to engage by many simple
and childlike devices; he loved to sit close before my fire, talking his broken talk or singing
his odd, endless, wordless songs, and sometimes drawing his hand over my clothes with an affectionate
manner of caressing that never failed to cause in me an embarrassment of which I was ashamed.
But for all that, he was capable of flashes of causeless anger and fits of sturdy sullenness.
At a word of reproof, I have seen him upset the dish of which I was about to eat, and this
not surreptitiously, but with defiance; and similarly at a hint of inquisition.  I was not
unnaturally curious, being in a strange place and surrounded by string people; but at the shadow
of a question, he shrank back, lowering and dangerous.  Then it was that, for a fraction of
a second, this rough lad might have been the brother of the lady in the frame.  But these humours
were swift to pass; and the resemblance died along with them.

In these first days I saw nothing of any one but Felipe, unless the portrait is to be counted;
and since the lad was plainly of weak mind, and had moments of passion, it may be wondered
that I bore his dangerous neighbourhood with equanimity.  As a matter of fact, it was for some
time irksome; but it happened before long that I obtained over him so complete a mastery as
set my disquietude at rest.

It fell in this way.  He was by nature slothful, and much of a vagabond, and yet he kept by
the house, and not only waited upon my wants, but laboured every day in the garden or small
farm to the south of the residencia.  Here he would be joined by the peasant whom I had seen
on the night of my arrival, and who dwelt at the far end of the enclosure, about half a mile
away, in a rude out-house; but it was plain to me that, of these two, it was Felipe who did
most; and though I would sometimes see him throw down his spade and go to sleep among the very
plants he had been digging, his constancy and energy were admirable in themselves, and still
more so since I was well assured they were foreign to his disposition and the fruit of an ungrateful
effort.  But while I admired, I wondered what had called forth in a lad so shuttle-witted this
enduring sense of duty.  How was it sustained?  I asked myself, and to what length did it prevail
over his instincts?  The priest was possibly his inspirer; but the priest came one day to the
residencia.  I saw him both come and go after an interval of close upon an hour, from a knoll
where I was sketching, and all that time Felipe continued to labour undisturbed in the garden.

At last, in a very unworthy spirit, I determined to debauch the lad from his good resolutions,
and, way-laying him at the gate, easily pursuaded him to join me in a ramble.  It was a fine
day, and the woods to which I led him were green and pleasant and sweet-smelling and alive
with the hum of insects.  Here he discovered himself in a fresh character, mounting up to heights
of gaiety that abashed me, and displaying an energy and grace of movement that delighted the
eye.  He leaped, he ran round me in mere glee; he would stop, and look and listen, and seem
to drink in the world like a cordial; and then he would suddenly spring into a tree with one
bound, and hang and gambol there like one at home.  Little as he said to me, and that of not
much import, I have rarely enjoyed more stirring company; the sight of his delight was a continual
feast; the speed and accuracy of his movements pleased me to the heart; and I might have been
so thoughtlessly unkind as to make a habit of these wants, had not chance prepared a very rude
conclusion to my pleasure.  By some swiftness or dexterity the lad captured a squirrel in a
tree top.  He was then some way ahead of me, but I saw him drop to the ground and crouch there,
crying aloud for pleasure like a child.  The sound stirred my sympathies, it was so fresh and
innocent; but as I bettered my pace to draw near, the cry of the squirrel knocked upon my heart.
I have heard and seen much of the cruelty of lads, and above all of peasants; but what I now
beheld struck me into a passion of anger.  I thrust the fellow aside, plucked the poor brute
out of his hands, and with swift mercy killed it.  Then I turned upon the torturer, spoke to
him long out of the heat of my indignation, calling him names at which he seemed to wither;
and at length, pointing toward the residencia, bade him begone and leave me, for I chose to
walk with men, not with vermin.  He fell upon his knees, and, the words coming to him with
more cleanness than usual, poured out a stream of the most touching supplications, begging
me in mercy to forgive him, to forget what he had done, to look to the future.  'O, I try so
hard,' he said.  'O, commandante, bear with Felipe this once; he will never be a brute again!'
Thereupon, much more affected than I cared to show, I suffered myself to be persuaded, and
at last shook hands with him and made it up.  But the squirrel, by way of penance, I made him
bury; speaking of the poor thing's beauty, telling him what pains it had suffered, and how
base a thing was the abuse of strength.  'See, Felipe,' said I, 'you are strong indeed; but
in my hands you are as helpless as that poor thing of the trees.  Give me your hand in mine.
You cannot remove it.  Now suppose that I were cruel like you, and took a pleasure in pain.
I only tighten my hold, and see how you suffer.'  He screamed aloud, his face stricken ashy
and dotted with needle points of sweat; and when I set him free, he fell to the earth and nursed
his hand and moaned over it like a baby.  But he took the lesson in good part; and whether
from that, or from what I had said to him, or the higher notion he now had of my bodily strength,
his original affection was changed into a dog- like, adoring fidelity.

Meanwhile I gained rapidly in health.  The residencia stood on the crown of a stony plateau;
on every side the mountains hemmed it about; only from the roof, where was a bartizan, there
might be seen between two peaks, a small segment of plain, blue with extreme distance.  The
air in these altitudes moved freely and largely; great clouds congregated there, and were broken
up by the wind and left in tatters on the hilltops; a hoarse, and yet faint rumbling of torrents
rose from all round; and one could there study all the ruder and more ancient characters of
nature in something of their pristine force.  I delighted from the first in the vigorous scenery
and changeful weather; nor less in the antique and dilapidated mansion where I dwelt.  This
was a large oblong, flanked at two opposite corners by bastion-like projections, one of which
commanded the door, while both were loopholed for musketry.  The lower storey was, besides,
naked of windows, so that the building, if garrisoned, could not be carried without artillery.
It enclosed an open court planted with pomegranate trees.  From this a broad flight of marble
stairs ascended to an open gallery, running all round and resting, towards the court, on slender
pillars.  Thence again, several enclosed stairs led to the upper storeys of the house, which
were thus broken up into distinct divisions. The windows, both within and without, were closely
shuttered; some of the stone-work in the upper parts had fallen; the roof, in one place, had
been wrecked in one of the flurries of wind which were common in these mountains; and the whole
house, in the strong, beating sunlight, and standing out above a grove of stunted cork-trees,
thickly laden and discoloured with dust, looked like the sleeping palace of the legend.  The
court, in particular, seemed the very home of slumber.  A hoarse cooing of doves haunted about
the eaves; the winds were excluded, but when they blew outside, the mountain dust fell here
as thick as rain, and veiled the red bloom of the pomegranates; shuttered windows and the closed
doors of numerous cellars, and the vacant, arches of the gallery, enclosed it; and all day
long the sun made broken profiles on the four sides, and paraded the shadow of the pillars
on the gallery floor.  At the ground level there was, however, a certain pillared recess, which
bore the marks of human habitation.  Though it was open in front upon the court, it was yet
provided with a chimney, where a wood fire would he always prettily blazing; and the tile floor
was littered with the skins of animals.

It was in this place that I first saw my hostess.  She had drawn one of the skins forward and
sat in the sun, leaning against a pillar.  It was her dress that struck me first of all, for
it was rich and brightly coloured, and shone out in that dusty courtyard with something of
the same relief as the flowers of the pomegranates.  At a second look it was her beauty of
person that took hold of me.  As she sat back--watching me, I thought, though with invisible
eyes--and wearing at the same time an expression of almost imbecile good-humour and contentment,
she showed a perfectness of feature and a quiet nobility of attitude that were beyond a statue's.
I took off my hat to her in passing, and her face puckered with suspicion as swiftly and lightly
as a pool ruffles in the breeze; but she paid no heed to my courtesy.  I went forth on my customary
walk a trifle daunted, her idol-like impassivity haunting me; and when I returned, although
she was still in much the same posture, I was half surprised to see that she had moved as far
as the next pillar, following the sunshine.  This time, however, she addressed me with some
trivial salutation, civilly enough conceived, and uttered in the same deep-chested, and yet
indistinct and lisping tones, that had already baffled the utmost niceness of my hearing from
her son.  I answered rather at a venture; for not only did I fail to take her meaning with
precision, but the sudden disclosure of her eyes disturbed me.  They were unusually large,
the iris golden like Felipe's, but the pupil at that moment so distended that they seemed almost
black; and what affected me was not so much their size as (what was perhaps its consequence)
the singular insignificance of their regard.  A look more blankly stupid I have never met.
My eyes dropped before it even as I spoke, and I went on my way upstairs to my own room, at
once baffled and embarrassed.  Yet, when I came there and saw the face of the portrait, I was
again reminded of the miracle of family descent.  My hostess was, indeed, both older and fuller
in person; her eyes were of a different colour; her face, besides, was not only free from the
ill-significance that offended and attracted me in the painting; it was devoid of either good
or bad--a moral blank expressing literally naught.  And yet there was a likeness, not so much
speaking as immanent, not so much in any particular feature as upon the whole.  It should seem,
I thought, as if when the master set his signature to that grave canvas, he had not only caught
the image of one smiling and false-eyed woman, but stamped the essential quality of a race.

From that day forth, whether I came or went, I was sure to find the Senora seated in the sun
against a pillar, or stretched on a rug before the fire; only at times she would shift her
station to the top round of the stone staircase, where she lay with the same nonchalance right
across my path.  In all these days, I never knew her to display the least spark of energy beyond
what she expended in brushing and re-brushing her copious copper-coloured hair, or in lisping
out, in the rich and broken hoarseness of her voice, her customary idle salutations to myself.
These, I think, were her two chief pleasures, beyond that of mere quiescence. She seemed always
proud of her remarks, as though they had been witticisms: and, indeed, though they were empty
enough, like the conversation of many respectable persons, and turned on a very narrow range
of subjects, they were never meaningless or incoherent; nay, they had a certain beauty of their
own, breathing, as they did, of her entire contentment.  Now she would speak of the warmth,
in which (like her son) she greatly delighted; now of the flowers of the pomegranate trees,
and now of the white doves and long-winged swallows that fanned the air of the court.  The
birds excited her.  As they raked the eaves in their swift flight, or skimmed sidelong past
her with a rush of wind, she would sometimes stir, and sit a little up, and seem to awaken
from her doze of satisfaction.  But for the rest of her days she lay luxuriously folded on
herself and sunk in sloth and pleasure.  Her invincible content at first annoyed me, but I
came gradually to find repose in the spectacle, until at last it grew to be my habit to sit
down beside her four times in the day, both coming and going, and to talk with her sleepily,
I scarce knew of what.  I had come to like her dull, almost animal neighbourhood; her beauty
and her stupidity soothed and amused me.  I began to find a kind of transcendental good sense
in her remarks, and her unfathomable good nature moved me to admiration and envy.  The liking
was returned; she enjoyed my presence half-unconsciously, as a man in deep meditation may enjoy
the babbling of a brook.  I can scarce say she brightened when I came, for satisfaction was
written on her face eternally, as on some foolish statue's; but I was made conscious of her
pleasure by some more intimate communication than the sight.  And one day, as I set within
reach of her on the marble step, she suddenly shot forth one of her hands and patted mine.
The thing was done, and she was back in her accustomed attitude, before my mind had received
intelligence of the caress; and when I turned to look her in the face I could perceive no answerable
sentiment.  It was plain she attached no moment to the act, and I blamed myself for my own
more uneasy consciousness.

The sight and (if I may so call it) the acquaintance of the mother confirmed the view I had
already taken of the son.  The family blood had been impoverished, perhaps by long inbreeding,
which I knew to be a common error among the proud and the exclusive.  No decline, indeed, was
to be traced in the body, which had been handed down unimpaired in shapeliness and strength;
and the faces of to-day were struck as sharply from the mint, as the face of two centuries
ago that smiled upon me from the portrait.  But the intelligence (that more precious heirloom)
was degenerate; the treasure of ancestral memory ran low; and it had required the potent, plebeian
crossing of a muleteer or mountain contrabandista to raise, what approached hebetude in the
mother, into the active oddity of the son.  Yet of the two, it was the mother I preferred.
Of Felipe, vengeful and placable, full of starts and shyings, inconstant as a hare, I could
even conceive as a creature possibly noxious.  Of the mother I had no thoughts but those of
kindness.  And indeed, as spectators are apt ignorantly to take sides, I grew something of
a partisan in the enmity which I perceived to smoulder between them.  True, it seemed mostly
on the mother's part.  She would sometimes draw in her breath as he came near, and the pupils
of her vacant eyes would contract as if with horror or fear.  Her emotions, such as they were,
were much upon the surface and readily shared; and this latent repulsion occupied my mind,
and kept me wondering on what grounds it rested, and whether the son was certainly in fault.

I had been about ten days in the residencia, when there sprang up a high and harsh wind, carrying
clouds of dust.  It came out of malarious lowlands, and over several snowy sierras.  The nerves
of those on whom it blew were strung and jangled; their eyes smarted with the dust; their legs
ached under the burthen of their body; and the touch of one hand upon another grew to be odious.
The wind, besides, came down the gullies of the hills and stormed about the house with a great,
hollow buzzing and whistling that was wearisome to the ear and dismally depressing to the mind.
It did not so much blow in gusts as with the steady sweep of a waterfall, so that there was
no remission of discomfort while it blew. But higher upon the mountain, it was probably of
a more variable strength, with accesses of fury; for there came down at times a far-off wailing,
infinitely grievous to hear; and at times, on one of the high shelves or terraces, there would
start up, and then disperse, a tower of dust, like the smoke of in explosion.

I no sooner awoke in bed than I was conscious of the nervous tension and depression of the
weather, and the effect grew stronger as the day proceeded.  It was in vain that I resisted;
in vain that I set forth upon my customary morning's walk; the irrational, unchanging fury
of the storm had soon beat down my strength and wrecked my temper; and I returned to the residencia,
glowing with dry heat, and foul and gritty with dust.  The court had a forlorn appearance;
now and then a glimmer of sun fled over it; now and then the wind swooped down upon the pomegranates,
and scattered the blossoms, and set the window shutters clapping on the wall. In the recess
the Senora was pacing to and fro with a flushed countenance and bright eyes; I thought, too,
she was speaking to herself, like one in anger.  But when I addressed her with my customary
salutation, she only replied by a sharp gesture and continued her walk.  The weather had distempered
even this impassive creature; and as I went on upstairs I was the less ashamed of my own discomposure.

All day the wind continued; and I sat in my room and made a feint of reading, or walked up
and down, and listened to the riot overhead.  Night fell, and I had not so much as a candle.
I began to long for some society, and stole down to the court.  It was now plunged in the blue
of the first darkness; but the recess was redly lighted by the fire.  The wood had been piled
high, and was crowned by a shock of flames, which the draught of the chimney brandished to
and fro.  In this strong and shaken brightness the Senora continued pacing from wall to wall
with disconnected gestures, clasping her hands, stretching forth her arms, throwing back her
head as in appeal to heaven.  In these disordered movements the beauty and grace of the woman
showed more clearly; but there was a light in her eye that struck on me unpleasantly; and when
I had looked on awhile in silence, and seemingly unobserved, I turned tail as I had come, and
groped my way back again to my own chamber.

By the time Felipe brought my supper and lights, my nerve was utterly gone; and, had the lad
been such as I was used to seeing him, I should have kept him (even by force had that been
necessary) to take off the edge from my distasteful solitude.  But on Felipe, also, the wind
had exercised its influence.  He had been feverish all day; now that the night had come he
was fallen into a low and tremulous humour that reacted on my own.  The sight of his scared
face, his starts and pallors and sudden harkenings, unstrung me; and when he dropped and broke
a dish, I fairly leaped out of my seat.

'I think we are all mad to-day,' said I, affecting to laugh.

'It is the black wind,' he replied dolefully.  'You feel as if you must do something, and you
don't know what it is.'

I noted the aptness of the description; but, indeed, Felipe had sometimes a strange felicity
in rendering into words the sensations of the body. 'And your mother, too,' said I; 'she seems
to feel this weather much.  Do you not fear she may be unwell?'

He stared at me a little, and then said, 'No,' almost defiantly; and the next moment, carrying
his hand to his brow, cried out lamentably on the wind and the noise that made his head go
round like a millwheel.  'Who can be well?' he cried; and, indeed, I could only echo his question,
for I was disturbed enough myself.

I went to bed early, wearied with day-long restlessness, but the poisonous nature of the wind,
and its ungodly and unintermittent uproar, would not suffer me to sleep.  I lay there and tossed,
my nerves and senses on the stretch.  At times I would doze, dream horribly, and wake again;
and these snatches of oblivion confused me as to time.  But it must have been late on in the
night, when I was suddenly startled by an outbreak of pitiable and hateful cries.  I leaped
from my bed, supposing I had dreamed; but the cries still continued to fill the house, cries
of pain, I thought, but certainly of rage also, and so savage and discordant that they shocked
the heart.  It was no illusion; some living thing, some lunatic or some wild animal, was being
foully tortured.  The thought of Felipe and the squirrel flashed into my mind, and I ran to
the door, but it had been locked from the outside; and I might shake it as I pleased, I was
a fast prisoner.  Still the cries continued.  Now they would dwindle down into a moaning that
seemed to be articulate, and at these times I made sure they must be human; and again they
would break forth and fill the house with ravings worthy of hell.  I stood at the door and
gave ear to them, till at, last they died away.  Long after that, I still lingered and still
continued to hear them mingle in fancy with the storming of the wind; and when at last I crept
to my bed, it was with a deadly sickness and a blackness of horror on my heart.

It was little wonder if I slept no more.  Why had I been locked in?  What had passed?  Who
was the author of these indescribable and shocking cries?  A human being?  It was inconceivable.
A beast?  The cries were scarce quite bestial; and what animal, short of a lion or a tiger,
could thus shake the solid walls of the residencia?  And while I was thus turning over the
elements of the mystery, it came into my mind that I had not yet set eyes upon the daughter
of the house.  What was more probable than that the daughter of the Senora, and the sister
of Felipe, should be herself insane?  Or, what more likely than that these ignorant and half-
witted people should seek to manage an afflicted kinswoman by violence? Here was a solution;
and yet when I called to mind the cries (which I never did without a shuddering chill) it seemed
altogether insufficient: not even cruelty could wring such cries from madness.  But of one
thing I was sure: I could not live in a house where such a thing was half conceivable, and
not probe the matter home and, if necessary, interfere.

The next day came, the wind had blown itself out, and there was nothing to remind me of the
business of the night.  Felipe came to my bedside with obvious cheerfulness; as I passed through
the court, the Senora was sunning herself with her accustomed immobility; and when I issued
from the gateway, I found the whole face of nature austerely smiling, the heavens of a cold
blue, and sown with great cloud islands, and the mountain-sides mapped forth into provinces
of light and shadow.  A short walk restored me to myself, and renewed within me the resolve
to plumb this mystery; and when, from the vantage of my knoll, I had seen Felipe pass forth
to his labours in the garden, I returned at once to the residencia to put my design in practice.
The Senora appeared plunged in slumber; I stood awhile and marked her, but she did not stir;
even if my design were indiscreet, I had little to fear from such a guardian; and turning away,
I mounted to the gallery and began my exploration of the house.

All morning I went from one door to another, and entered spacious and faded chambers, some
rudely shuttered, some receiving their full charge of daylight, all empty and unhomely.  It
was a rich house, on which Time had breathed his tarnish and dust had scattered disillusion.
The spider swung there; the bloated tarantula scampered on the cornices; ants had their crowded
highways on the floor of halls of audience; the big and foul fly, that lives on carrion and
is often the messenger of death, had set up his nest in the rotten woodwork, and buzzed heavily
about the rooms. Hence it came to pass that these nations sent out a savory report to all the neighboring
reformed churches, a report which comforted, revived, strengthened, animated and encouraged all
the true and loyal subjects of Christ's kingdom; which struck terror and amazement to the hearts
of his enemies; which shook and caused to tremble the pillars of Antichrist's kingdom, and disquieted
the very foundations of the seat of that beast; which made malignants at home and abroad to be ashamed
and confounded, and even forced the haters of the Lord to feign submission to him. Numberless were
the advantages and privileges which did redound to these nations by, and were the lovely attendants
and sweet consequents of, these covenants; whereby God did set to his seal of approbation, and gave
clear evidence and demonstration of his acceptance of his people's cheerful and willing adventures
in this duty of covenanting with him: and as these blessings and mercies, which, as the dew of Hermon,
were distilled upon his people's heads and hearts, while they abode steadfast with him, and faithful
in his covenant were so many irrefragable proofs of his acquiescence in their first and laudable undertakings;
so the many sad and fearful plagues, distractions, confusions and miseries, which have attended
and followed the many gross breaches and violations of these covenants and departures from God,
are no less evident discoveries, undeniable signs and pregnant convictions of the Lord's most
just displeasure and indignation with the bypast and present courses of revolting and backsliding
from him; which courses of declension and grievous apostatizing from God and his covenant,
all the three kingdoms and in special this nation, and every individual
therein capable of such a work, are, without all controversy, called
to bewail and confess before God, and by speedy amendment to turn
from them, in order to avert judgments, and turn away justly impendent
wrath and long threatened strokes.

The consideration of these blessings and benefits, on the one hand, which followed the zealous entering
into, and sincere performing of these sacred oaths; and upon the other hand the sense we desire
to retain of the plagues and curses, threatened by God in his word against covenant-breaking
inflicted upon covenant-breakers in former ages, and foreign nations, and visibly impending upon
us in these nations, for our perfidious dealing in God's covenant; hath moved us a poor insignificant
handful of people, unworthy indeed to be called the posterity of our zealous reforming ancestors,
though heartily desirous to be found adhering to the same standard of doctrine, worship, discipline
and government to which they adhered, to attempt this solemn and weighty duty of renewing (in
our capacities and stations) these covenant obligations, that we might at least give some discovery
of our respect to the cause of God, for the advancement and preservation whereof these covenants
were first entered into, and afterwards again and again renewed by our religious progenitors,
and by the whole representative body of the three kingdoms, who had
any zeal for the interest of religion.

   And that we might, for our parts, be in
   some measure instrumental to transmit
   a testimony for the work of God
   in our land to the succeeding
   generation. Neither do we want, besides
         these general motives, some special inducements to this undertaking.

As 1. Because these national covenants, having been nationally broken, and their funeral piles
erected by wicked and perfidious rulers in the capital cities of the kingdom, with all imaginable
ignominy and contempt, have long lien buried and (almost) quite forgotten under these ashes;
most people either hating the very name and remembrance of them, or at least being ashamed honorably
to avouch their adherence to them, and afraid to endeavor a vigorous and constant prosecution
of the duties contained in them: So that it is high time that every one should do his utmost
towards a reviving of them. 2. Because many openly declare their sorrow and grief that ever
these covenants should have been entered into: malignants calling them a conspiracy, attributing
every miscarriage of the persons engaged in them to the covenants themselves as their native effects;
and others, who would take it ill to be called malignants, making them the causes of all the tyranny,
rapine, bloodshed and persecution of the late reigns, as having raised the spleen of the enemies
of religion, and accounting it safer that they should lie still in their graves, than that they
should irritate malignants any more by their resurrection.[4] Therefore we judge it our duty
to renew them, that we might evidence, that notwithstanding all these
malicious calumnies and false consequences cast upon them, we are
still of the same judgment with our reformers, that they are the most
sovereign means, under the blessing of God, for the reviving and preserving
the work of God in the land.

3. Because of the courses that are carried on in direct opposition to these covenants; the nations,
formerly cemented in peace and love in conjunction with truth and righteousness, having broken
these bonds, and united themselves upon another footing, by the late sinful incorporating union:
and imposing new oaths in opposition to the covenant; such as abjuration, &c. granting license,
protection and toleration to all the evils abjured in the covenant; as heresies and errors
in doctrine, superstition in worship, Prelacy and Erastianism in government, and overthrowing
all good discipline. 4. Because of our own sinful miscarriages in, and woful declinings from
our covenanted duties, our proneness to break covenant with God, and to be indifferent, lax,
negligent and unsteadfast in the cause and work of God, and to be led away with the error of the
wicked, and to fall from our steadfastness; wherefore we thought it necessary to bind ourselves
by a new tie to the Lord, and one to another in a zealous prosecution of covenanted duties, that
the covenant might be as a hedge to keep us from running out into
the paths of destroyers. 5.

We being sincerely desirous and having an earnest longing to celebrate the sacred ordinance
of the Lord's Supper, whereof many had unjustly called us despisers
and contemners, and finding it to have been the laudable practice
of the church of Scotland formerly, that all such as were admitted
to that holy table should swear and subscribe the covenant before
their coming thereunto; we judged it a fit preparation for our receiving
a sacramental confirmation of God's covenanted love and favor to us,
through our Lord Jesus Christ, that we should avouch Him for our God,
and testify our adherence to His cause and truth, by our renewing
our national covenants with Him.

Upon these and the like weighty considerations we resolved to set about this solemn and tremendous
duty; and being assured that we have no sufficiency in ourselves for any such undertaking,
after frequently imploring the Lord for light and direction, strength and assistance, and seeking
for ourselves a right way in the performance of the duty, upon days of humiliation, both in our
private societies and publicly in the fields, we did condescend upon
the following acknowledgment of sins, the more to enable us to remember
our own and the land's breaches of covenant, in our solemn public
confession thereof; and did draw up the following engagement to duties,
not to superadd any new oath and obligation to the covenants, but
only to adjust the articles of the covenant to the circumstances of
the time, and to explain in what sense the covenant binds us against
the present evils that are now prevalent in the land, and to the contrary
duties.

As for the covenants themselves, we made no material alteration in
them, as judging it a work more proper for an assembly of divines,
or representative body of church and state (had they been upright
and faithful in this cause) than for us, who, as we are called by
others in contempt, must own ourselves in truth to be, but a handful
of weak and most illiterate people, and but as babes in comparison
of the first framers of our covenants; only that we might make them
in some measure accomodable to the present lamentable circumstances,
whereinto we are involved by our iniquities, we have annotated some
few necessary alterations upon the margin, wherein the judicious will
find that we have in nothing receded from the scope and substance
of the covenant, but only in the phrase; for instance, where the covenant
binds to the defence and preservation of the king's majesty and government,
in regard we have no king nor supreme civil magistrate so qualified,
as God's law and the laudable laws of this realm require, to whom
we might, for conscience sake, subject ourselves, in a consistency
with our defending the true reformed religion in all its parts and
privileges: Therefore, we can only bind ourselves to defend and preserve
the honor, authority and majesty of lawful sovereigns, or supreme
magistrates, having the qualifications aforesaid, when God shall be
pleased to grant them to us.

Where no judicious person will say that there is any substantial
alteration as to the matter of the duty, but only as to the object
to whom the duty is to be performed; there being none such in being
as can justly claim, or to whom we may with a good conscience pay
such an allegiance.

Having mutually agreed concerning these prerequisites to this sacred action, that the same might
be orderly gone about, and might not be performed in a clandestine
way, so as to preclude any upright-hearted friends to the covenanted
reformation from joining with us in that so necessary a duty, there
was public intimation made of the design a competent space of time
before, upon a day of humiliation, and likewise upon the Lord's day
immediately preceding the work.

As for the particular way and manner, method and circumstances of the work, we had not given
any narrative of them; but that some, who came with an evil eye,
to spy out our liberty, for criticizing, not for joining or profiting,
have in part misrepresented the same, and may further do so; therefore,
to obviate all such misreports, we have thought fit to make this brief
relation thereof.

Upon Wednesday, July 23d, those who had the work in design being met together, the minister began
the day's work with prayer for special assistance to attain due preparation, and a suitable
frame, throughout the whole solemnity: and thereafter had a prefatory
discourse to the people, showing the nature of the work in general,
its lawfulness, expediency, and necessity, from scripture precedents
and approven examples of the people of God, adducing the 9th chapter
of Ezra, Neh.

Ezek. Dan. and Neh. x. 28, 29, for proof thereof; and of the day in particular, that it was
a day of fasting and supplication, with preaching of the word, in
order to preparation for the solemnities intended, both of renewing
the covenants and celebrating the sacrament of the Lord's, Supper.

After which a part of the lxxviii.

Psalm, from the 5th to the 12th verse being sung, Mr. John M'Neil, preacher of the gospel,
had a sermon upon Jer. 1. 4, and 5. From which text he raised and prosecuted largely, and particularly
the two following observations, as most pertinent for the work of the day; the first implicitly
supposed, the other more explicitly asserted in the words; viz. 1. That, a people in covenant with
God may be forgetful of and deal falsely in their covenant; or that covenant-takers may be covenant-breakers.
2. That, it is the duty of a people who have broken covenant with God to engage themselves
again to the Lord by the renovation of their covenant. Where in prosecuting the former, he
showed by what gradual steps of declension a people usually come
to deal falsely in God's covenant, such as, (1.) By forgetfulness,
Deut. iv.

23. There being a connexion between forgetting and forsaking, or dealing falsely in God's covenant,
so the church intimates, Psal. xliv. 17, 18. "All this is come upon us; yet have we not forgotten
thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy covenant; our heart is not turned back, neither have
our steps declined from thy way." And the returning remnant of Israel being sensible of this connexion,
resolve to bind themselves to the Lord in a perpetual covenant that may not be forgotten. (2.)
By seeking shifts and arguments to elude and evade the obligation of the covenant and to defend
the breaches thereof; which is after vows to make inquiry. (3.) By despising the bond of it;
Ezek. xvi. 59. "Which hast despised the oath in breaking the covenant." (4.) By defection to
the iniquities which are sworn and engaged against in the covenant, Jer. xi. 10. (5.) By changing
the government, laws, and ordinances sworn to be maintained in the covenant; either the government
of the state, without consulting divine direction, and due inspection into the qualification of
the persons set up, Hos. viii., compare the 1st and 4th verses. "They have transgressed my covenant,
&c. They have set up kings, but not by me, princes and I knew it
not;" that is, without consulting me to know my will, and without
my approbation and consent; or the government of the church, without
regard to the revealed will of God.

2 Chron. xiii. 6, 10. (6.) By an entire forsaking and disowning the obligation of the covenant,
Dan. xi. 30. "He------shall have intelligence with them that forsake the holy covenant." (7.) By
a stated opposition to the covenant, and persecuting of these who adhere thereunto. Thus Elijah
justly charges Israel, 1 Kings xix. 10, that they had forsaken God's covenant, because they had
thrown down his altars, slain his prophets, and sought after Elijah's life. And in a use of
lamentation deduced from the foresaid doctrine, he showed, that all ranks in the land had
reason to mourn over their breach of covenant, in regard that some of all ranks, from the throne
to the dunghill, in church and state, are, or have been guilty of dealing falsely in God's covenant,
in all and every one of these diverse ways, and of declining from it: and in regard that there
has been so much ignominy and contempt cast upon these sacred covenants,
not only by breaking them openly, but also avowedly disowning and
disdaining their obligation, and making the adherence to them criminal;
and, which is above all, burning them by the hand of the hangman,
and burying them so long in forgetfulness.

This guiltiness he applied not to great persons only, but also to professors, to ministers,
and particularly to ourselves, who are called dissenters from the present establishment; pressing
upon us no less than others, the absolute and indispensable necessity of being convinced of, and
mourning over these, not as the sins of others only, but also as our own--we having a chief hand in
the trespass; pressing upon all present concerned in the work the duty of self-examination,
and putting themselves to the trial, concerning their knowledge of the covenant obligations,
both as to their nature and extent, as well as their sense of the breaches of these obligations.
  And again, as
I marked her make infinitesimal changes in her posture, savouring and lingering on the bodily
pleasure of the movement, I was driven to wonder at this depth of passive sensuality.  She
lived in her body; and her consciousness was all sunk into and disseminated through her members,
where it luxuriously dwelt.  Lastly, I could not grow accustomed to her eyes.  Each time she
turned on me these great beautiful and meaningless orbs, wide open to the day, but closed against
human inquiry--each time I had occasion to observe the lively changes of her pupils which expanded
and contracted in a breath--I know not what it was came over me, I can find no name for the
mingled feeling of disappointment, annoyance, and distaste that jarred along my nerves.  I
tried her on a variety of subjects, equally in vain; and at last led the talk to her daughter.
But even there she proved indifferent; said she was pretty, which (as with children) was her
highest word of commendation, but was plainly incapable of any higher thought; and when I remarked
that Olalla seemed silent, merely yawned in my face and replied that speech was of no great
use when you had nothing to say.  'People speak much, very much,' she added, looking at me
with expanded pupils; and then again yawned and again showed me a mouth that was as dainty
as a toy.  This time I took the hint, and, leaving her to her repose, went up into my own chamber
to sit by the open window, looking on the hills and not beholding them, sunk in lustrous and
deep dreams, and hearkening in fancy to the note of a voice that I had never heard.

I awoke on the fifth morning with a brightness of anticipation that seemed to challenge fate.
I was sure of myself, light of heart and foot, and resolved to put my love incontinently to
the touch of knowledge.  It should lie no longer under the bonds of silence, a dumb thing,
living by the eye only, like the love of beasts; but should now put on the spirit, and enter
upon the joys of the complete human intimacy.  I thought of it with wild hopes, like a voyager
to El Dorado; into that unknown and lovely country of her soul, I no longer trembled to adventure.
Yet when I did indeed encounter her, the same force of passion descended on me and at once
submerged my mind; speech seemed to drop away from me like a childish habit; and I but drew
near to her as the giddy man draws near to the margin of a gulf.  She drew back from me a little
as I came; but her eyes did not waver from mine, and these lured me forward.  At last, when
I was already within reach of her, I stopped.  Words were denied me; if I advanced I could
but clasp her to my heart in silence; and all that was sane in me, all that was still unconquered,
revolted against the thought of such an accost.  So we stood for a second, all our life in
our eyes, exchanging salvos of attraction and yet each resisting; and then, with a great effort
of the will, and conscious at the same time of a sudden bitterness of disappointment, I turned
and went away in the same silence.

What power lay upon me that I could not speak?  And she, why was she also silent?  Why did
she draw away before me dumbly, with fascinated eyes? Was this love? or was it a mere brute
attraction, mindless and inevitable, like that of the magnet for the steel?  We had never spoken,
we were wholly strangers: and yet an influence, strong as the grasp of a giant, swept us silently
together.  On my side, it filled me with impatience; and yet I was sure that she was worthy;
I had seen her books, read her verses, and thus, in a sense, divined the soul of my mistress.
But on her side, it struck me almost cold.  Of me, she knew nothing but my bodily favour; she
was drawn to me as stones fall to the earth; the laws that rule the earth conducted her, unconsenting,
to my arms; and I drew back at the thought of such a bridal, and began to be jealous for myself.
It was not thus that I desired to be loved.  And then I began to fall into a great pity for
the girl herself.  I thought how sharp must be her mortification, that she, the student, the
recluse, Felipe's saintly monitress, should have thus confessed an overweening weakness for
a man with whom she had never exchanged a word.  And at the coming of pity, all other thoughts
were swallowed up; and I longed only to find and console and reassure her; to tell her how
wholly her love was returned on my side, and how her choice, even if blindly made, was not
unworthy.

The next day it was glorious weather; depth upon depth of blue over-canopied the mountains;
the sun shone wide; and the wind in the trees and the many falling torrents in the mountains
filled the air with delicate and haunting music.  Yet I was prostrated with sadness.  My heart
wept for the sight of Olalla, as a child weeps for its mother.  I sat down on a boulder on
the verge of the low cliffs that bound the plateau to the north.  Thence I looked down into
the wooded valley of a stream, where no foot came.  In the mood I was in, it was even touching
to behold the place untenanted; it lacked Olalla; and I thought of the delight and glory of
a life passed wholly with her in that strong air, and among these rugged and lovely surroundings,
at first with a whimpering sentiment, and then again with such a fiery joy that I seemed to
grow in strength and stature, like a Samson.

And then suddenly I was aware of Olalla drawing near.  She appeared out of a grove of cork-trees,
and came straight towards me; and I stood up and waited.  She seemed in her walking a creature
of such life and fire and lightness as amazed me; yet she came quietly and slowly.  Her energy
was in the slowness; but for inimitable strength, I felt she would have run, she would have
flown to me.  Still, as she approached, she kept her eyes lowered to the ground; and when she
had drawn quite near, it was without one glance that she addressed me.  At the first note of
her voice I started.  It was for this I had been waiting; this was the last test of my love.
And lo, her enunciation was precise and clear, not lisping and incomplete like that of her
family; and the voice, though deeper than usual with women, was still both youthful and womanly.
She spoke in a rich chord; golden contralto strains mingled with hoarseness, as the red threads
were mingled with the brown among her tresses.  It was not only a voice that spoke to my heart
directly; but it spoke to me of her.  And yet her words immediately plunged me back upon despair.

'You will go away,' she said, 'to-day.'

Her example broke the bonds of my speech; I felt as lightened of a weight, or as if a spell
had been dissolved.  I know not in what words I answered; but, standing before her on the cliffs,
I poured out the whole ardour of my love, telling her that I lived upon the thought of her,
slept only to dream of her loveliness, and would gladly forswear my country, my language, and
my friends, to live for ever by her side.  And then, strongly commanding myself, I changed
the note; I reassured, I comforted her; I told her I had divined in her a pious and heroic
spirit, with which I was worthy to sympathise, and which I longed to share and lighten.  'Nature,'
I told her, 'was the voice of God, which men disobey at peril; and if we were thus humbly drawn
together, ay, even as by a miracle of love, it must imply a divine fitness in our souls; we
must be made,' I said--'made for one another.  We should be mad rebels,' I cried out--'mad
rebels against God, not to obey this instinct.'

She shook her head.  'You will go to-day,' she repeated, and then with a gesture, and in a
sudden, sharp note--'no, not to-day,' she cried, 'to- morrow!'

But at this sign of relenting, power came in upon me in a tide.  I stretched out my arms and
called upon her name; and she leaped to me and clung to me.  The hills rocked about us, the
earth quailed; a shock as of a blow went through me and left me blind and dizzy.  And the next
moment she had thrust me back, broken rudely from my arms, and fled with the speed of a deer
among the cork-trees.

I stood and shouted to the mountains; I turned and went back towards the residencia, waltzing
upon air.  She sent me away, and yet I had but to call upon her name and she came to me.  These
were but the weaknesses of girls, from which even she, the strangest of her sex, was not exempted.
Go?  Not I, Olalla--O, not I, Olalla, my Olalla!  A bird sang near by; and in that season,
birds were rare.  It bade me be of good cheer.  And once more the whole countenance of nature,
from the ponderous and stable mountains down to the lightest leaf and the smallest darting
fly in the shadow of the groves, began to stir before me and to put on the lineaments of life
and wear a face of awful joy.  The sunshine struck upon the hills, strong as a hammer on the
anvil, and the hills shook; the earth, under that vigorous insulation, yielded up heady scents;
the woods smouldered in the blaze.  I felt the thrill of travail and delight run through the
earth.  Something elemental, something rude, violent, and savage, in the love that sang in
my heart, was like a key to nature's secrets; and the very stones that rattled under my feet
appeared alive and friendly.  Olalla!  Her touch had quickened, and renewed, and strung me
up to the old pitch of concert with the rugged earth, to a swelling of the soul that men learn
to forget in their polite assemblies.  Love burned in me like rage; tenderness waxed fierce;
I hated, I adored, I pitied, I revered her with ecstasy.  She seemed the link that bound me
in with dead things on the one hand, and with our pure and pitying God upon the other: a thing
brutal and divine, and akin at once to the innocence and to the unbridled forces of the earth.

My head thus reeling, I came into the courtyard of the residencia, and the sight of the mother
struck me like a revelation.  She sat there, all sloth and contentment, blinking under the
strong sunshine, branded with a passive enjoyment, a creature set quite apart, before whom
my ardour fell away like a thing ashamed.  I stopped a moment, and, commanding such shaken
tones as I was able, said a word or two.  She looked at me with her unfathomable kindness;
her voice in reply sounded vaguely out of the realm of peace in which she slumbered, and there
fell on my mind, for the first time, a sense of respect for one so uniformly innocent and happy,
and I passed on in a kind of wonder at myself, that I should be so much disquieted.

On my table there lay a piece of the same yellow paper I had seen in the north room; it was
written on with pencil in the same hand, Olalla's hand, and I picked it up with a sudden sinking
of alarm, and read, 'If you have any kindness for Olalla, if you have any chivalry for a creature
sorely wrought, go from here to-day; in pity, in honour, for the sake of Him who died, I supplicate
that you shall go.'  I looked at this awhile in mere stupidity, then I began to awaken to a
weariness and horror of life; the sunshine darkened outside on the bare hills, and I began
to shake like a man in terror.  The vacancy thus suddenly opened in my life unmanned me like
a physical void.  It was not my heart, it was not my happiness, it was life itself that was
involved.  I could not lose her.  I said so, and stood repeating it.  And then, like one in
a dream, I moved to the window, put forth my hand to open the casement, and thrust it through
the pane.  The blood spurted from my wrist; and with an instantaneous quietude and command
of myself, I pressed my thumb on the little leaping fountain, and reflected what to do.  In
that empty room there was nothing to my purpose; I felt, besides, that I required assistance.
There shot into my mind a hope that Olalla herself might be my helper, and I turned and went
down stairs, still keeping my thumb upon the wound.

There was no sign of either Olalla or Felipe, and I addressed myself to the recess, whither
the Senora had now drawn quite back and sat dozing close before the fire, for no degree of
heat appeared too much for her.

'Pardon me,' said I, 'if I disturb you, but I must apply to you for help.'

She looked up sleepily and asked me what it was, and with the very words I thought she drew
in her breath with a widening of the nostrils and seemed to come suddenly and fully alive.

'I have cut myself,' I said, 'and rather badly.  See!'  And I held out my two hands from which
the blood was oozing and dripping.

Her great eyes opened wide, the pupils shrank into points; a veil seemed to fall from her face,
and leave it sharply expressive and yet inscrutable.  And as I still stood, marvelling a little
at her disturbance, she came swiftly up to me, and stooped and caught me by the hand; and the
next moment my hand was at her mouth, and she had bitten me to the bone.  The pang of the bite,
the sudden spurting of blood, and the monstrous horror of the act, flashed through me all in
one, and I beat her back; and she sprang at me again and again, with bestial cries, cries that
I recognised, such cries as had awakened me on the night of the high wind.  Her strength was
like that of madness; mine was rapidly ebbing with the loss of blood; my mind besides was whirling
with the abhorrent strangeness of the onslaught, and I was already forced against the wall,
when Olalla ran betwixt us, and Felipe, following at a bound, pinned down his mother on the floor.

A trance-like weakness fell upon me; I saw, heard, and felt, but I was incapable of movement.
I heard the struggle roll to and fro upon the floor, the yells of that catamount ringing up
to Heaven as she strove to reach me.  I felt Olalla clasp me in her arms, her hair falling
on my face, and, with the strength of a man, raise and half drag, half carry me upstairs into
my own room, where she cast me down upon the bed.  Then I saw her hasten to the door and lock
it, and stand an instant listening to the savage cries that shook the residencia.  And then,
swift and light as a thought, she was again beside me, binding up my hand, laying it in her
bosom, moaning and mourning over it with dove-like sounds.  They were not words that came to
her, they were sounds more beautiful than speech, infinitely touching, infinitely tender; and
yet as I lay there, a thought stung to my heart, a thought wounded me like a sword, a thought,
like a worm in a flower, profaned the holiness of my love.  Yes, they were beautiful sounds,
and they were inspired by human tenderness; but was their beauty human?

All day I lay there.  For a long time the cries of that nameless female thing, as she struggled
with her half-witted whelp, resounded through the house, and pierced me with despairing sorrow
and disgust.  They were the death-cry of my love; my love was murdered; was not only dead,
but an offence to me; and yet, think as I pleased, feel as I must, it still swelled within
me like a storm of sweetness, and my heart melted at her looks and touch.  This horror that
had sprung out, this doubt upon Olalla, this savage and bestial strain that ran not only through
the whole behaviour of her family, but found a place in the very foundations and story of our
love--though it appalled, though it shocked and sickened me, was yet not of power to break
the knot of my infatuation.

When the cries had ceased, there came a scraping at the door, by which I knew Felipe was without;
and Olalla went and spoke to him--I know not what.  With that exception, she stayed close beside
me, now kneeling by my bed and fervently praying, now sitting with her eyes upon mine.  So
then, for these six hours I drank in her beauty, and silently perused the story in her face.
I saw the golden coin hover on her breaths; I saw her eyes darken and brighter, and still speak
no language but that of an unfathomable kindness; I saw the faultless face, and, through the
robe, the lines of the faultless body.  Night came at last, and in the growing darkness of
the chamber, the sight of her slowly melted; but even then the touch of her smooth hand lingered
in mine and talked with me.  To lie thus in deadly weakness and drink in the traits of the
beloved, is to reawake to love from whatever shock of disillusion.  I reasoned with myself;
and I shut my eyes on horrors, and again I was very bold to accept the worst.  What mattered
it, if that imperious sentiment survived; if her eyes still beckoned and attached me; if now,
even as before, every fibre of my dull body yearned and turned to her?  Late on in the night
some strength revived in me, and I spoke:--

'Olalla,' I said, 'nothing matters; I ask nothing; I am content; I love you.'

She knelt down awhile and prayed, and I devoutly respected her devotions. The moon had begun
to shine in upon one side of each of the three windows, and make a misty clearness in the room,
by which I saw her indistinctly.  When she rearose she made the sign of the cross.

'It is for me to speak,' she said, 'and for you to listen.  I know; you can but guess.  I prayed,
how I prayed for you to leave this place.  I begged it of you, and I know you would have granted
me even this; or if not, O let me think so!'

'I love you,' I said.

'And yet you have lived in the world,' she said; after a pause, 'you are a man and wise; and
I am but a child.  Go, rather, go now, and keep me in mind.  So I shall have a life in the
cherished places of your memory: a life as much my own, as that which I lead in this body.'

'I love you,' I said once more; and reaching out my weak hand, took hers, and carried it to
my lips, and kissed it.  Nor did she resist, but winced a little; and I could see her look
upon me with a frown that was not unkindly, only sad and baffled.  And then it seemed she made
a call upon her resolution; plucked my hand towards her, herself at the same time leaning somewhat
forward, and laid it on the beating of her heart. 'There,' she cried, 'you feel the very footfall
of my life.  It only moves for you; it is yours.  But is it even mine?  It is mine indeed to
offer you, as I might take the coin from my neck, as I might break a live branch from a tree,
and give it you.  And yet not mine!  I dwell, or I think I dwell (if I exist at all), somewhere
apart, an impotent prisoner, and carried about and deafened by a mob that I disown.  This capsule,
such as throbs against the sides of animals, knows you at a touch for its master; ay, it loves
you!  But my soul, does my soul?  I think not; I know not, fearing to ask. Have you looked
at my mother or at Felipe?  Have your eyes never rested on that picture that hangs by your
bed?  She who sat for it died ages ago; and she did evil in her life.  But, look-again: there
is my hand to the least line, there are my eyes and my hair.  My fathers, eight hundred years
ago, ruled all this province: they were wise, great, cunning, and cruel; they were a picked
race of the Spanish; their flags led in war; the king called them his cousin; the people, when
the rope was slung for them or when they returned and found their hovels smoking, blasphemed
their name.  Presently a change began.  Man has risen; if he has sprung from the brutes, he
can descend again to the same level.  The breath of weariness blew on their humanity and the
cords relaxed; they began to go down; their minds fell on sleep, their passions awoke in gusts,
heady and senseless like the wind in the gutters of the mountains; beauty was still handed
down, but no longer the guiding wit nor the human heart; the seed passed on, it was wrapped
in flesh, the flesh covered the bones, but they were the bones and the flesh of brutes, and
their mind was as the mind of flies.  I speak to you as I dare; but you have seen for yourself
how the wheel has gone backward with my doomed race.  I stand, as it were, upon a little rising
ground in this desperate descent, and see both before and behind, both what we have lost and
to what we are condemned to go farther downward.  And shall I--I that dwell apart in the house
of the dead, my body, loathing its ways--shall I repeat the spell?  Shall I bind another spirit,
reluctant as my own, into this bewitched and tempest-broken tenement that I now suffer in?
Shall I hand down this cursed vessel of humanity, charge it with fresh life as with fresh poison,
and dash it, like a fire, in the faces of posterity?  But my vow has been given; the race shall
cease from off the earth.  At this hour my brother is making ready; his foot will soon be on
the stair; and you will go with him and pass out of my sight for ever.  Think of me sometimes
as one to whom the lesson of life was very harshly told, but who heard it with courage; as
one who loved you indeed, but who hated herself so deeply that her love was hateful to her;
as one who sent you away and yet would have longed to keep you for ever; who had no dearer
hope than to forget you, and no greater fear than to be forgotten.'

She had drawn towards the door as she spoke, her rich voice sounding softer and farther away;
and with the last word she was gone, and I lay alone in the moonlit chamber.  What I might
have done had not I lain bound by my extreme weakness, I know not; but as it was there fell
upon me a great and blank despair.  It was not long before there shone in at the door the ruddy
glimmer of a lantern, and Felipe coming, charged me without a word upon his shoulders, and
carried me down to the great gate, where the cart was waiting.  In the moonlight the hills
stood out sharply, as if they were of cardboard; on the glimmering surface of the plateau,
and from among the low trees which swung together and sparkled in the wind, the great black
cube of the residencia stood out bulkily, its mass only broken by three dimly lighted windows
in the northern front above the gate.  They were Olalla's windows, and as the cart jolted onwards
I kept my eyes fixed upon them till, where the road dipped into a valley, they were lost to
my view forever.  Felipe walked in silence beside the shafts, but from time to time he would
cheek the mule and seem to look back upon me; and at length drew quite near and laid his hand
upon my head.  There was such kindness in the touch, and such a simplicity, as of the brutes,
that tears broke from me like the bursting of an artery.

'Felipe,' I said, 'take me where they will ask no questions.'

He said never a word, but he turned his mule about, end for end, retraced some part of the
way we had gone, and, striking into another path, led me to the mountain village, which was,
as we say in Scotland, the kirkton of that thinly peopled district.  Some broken memories dwell
in my mind of the day breaking over the plain, of the cart stopping, of arms that helped me
down, of a bare room into which I was carried, and of a swoon that fell upon me like sleep.

The next day and the days following the old priest was often at my side with his snuff-box
and prayer book, and after a while, when I began to pick up strength, he told me that I was
now on a fair way to recovery, and must as soon as possible hurry my departure; whereupon,
without naming any reason, he took snuff and looked at me sideways.  I did not affect ignorance;
I knew he must have seen Olalla.  'Sir,' said I, 'you know that I do not ask in wantonness.
What of that family?'

He said they were very unfortunate; that it seemed a declining race, and that they were very
poor and had been much neglected.

'But she has not,' I said.  'Thanks, doubtless, to yourself, she is instructed and wise beyond
the use of women.'

'Yes,' he said; 'the Senorita is well-informed.  But the family has been neglected.'

'The mother?' I queried.

'Yes, the mother too,' said the Padre, taking snuff.  'But Felipe is a well-intentioned lad.'

'The mother is odd?' I asked.

'Very odd,' replied the priest.

'I think, sir, we beat about the bush,' said I.  'You must know more of my affairs than you
allow.  You must know my curiosity to be justified on many grounds.  Will you not be frank
with me?'

'My son,' said the old gentleman, 'I will be very frank with you on matters within my competence;
on those of which I know nothing it does not require much discretion to be silent.  I will
not fence with you, I take your meaning perfectly; and what can I say, but that we are all
in God's hands, and that His ways are not as our ways?  I have even advised with my superiors
in the church, but they, too, were dumb.  It is a great mystery.'

'Is she mad?' I asked.

'I will answer you according to my belief.  She is not,' returned the Padre, 'or she was not.
When she was young--God help me, I fear I neglected that wild lamb--she was surely sane; and
yet, although it did not run to such heights, the same strain was already notable; it had been
so before her in her father, ay, and before him, and this inclined me, perhaps, to think too
lightly of it.  But these things go on growing, not only in the individual but in the race.'

'When she was young,' I began, and my voice failed me for a moment, and it was only with a
great effort that I was able to add, 'was she like Olalla?'

'Now God forbid!' exclaimed the Padre.  'God forbid that any man should think so slightingly
of my favourite penitent.  No, no; the Senorita (but for her beauty, which I wish most honestly
she had less of) has not a hair's resemblance to what her mother was at the same age.  I could
not bear to have you think so; though, Heaven knows, it were, perhaps, better that you should.'

At this, I raised myself in bed, and opened my heart to the old man; telling him of our love
and of her decision, owning my own horrors, my own passing fancies, but telling him that these
were at an end; and with something more than a purely formal submission, appealing to his judgment.

He heard me very patiently and without surprise; and when I had done, he sat for some time
silent.  Then he began: 'The church,' and instantly broke off again to apologise.  'I had forgotten,
my child, that you were not a Christian,' said he.  'And indeed, upon a point so highly unusual,
even the church can scarce be said to have decided.  But would you have my opinion?  The Senorita
is, in a matter of this kind, the best judge; I would accept her judgment.'

On the back of that he went away, nor was he thenceforward so assiduous in his visits; indeed,
even when I began to get about again, he plainly feared and deprecated my society, not as in
distaste but much as a man might be disposed to flee from the riddling sphynx.  The villagers,
too, avoided me; they were unwilling to be my guides upon the mountain.  I thought they looked
at me askance, and I made sure that the more superstitious crossed themselves on my approach.
At first I set this down to my heretical opinions; but it began at length to dawn upon me that
if I was thus redoubted it was because I had stayed at the residencia.  All men despise the
savage notions of such peasantry; and yet I was conscious of a chill shadow that seemed to
fall and dwell upon my love.  It did not conquer, but I may not deify that it restrained my ardour.

Some miles westward of the village there was a gap in the sierra, from which the eye plunged
direct upon the residencia; and thither it became my daily habit to repair.  A wood crowned
the summit; and just where the pathway issued from its fringes, it was overhung by a considerable
shelf of rock, and that, in its turn, was surmounted by a crucifix of the size of life and
more than usually painful in design.  This was my perch; thence, day after day, I looked down
upon the plateau, and the great old house, and could see Felipe, no bigger than a fly, going
to and fro about the garden.  Sometimes mists would draw across the view, and be broken up
again by mountain winds; sometimes the plain slumbered below me in unbroken sunshine; it would
sometimes be all blotted out by rain.  This distant post, these interrupted sights of the place
where my life had been so strangely changed, suited the indecision of my humour.  I passed
whole days there, debating with myself the various elements of our position; now leaning to
the suggestions of love, now giving an ear to prudence, and in the end halting irresolute between
the two.

One day, as I was sitting on my rock, there came by that way a somewhat gaunt peasant wrapped
in a mantle.  He was a stranger, and plainly did not know me even by repute; for, instead of
keeping the other side, he drew near and sat down beside me, and we had soon fallen in talk.
Among other things he told me he had been a muleteer, and in former years had much frequented
these mountains; later on, he had followed the army with his mules, had realised a competence,
and was now living retired with his family.

'Do you know that house?' I inquired, at last, pointing to the residencia, for I readily wearied
of any talk that kept me from the thought of Olalla.

He looked at me darkly and crossed himself.

'Too well,' he said, 'it was there that one of my comrades sold himself to Satan; the Virgin
shield us from temptations!  He has paid the price; he is now burning in the reddest place
in Hell!'

A fear came upon me; I could answer nothing; and presently the man resumed, as if to himself:
'Yes,' he said, 'O yes, I know it.  I have passed its doors.  There was snow upon the pass,
the wind was driving it; sure enough there was death that night upon the mountains, but there
was worse beside the hearth.  I took him by the arm, Senor, and dragged him to the gate; I
conjured him, by all he loved and respected, to go forth with me; I went on my knees before
him in the snow; and I could see he was moved by my entreaty.  And just then she came out on
the gallery, and called him by his name; and he turned, and there was she standing with a lamp
in her hand and smiling on him to come back.  I cried out aloud to God, and threw my arms about
him, but he put me by, and left me alone.  He had made his choice; God help us.  I would pray
for him, but to what end? there are sins that not even the Pope can loose.'

'And your friend,' I asked, 'what became of him?'

'Nay, God knows,' said the muleteer.  'If all be true that we hear, his end was like his sin,
a thing to raise the hair.'

'Do you mean that he was killed?' I asked.

'Sure enough, he was killed,' returned the man.  'But how?  Ay, how?  But these are things
that it is sin to speak of.'

'The people of that house . . . ' I began.

But he interrupted me with a savage outburst.  'The people?' he cried. 'What people?  There
are neither men nor women in that house of Satan's! What? have you lived here so long, and
never heard?'  And here he put his mouth to my ear and whispered, as if even the fowls of the
mountain might have over-heard and been stricken with horror.

What he told me was not true, nor was it even original; being, indeed, but a new edition, vamped
up again by village ignorance and superstition, of stories nearly as ancient as the race of
man.  It was rather the application that appalled me.  In the old days, he said, the church
would have burned out that nest of basilisks; but the arm of the church was now shortened;
his friend Miguel had been unpunished by the hands of men, and left to the more awful judgment
of an offended God.  This was wrong; but it should be so no more.  The Padre was sunk in age;
he was even bewitched himself; but the eyes of his flock were now awake to their own danger;
and some day--ay, and before long--the smoke of that house should go up to heaven.

He left me filled with horror and fear.  Which way to turn I knew not; whether first to warn
the Padre, or to carry my ill-news direct to the threatened inhabitants of the residencia.
Fate was to decide for me; for, while I was still hesitating, I beheld the veiled figure of
a woman drawing near to me up the pathway.  No veil could deceive my penetration; by every
line and every movement I recognised Olalla; and keeping hidden behind a corner of the rock,
I suffered her to gain the summit.  Then I came forward.  She knew me and paused, but did not
speak; I, too, remained silent; and we continued for some time to gaze upon each other with
a passionate sadness.

'I thought you had gone,' she said at length.  'It is all that you can do for me--to go.  It
is all I ever asked of you.  And you still stay.  But do you know, that every day heaps up
the peril of death, not only on your head, but on ours?  A report has gone about the mountain;
it is thought you love me, and the people will not suffer it.'

I saw she was already informed of her danger, and I rejoiced at it. 'Olalla,' I said, 'I am
ready to go this day, this very hour, but not alone.'

She stepped aside and knelt down before the crucifix to pray, and I stood by and looked now
at her and now at the object of her adoration, now at the living figure of the penitent, and
now at the ghastly, daubed countenance, the painted wounds, and the projected ribs of the image.
The silence was only broken by the wailing of some large birds that circled sidelong, as if
in surprise or alarm, about the summit of the hills. Presently Olalla rose again, turned towards
me, raised her veil, and, still leaning with one hand on the shaft of the crucifix, looked
upon me with a pale and sorrowful countenance.

'I have laid my hand upon the cross,' she said.  'The Padre says you are no Christian; but
look up for a moment with my eyes, and behold the face of the Man of Sorrows.  Suffer me to
pass on upon my way alone; it is thus that I shall be least lonely, counting for my friend
Him who is the friend of all the distressed; it is thus that I shall be the most happy, having
taken my farewell of earthly happiness, and willingly accepted sorrow for my portion.'

I looked at the face of the crucifix, and, though I was no friend to images, and despised that
imitative and grimacing art of which it was a rude example, some sense of what the thing implied
was carried home to my intelligence.  The face looked down upon me with a painful and deadly
contraction; but the rays of a glory encircled it, and reminded me that the sacrifice was voluntary.
It stood there, crowning the rock, as it still stands on so many highway sides, vainly preaching
to passers-by, an emblem of sad and noble truths; that pleasure is not an end, but an accident;
that pain is the choice of the magnanimous; that it is best to suffer all things and do well.
I turned and went down the mountain in silence; and when I looked back for the last time before
the wood closed about my path, I saw Olalla still leaning on the crucifix.

THE TREASURE OF FRANCHARD.

CHAPTER I.  BY THE DYING MOUNTEBANK.

They had sent for the doctor from Bourron before six.  About eight some villagers came round
for the performance, and were told how matters stood.  It seemed a liberty for a mountebank
to fall ill like real people, and they made off again in dudgeon.  By ten Madame Tentaillon
was gravely alarmed, and had sent down the street for Doctor Desprez.

The Doctor was at work over his manuscripts in one corner of the little dining-room, and his
wife was asleep over the fire in another, when the messenger arrived.

'Sapristi!' said the Doctor, 'you should have sent for me before.  It was a case for hurry.'
And he followed the messenger as he was, in his slippers and skull-cap.

The inn was not thirty yards away, but the messenger did not stop there; he went in at one
door and out by another into the court, and then led the way by a flight of steps beside the
stable, to the loft where the mountebank lay sick.  If Doctor Desprez were to live a thousand
years, he would never forget his arrival in that room; for not only was the scene picturesque,
but the moment made a date in his existence.  We reckon our lives, I hardly know why, from
the date of our first sorry appearance in society, as if from a first humiliation; for no actor
can come upon the stage with a worse grace.  Not to go further back, which would be judged
too curious, there are subsequently many moving and decisive accidents in the lives of all,
which would make as logical a period as this of birth. And here, for instance, Doctor Desprez,
a man past forty, who had made what is called a failure in life, and was moreover married,
found himself at a new point of departure when he opened the door of the loft above Tentaillon's
stable.

It was a large place, lighted only by a single candle set upon the floor. The mountebank lay
on his back upon a pallet; a large man, with a Quixotic nose inflamed with drinking.  Madame
Tentaillon stooped over him, applying a hot water and mustard embrocation to his feet; and
on a chair close by sat a little fellow of eleven or twelve, with his feet dangling.  These
three were the only occupants, except the shadows.  But the shadows were a company in themselves;
the extent of the room exaggerated them to a gigantic size, and from the low position of the
candle the light struck upwards and produced deformed foreshortenings. The mountebank's profile
was enlarged upon the wall in caricature, and it was strange to see his nose shorten and lengthen
as the flame was blown about by draughts.  As for Madame Tentaillon, her shadow was no more
than a gross hump of shoulders, with now and again a hemisphere of head.  The chair legs were
spindled out as long as stilts, and the boy set perched atop of them, like a cloud, in the
corner of the roof.

It was the boy who took the Doctor's fancy.  He had a great arched skull, the forehead and
the hands of a musician, and a pair of haunting eyes.  It was not merely that these eyes were
large, or steady, or the softest ruddy brown.  There was a look in them, besides, which thrilled
the Doctor, and made him half uneasy.  He was sure he had seen such a look before, and yet
he could not remember how or where.  It was as if this boy, who was quite a stranger to him,
had the eyes of an old friend or an old enemy.  And the boy would give him no peace; he seemed
profoundly indifferent to what was going on, or rather abstracted from it in a superior contemplation,
beating gently with his feet against the bars of the chair, and holding his hands folded on
his lap.  But, for all that, his eyes kept following the Doctor about the room with a thoughtful
fixity of gaze.  Desprez could not tell whether he was fascinating the boy, or the boy was
fascinating him.  He busied himself over the sick man: he put questions, he felt the pulse,
he jested, he grew a little hot and swore: and still, whenever he looked round, there were
the brown eyes waiting for his with the same inquiring, melancholy gaze.

At last the Doctor hit on the solution at a leap.  He remembered the look now.  The little
fellow, although he was as straight as a dart, had the eyes that go usually with a crooked
back; he was not at all deformed, and yet a deformed person seemed to be looking at you from
below his brows. The Doctor drew a long breath, he was so much relieved to find a theory (for
he loved theories) and to explain away his interest.

For all that, he despatched the invalid with unusual haste, and, still kneeling with one knee
on the floor, turned a little round and looked the boy over at his leisure.  The boy was not
in the least put out, but looked placidly back at the Doctor.

'Is this your father?' asked Desprez.

'Oh, no,' returned the boy; 'my master.'

'Are you fond of him?' continued the Doctor.

'No, sir,' said the boy.

Madame Tentaillon and Desprez exchanged expressive glances.

'That is bad, my man,' resumed the latter, with a shade of sternness. 'Every one should be
fond of the dying, or conceal their sentiments; and your master here is dying.  If I have watched
a bird a little while stealing my cherries, I have a thought of disappointment when he flies
away over my garden wall, and I see him steer for the forest and vanish. How much more a creature
such as this, so strong, so astute, so richly endowed with faculties!  When I think that, in
a few hours, the speech will be silenced, the breath extinct, and even the shadow vanished
from the wall, I who never saw him, this lady who knew him only as a guest, are touched with
some affection.'

The boy was silent for a little, and appeared to be reflecting.

'You did not know him,' he replied at last, 'he was a bad man.'

'He is a little pagan,' said the landlady.  'For that matter, they are all the same, these
mountebanks, tumblers, artists, and what not. And if it be considered as an association, it respects those only
who now do, or hereafter shall, adhere unto it, whether here or in
the other two kingdoms.

Hence, the words in the preamble of the Solemn League and Covenant,
expressing the several ranks and the extent of the Covenanters, were
not read at the renewing of it at Douglass, because we own ourselves
to be under a league with none but such as own the covenanted Reformation;
these, and these only, we heartily embrace as our colleagues, into
the nearest and dearest bonds of Christian union and fellowship, according
to this League and Covenant.

As the revolt of the ten tribes from the true religion and covenant of the Lord their God, hindered
not the godly of Judah, nor the small party that joined in the sincere
worship of God, out of Ephraim and Manasseh, to renew their covenant
under the auspicious reigns of Asa, Hezekiah, Josiah; Nor did the
horrid apostacy of the Sectarian party in England impede our ancestors
to renew this Solemn League and Covenant in Scotland, Anno, 1649.

So neither can the defection of the generality of the three kingdoms,
which is to be bewailed, if possible, with tears of blood, hinder
us from testifying our adherence to the covenant, or invalidate what
we have done therein.

Object. 4. "Albeit the action should be granted to be for the main, lawful and right, yet it was
most unseasonable to undertake it at such a time, when the parliament
and ministry is composed of a set of men that evidence no good affection
to the present established church in Scotland, who will be ready to
interpret the action of a few immoderately and unseasonably zealous
people, as the deed of the whole Presbyterians in Scotland, and to
make a handle thereof against them, to impose upon them some new burdens;
or to take such measures as will effectually put a stop to the more
general renovation thereof throughout the land."

In answer to this objection, we shall only desire the gentlemen that
made it to remember, That now for the space of 24 years they have
been crying, the time is not come wherein we should set about covenant-renewing;
one while they have pretended that the time was not seasonable, because
such as were in authority were friends to the church; and it would
look like a suspecting of their integrity, to enter into covenant
for defence and reformation of religion, as if they would not show
themselves active enough for these ends, and prove an irritation to
them to turn enemies to Presbyterian government; it would cause them
to think the Presbyterians to be a people of indiscreet and ungovernable
zeal, and so disgust them at the establishment.

Another, while they excuse themselves from this duty, because these
in authority are unfriendly to the Presbyterian establishment, they
must walk cautiously now and manage prudently, lest they give any
umbrage to Jacobites and Episcopalians to represent them ill at court,
and so occasion the overthrow of the great security founded in the
Union Treaty.

Formerly they needed not renew the covenant, because religion was not in danger; now they dare
not attempt to do it because it is; they must wait till a well-affected parliament and good
counsellors set it out of danger again, and then they will not need to covenant for its safety.
These shifts are too shrewd discoveries of neutrality in this cause. It is to be feared that
the godly have too long been hoodwinked with such frivolous pretexts;
and it is high time for every one that has the low case of the work
of God in the land at heart, to be awakened to renew their covenant
with God and keep the same.

The motives and calls to the work above mentioned will sufficiently,
we hope, demonstrate the seasonableness of it.

But if there was a defect as to the seasonableness, it was not because it was so soon set about,
but because it was no sooner.

We shall not dwell any longer upon these and the like objections; there will not want mountains
of difficulties in the way till such time as the Lord, coming by his Spirit in a day of his
power, shall be pleased to level them and say, "Who art thou, O great mountain? before Zerubabel
thou shalt become a plain." In that day (we doubt not) there shall be a willing people to enter
covenant with the Lord, even a perpetual covenant that shall not
be forgotten; but, in the mean time, they would do well to consider
the hazard they bring themselves into who wilfully raise objections
against the covenant, because they are unwilling to enter into it,
or be bound by it.

It may be some will desiderate an account of the other solemn holy action that followed upon
the back of this, in regard there were some circumstances in it not so ordinary in this church
in former times, because of the paucity of public instruments; but neither do we think it needful
to give any large account of it, nor will it fall so properly into this preface, which concerneth
only national covenanting, and, it is likely the reader's patience is too far transgressed upon
already; nor was there any substantial or formal difference betwixt it and the comely order
of the Church of Scotland observed in our purest times of reformation in the celebration of that
sacred ordinance, except what in the form arose from the circumstances we were in, and the reason
now mentioned.

The work was awful and great, the persons employed about it few, insignificant in their own eyes,
as well as mean in the eyes of others; and hence the Lord's power and grace was the more conspicuous,
who (we must not dissemble it) was present to the sensible experience of many, sealing instruction
upon the hearts of some, and granting, strengthening, and confirming grace to others, for which
he ought to have all the glory.

But because there has been, as we are informed, no small clamor raised anent some expressions used
in debarring the ignorant and scandalous from the holy table of the Lord; That the Minister
should have unreasonably and presumptuously excommunicated the Queen and Parliament, and the
whole Ministers of the established church of Scotland; Therefore, we shall here insert the very
words relating to that affair, as they were uttered by him without any alteration. In warning
the ignorant, scandalous and profane to beware of presuming to approach to the holy table of
the Lord, the minister observed (as the manner is) the order of the
decalogue, where, in the sins forbidden in the second commandment,
as they are enumerated by the very Reverend the Assembly of Divines
sitting at Westminster, in their humble advice concerning a Larger
Catechism, we find these amongst others--"All devising, counseling,
commanding, using, and any ways approving any religious worship not
instituted by God himself, tolerating a false religion.---- All superstitious
devices, corrupting the worship of God, adding to it, taking from
it, whether invented and taken up of ourselves, or received by tradition
from others, though under the title of antiquity, custom, devotion,
good intent, or any other pretence whatsoever."

Hence, he expressed himself in these words--"I excommunicate and debar from this holy table
of the Lord, all devisers, commanders, users, or approvers of any religious worship not instituted
by God in his Word, all tolerators and countenancers thereof; and by consequence I debar and
excommunicate from this holy table of the Lord, Queen and Parliament, and all under them, who
spread and propagate or tolerate a false superstitious worship, ay and until they repent," And
in relation to the opposing of the covenants and work of reformation, he had these words--"I
excommunicate and debar all who are opposers of our covenants and covenanted Reformation,
and all that have taken oaths contrary to our covenants, and such particularly as are takers of
the Oath of Abjuration, whether Ministers or others, until they repent."

That this was no presumptuous and rebellious arrogance is evident, because the sins for which
he debarred Queen and Parliament, and all others guilty of them, are proven from Scripture to be
gross breaches of God's law, and every violation thereof persisted in without repentance, is
a sufficient cause (in the opinion of Protestant Divines) to debar and exclude from the Lord's
table.

Now, it is certain that even those ministers of the established church who make such obloquy
against the work for this particular, do the same thing in effect
every time that they administrate this ordinance, for (as can be proved
if they please to require it, or do deny it,) they excommunicate from
the table all guilty of such sins as are forbidden in the second commandment,
according as they are specified in the forsaid Catechism; and so,
by an infallible consequence, they excommunicate the Queen and Parliament,
who are grossly guilty of the most of them, only they have not the
courage ingenuously and freely to own and express the consequence,
but that it follows natively and necessarily from the premises, even
according to their own principles, they will never be able to disprove.

Now,

Reader, thou hast a just and true account as far as was necessary, of our poor and weak endeavours
in this matter, which we hope will, at least, stand as a witness
and testimony (without arrogance we desire to speak it) against the
apostacy of some and indifferency of others, who should have been
to us as the he-goats before the flock in paving our way to Zion,
but are rather making to themselves captains to carry us back to Babylon,
and pollute our land with idolatry and superstition; and, as a pledge
to posterity that the Lord has not yet utterly deserted the land,
though we rather wish,(if so it may consist with his holy purpose,
who is wonderful in counsel and excellent in working) that it might
tend to excite, some to bethink "whence they have fallen, and repent,
and to do their first works, lest the Lord come quickly, and utterly
remove his candlestick from us:" and engage them to renew these covenants
in a more public way, and prosecute the ends of them with more zeal,
fidelity, and constancy, "that the Lord may yet delight to dwell amongst
us, make our judges peace, and our exactors righteousness," and make
us to be called Hephzibah, and our land Beulah.

The reader may please to cast his eye upon the following passages,
quoted from the writings of some of the ablest divines, wherewith
these kingdoms have been blessed, since the first reformation from
Popery; wherein he will see, how far different an opinion they have
entertained of the Covenant, from what are the thoughts of the learned
Latitudinarians of our age.

A Testimony to the truth of JESUS CHRIST and to our Solemn League and Covenant, &c., subscribed
by the Ministers of Christ, within the province of London, December
14, 1649 Head IV.

"In order unto reformation and defence of religion within these three
kingdoms, we shall never forget, how solemnly and cheerfully the Solemn
League and Covenant was sworn with hands lifted up to the most high
God.--We were, and are abundantly satisfied, that our Solemn League
and Covenant of September 27, 1643, is not only warrantable for the
matter of it and manner of entering into it, but also of such excellency
and importance,--That it will be very hard in all points to parallel
it; and, therefore, as we did sincerely swear this covenant with God,
with all our heart, and with all our soul, much rejoicing at the oath
with a true intention to perform it, and not for promoting any politic
design; so we do believe and profess to the world that we still stand
as firmly engaged to the real performance of it, and that it is not
in the power of any person or persons on earth to dispense with it
or absolve from it."

The harmonious consent of the Ministers of the county Palatine Lancaster with their Reverend Brethren
the Ministers of the province of London. Head V.

"We shall never forget how solemn it (the Solemn League and Covenant)
was sworn, and what rejoicing there was at the oath, sundry at the
taking of it weeping for joy; and when the Covenant was thus taken,
we thought with ourselves, that surely now the crown is set upon England's
head: We judged the day of entering into this Covenant to be England's
coronation-day, as it was the day of the gladness of our hearts."

Mr. Philip Nye's Exhortation at the taking of the Covenant, September 29th, 1649, p. 2.

"This Oath is such, and in the matter and consequence of it of such concernment, as I can truly
say, it is worthy of us, yea, of all the kingdoms of the world; for it is swearing fealty and allegiance
to Christ the King of kings, and giving up of all these kingdoms which are his inheritance,
to be subdued more to his throne, and ruled more by his sceptre,
upon whose shoulders the government is laid."

* * * * *

THE NATIONAL COVENANT, OR THE CONFESSION OF FAITH OF THE KIRK OF SCOTLAND;

Subscribed at first by the King's Majesty and his Household, in the
year of God 1580; Thereafter, by persons of all ranks, in the year
1581; By Ordinance of the Lords of the Secret Council, and Acts of
the General Assembly.

Subscribed again by all sorts of persons in the year 1590, by a new Ordinance of Council, at
the desire of the General Assembly, with a Band for the maintenance
of the true religion, and the King's person: And subscribed in the
year 1638, by the Noblemen, Barons, Gentlemen, Burgesses, Ministers
and Commons, then under-subscribing; together with their resolution
and promises for the causes after specified, to maintain the True
Religion, and the King's Majesty, according to the Confession aforesaid
and Acts of Parliament; And upon the supplication of the General Assembly
to his Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Lords of his Majesty's
honorable Privy Council.

Subscribed again in the year 1639, by Ordinance of Council, and Acts of General Assembly, &c., &c.
The Tenor whereof here followeth.

We all, and every one of us underwritten, protest, that after long
and due examination of our own consciences in matters of true and
false religion, we are now thoroughly resolved in the truth by the
Word and Spirit of God: And, therefore, we believe with our hearts,
confess with our mouths, subscribe with our hands and constantly affirm
before God and the whole world, that this only is the true Christian
faith and religion pleasing God, revealed to the world by the preaching
of the blessed evangel; and is received, believed, and defended by
many and sundry notable kirks and realms, but chiefly by the Kirk
of Scotland, and sometimes by the King's Majesty, and the three estates
of this realm, as God's eternal truth and only ground of our salvation,
as more particularly is expressed in the Confession of our Faith,
established and publickly confirmed by sundry Acts of Parliaments,
and now of a long time have been openly professed by the King's Majesty,
and whole body of this realm, both in burgh and land.

To the which Confession and form of religion, we willingly agree
in our own consciences, in all points, as unto God's undoubted truth
and verity, grounded only upon his written word.

And, therefore, we abhor and detest all contrary religion and doctrine; but chiefly all kind
of Papistry in general, and particular heads, even as they are now damned and confuted by the
word of God, and Kirk of Scotland.
  If the child were my own flesh and blood, I would not say
no.  But to take another person's indiscretion on my shoulders, my dear friend, I have too
much sense.'

'Precisely,' replied the Doctor.  'We both had.  And I am all the better pleased with our wisdom,
because--because--'  He looked at her sharply.

'Because what?' she asked, with a faint premonition of danger.

'Because I have found the right person,' said the Doctor firmly, 'and shall adopt him this
afternoon.'

Anastasie looked at him out of a mist.  'You have lost your reason,' she said; and there was
a clang in her voice that seemed to threaten trouble.

'Not so, my dear,' he replied; 'I retain its complete exercise.  To the proof: instead of attempting
to cloak my inconsistency, I have, by way of preparing you, thrown it into strong relief. 
You will there, I think, recognise the philosopher who has the ecstasy to call you wife.  The
fact is, I have been reckoning all this while without an accident.  I never thought to find
a son of my own.  Now, last night, I found one.  Do not unnecessarily alarm yourself, my dear;
he is not a drop of blood to me that I know.  It is his mind, darling, his mind that calls
me father.'

'His mind!' she repeated with a titter between scorn and hysterics.  'His mind, indeed!  Henri,
is this an idiotic pleasantry, or are you mad?  His mind!  And what of my mind?'

'Truly,' replied the Doctor with a shrug, 'you have your finger on the hitch.  He will be strikingly
antipathetic to my ever beautiful Anastasie.  She will never understand him; he will never
understand her. You married the animal side of my nature, dear and it is on the spiritual side
that I find my affinity for Jean-Marie.  So much so, that, to be perfectly frank, I stand in
some awe of him myself.  You will easily perceive that I am announcing a calamity for you.
Do not,' he broke out in tones of real solicitude--'do not give way to tears after a meal,
Anastasie.  You will certainly give yourself a false digestion.'

Anastasie controlled herself.  'You know how willing I am to humour you,' she said, 'in all
reasonable matters.  But on this point--'

'My dear love,' interrupted the Doctor, eager to prevent a refusal, 'who wished to leave Paris?
Who made me give up cards, and the opera, and the boulevard, and my social relations, and all
that was my life before I knew you?  Have I been faithful?  Have I been obedient?  Have I not
borne my doom with cheerfulness?  In all honesty, Anastasie, have I not a right to a stipulation
on my side?  I have, and you know it.  I stipulate my son.'

Anastasie was aware of defeat; she struck her colours instantly.  'You will break my heart,'
she sighed.

'Not in the least,' said he.  'You will feel a trifling inconvenience for a month, just as
I did when I was first brought to this vile hamlet; then your admirable sense and temper will
prevail, and I see you already as content as ever, and making your husband the happiest of men.'

'You know I can refuse you nothing,' she said, with a last flicker of resistance; 'nothing
that will make you truly happier.  But will this? Are you sure, my husband?  Last night, you
say, you found him!  He may be the worst of humbugs.'

'I think not,' replied the Doctor.  'But do not suppose me so unwary as to adopt him out of
hand.  I am, I flatter myself, a finished man of the world; I have had all possibilities in
view; my plan is contrived to meet them all.  I take the lad as stable boy.  If he pilfer,
if he grumble, if he desire to change, I shall see I was mistaken; I shall recognise him for
no son of mine, and send him tramping.'

'You will never do so when the time comes,' said his wife; 'I know your good heart.'

She reached out her hand to him, with a sigh; the Doctor smiled as he took it and carried it
to his lips; he had gained his point with greater ease than he had dared to hope; for perhaps
the twentieth time he had proved the efficacy of his trusty argument, his Excalibur, the hint
of a return to Paris.  Six months in the capital, for a man of the Doctor's antecedents and
relations, implied no less a calamity than total ruin. Anastasie had saved the remainder of
his fortune by keeping him strictly in the country.  The very name of Paris put her in a blue
fear; and she would have allowed her husband to keep a menagerie in the back garden, let alone
adopting a stable-boy, rather than permit the question of return to be discussed.

About four of the afternoon, the mountebank rendered up his ghost; he had never been conscious
since his seizure.  Doctor Desprez was present at his last passage, and declared the farce
over.  Then he took Jean-Marie by the shoulder and led him out into the inn garden where there
was a convenient bench beside the river.  Here he sat him down and made the boy place himself
on his left.

'Jean-Marie,' he said very gravely, 'this world is exceedingly vast; and even France, which
is only a small corner of it, is a great place for a little lad like you.  Unfortunately it
is full of eager, shouldering people moving on; and there are very few bakers' shops for so
many eaters.  Your master is dead; you are not fit to gain a living by yourself; you do not
wish to steal?  No.  Your situation then is undesirable; it is, for the moment, critical. 
On the other hand, you behold in me a man not old, though elderly, still enjoying the youth
of the heart and the intelligence; a man of instruction; easily situated in this world's affairs;
keeping a good table:--a man, neither as friend nor host, to be despised.  I offer you your
food and clothes, and to teach you lessons in the evening, which will be infinitely more to
the purpose for a lad of your stamp than those of all the priests in Europe.  I propose no
wages, but if ever you take a thought to leave me, the door shall be open, and I will give
you a hundred francs to start the world upon.  In return, I have an old horse and chaise, which
you would very speedily learn to clean and keep in order.  Do not hurry yourself to answer,
and take it or leave it as you judge aright.  Only remember this, that I am no sentimentalist
or charitable person, but a man who lives rigorously to himself; and that if I make the proposal,
it is for my own ends--it is because I perceive clearly an advantage to myself.  And now, reflect.'

'I shall be very glad.  I do not see what else I can do.  I thank you, sir, most kindly, and
I will try to be useful,' said the boy.

'Thank you,' said the Doctor warmly, rising at the same time and wiping his brow, for he had
suffered agonies while the thing hung in the wind.  A refusal, after the scene at noon, would
have placed him in a ridiculous light before Anastasie.  'How hot and heavy is the evening,
to be sure!  I have always had a fancy to be a fish in summer, Jean-Marie, here in the Loing
beside Gretz.  I should lie under a water-lily and listen to the bells, which must sound most
delicately down below.  That would be a life--do you not think so too?'

'Yes,' said Jean-Marie.

'Thank God you have imagination!' cried the Doctor, embracing the boy with his usual effusive
warmth, though it was a proceeding that seemed to disconcert the sufferer almost as much as
if he had been an English schoolboy of the same age.  'And now,' he added, 'I will take you
to my wife.'

Madame Desprez sat in the dining-room in a cool wrapper.  All the blinds were down, and the
tile floor had been recently sprinkled with water; her eyes were half shut, but she affected
to be reading a novel as the they entered.  Though she was a bustling woman, she enjoyed repose
between whiles and had a remarkable appetite for sleep.

The Doctor went through a solemn form of introduction, adding, for the benefit of both parties,
'You must try to like each other for my sake.'

'He is very pretty,' said Anastasie.  'Will you kiss me, my pretty little fellow?'

The Doctor was furious, and dragged her into the passage.  'Are you a fool, Anastasie?' he
said.  'What is all this I hear about the tact of women?  Heaven knows, I have not met with
it in my experience.  You address my little philosopher as if he were an infant.  He must be
spoken to with more respect, I tell you; he must not be kissed and Georgy-porgy'd like an ordinary
child.'

'I only did it to please you, I am sure,' replied Anastasie; 'but I will try to do better.'

The Doctor apologised for his warmth.  'But I do wish him,' he continued, 'to feel at home
among us. "God is love;" and reciprocal love constitutes "the bond of perfectness" between God and
rational creatures. Communion with God is the supreme felicity and highest honor of which angels
and men are capable. The first emanation of divine love revealed to us was displayed in the
covenant of works; although not called a covenant, the narrative contains all the elements essential
to a federal deed, comprising a summary of the whole moral law.

Thus the sovereign love of God was manifested through the medium of law and covenant inseparably
combined; and this is the Lord's manner of dealing with mankind till the present time.

That covenant was made with us in Adam as our common father and public representative. By the
breach of it we are born in Adam's image and "children of wrath;" for the principle of representative
identification pervades the moral universe. Our rational and social nature fits us both for personal
and federal responsibility.

The gift of his Son to be a covenant head to sinners is God's highest, and most glorious demonstration
of his ineffable love. Rev. i: 5, 6.

Ever since our fall in Adam God has dealt with our sinful race by covenant. This covenant was made
with Christ as Mediator between God and man, and as the representative
of all whom the Father gave him to be redeemed and brought to glory.

John xvii: 2. Accordingly, the Lord Jesus, immediately on the fall of our first parents, entered
upon his work of mediation. To them first he announced his commission, declaring his purpose
to "bruise the serpent's head--to destroy the works of the devil." Gen. iii: 15; 1 John iii: 8. Christ
is given "for a witness to the people; a leader and commander to the people; to have power over
all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as the Father
hath given him."

Throughout the whole of the mediatorial administration the law and the covenant are distinct,
though inseparably connected: and although many covenants are mentioned in the Scriptures,
and even distinguished as old and new. Jer. xxxi: 31; Heb. viii: 8; yet we must understand
these as only different and successive modes of administering one and the same Covenant of Grace.
This covenant was proclaimed before the deluge by prophets, as Enoch and Noah; after the flood
by patriarchs; then by the ministry of Moses and other prophets,
when John the Baptist and the Messiah in person proclaimed it; and
from the day of Pentecost till the end of the world is the last dispensation--still,
the covenant is immutably the same.

The most solemn and memorable act of covenanting with God was at Horeb, otherwise called Sinai, when
the Israelites were first and formally organized in ecclesiastical and civil relations. Then
"Judah was his sanctuary, and Israel his dominion." Ps. cxiv: 2.

Besides circumcision and the passover, both of which involved covenant obligation, God instituted
the additional ordinance of public and social federal transaction, that the whole body might
glorify him by a united act of solemn dedication as his special property separated visibly
from the world. Is. lxiii: 19. And that this is a moral ordinance, and of perpetual obligation,
is evident from the practice of God's people, both under the Old and New Testament, and the language
of prophecy. Deut. xxix: 10-12; 2 Cor. viii: 5; Is. xliv: 5.

Again, when we renew our covenant, we do not mean that the obligation has ceased, or that we can increase
its obligation, for this is infinite and permanent; we intend by our personal act to deepen
and render more durable our sense of preexisting obligation.

This is, indeed, the immediate object of all renovations, by Moses, Joshua, kings of Judah and
Nehemiah.

And as we have seen, this ordinance was observed by Christians in the time of the apostles,
so their practice may be traced through history afterwards, however obscure, until the time of the Reformation
from Popery; when in Europe, both continental and insular, this ordinance
was revived and exemplified. Among all nations in Christendom Scotland
stands preeminent since first emancipated from bondage in mystical
Babylon, for the frequency and fidelity of her ecclesiastical and
national vows to the Most High.  On the contrary, she
looked the very picture of luxurious and appetising ease, and woke without a start to the perfect
possession of her faculties.  I am afraid she was greatly an animal, but she was a very nice
animal to have about. In this way, she had little to do with Jean-Marie; but the sympathy which
had been established between them on the first night remained unbroken; they held occasional
conversations, mostly on household matters; to the extreme disappointment of the Doctor, they
occasionally sallied off together to that temple of debasing superstition, the village church;
madame and he, both in their Sunday's best, drove twice a month to Fontainebleau and returned
laden with purchases; and in short, although the Doctor still continued to regard them as irreconcilably
anti-pathetic, their relation was as intimate, friendly, and confidential as their natures
suffered.

I fear, however, that in her heart of hearts, madame kindly despised and pitied the boy.  She
had no admiration for his class of virtues; she liked a smart, polite, forward, roguish sort
of boy, cap in hand, light of foot, meeting the eye; she liked volubility, charm, a little
vice--the promise of a second Doctor Desprez.  And it was her indefeasible belief that Jean-Marie
was dull.  'Poor dear boy,' she had said once, 'how sad it is that he should be so stupid!'
She had never repeated that remark, for the Doctor had raged like a wild bull, denouncing the
brutal bluntness of her mind, bemoaning his own fate to be so unequally mated with an ass,
and, what touched Anastasie more nearly, menacing the table china by the fury of his gesticulations.
But she adhered silently to her opinion; and when Jean-Marie was sitting, stolid, blank, but
not unhappy, over his unfinished tasks, she would snatch her opportunity in the Doctor's absence,
go over to him, put her arms about his neck, lay her cheek to his, and communicate her sympathy
with his distress.  'Do not mind,' she would say; 'I, too, am not at all clever, and I can
assure you that it makes no difference in life.'

The Doctor's view was naturally different.  That gentleman never wearied of the sound of his
own voice, which was, to say the truth, agreeable enough to hear.  He now had a listener, who
was not so cynically indifferent as Anastasie, and who sometimes put him on his mettle by the
most relevant objections.  Besides, was he not educating the boy?  And education, philosophers
are agreed, is the most philosophical of duties. What can be more heavenly to poor mankind
than to have one's hobby grow into a duty to the State?  Then, indeed, do the ways of life
become ways of pleasantness.  Never had the Doctor seen reason to be more content with his
endowments.  Philosophy flowed smoothly from his lips.  He was so agile a dialectician that
he could trace his nonsense, when challenged, back to some root in sense, and prove it to be
a sort of flower upon his system.  He slipped out of antinomies like a fish, and left his disciple
marvelling at the rabbi's depth.

Moreover, deep down in his heart the Doctor was disappointed with the ill- success of his more
formal education.  A boy, chosen by so acute an observer for his aptitude, and guided along
the path of learning by so philosophic an instructor, was bound, by the nature of the universe,
to make a more obvious and lasting advance.  Now Jean-Marie was slow in all things, impenetrable
in others; and his power of forgetting was fully on a level with his power to learn.  Therefore
the Doctor cherished his peripatetic lectures, to which the boy attended, which he generally
appeared to enjoy, and by which he often profited.

Many and many were the talks they had together; and health and moderation proved the subject
of the Doctor's divagations.  To these he lovingly returned.  Though a professed atheist, I
delight to bear my testimony to the world.  Look at the gratuitous remedies and pleasures that
surround our path!  The river runs by the garden end, our bath, our fishpond, our natural system
of drainage.  There is a well in the court which sends up sparkling water from the earth's
very heart, clean, cool, and, with a little wine, most wholesome.  The district is notorious
for its salubrity; rheumatism is the only prevalent complaint, and I myself have never had
a touch of it. I tell you--and my opinion is based upon the coldest, clearest processes of
reason--if I, if you, desired to leave this home of pleasures, it would be the duty, it would
be the privilege, of our best friend to prevent us with a pistol bullet.'

One beautiful June day they sat upon the hill outside the village.  The river, as blue as heaven,
shone here and there among the foliage.  The indefatigable birds turned and flickered about
Gretz church tower.  A healthy wind blew from over the forest, and the sound of innumerable
thousands of tree-tops and innumerable millions on millions of green leaves was abroad in the
air, and filled the ear with something between whispered speech and singing.  It seemed as
if every blade of grass must hide a cigale; and the fields rang merrily with their music, jingling
far and near as with the sleigh-bells of the fairy queen.  From their station on the slope
the eye embraced a large space of poplar'd plain upon the one hand, the waving hill-tops of
the forest on the other, and Gretz itself in the middle, a handful of roofs.  Under the bestriding
arch of the blue heavens, the place seemed dwindled to a toy.  It seemed incredible that people
dwelt, and could find room to turn or air to breathe, in such a corner of the world.  The thought
came home to the boy, perhaps for the first time, and he gave it words.

'How small it looks!' he sighed.

'Ay,' replied the Doctor, 'small enough now.  Yet it was once a walled city; thriving, full
of furred burgesses and men in armour, humming with affairs;--with tall spires, for aught that
I know, and portly towers along the battlements.  A thousand chimneys ceased smoking at the
curfew bell.  There were gibbets at the gate as thick as scarecrows.  In time of war, the assault
swarmed against it with ladders, the arrows fell like leaves, the defenders sallied hotly over
the drawbridge, each side uttered its cry as they plied their weapons.  Do you know that the
walls extended as far as the Commanderie?  Tradition so reports.  Alas, what a long way off
is all this confusion--nothing left of it but my quiet words spoken in your ear--and the town
itself shrunk to the hamlet underneath us!  By-and-by came the English wars--you shall hear
more of the English, a stupid people, who sometimes blundered into good--and Gretz was taken,
sacked, and burned.  It is the history of many towns; but Gretz never rose again; it was never
rebuilt; its ruins were a quarry to serve the growth of rivals; and the stones of Gretz are
now erect along the streets of Nemours.  It gratifies me that our old house was the first to
rise after the calamity; when the town had come to an end, it inaugurated the hamlet.'

'I, too, am glad of that,' said Jean-Marie.

'It should be the temple of the humbler virtues,' responded the Doctor with a savoury gusto.
'Perhaps one of the reasons why I love my little hamlet as I do, is that we have a similar
history, she and I.  Have I told you that I was once rich?'

'I do not think so,' answered Jean-Marie.  'I do not think I should have forgotten. 14; Jer. ix.
3; Ezek. xxii. 25; Hag. i. 2; Phil. ii.

21; II Tim. iv. 10; Rev. iii. 15.

But, alas! it is long since our fathers had reason to complain and confess, "That many in their
day through persuasion or terror, suffered themselves to be divided
and withdrawn to make defection to the contrary part.

Nay, many had made it their study to walk so, as they might comply
with all times, and all the revolutions thereof.

That it was not their care to countenance, encourage, entrust, and employ, such only as from their
hearts did affect and mind God's work; but the hearts of such, many times had been discouraged,
and their hands weakened, their sufferings neglected, and themselves slighted, and many who
had been once open enemies, and always secret underminers, countenanced and employed. Nay, even
those who had been looked upon as incendiaries, and upon whom the Lord had set marks of desperate
malignancy, falsehood and deceit, were brought in as fit to manage public affairs."

All which sins and breaches of covenant have now increased to a great height of heinousness; for,
in our day, these incendiaries, desperate and engrained malignants have only been employed in,
and admitted to the management of the affairs of the kingdom, and none but they accounted habile
by law; and such divisions from the Covenanted-conjunction, and defections to the contrary
part have been, and are enacted and established by law; yea, all the unhappy divisions that
have been from the public resolutions, and downward, have been the
woful consequents and effects of defections to the contrary part.

At the first erection of Prelacy, many, both ministers and professors, partly by terror, partly
by persuasions, did withdraw from this covenanted conjunction, and make defection unto Prelacy,
with which they combined, conforming with, and submitting to the
ministry of the conforming curates; and afterward, by the terror of
the fear of men, and the persuasions of their counsel and example,
many of the land were seduced into a combination with malignants,
in taking oaths and bonds contrary to the covenant, thereby dividing
themselves from the recusants, and making defection to the party imposing
them, and opposing the covenants.

By combination of those that preferred peace to truth, and ease to
duty--by the terror of threatened continuance of persecution, and
the persuasion of a promised relaxation and immunity from troubles;
many ministers have been divided from the testimony of the Church
of Scotland, against the enroaching supremacy and absolute power,
and one from another, and have made defection to that part and party
that were advancing these encroachments and usurpations on the prerogatives
of Christ and privileges of his church; by receiving indulgences and
tolerations from them, in their own nature destructive unto, and given
and received on terms inconsistent with the duties of the covenants,
which were contrived and conferred on purpose to divide them from
this cause, and from their brethren that more tenaciously adhered
to it; and did effectuate that design in a great measure--and others
gave themselves to a detestable indifferency in complying with, conniving
at, and not witnessing against these defections, but passing them
over in a secure submissive silence.


There was never any one more vigorously determined to be pleased; and if he was not a great
logician, and so had no right to convince the intellect, he was certainly something of a poet,
and had a fascination to seduce the heart.  What he could not achieve in his customary humour
of a radiant admiration of himself and his circumstances, he sometimes effected in his fits
of gloom.

'Boy,' he would say, 'avoid me to-day.  If I were superstitious, I should even beg for an interest
in your prayers.  I am in the black fit; the evil spirit of King Saul, the hag of the merchant
Abudah, the personal devil of the mediaeval monk, is with me--is in me,' tapping on his breast.
'The vices of my nature are now uppermost; innocent pleasures woo me in vain; I long for Paris,
for my wallowing in the mire.  See,' he would continue, producing a handful of silver, 'I denude
myself, I am not to be trusted with the price of a fare.  Take it, keep it for me, squander
it on deleterious candy, throw it in the deepest of the river--I will homologate your action.
Save me from that part of myself which I disown.  If you see me falter, do not hesitate; if
necessary, wreck the train!  I speak, of course, by a parable.  Any extremity were better than
for me to reach Paris alive.'

Doubtless the Doctor enjoyed these little scenes, as a variation in his part; they represented
the Byronic element in the somewhat artificial poetry of his existence; but to the boy, though
he was dimly aware of their theatricality, they represented more.  The Doctor made perhaps
too little, the boy possibly too much, of the reality and gravity of these temptations.

One day a great light shone for Jean-Marie.  'Could not riches be used well?' he asked.

'In theory, yes,' replied the Doctor.  'But it is found in experience that no one does so.
All the world imagine they will be exceptional when they grow wealthy; but possession is debasing,
new desires spring up; and the silly taste for ostentation eats out the heart of pleasure.'

'Then you might be better if you had less,' said the boy.

'Certainly not,' replied the Doctor; but his voice quavered as he spoke.

'Why?' demanded pitiless innocence.

Doctor Desprez saw all the colours of the rainbow in a moment; the stable universe appeared
to be about capsizing with him.  'Because,' said he--affecting deliberation after an obvious
pause--'because I have formed my life for my present income.  It is not good for men of my
years to be violently dissevered from their habits.'

That was a sharp brush.  The Doctor breathed hard, and fell into taciturnity for the afternoon.
As for the boy, he was delighted with the resolution of his doubts; even wondered that he had
not foreseen the obvious and conclusive answer.  His faith in the Doctor was a stout piece
of goods.  Desprez was inclined to be a sheet in the wind's eye after dinner, especially after
Rhone wine, his favourite weakness.  He would then remark on the warmth of his feeling for
Anastasie, and with inflamed cheeks and a loose, flustered smile, debate upon all sorts of
topics, and be feebly and indiscreetly witty.  But the adopted stable-boy would not permit
himself to entertain a doubt that savoured of ingratitude.  It is quite true that a man may
be a second father to you, and yet take too much to drink; but the best natures are ever slow
to accept such truths.

The Doctor thoroughly possessed his heart, but perhaps he exaggerated his influence over his
mind.  Certainly Jean-Marie adopted some of his master's opinions, but I have yet to learn
that he ever surrendered one of his own.  Convictions existed in him by divine right; they
were virgin, unwrought, the brute metal of decision.  He could add others indeed, but he could
not put away; neither did he care if they were perfectly agreed among themselves; and his spiritual
pleasures had nothing to do with turning them over or justifying them in words.  Words were
with him a mere accomplishment, like dancing.  When he was by himself, his pleasures were almost
vegetable.  He would slip into the woods towards Acheres, and sit in the mouth of a cave among
grey birches. His soul stared straight out of his eyes; he did not move or think; sunlight,
thin shadows moving in the wind, the edge of firs against the sky, occupied and bound his faculties.
He was pure unity, a spirit wholly abstracted.  A single mood filled him, to which all the
objects of sense contributed, as the colours of the spectrum merge and disappear in white light.

So while the Doctor made himself drunk with words, the adopted stable-boy bemused himself with
silence.

CHAPTER V.  TREASURE TROVE.

The Doctor's carriage was a two-wheeled gig with a hood; a kind of vehicle in much favour among
country doctors.  On how many roads has one not seen it, a great way off between the poplars!--in
how many village streets, tied to a gate-post!  This sort of chariot is affected--particularly
at the trot--by a kind of pitching movement to and fro across the axle, which well entitles
it to the style of a Noddy.  The hood describes a considerable arc against the landscape, with
a solemnly absurd effect on the contemplative pedestrian.  To ride in such a carriage cannot
be numbered among the things that appertain to glory; but I have no doubt it may be useful
in liver complaint.  Thence, perhaps, its wide popularity among physicians.

One morning early, Jean-Marie led forth the Doctor's noddy, opened the gate, and mounted to
the driving-seat.  The Doctor followed, arrayed from top to toe in spotless linen, armed with
an immense flesh-coloured umbrella, and girt with a botanical case on a baldric; and the equipage
drove off smartly in a breeze of its own provocation.  They were bound for Franchard, to collect
plants, with an eye to the 'Comparative Pharmacopoeia.'

A little rattling on the open roads, and they came to the borders of the forest and struck
into an unfrequented track; the noddy yawed softly over the sand, with an accompaniment of
snapping twigs.  There was a great, green, softly murmuring cloud of congregated foliage overhead.
In the arcades of the forest the air retained the freshness of the night.  The athletic bearing
of the trees, each carrying its leafy mountain, pleased the mind like so many statues; and
the lines of the trunk led the eye admiringly upward to where the extreme leaves sparkled in
a patch of azure.  Squirrels leaped in mid air.  It was a proper spot for a devotee of the
goddess Hygieia.

'Have you been to Franchard, Jean-Marie?' inquired the Doctor.  'I fancy not.'

'Never,' replied the boy.

'It is ruin in a gorge,' continued Desprez, adopting his expository voice; 'the ruin of a hermitage
and chapel.  History tells us much of Franchard; how the recluse was often slain by robbers;
how he lived on a most insufficient diet; how he was expected to pass his days in prayer. 
A letter is preserved, addressed to one of these solitaries by the superior of his order, full
of admirable hygienic advice; bidding him go from his book to praying, and so back again, for
variety's sake, and when he was weary of both to stroll about his garden and observe the honey
bees.  It is to this day my own system.  You must often have remarked me leaving the "Pharmacopoeia"--often
even in the middle of a phrase--to come forth into the sun and air. THE DUTCHMAN WHO HAD THE
"SMALL POX"

BY HENRY P. LELAND

Very dry, indeed, is the drive from Blackberry to Squash Point,--dry
even for New Jersey; and when you remember that it's fifty miles between
the two towns, its division into five drinks seems very natural.

When you are packed, three on one narrow seat, in a Jersey stage,
it is necessary.

A Jersey stage!

It is not on record, but when Dante winds up his Tenth "Canter" into the Inferno with--

Each, as his back was laden, came indeed Or more or less contracted; and it seemed As he who
showed most patience in his look, Wailing, exclaimed, "I can endure no more!"

the conclusion that he alluded to a crowded Jersey stage-load is irresistible. A man with long
legs, on a back seat, in one of these vehicles, suffers like a snipe shut up in a snuff-box.
For this reason, the long-legged man should sit on the front seat with the driver; there, like
the hen-turkey who tried to sit on a hundred eggs, he can "spread
himself." The writer sat alongside the driver one morning, just at
break of day, as the stage drove out of Blackberry: he was a through
passenger to Squash Point. It was a very cold morning. In order to
break the ice for a conversation, he praised the fine points of an
off horse. The driver thawed:

"Ya-as; she's a goot hoss, und I knows
how to trive him!" It was evidently a case of mixed breed.

"Where
is Wood, who used to drive this stage?"

"He be's lait up mit ter
rummatiz sence yesterweek, und I trives for him.  It was a coffer, and in Franchard the place of buried treasure!  They tore it open like
famished beasts.  Alas! it was not the treasure; only some priestly robes, which, at the touch
of the eating air, fell upon themselves and instantly wasted into dust.  The perspiration of
these good fellows turned cold upon them, Jean-Marie.  I will pledge my reputation, if there
was anything like a cutting wind, one or other had a pneumonia for his trouble.'

'I should like to have seen them turning into dust,' said Jean-Marie. 'Otherwise, I should
not have cared so greatly.'

'You have no imagination,' cried the Doctor.  'Picture to yourself the scene.  Dwell on the
idea--a great treasure lying in the earth for centuries: the material for a giddy, copious,
opulent existence not employed; dresses and exquisite pictures unseen; the swiftest galloping
horses not stirring a hoof, arrested by a spell; women with the beautiful faculty of smiles,
not smiling; cards, dice, opera singing, orchestras, castles, beautiful parks and gardens,
big ships with a tower of sailcloth, all lying unborn in a coffin--and the stupid trees growing
overhead in the sunlight, year after year.  The thought drives one frantic.'

'It is only money,' replied Jean-Marie.  'It would do harm.'

'O, come!' cried Desprez, 'that is philosophy; it is all very fine, but not to the point just
now.  And besides, it is not "only money," as you call it; there are works of art in the question;
the vessels were carved. The essays of Dr. Jessopp and Mr. Paul are of course merely Essays, of
a score or two of pages: though the first is pretty wide in its scope.

There would be nothing but good to be said of either, if both had
not been, not perhaps blasphemous but parsimonious of praise, towards
"Our Lady of the Rocks."

It cannot be too often or too solemnly laid down that an adoration of Madame de Sévigné as
a letter-writer is not crotchet or fashion or affectation--is no result of merely taking authority
on trust. The more one reads her, and the more one reads others, the more convinced should one
be of her absolute non-pareility in almost every kind of genuine letter (as apart from letters
that are really pamphlets or speeches or sermons) except pure love-letters, of which we have
none from her. As for Littérature Epistolaire, it is a collection of some two dozen reviews
of various modern reprints of letters by distinguished writers--mostly but not all French. The author
has throughout used the letters he is considering almost wholly as
tell-tales of character, not as examples of art: and therefore he
does not, except in possible glances, require further attention, though
the book is full of interesting things.

Its judgment of one of our greatest, and one of the greatest of all, letter-writers--Horace
Walpole--is too severe, but not, like Macaulay's, superficially insistent on superficial defects,
and ought not to be neglected by anyone who studies the subject.

If, however, there was no need to rely on any of these books, they did nothing to hinder in the
peculiar way in which I had feared some hindrance. For it is a nuisance to find that somebody
else has done something in the precise way in which you have planned
doing it.

I have not yet encountered that nuisance here.

Dr. Jessopp's general plan is most like mine--indeed some similarity was unavoidable: but the
two are not identical, and I had planned mine before I knew anything
about his.

So with this prelude let us go to business, only premising further that the object, unlike that
of the anonymous Augustan, is not to "give rules and instructions for writing good letters,"
except in the way (which far excels all rules and instructions) of
showing how good letters have been written.

Let us also modestly trust that the collection may deal with some
"interesting occasions of life" and contain "thoughts on a [fair]
multiplicity of subjects."

  'I have just discovered America,' he added.

'But what is it?' asked the boy.

'The Treasure of Franchard,' cried the Doctor; and, throwing his brown straw hat upon the ground,
he whooped like an Indian and sprang upon Jean- Marie, whom he suffocated with embraces and
bedewed with tears.  Then he flung himself down among the heather and once more laughed until
the valley rang.

But the boy had now an interest of his own, a boy's interest.  No sooner was he released from
the Doctor's accolade than he ran to the boulders, sprang into the niche, and, thrusting his
hand into the crevice, drew forth one after another, encrusted with the earth of ages, the
flagons, candlesticks, and patens of the hermitage of Franchard.  A casket came last, tightly
shut and very heavy.

'O what fun!' he cried.

But when he looked back at the Doctor, who had followed close behind and was silently observing,
the words died from his lips.  Desprez was once more the colour of ashes; his lip worked and
trembled; a sort of bestial greed possessed him.

'This is childish,' he said.  'We lose precious time.  Back to the inn, harness the trap, and
bring it to yon bank.  Run for your life, and remember--not one whisper.  I stay here to watch.'

Jean-Marie did as he was bid, though not without surprise.  The noddy was brought round to
the spot indicated; and the two gradually transported the treasure from its place of concealment
to the boot below the driving seat.  Once it was all stored the Doctor recovered his gaiety.

'I pay my grateful duties to the genius of this dell,' he said.  'O, for a live coal, a heifer,
and a jar of country wine!  I am in the vein for sacrifice, for a superb libation.  Well, and
why not?  We are at Franchard.  English pale ale is to be had--not classical, indeed, but excellent.
Boy, we shall drink ale.'

'But I thought it was so unwholesome,' said Jean-Marie, 'and very dear besides.'

'Fiddle-de-dee!' exclaimed the Doctor gaily.  'To the inn!'

And he stepped into the noddy, tossing his head, with an elastic, youthful air.  The horse
was turned, and in a few seconds they drew up beside the palings of the inn garden.

'Here,' said Desprez--'here, near the table, so that we may keep an eye upon things.'

They tied the horse, and entered the garden, the Doctor singing, now in fantastic high notes,
now producing deep reverberations from his chest. He took a seat, rapped loudly on the table,
assailed the waiter with witticisms; and when the bottle of Bass was at length produced, far
more charged with gas than the most delirious champagne, he filled out a long glassful of froth
and pushed it over to Jean-Marie.  'Drink,' he said; 'drink deep.'

'I would rather not,' faltered the boy, true to his training.

'What?' thundered Desprez.

'I am afraid of it,' said Jean-Marie: 'my stomach--'

'Take it or leave it,' interrupted Desprez fiercely; 'but understand it once for all--there
is nothing so contemptible as a precisian.'

Here was a new lesson!  The boy sat bemused, looking at the glass but not tasting it, while
the Doctor emptied and refilled his own, at first with clouded brow, but gradually yielding
to the sun, the heady, prickling beverage, and his own predisposition to be happy.

'Once in a way,' he said at last, by way of a concession to the boy's more rigorous attitude,
'once in a way, and at so critical a moment, this ale is a nectar for the gods.  The habit,
indeed, is debasing; wine, the juice of the grape, is the true drink of the Frenchman, as I
have often had occasion to point out; and I do not know that I can blame you for refusing this
outlandish stimulant.  You can have some wine and cakes.  Is the bottle empty?  Well, we will
not be proud; we will have pity on your glass.'

The beer being done, the Doctor chafed bitterly while Jean-Marie finished his cakes.  'I burn
to be gone,' he said, looking at his watch.  'Good God, how slow you eat!'  And yet to eat
slowly was his own particular prescription, the main secret of longevity!

His martyrdom, however, reached an end at last; the pair resumed their places in the buggy,
and Desprez, leaning luxuriously back, announced his intention of proceeding to Fontainebleau.

'To Fontainebleau?' repeated Jean-Marie.

'My words are always measured,' said the Doctor.  'On!'

The Doctor was driven through the glades of paradise; the air, the light, the shining leaves,
the very movements of the vehicle, seemed to fall in tune with his golden meditations; with
his head thrown back, he dreamed a series of sunny visions, ale and pleasure dancing in his
veins.  At last he spoke.

'I shall telegraph for Casimir,' he said.  'Good Casimir! a fellow of the lower order of intelligence,
Jean-Marie, distinctly not creative, not poetic; and yet he will repay your study; his fortune
is vast, and is entirely due to his own exertions.  He is the very fellow to help us to dispose
of our trinkets, find us a suitable house in Paris, and manage the details of our installation.
Admirable Casimir, one of my oldest comrades!  It was on his advice, I may add, that I invested
my little fortune in Turkish bonds; when we have added these spoils of the mediaeval church
to our stake in the Mahometan empire, little boy, we shall positively roll among doubloons,
positively roll!  Beautiful forest,' he cried, 'farewell!  Though called to other scenes, I
will not forget thee. Thy name is graven in my heart.  Under the influence of prosperity I
become dithyrambic, Jean-Marie.  Such is the impulse of the natural soul; such was the constitution
of primaeval man.  And I--well, I will not refuse the credit--I have preserved my youth like
a virginity; another, who should have led the same snoozing, countryfied existence for these
years, another had become rusted, become stereotype; but I, I praise my happy constitution,
retain the spring unbroken.  Fresh opulence and a new sphere of duties find me unabated in
ardour and only more mature by knowledge.  For this prospective change, Jean-Marie--it may
probably have shocked you.  Tell me now, did it not strike you as an inconsistency? Confess--it
is useless to dissemble--it pained you?'

'Yes,' said the boy.

'You see,' returned the Doctor, with sublime fatuity, 'I read your thoughts!  Nor am I surprised--your
education is not yet complete; the higher duties of men have not been yet presented to you
fully.  A hint--till we have leisure--must suffice.  Now that I am once more in possession
of a modest competence; now that I have so long prepared myself in silent meditation, it becomes
my superior duty to proceed to Paris. Bully for the idiot! Bully for the guy! You could be a prig
yourself, if you would only try! Altruistic asses keep the fun alive; Clowns are growing scarcer;
hurry and arrive!

I seen a crazy critic a-writin' of a screed; "Tendencies" and "Unities"--Maeterlinck
indeed!

He wore a paper collar, and his tie was up behind; If that's the test of Culture, then I'm glad
I'm not refined!

Let me laugh at you, then you can laugh at me; Then we'll josh together
everything we see; Every one's a nincompoop to another's view; Laughter
makes the sun shine!

Roop-de-doodle-doo!

THE TWO BROTHERS

BY CAROLYN WELLS

Once on a Time there were Two Brothers who Set Out to make their Way In The World.

One was of a Roving Disposition, and no sooner had he settled Down to Live in One Place than he
would Gather Up all his Goods and Chattels and Move to another Place. From here again he would
Depart and make him a Fresh Home, and so on until he Became an Old Man and had gained neither
Fortune nor Friends.
The Other, being Disinclined to Change or Diversity of Scene, remained
all his Life in One Place. He therefore Became Narrow-Minded and Provincial,
and gained None of the Culture and Liberality of Nature which comes
from Contact with various Scenes of Life.

MORALS:

This Fable teaches
that a Rolling Stone Gathers No Moss, and a Setting Hen Never Grows
Fat.

PETROLEUM V. NASBY.

FAMILIAR AUTHORS AT WORK

BY HAYDEN CARRUTH

MISS
TRIPP

Miss Tripp for years has lived alone, Without display or fuss
or pother. The house she dwells in is her own-- She got it from her
dying father.

Miss T. delights in all good works, She goes to church
three times on Sunday, Her daily duty never shirks, Nor keeps her
goodness for this one day.  Half-way home, the last gold flicker vanished from a great oak
upon the left; and when they came forth beyond the borders of the wood, the plain was already
sunken in pearly greyness, and a great, pale moon came swinging skyward through the filmy poplars.

The Doctor sang, the Doctor whistled, the Doctor talked.  He spoke of the woods, and the wars,
and the deposition of dew; he brightened and babbled of Paris; he soared into cloudy bombast
on the glories of the political arena.  All was to be changed; as the day departed, it took
with it the vestiges of an outworn existence, and to-morrow's sun was to inaugurate the new.
'Enough,' he cried, 'of this life of maceration!'  His wife (still beautiful, or he was sadly
partial) was to be no longer buried; she should now shine before society.  Jean-Marie would
find the world at his feet; the roads open to success, wealth, honour, and post-humous renown.
'And O, by the way,' said he, 'for God's sake keep your tongue quiet!  You are, of course,
a very silent fellow; it is a quality I gladly recognise in you--silence, golden silence! 
But this is a matter of gravity.  No word must get abroad; none but the good Casimir is to
be trusted; we shall probably dispose of the vessels in England.'

'But are they not even ours?' the boy said, almost with a sob--it was the only time he had spoken.

'Ours in this sense, that they are nobody else's,' replied the Doctor. 'But the State would
have some claim.  If they were stolen, for instance, we should be unable to demand their restitution;
we should have no title; we should be unable even to communicate with the police.  Such is
the monstrous condition of the law. {263}  It is a mere instance of what remains to be done,
of the injustices that may yet be righted by an ardent, active, and philosophical deputy.'

Jean-Marie put his faith in Madame Desprez; and as they drove forward down the road from Bourron,
between the rustling poplars, he prayed in his teeth, and whipped up the horse to an unusual
speed.  Surely, as soon as they arrived, madame would assert her character, and bring this
waking nightmare to an end.

Their entrance into Gretz was heralded and accompanied by a most furious barking; all the dogs
in the village seemed to smell the treasure in the noddy.  But there was no one in the street,
save three lounging landscape painters at Tentaillon's door.  Jean-Marie opened the green gate
and led in the horse and carriage; and almost at the same moment Madame Desprez came to the
kitchen threshold with a lighted lantern; for the moon was not yet high enough to clear the
garden walls.

'Close the gates, Jean-Marie!' cried the Doctor, somewhat unsteadily alighting.  'Anastasie,
where is Aline?'

'She has gone to Montereau to see her parents,' said madame.

'All is for the best!' exclaimed the Doctor fervently.  'Here, quick, come near to me; I do
not wish to speak too loud,' he continued. 'Darling, we are wealthy!'

'Wealthy!' repeated the wife.

'I have found the treasure of Franchard,' replied her husband.  'See, here are the first fruits;
a pineapple, a dress for my ever-beautiful--it will suit her--trust a husband's, trust a lover's,
taste!  Embrace me, darling!  This grimy episode is over; the butterfly unfolds its painted
wings.  To-morrow Casimir will come; in a week we may be in Paris--happy at last! Get a hatchet
from the carpenter, and set him alongside of the second rope. When I whistle twice, both of
you nick the ropes, and we'll jink these swindling swine." The engineer also received orders
to go full speed ahead on the instant that the whistle sounded.

Hindhaugh kept up his air of good-humour, although the full sense
of the risk he ran was in his mind.

His threat of shooting had made the Spaniards suspicious, although
they were used to big talk of the kind.

One peep into the cabin would have brought on a collision, and although the Englishmen might
have fought, there was nothing to gain by a fight.

Everything depended on swiftness of action, and Hindhaugh determined grimly that if rapidity
could do anything he would teach the "furriners" a lesson for trying
to swindle him.

He said, very politely, "We're all ready now. You get your men aboard the lighters, and we'll
soon rash your cargo over the side." This was transmitted to the smugglers, and immediately they
swarmed aboard their own boats. They had rather expected a quarrel, and this pacific solution pleased
them. As Jack afterward said, "They blethered like a lot o' wild geese."
All the foreigners were gone but three. Hindhaugh stepped quietly
up to the interpreter, and said, very low, "I'm covering you with
my revolver from inside my pocket. Don't you stir. Is that other money
going to be paid?"

The interpreter had been innocent of all knowledge
of the wild work in the cabin. He stammered, "I thought by your way
it was all right.  He was in and out of the kitchen, plying Anastasie with vermouth, heating
her with glimpses of the future, estimating their new wealth at ever larger figures; and before
they sat down to supper, the lady's virtue had melted in the fire of his enthusiasm, her timidity
had disappeared; she, too, had begun to speak disparagingly of the life at Gretz; and as she
took her place and helped the soup, her eyes shone with the glitter of prospective diamonds.

All through the meal, she and the Doctor made and unmade fairy plans. They bobbed and bowed
and pledged each other.  Their faces ran over with smiles; their eyes scattered sparkles, as
they projected the Doctor's political honours and the lady's drawing-room ovations.

'But you will not be a Red!' cried Anastasie.

'I am Left Centre to the core,' replied the Doctor.

'Madame Gastein will present us--we shall find ourselves forgotten,' said the lady.

'Never,' protested the Doctor.  'Beauty and talent leave a mark.'

'I have positively forgotten how to dress,' she sighed.

'Darling, you make me blush,' cried he.  'Yours has been a tragic marriage!'

'But your success--to see you appreciated, honoured, your name in all the papers, that will
be more than pleasure--it will be heaven!' she cried.

'And once a week,' said the Doctor, archly scanning the syllables, 'once a week--one good little
game of baccarat?'

'Only once a week?' she questioned, threatening him with a finger.

'I swear it by my political honour,' cried he.

'I spoil you,' she said, and gave him her hand.

He covered it with kisses.

Jean-Marie escaped into the night.  The moon swung high over Gretz.  He went down to the garden
end and sat on the jetty.  The river ran by with eddies of oily silver, and a low, monotonous
song.  Faint veils of mist moved among the poplars on the farther side.  The reeds were quietly
nodding.  A hundred times already had the boy sat, on such a night, and watched the streaming
river with untroubled fancy.  And this perhaps was to be the last.  He was to leave this familiar
hamlet, this green, rustling country, this bright and quiet stream; he was to pass into the
great city; his dear lady mistress was to move bedizened in saloons; his good, garrulous, kind-hearted
master to become a brawling deputy; and both be lost for ever to Jean-Marie and their better
selves.  He knew his own defects; he knew he must sink into less and less consideration in
the turmoil of a city life, sink more and more from the child into the servant.  And he began
dimly to believe the Doctor's prophecies of evil. He could see a change in both.  His generous
incredulity failed him for this once; a child must have perceived that the Hermitage had completed
what the absinthe had begun.  If this were the first day, what would be the last?  'If necessary,
wreck the train,' thought he, remembering the Doctor's parable.  He looked round on the delightful
scene; he drank deep of the charmed night air, laden with the scent of hay.  'If necessary,
wreck the train,' he repeated.  And he rose and returned to the house.

CHAPTER VI.  A CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION, IN TWO PARTS.

The next morning there was a most unusual outcry, in the Doctor's house. The last thing before
going to bed, the Doctor had locked up some valuables in the dining-room cupboard; and behold,
when he rose again, as he did about four o'clock, the cupboard had been broken open, and the
valuables in question had disappeared.  Madame and Jean-Marie were summoned from their rooms,
and appeared in hasty toilets; they found the Doctor raving, calling the heavens to witness
and avenge his injury, pacing the room bare-footed, with the tails of his night-shirt flirting
as he turned.

'Gone!' he said; 'the things are gone, the fortune gone!  We are paupers once more.  Boy! what
do you know of this?  Speak up, sir, speak up.  Do you know of it?  Where are they?'  He had
him by the arm, shaking him like a bag, and the boy's words, if he had any, were jolted forth
in inarticulate murmurs.  The Doctor, with a revulsion from his own violence, set him down
again.  He observed Anastasie in tears. 'Anastasie,' he said, in quite an altered voice, 'compose
yourself, command your feelings.  I would not have you give way to passion like the vulgar.
This--this trifling accident must be lived down.  Jean-Marie, bring me my smaller medicine
chest.  A gentle laxative is indicated.'

And he dosed the family all round, leading the way himself with a double quantity.  The wretched
Anastasie, who had never been ill in the whole course of her existence, and whose soul recoiled
from remedies, wept floods of tears as she sipped, and shuddered, and protested, and then was
bullied and shouted at until she sipped again.  As for Jean-Marie, he took his portion down
with stoicism.

'I have given him a less amount,' observed the Doctor, 'his youth protecting him against emotion.
And now that we have thus parried any morbid consequences, let us reason.'

'I am so cold,' wailed Anastasie.

'Cold!' cried the Doctor.  'I give thanks to God that I am made of fierier material.  Why,
madam, a blow like this would set a frog into a transpiration.  If you are cold, you can retire;
and, by the way, you might throw me down my trousers.  It is chilly for the legs.'

'Oh, no!' protested Anastasie; 'I will stay with you.'

'Nay, madam, you shall not suffer for your devotion,' said the Doctor.  'I will myself fetch
you a shawl.'  And he went upstairs and returned more fully clad and with an armful of wraps
for the shivering Anastasie.  'And now,' he resumed, 'to investigate this crime.  Let us proceed
by induction.  Anastasie, do you know anything that can help us?'  Anastasie knew nothing.
'Or you, Jean-Marie?'

'Not I,' replied the boy steadily.

'Good,' returned the Doctor.  'We shall now turn our attention to the material evidences. 
(I was born to be a detective; I have the eye and the systematic spirit.)  First, violence
has been employed.  The door was broken open; and it may be observed, in passing, that the
lock was dear indeed at what I paid for it: a crow to pluck with Master Goguelat. Second, here
is the instrument employed, one of our own table-knives, one of our best, my dear; which seems
to indicate no preparation on the part of the gang--if gang it was.  Thirdly, I observe that
nothing has been removed except the Franchard dishes and the casket; our own silver has been
minutely respected.  This is wily; it shows intelligence, a knowledge of the code, a desire
to avoid legal consequences.  I argue from this fact that the gang numbers persons of respectability--outward,
of course, and merely outward, as the robbery proves.  But I argue, second, that we must have
been observed at Franchard itself by some occult observer, and dogged throughout the day with
a skill and patience that I venture to qualify as consummate.  No ordinary man, no occasional
criminal, would have shown himself capable of this combination.  We have in our neighbourhood,
it is far from improbable, a retired bandit of the highest order of intelligence.'

'Good heaven!' cried the horrified Anastasie.  'Henri, how can you?'

'My cherished one, this is a process of induction,' said the Doctor.  'If any of my steps are
unsound, correct me.  You are silent?  Then do not, I beseech you, be so vulgarly illogical
as to revolt from my conclusion.  We have now arrived,' he resumed, 'at some idea of the composition
of the gang--for I incline to the hypothesis of more than one--and we now leave this room,
which can disclose no more, and turn our attention to the court and garden.  (Jean-Marie, I
trust you are observantly following my various steps; this is an excellent piece of education
for you.)  Come with me to the door.  No steps on the court; it is unfortunate our court should
be paved.  On what small matters hang the destiny of these delicate investigations!  Hey! 
What have we here?  I have led on to the very spot,' he said, standing grandly backward and
indicating the green gate.  'An escalade, as you can now see for yourselves, has taken place.'

Sure enough, the green paint was in several places scratched and broken; and one of the panels
preserved the print of a nailed shoe.  The foot had slipped, however, and it was difficult
to estimate the size of the shoe, and impossible to distinguish the pattern of the nails.

'The whole robbery,' concluded the Doctor, 'step by step, has been reconstituted.  Inductive
science can no further go.'

'It is wonderful,' said his wife.  'You should indeed have been a detective, Henri.  I had
no idea of your talents.'

'My dear,' replied Desprez, condescendingly, 'a man of scientific imagination combines the
lesser faculties; he is a detective just as he is a publicist or a general; these are but local
applications of his special talent.  But now,' he continued, 'would you have me go further?
Would you have me lay my finger on the culprits--or rather, for I cannot promise quite so much,
point out to you the very house where they consort? 5th, That the covenant has a greater entail
of blessings, than what will sufficiently compensate whatever expense and pains a people may be
at, in undertaking and performing it. In regard, that though a Christian should lose all, yea,
even life itself, upon the account of it, yet the covenant will bring in all with advantage
to a hundred fold, and glory to the overplus, when it is duly observed. 6th, That the undertakers
have God's call and commandment to set about it; this is that which, above all other considerations,
inspires a Christian with undaunted courage and alacrity in the undertaking of a duty, when
it is made clear that the person has God's call and command for a warrant; otherwise the want
of this may make the duty to be heartlessly and doubtingly entered upon, and lamely performed.

Seeing,
therefore, that sometimes a work may be the Lord's, and yet the Lord's call to such a particular
person, or people to undertake it, may be wanting; he came necessarily (which was the second head
proposed) to enquire, what were the several things that might seem
to speak against us, as not having this call from the Lord, and what
were the things that spake for us, and might give us matter of encouragement
in undertaking the work before us.--In solution of which the following
considerations were proposed.

1st, As to the things that might seem to speak against us: 1st, Our darkness, not whether covenanting
be a duty, but in regard of the want of right apprehensions of the nature and greatness of the
duty, which cannot be a sufficient ground to neglect the duty, unless there were some duties from
which a Christian is exeemed and that this is one of them, which indeed will not be found in
the whole Bible. 2d, Our want of a frame suitable for the greatness and weightiness of the work,
which speaks sadly against us, but is not to be a ground to neglect the duty, we being commanded
to look to the God of the covenant for it.

Upon the other hand, the things which seemed to speak for us, and yield matter of encouragement,
that not only the work was the Lord's, but also that we had his call to the same, were, 1st,
The many, palpable, plain, and open breaches of these covenants,
are a loud call to renew them.

2d, The undervaluing account that the nations have made of them, is a call to all such as have
any respect to the sacred name of the Lord invocated in these covenants, to do their utmost to
vindicate them from that disgrace, by showing how high a price and value they put upon them.
3d, The lands enacting the perpetual banishment of these covenants, and imposing oaths contrary
and opposite to them; which brings double perjury upon the nation,
both by disregarding and omitting the performance of this just, lawful,
and commendable covenant, and by making unjust, sinful and hateful
covenants, for opposing the growth and success of Christ's kingdom,
even the reformation of these many abuses that have corrupted the
holy religion of his institution: And perjury drawing wrath after
it, as a native and necessary fruit consequent; they that would stand
in the gap, to turn away national wrath, cannot otherwise make up
the hedge, that the land should not be destroyed, but by renewing
and keeping national covenants.

4th, That so many are speaking against them everywhere, accounting
them a conspiracy against royal authority, a popular combination for
advancing private ends and interests under the cloak of religion,
or at least unnecessary and unprofitable for the end intended by them,
binding to things of such a heterogeneous nature, as renders the keeping
of them, and keeping within the sphere of our own activity and station,
inconsistent and impossible, and such things as whereof we now have
no occasion, and the like; which is a loud call to us, or any that
retain other thoughts of their nature and ends, than the generality
do, to speak for them; which cannot be done more fitly, honorably,
nor conspicuously any other way, than by renewing and observing them.

5th, The practice of the godly in such a juncture of time, as what ours appears to be, is a call
and encouraging consideration to set us upon this work: the godly usually in times of great defection
from the purity and power of religion, and corruption of the ordinances
of God's worship, set about renewing their covenant, thereby to prevent
covenant curses, and procure covenant blessings; as we find both in
scripture record, 2 Chron. xv.

12, 13; xxix. 10; xxxiv.
  'You are
a man of very rosy views.  But this robbery,' he continued--'this robbery is an odd thing.
Of course I pass over your nonsense about gangs and landscape-painters.  For me, that is a
dream. Who was in the house last night?'

'None but ourselves,' replied the Doctor.

'And this young gentleman?' asked Casimir, jerking a nod in the direction of Jean-Marie.

'He too'--the Doctor bowed.

'Well; and if it is a fair question, who is he?' pursued the brother-in- law.

'Jean-Marie,' answered the Doctor, 'combines the functions of a son and stable-boy.  He began
as the latter, but he rose rapidly to the more honourable rank in our affections.  He is, I
may say, the greatest comfort in our lives.'

'Ha!' said Casimir.  'And previous to becoming one of you?'

'Jean-Marie has lived a remarkable existence; his experience his been eminently formative,'
replied Desprez.  'If I had had to choose an education for my son, I should have chosen such
another.  Beginning life with mountebanks and thieves, passing onward to the society and friendship
of philosophers, he may be said to have skimmed the volume of human life.'

'Thieves?' repeated the brother-in-law, with a meditative air.

The Doctor could have bitten his tongue out.  He foresaw what was coming, and prepared his
mind for a vigorous defence.

'Did you ever steal yourself?' asked Casimir, turning suddenly on Jean- Marie, and for the
first time employing a single eyeglass which hung round his neck.

'Yes, sir,' replied the boy, with a deep blush.

Casimir turned to the others with pursed lips, and nodded to them meaningly.  'Hey?' said he;
'how is that?'

'Jean-Marie is a teller of the truth,' returned the Doctor, throwing out his bust.

'He has never told a lie,' added madame.  'He is the best of boys.'

'Never told a lie, has he not?' reflected Casimir.  'Strange, very strange.  Give me your attention,
my young friend,' he continued.  'You knew about this treasure?'

'He helped to bring it home,' interposed the Doctor.

'Desprez, I ask you nothing but to hold your tongue,' returned Casimir. 'I mean to question
this stable-boy of yours; and if you are so certain of his innocence, you can afford to let
him answer for himself.  Now, sir,' he resumed, pointing his eyeglass straight at Jean-Marie.
'You knew it could be stolen with impunity?  You knew you could not be prosecuted?  Come! 
Did you, or did you not?'

'I did,' answered Jean-Marie, in a miserable whisper.  He sat there changing colour like a
revolving pharos, twisting his fingers hysterically, swallowing air, the picture of guilt.

'You knew where it was put?' resumed the inquisitor.

'Yes,' from Jean-Marie.

'You say you have been a thief before,' continued Casimir.  'Now how am I to know that you
are not one still?  I suppose you could climb the green gate?'

'Yes,' still lower, from the culprit.

'Well, then, it was you who stole these things.  You know it, and you dare not deny it.  Look
me in the face!  Raise your sneak's eyes, and answer!'

But in place of anything of that sort Jean-Marie broke into a dismal howl and fled from the
arbour.  Anastasie, as she pursued to capture and reassure the victim, found time to send one
Parthian arrow--'Casimir, you are a brute!'

'My brother,' said Desprez, with the greatest dignity, 'you take upon yourself a licence--'

'Desprez,' interrupted Casimir, 'for Heaven's sake be a man of the world. You telegraph me
to leave my business and come down here on yours.  I come, I ask the business, you say "Find
me this thief!"  Well, I find him; I say "There he is!"  You need not like it, but you have
no manner of right to take offence.'

'Well,' returned the Doctor, 'I grant that; I will even thank you for your mistaken zeal. 
But your hypothesis was so extravagantly monstrous--'

'Look here,' interrupted Casimir; 'was it you or Stasie?'

'Certainly not,' answered the Doctor.

'Very well; then it was the boy.  Say no more about it,' said the brother- in-law, and he produced
his cigar-case. 

He would know, of course, that such tales are not uncommon in contemporary English; he would
certainly be acquainted with Addison's, Johnson's, Goldsmith's experiments in them, perhaps
with those of Hawkesworth and others.[233] He could see for himself
that the "accaparation" by France of the peerless Arabian Nights themselves
must have led to a still greater fancy for them there; and he might
possibly have heard the tradition (which the present writer[234] never
traced to its source, or connected with any real evidence either way)
that no less a person than Lesage assisted Galland in his task.

But though the Nights themselves form the most considerable single group in the Cabinet, the
united bulk of their congeners or imitations occupies a still larger space. There are the rather
pale and "moon-like" but sometimes not uninteresting Thousand and One Days, and the obviously
and rather foolishly pastiched Thousand and One Quarters of an Hour.

There are Persian Tales--origin of a famous and characteristic jibe at "Namby Pamby" Philips--and
Turkish Tales which are a fragment of one of the numerous versions
of the Seven Sages scheme.

The just mentioned Adventures of Abdallah betray their source and their nature at once; the hoary
fables of Bidpai and Lokman are modernised to keep company with these
"fakings," and there are more definitely literary attempts to follow.

  The Doctor, that night, dissected his character before Anastasie.  'One
thing, my beautiful,' he said, 'he has learned one thing from his lifelong acquaintance with
your husband: the word ratiocinate.  It shines in his vocabulary, like a jewel in a muck-heap.
And, even so, he continually misapplies it.  For you must have observed he uses it as a sort
of taunt, in the sense of to ergotise, implying, as it were--the poor, dear fellow!--a vein
of sophistry.  As for his cruelty to Jean-Marie, it must be forgiven him--it is not his nature,
it is the nature of his life.  A man who deals with money, my dear, is a man lost.'

With Jean-Marie the process of reconciliation had been somewhat slow.  At first he was inconsolable,
insisted on leaving the family, went from paroxysm to paroxysm of tears; and it was only after
Anastasie had been closeted for an hour with him, alone, that she came forth, sought out the
Doctor, and, with tears in her eyes, acquainted that gentleman with what had passed.

'At first, my husband, he would hear of nothing,' she said.  'Imagine! if he had left us! what
would the treasure be to that?  Horrible treasure, it has brought all this about!  At last,
after he has sobbed his very heart out, he agrees to stay on a condition--we are not to mention
this matter, this infamous suspicion, not even to mention the robbery.  On that agreement only,
the poor, cruel boy will consent to remain among his friends.'

'But this inhibition,' said the Doctor, 'this embargo--it cannot possibly apply to me?'

'To all of us,' Anastasie assured him.

'My cherished one,' Desprez protested, 'you must have misunderstood.  It cannot apply to me.
He would naturally come to me.'

'Henri,' she said, 'it does; I swear to you it does.'

'This is a painful, a very painful circumstance,' the Doctor said, looking a little black.
'I cannot affect, Anastasie, to be anything but justly wounded.  I feel this, I feel it, my
wife, acutely.'

'I knew you would,' she said.  'But if you had seen his distress!  We must make allowances,
we must sacrifice our feelings.'

'I trust, my dear, you have never found me averse to sacrifices,' returned the Doctor very stiffly.

'And you will let me go and tell him that you have agreed?  It will be like your noble nature,'
she cried.

So it would, he perceived--it would be like his noble nature!  Up jumped his spirits, triumphant
at the thought. The interesting point is the extreme restriction of the species and varieties.
The average range of each species is only five or six miles, while
some are restricted to but one or two square miles, and only a very
few range over a whole island.

  He was the only unhappy member of the party that
sat down that night to supper.  As for the Doctor, he was radiant.  He thus sang the requiem
of the treasure:--

'This has been, on the whole, a most amusing episode,' he said.  'We are not a penny the worse--nay,
we are immensely gainers.  Our philosophy has been exercised; some of the turtle is still left--the
most wholesome of delicacies; I have my staff, Anastasie has her new dress, Jean-Marie is the
proud possessor of a fashionable kepi.  Besides, we had a glass of Hermitage last night; the
glow still suffuses my memory.  I was growing positively niggardly with that Hermitage, positively
niggardly. He marked his man's throat, and saw that the insolent hands could not get at a knife quickly.
Then he sprang at the Scorpion, gripped him by the windpipe, and swung him down. The fellow gurgled,
but he couldn't cry out.

Hindhaugh called the steward, and that functionary came out of his
den with the long bowie.

"Sit on him," said the captain. "If he stirs cut his throat. Now, you, if you move a finger
you're done." The steward straddled across the Scorpion, and held the knife up in a sarcastic
way.

Hindhaugh went swiftly on deck, and stepped right among the jabbering
Spaniards. He smiled as though nothing had happened, but when he saw
one man lay hold of a bale he pulled him back. "Tell them I'll shoot
the first man that tries to lift a bale till I'm ready."  The large
rafters were here and there engraven with rude marks and patterns; the handrail of the stair
was carved in countrified arabesque; a stout timber pillar, which did duty to support the dining-room
roof, bore mysterious characters on its darker side, runes, according to the Doctor; nor did
he fail, when he ran over the legendary history of the house and its possessors, to dwell upon
the Scandinavian scholar who had left them.  Floors, doors, and rafters made a great variety
of angles; every room had a particular inclination; the gable had tilted towards the garden,
after the manner of a leaning tower, and one of the former proprietors had buttressed the building
from that side with a great strut of wood, like the derrick of a crane.  Altogether, it had
many marks of ruin; it was a house for the rats to desert; and nothing but its excellent brightness--the
window-glass polished and shining, the paint well scoured, the brasses radiant, the very prop
all wreathed about with climbing flowers--nothing but its air of a well-tended, smiling veteran,
sitting, crutch and all, in the sunny corner of a garden, marked it as a house for comfortable
people to inhabit.  In poor or idle management it would soon have hurried into the blackguard
stages of decay. The so oft-repeated expression "juice of the grape" has been for a long time on his
hands, and, wishing to work it up, he would have done it in this case, only he fears the skepticism
of his readers. By courtesy, they may wink at the poetical license of a reporter of a public
dinner who calls turnip-juice and painted whisky "juice of the grape," but they would not allow
the existence, for one minute, of such application to the liquors
of a Jersey tavern. It's out of place.  As for any alarm about its security, the
idea had never presented itself. What had stood four centuries might well endure a little longer.

Indeed, in this particular winter, after the finding and losing of the treasure, the Desprez'
had an anxiety of a very different order, and one which lay nearer their hearts.  Jean-Marie
was plainly not himself.  He had fits of hectic activity, when he made unusual exertions to
please, spoke more and faster, and redoubled in attention to his lessons. "The Art of Letter Writing: Divided
into Two Parts.

The First: Containing Rules and Directions for writing letters on
all sorts of subjects [this line as well as several others is Rubricked]
with a variety of examples equally elegant and instructive.  Had the boy properly
unbosomed himself, the little disappointment about the treasure, the little annoyance about
Casimir's incivility, would long ago have been forgotten.  As it is, they prey upon him like
a disease.  He loses flesh, his appetite is variable and, on the whole, impaired.  I keep him
on the strictest regimen, I exhibit the most powerful tonics; both in vain.'

'Don't you think you drug him too much?' asked madame, with an irrepressible shudder.

'Drug?' cried the Doctor; 'I drug?

