As the churn-dasher grew heavier, the wrath in Jimmy's cup began to sputter, dissolving into
that which in his older sister's heart would have been tears; in Jimmy's heart, it took the
form of convulsive sniffling. The boy could hear his sister clattering the breakfast dishes
in the kitchen. The thing that ground upon his heart was the firm footfall of Mrs. Jones, a
neighbor woman, who was overseeing the affairs of the household. Jimmy could not remember hearing
that footstep except in times of what seemed to him to be the family's disgrace. He hated Mrs.
Jones because she tried to cool his ire by describing the superior points of the particular
new baby that had arrived each time she came upon her errands of neighborly mercy. Just as
the yellow granules began to appear in the buttermilk pool on the churn-top, Jimmy heard a
step on the gravel walk behind him. The step came nearer; when Jimmy lifted his eyes, they
glared into the face of Harold Jones. Choler cooled into surprise, and surprise exploded into
a vapid, grinning "Huh!" which was followed by another "Huh!" that gurgled out into a real
laugh as Jimmy greeted the visitor. The Jones boy giggled, and Jimmy found his tongue and asked:
"Did you ever churn?" When Harold admitted that he, too, was a slave of the churn, the freemasonry
of Boyville was established. A moment later Mealy--Harold's title in the Court--was exemplifying
the work. When Mrs. Jones came out of the house to take care of the butter, she saw her son
and Jimmy lying on the grass. Half an hour later the boys in the barn heard Mrs. Jones's voice
calling,--

"Harold, O Harold, don't you want to come and look at the baby?" Now James Sears in the twenty-four
hours of his new sister's life had not let the fact of her existence form expression on his
lips. Much less had he lowered his hostile flag to salute her; but he knew instinctively that
Harold Jones was the sort of a boy who would unsex himself by looking at a baby. When Mealy
answered, "Yes'm," and trotted down the back-yard path to the kitchen, Jimmy Sears scorned
him heartily enough to fancy Mealy in the act of holding the loathsome thing in his arms. Further
contumely was beyond Jimmy's imagination.

When Mealy Jones came back, the barn wherein he had left Jimmy was empty; and only when Mealy
had started homeward, and a clod came whizzing down the alley, hitting him under the ear, did
Mealy know how Jimmy Sears resented an insult. Mealy looked around; no one was in sight.

Right here the reader should know that Jimmy Sears was not alone in his displeasure. There
was mutiny in the Sears household. When the baby came, the four elder of the seven Sears children
joined Jimmy in informal, silent sedition. They looked upon the newcomer as an intruder. For
all who extended sympathy to the pretender, the insurgents developed a wholesome scorn. This
scorn fell most heavily upon kind Mrs. Jones. He hurled a bit of that anger in the clod that
hit Mealy Jones, then Jimmy walked doggedly back to the house. He coaxed the little sister
from the kitchen, took the child's chubby hand and led her to the barn. There Jimmy nursed
his sorrow. He assured the younker as they sat on the hay that he for one would not desert
her, "even if mamma had forgotten her." He hugged the wondering tot until her ribs hurt, and
in his lamentations referred to the new baby as "that old thing." The evening before, when
Mrs. Jones had marshalled the other Sears children and had taken them into the bedroom to see
their new sister, Jimmy was not to be found. None of the older children had looked at the baby.
They had turned their heads away deliberately, and had responded in gutteral affirmatives when
they were asked if it were not a pretty baby. But Jimmy had escaped that humiliation, and since
then he had avoided all snares set to lure him to his mother's bed-side. He sat there in the
barn, fuming as he recalled what he had heard while Annie was in his mother's room early that
morning.

"See little sister's hands. Oh, what pretty hands!" Jimmy had reasoned, and probably correctly,
that the pause was filled by the child's big-eyed astonishment. Mrs. Jones continued,--

"Weenty teenty little feets! See little sister's toeses. What little bitsey toeses. Baby touch
little sister's toeses."

Jimmy had chafed while he listened; but now that the scene came to him after reflection, he
saw how inhuman a thing it was to dupe the child into an affection for her inevitable enemy.

"Does baby love little sister?" continued the voice. "Love nice, pretty little sister! Sweet
little sister! Zhere! Zhere! Zhat's right; love little sister!" As he toyed with a wisp of
hay, Jimmy Sears's blood froze in his veins at the recollection that his own mother had lent
her countenance to this baseness. He knew, and he knew that his mother knew, that the baby
would take all the care due to his toddling sister. He saw, from the elevation of the hay-cock
on which he and the little one sat, that her throat had been cut in a cowardly manner while
she smiled. It seemed deliberately cruel. A lump of pity for the child filled his throat. Still,
in his heart, he forgave his mother for her part in the duplicity. He did not feel for her
the contempt he felt for Henry Sears, his father; for the boy knew that Henry Sears was actually
proud of the family's ignominy. Jimmy blushed at the picture in his mind of his father strutting
around town, with his vest pockets full of cigars, and his thumbs in the armpits, bragging
of the occurrence that filled the boy with shame. Jimmy felt that secretly his mother did not
consider the baby's arrival an occasion for vainglory. He felt that his mother was merely putting
a good face upon the misfortune. These reflections kept Jimmy quiet for ten minutes.

At the end thereof a calamitous fate took him up and made him its toy. Tragedy is the everlasting
piling up of little things. So Jimmy Sears could not know that an evil destiny had come to
guide his steps when he started townward, for it came so gently. To meet Piggy Pennington and
Bud Perkins and Abe Carpenter coming out of the Pennington yard was not such a dreadful thing.
Jimmy had met them a score of times before at that particular gate, with no serious consequences.
It was not in the least ominous that the four boys started for the Creek of the Willows, for
Jimmy had gone to the Creek times without number in that very company. It did not augur evil
for Jimmy Sears that the lot fell to him to go forth and forage a chicken, for the great corn
feast of the Black Feet, a savage tribe of four warriors, among whom Jimmy was known as the
"Bald Eagle." Perhaps there were signs and warnings in all these things; and then, on the other
hand, perhaps Jimmy Sears was so intent upon escaping from the shadow that lowered over his
family that he did not read the signs, and so rushed into his misfortunes blindly. These, however,
are idle speculations; they are the materials from which sages spin their dry and ethereal
webs. But this narrative is concerned only with the facts in the case. Therefore it is necessary
to know only that when Jimmy Sears stooped to pick up his nail-pointed arrow, lying beside
a stunned pullet, he heard the sharp nasal "sping" of a rock whirring near his head. Chicken
and bow and arrow in hand, he began to run, not looking back.

"Here, here, Jimmy Sears, hold on there!" cried a voice. Jimmy knew the voice. It and the chicken
belonged to the same person. So Jimmy quickened his speed. He heard the clattering thump of
pursuing feet. It was two hundred yards to the end of the cob-strewn cow lot. The boy fixed
his course toward the lowest length of fence. Then he kept his eyes upon the ground. He clenched
his teeth and skimmed over the earth. The feathers in his hat--stuck there to satisfy the verities
of his assumed Indian character--caught the breeze; so, rather than lose his hat, he grabbed
it in the hand that held the chicken. He cleared the fence and plunged into the timber. Looking
over his shoulder, he saw a man's form on the top of the fence; the thud of boots on the sod
and the crash of branches behind him sent terror through the boy's frame, and he turned towards
the creek that flowed sluggishly near by. He took great bounding strides, throwing his head
from side to side as he ran. The boy knew the path. It led to a rickety fence--a cattle guard--across
the river. Jimmy's heart beat wildly, and the trees danced by him on the sloping path. But
he was not "the champeen fence-walker of Willow Creek," late of "Pennington & Carpenter's Circus
& Menagerie, price ten pins," without having won his proud place by prowess. He came to the
water's edge with sure feet. He knew that he could cross. He had crossed the creek there a
score of times. He jumped for the slanting boards with his bare feet, and his heart was glad.
The boy was sure that no man would dare to follow him, even if the fence would hold a man's
weight. He had scurried up the bank before his pursuer had reached the side Jimmy had leaped
from so lightly. He scooted through the underbrush. Again and again did the "champeen fence-walker"
smile to himself as he slackened his pace to dodge a volley of rocks, and again and again did
James Sears--an exemplary youth for the most part, who knew his Ten Commandments by heart--look
exultingly at his pullet. He gloried in his iniquity. Lentulus returning to Capua with victorious
legions was not so proud. But there the evil spirit swooped low upon him--the spirit of destruction
that always follows pride. Jimmy tripped, and lunged forward; the chicken, the hat, the bow
and arrow, and the boy all parted company. Then Jimmy felt a pain--a sharp pain that he recognized
too well. He feared to make sure of the extent of his injury. Instinctive knowledge told him
he had "stumped" his toe. This knowledge also brought the sense of certainty that his day's
pleasure was spoiled. He knew that he would go hobbling along, the last brave in the Indian
file. The pain in his foot began to throb as he gathered up his weapons. He walked for a few
moments without looking at the wound. He felt the oozing blood, and he bent his body and went
along, grunting at every step. He peeked at his toe at first stealthily; then little by little
uncovering it with his nursing hand, he gazed fixedly at the wound. The flesh on the end of
the toe was hanging loosely by the skin. It was a full minute before the boy could find courage
to press the hanging flesh back to its place. In the mean time the chicken, which lay behind
him under the log, had regained its senses, squawked hoarsely twice, and walked into the bushes.
When Jimmy's mind turned to his prize, the prize was gone. He had been in the depths as he
sat on the log. But the loss of the pullet brought with it a still further depression, and
Jimmy forgot all about his impersonation of the "Bald Eagle." He lost his conceit in the red
ochre stripes on his face, and the iridescent feathers in his hat, and the blue-black mud on
his nimble feet. For a few moments he was just a sad-eyed boy who saw the hand of the whole
world raised against him. The cry of the new baby rang in his ears. The thought of the other
boys teasing him about the number of babies at his house frenzied him; and as his bills of
wrongs grew longer and longer, Jimmy shook his head defiantly at all the world. For a few hollow
moments Jimmy tried to find the straying chicken.

He threw a stick in the direction the chicken might have taken, but he knew that luck--like
all the world--was against him, and he had no heart in the rites that on another day might
have brought fortune to him. His stubbed toe was hurting him, and the murmur of a ripple in
the stream a few rods below the cattle guard called to him enticingly. As soon as the boy deemed
it safe to venture out of the thicket, he hobbled down to the water's edge, and sat for a long
time in the shade, with the cooling water laving his bruised feet. He knew that the other boys
would miss him, but he did not care. He was enjoying the gloom that was settling down upon
him. Slowly, and by almost imperceptible degrees, there rose in his consciousness the conviction
of guilt. At the end of an hour, the feeling that he was a thief swept over him, covering his
sense of personal grievance like a mantle. For another hour he wrestled with a persistent devil
that was tempting him to strangle his scruples; he won. Jimmy Sears had seventeen cents in
his cast-iron bank at home--the result of a year's careful saving. He crossed the creek and
trudged back to town, and fancied that he was walking in a sanctified road; for he was full
of the resolve to go straight to the store of the grocer who owned the chicken, and to offer
all his available resources in payment for the wrong he had done. Only the heel of his left
foot touched the ground, and he progressed slowly. So the afternoon was old when he turned
the corner and trudged into Baker's store. The speech he was going to make, Jimmy had recited
to himself over and over. He intended to walk up to the counter and say,--

"I want to pay for that chicken I took, Mr. Baker."

To Jimmy that sounded sufficiently humble, and yet it did not seem completely abject. He fancied
the grocer would reply,--

"All right, Jimmy; it will be twenty cents."

To which the boy expected to answer, in a clear, strong voice,--

"Well, Mr. Baker, I have seventeen cents at home; you may have that, and I will bring in the
rest as soon as my mushmelons are ripe."

With that agreement reached, Jimmy saw himself limping out of the store. He harbored a hope
that maybe the grocer, pitying the poor, lame boy, would call him back, cancel the debt, and
perhaps give him a stick of licorice. Jimmy knew his part by heart. He was sure there would
be no halt nor break in this dialogue. But the demon that was torturing his destiny that day
probably chuckled as Jimmy crossed the threshold of the grocery store.

The boy that the grocer saw when he looked up from the pickle barrel certainly had a badly
freckled face; the grocer thought the boy had bold, mean eyes. The youthful jaw set firmly,
and the pain in his foot engraved ugly lines in his face. The button was off one wristband.
A long tear down the lower part of his trousers' leg revealed a glimpse of brown, tanned skin.
He was not a boy that looked like a creature of dreams and of high resolve. No boy that amounts
to much ever does look the part, as the actors say. So when Jimmy Sears--ragged and brazen--stood
before the wronged chicken owner, rage flooded the man's bosom. He rushed around the counter
end, mumbling at the boy. The instinct of fear crowded all the fine speeches out of Jimmy's
head. He backed off, and exclaimed, as he saw the grocer grab a butter paddle,--

"Dern you, don't you touch me; I'll pay for your old chicken. Watch out now!"

Two scale weights slipped involuntarily into Jimmy's hands, and he backed from the counter
to the sidewalk. His hands were uplifted as if to throw the weights. The grocer had not come
up to the boy who shouted in a burst of fear and anger,--

"I'll pay for your chicken, I say. Now you keep away from me!"

