Add to this that he was out of favour both at Whitehall and at Lambeth on account of his marriage--for
that reason "Archbishop Sheldon who had the keys of the Church for a great time in his power,
and could admit unto it and keep out of it whom he pleased, I mean (Pope hastens to explain)
disposed of all Ecclesiastical Preferments, entertained a strong prejudice against him." This
prejudice the Archbishop, when later, on the introduction of Ward, he came to know him better,
acknowledged to have been unjust, a signal instance of Wilkins' power of winning men. The Latitudinarian
was at first coldly received at Lambeth: the brother-in-law of Cromwell was not acceptable
at Whitehall. His friend Ward did not desert him, but "followed up good words with answerable
actions," and procured for him the Precentor's place at Exeter,--"the first step which Wilkins
ascended to a better fortune."

In Charles II. he soon found a still more powerful friend. The King, who was himself the broadest
of Latitudinarians, as far as Protestantism was concerned, was not repelled by Wilkins' theological
views, and yielded readily to the attractions of a versatile and agreeable man of science.
Science was the most creditable of Charles's tastes and occupations; the one in which he took
a genuine and enduring interest.

On November 28, 1660, the Invisible College was embodied, and became a tangible reality. At
a meeting held in Gresham College, twelve persons of eminence in science and in other ways
"formed the design," as the first Journal Book of the Royal Society records, "of founding a
College for the promotion of Physico-Mathematicall Experimentall Learning." Among those present
were Rooke, Petty, Wren, and Wilkins: a committee was formed, of which Wilkins was appointed
chairman: the King gave his approval to the scheme drawn up by the committee, and offered to
become a member of the new College: in 1662 he gave it the Charter of Incorporation which passed
the Great Seal on July 13th of that year. Wilkins was not chosen President; that honour was
given to Lord Brouncker.

The Royal Society of London for the Improvement of Natural Knowledge (its official title) took
knowledge for its province; that is, natural knowledge, of Nature, Art, and Works, in preference
to, though not necessarily to the exclusion of, moral and metaphysical philosophy, history
and language. The experiments, its chief work, were to be productive both of light and fruit:
the influence of Bacon is so great and evident that he might in a sense be called the founder
of the Royal Society. Sprat's real preface to his History is Cowley's famous ode. The poet
speaks of philosophy--i.e., natural philosophy, as the captive and slave of Authority and Words,
set free by Bacon: its followers he likens to the Children of Israel wandering aimlessly from
one desert to another till Moses brought them to the border of the promised land. The stately
lines may well be quoted here:--

     "From these and all long errors of the way
       In which our wandering predecessors went,
     And like th' old Hebrews many years did stray
       In desarts but of small extent,
     Bacon like Moses led us forth at last,
     The barren Wilderness he past,
     Did on the very Border stand
     Of the blest promised land,
     And from the Mountain Top of his Exalted Wit
     Saw it himself and shew'd us it.
     But Life did never to one Man allow
     Time to discover Worlds and conquer too;
     Nor can so short a line sufficient be
     To fadome the vast depths of Nature's sea."

Like all human institutions, the Royal Society was criticised, feared, misunderstood, and ridiculed.
There is evidence of this in Sprat's anxiety to show that experiments "are not dangerous to
the Universities nor to the Church of England," a contention which now would be admitted or
denied if the term "experiments" were first defined. He labours, too, to show that they are
not dangerous to the Christian religion, either its belief or practice. His remarks on this
question are of great interest and value, and are strangely modern. He pleads that "experiments
will be beneficial to our wits and writers." Alas! the wits at least benefited in a way which
Sprat did anticipate. Shadwell in his 'Virtuoso' found material for profane merriment in some
of the unquestionably absurd inquiries made or suggested by the natural philosophers. "Science
was then only just emerging from the Mists of Superstition." Astrology and Alchemy still infected
Astronomy, Chemistry, and Medicine. A Fellow of the Royal Society, along with the Puritan,
made a ridiculous figure on the stage. But Puritanism and Natural Philosophy both survived
the "test of truth," and were better for the ordeal.[3]

In 1668, through the influence of the Duke of Buckingham, Wilkins was made Bishop of Chester.
The position of a Bishop in some ways resembles that of the Head of a College: Fellows are
like canons and archdeacons; undergraduates are the "inferior clergy." The Bishop showed in
the management of his diocese the moderation, tact, and charity which had made him a successful
Warden. He brought back into the Church of England, or into loyalty to that Church, many ministers
who had been ejected from their livings for non-compliance with the Act of Uniformity: his
success in this good work was due to his "soft interpretation of the terms of conformity."
They needed softening; no part of Macaulay's 'History of England' is more striking and instructive
than his account in chapter ii. of the sufferings of the Puritans and Nonconformists of all
descriptions. "It was made a crime to attend a dissenting place of worship.

It is probable that Chester jail was less crowded than other jails in England, and that dissenters
were allowed to come within five miles of Chester, even to the Bishop's palace.

Wilkins, like many "moderate" men, had convictions, and was ready to make sacrifices in their
defence. Not only in his diocese, but in the House of Lords, he pleaded for a lenient treatment
of dissenters. In reference to the second Conventicle Act, Wilkins gained for himself, in the
view of all right-minded men, especial honour. He argued earnestly against the Bill in the
Upper House. Even when the king desired him to be silent, he replied "That he thought it an
ill thing, both in conscience and policy, and therefore as an Englishman and a Bishop, he was
bound to oppose it." Being still further requested by Charles not to go to the House while
the Bill was pending, his answer was "That by the law and constitution of England, and by his
Majesty's favour, he had a right to debate and vote: and he was neither afraid nor ashamed
to own his opinion in this matter, and to act pursuant to it, and the king was not offended
with his freedom."[4] He did not hesitate to endanger his favour with the king--perhaps not
with him, for Charles was not by temper a persecutor, but with the party then in power. From
the 'Church of England in the Reigns of the Stuarts,' I quote another instance of his moderation
and clear-headedness in the fierce controversies of his time. In a conversation with Cosin,
Bishop of Devon, who had censured him for his moderation, Wilkins frankly told him that he
was a better friend to the Church of England than his lordship--"for while you," says he, "are
for setting the top on the picqued end and downwards, you won't be able to keep it up any longer
than you keep whipping and scourging; whereas I am for setting the broad end downwards, and
so 'twill stand of itself." The metaphor has obvious defects, but expresses the broadness of
the Broad party in the Church.

Of Wilkins' work in his diocese few particulars are recorded: it is called by Wood the "kill
Bishop see," a name which now happily it does not deserve. His had been a laborious life, and
the last years of it must have been full of difficulties and anxieties to the friend of an
unpopular cause. After four years' tenure of his bishopric, he died in the year 1672, at the
age of fifty-eight, in Tillotson's house: he was buried in the churchyard of St Lawrence Jewry,
his old vicarage. His College pupil, William Lloyd, preached the funeral sermon, in which he
defends him against the charge of having looked with too much favour on the dissenters, urging
as his excuse, "the vehemence of his desire to bring the Dissenters off their prejudices, and
reduce them to the Unity of the Church"; no bad defence.

It is pleasant to turn from Wilkins' public to his private life. There are many allusions to
him in the Diaries of Pepys and Evelyn.

Pepys made his first acquaintance with Wilkins in 1665: he was now a man widely known in London
society, especially among learned men and natural philosophers. Pepys describes his first visit
to him, paid at his house, then probably the Vicarage of St Lawrence Jewry. "And so to Dr Merritt"
In 1668 the book was published, carried home by Pepys, and carefully perused. He enjoyed the
account given by Wilkins of the ark, and his solutions of the difficulties raised even in his
time. The solutions, Pepys says, "do please me mightily, and are much beyond whatever I heard
of the subject." This is easy to believe. He must have been impressed by Wilkins' contention
that "few were the several species of beasts and fowls which were to be in the Arke"; a consequence
of the fundamental error of his system, the belief that nature was easily classified, and her
classes few.

Evelyn was a warm friend of Wilkins, and a frequent visitor at his lodgings in Wadham. In 1654
he came to Oxford with his wife and daughter, as London visitors do now for a weekend, or for
Commemoration. He "supped at a magnificent entertainment in Wadham Hall, invited by my dear
and excellent friend Dr Wilkins," and met "that miracle of a youth, Mr Christopher Wren." Two
years later, on another visit, he "dined with that most obliging and universally curious person
Dr Wilkins at Wadham College." There he saw many wonderful things--transparent apiaries, a
statue that spoke through a tube, a way-wiser (i.e., a kind of pedometer), dials, perspectives,
mathematical and magical curiosities, the property or invention of Wilkins or of "that prodigious
young scholar Christopher Wren." Alas! there are none of these magical curiosities in the Warden's
lodgings now; they were taken to London and lost in the Great Fire.

In 1665 Evelyn heard his friend preach before the Lord Mayor at St Paul's on the text, "Obedience
is better than sacrifice,"--a curious text for him to choose, for it may be interpreted in
more ways than one, and might have been taken by an enemy as a summary of the preacher's own
career. Under the same entry Evelyn describes his friend as one "who took great pains to preserve
the Universities from the ignorant and sacrilegious commanders who would have demolished all
places and persons that pretended to learning"; another indication among many that the "obliging"
Dr Wilkins was not invertebrate.

In the same year Evelyn, calling at The Durdans, the home of Wilkins' former pupil, Lord Berkeley,
found there a remarkable group, Petty, Rooke, and Wilkins, amusing themselves with "contrivances
for chariots, and for a wheel for one to run races in,"--the first forms possibly of a hansom,
and a cycle. "Perhaps," continues Evelyn, "three such persons were not to be found elsewhere
in Europe for parts and ingenuity." Lord Rosebery, we may safely presume, would be glad to
see them at The Durdans now.

In November 1668, Evelyn went to London, "invited to the consecration of that excellent person,
the Dean of Ripon, now made Bishop of Chester: Dr Tillotson preached." Then he went to a sumptuous
banquet in the Hall of Ely House, where were "the Duke of Buckingham, Judges, the Lord Keeper,
Noblemen, and innumerable other company, who were honourers of this incomparable man, universally
beloved by all who knew him."

Tillotson, who married Wilkins' stepdaughter, and may therefore have been prejudiced, though
such relationships give rise to prejudices of various kinds, was deeply attached to him. He
edited and wrote a preface to the book on 'Natural Religion,' and did the same pious duty in
respect of the 'Sermons Preached on Several Occasions,' taking opportunity in the preface to
defend him against the censures of Antony Wood. He edited also a pamphlet of an attractive
title, which the writer has not seen and fain would see, 'The Moderate Man, the best subject
in Church and State, proved from the arguments of Wilkins, with Tillotson's opinions on the
subject.' Between them they must make a strong case for the Moderate Man. Tillotson says of
his father-in-law: "I think I may truly say that there are or have been few in this age and
nation so well known, and greatly esteemed, and favoured by many persons of high rank and quality,
and of singular worth and eminence in all the learned professions." This eulogy has perhaps
the ring of a time when rank and quality were made more of than they are now made, but it is
quoted as an illustration of the change of feeling which would make it now impossible or indecorous
to praise a bishop because he got on well with great people: allowance must be made for the
difference between the seventeenth and the twentieth century.

Funeral sermons are not always the naked truth, but Lloyd's fine saying about Wilkins bears
on it the stamp of sincerity: "It was his way of friendship not so much to oblige men as to
do them good."

Burnet adds another testimony to Wilkins' singular power of winning affection. He writes: "Wilkins
was a man of as great a mind, as true a judgement, as eminent virtues, and of as good a soul,
as any one I ever knew. He was naturally ambitious, but was the wisest clergyman I ever knew.
He was a lover of mankind, and had a delight in doing good."

Burnet was a partisan, but these are the words of more than partisanship. In his 'History of
his Own Time' he introduces Wilkins to his readers in very distinguished company, among the
Latitudinarians--Whichcote, Cudworth, Tillotson, Lloyd, and Stillingfleet,--of whom he says
that if such men had not appeared, of another stamp than their predecessors, "the Church had
quite lost its esteem over the nation." Clarendon, whom he calls "more the friend of the Bishops
than of the Church," had, in his opinion, endowed them and the higher clergy too well, and
they were sunk in luxury and sloth. The Latitudinarians infused into the Church life, energy,
and a sense of duty: they were, he adds, good preachers and acceptable to the king, who, "having
little or no literature, but true and good sense," liked sermons "plain, clear, and short."
"Incedo per ignes," but it is impossible to refrain from quoting Burnet's language, which,
mutatis mutandis, would have expressed what High Churchmen felt towards the leaders of the
Oxford movement, and with equal truth and justice.

Here Antony Wood may be called in to play the part of the Advocatus Diaboli. He plays it in
the following passage, as always, with great vigour and enjoyment: "Dr John Wilkins, a notorious
complyer with the Presbyterians, from whom he obtained the Wardenship of Wadham; with the Independants
and Cromwell himself, by whose favour he did not only get a dispensation to marry (contrary
to the College Statutes), but also, because he had married his sister, Master of Trinity College,
Cambridge: from which being ejected at the Restoration, he faced about, and by his smooth language,
insinuating preaching, flatteries, and I know not what, got among other preferments the Deanery
of Ripon, and at length by the commendation of George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, a great
favourer of fanaticks and atheists, the Bishopric of Chester."

The passage is inaccurate both in grammar and in facts, but it is valuable as evidence of the
venomous party spirit prevalent in the seventeenth century,--a spirit to which we can easily
rise superior, we whose station, property, life, do not depend on the triumph of this or that
opinion. In Oxford at least we do not now say such things about each other. But in another
place Wood takes a less unfavourable view of Wilkins' character, and uses about him the politest
language at his command. "He was a person of rare gifts, a noted theologist and preacher; a
curious critick in several matters; an excellent mathematician and experimentalist, &c.; and
I cannot say that there was anything deficient in him but a constant mind and settled principles."

This is an outline of the facts and opinions about Wilkins which have come down to us. What
are we to think of him?

Unquestionably there lies against a man who prospered under Cromwell and Charles II., and was
a favourite of both, a presumption of excessive pliancy, of too much readiness to adapt himself
to his environment, of time-serving, if you like, and insincerity. It cannot be proved that
he was not a Vicar of Bray, the title which at once suggests itself. Tolerance, geniality,
and charity are virtues which have their own defects, and some measure of austerity is one
of the ingredients of a perfect character. It has been said of Wilkins that two principles
determined his career: a large tolerance of actions and opinions; a readiness to submit himself
to "the powers that be," let them have been established if they might. These are the marks
of a wise man, and of a man supremely useful in times of bitter hatred and uncompromising revenge:
they are not the marks of a hero or a martyr.

Wilkins was in fact a Trimmer. It may be said of him what has been said by Mr Herbert Paul
of a more famous Trimmer, Lord Halifax (not our Lord Halifax), that "he was thoroughly imbued
with the English spirit of compromise, that he had a remarkable power of understanding, even
sympathetically understanding, opinions which he did not hold." Wilkins hated persecution,
and that hatred nerves a Trimmer to defend unpopular persons and unpopular causes, as he did
in his College and University and Diocese. Toleration has a courage of its own equal to that
of fanaticism, and more useful and intelligent. It is now an easier and a safer virtue than
it was two hundred and fifty years ago: it is not popular now; it was odious then, and men
were impatient with those who took no side, or changed sides for reasons good or bad.

Macaulay--who never knew a doubt, whose way was clear and easy in the struggles of his day,
when reform and free trade in corn were obviously desirable and necessary--writes with contemptuous
severity of the profligacy of politicians from the Restoration to the accession of the House
of Hanover. "One who in such an age is determined to attain civil greatness must renounce all
thought of consistency. He has seen so many institutions from which much had been expected
produce mere disappointment, that he has no hope of improvement. There is nothing in the state
which he could not, without a scruple, join in defending or destroying." Compare with these
scathing words his estimate of the character of Halifax, the Whig: "The most estimable of the
statesmen who were formed in the corrupt and licentious Whitehall of the Restoration. He was
called inconsistent because the relative position in which he stood to the contending parties
was perpetually varying. More than one British statesman, Tory, be it observed, as well as
Whig, needs and deserves a defence like this. Alter names and dates, and it will serve as a
vindication of Wilkins' deficiency in a "constant mind and settled principles." Therefore the
paradox is true that a Trimmer may be a man of firmness and courage; one who is bold enough
to make many enemies and few friends; who has convictions of his own, but by a power of sympathy,
one of the rarest and highest mental, half moral, half intellectual, qualities, can understand
opinions which he does not hold; understand and pardon, as the French say.

Whether Wilkins' tolerance was of the exalted kind, or alloyed by an admixture of that other
tolerance which is no better than indifference and opportunism, it is impossible to say, for
we do not know enough about him to pronounce a judgment. Our data are scanty and incoherent,
scattered about in diaries and memoirs written by persons of different stations and opinions.
This much is certain, that Pope, Aubrey, Sprat, Evelyn, Pepys, Tillotson, and Burnet speak
of him with affection and respect: one note runs through all their eulogies, that he was universally
beloved; yet he was not one of those nonentities whom now we style amiable persons, but a man
of character and power.

As a loyal son of the College, the writer is prepared to maintain that a Vicar of Bray could
not have won love and admiration in his College, his University, and in his Diocese, and in
a larger world than these; nor have been "laudatus a laudatis viris." It is more rational to
believe that Wilkins was a good and wise man, who accepted the situations in which he found
himself placed, and made the best of them, being more solicitous to do good than to preserve
consistency, that most negative of virtues. Let him be judged by his best, as men are most
fairly judged, and by another good criterion, the times in which he lived,--times of perpetual
change, confusion, and perplexity.

FOOTNOTES:

[3] See Mr Pearson's instructive and amusing article on "The Virtuoso" in the 'Nineteenth Century,'
November 1909.

[4] This is an abbreviation of the passage in Burnet's 'History of his Own Time,' vol. i. p.
272. First edition.

PRINTED BY WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS.