We received the conviction that Rochester, in fact, deserves its fame. Covering an area of
about seventeen square miles, it is laid out chiefly in squares, with streets from sixty to
one hundred feet wide, shaded by beautiful trees. It abounds in handsome and tasteful residences,
which are for the most part surrounded by carefully tended lawns and gardens. Its fire-proof
office buildings and warehouses, are a credit to the city; only few, even in the metropolis,
are equal to them in magnificence.

In the center of the city are the upper Falls of the Genesee, a perpendicular cataract of ninety-six
feet, over which Sam Patch made his last and fatal leap.

To the prominent public institutions of Rochester belong the State Industrial School, two large
hospitals, an Institution for Deaf-Mutes, and charitable organizations of every description.
The principal business thoroughfare, Main Street, is in the heart of the city, and crosses
the river over a handsome iron bridge.

The manufactures of Rochester are extensive and varied. In early years flour was the chief
product, giving it the title "Flour City;" there being no less than eighteen mills within its
limits. Rochester might be also appropriately styled the "Flower City," for its nursery trade
is hardly surpassed by that of any other place in the world. The suburbs are highly cultivated,
having 4,000 acres of fruit trees, and nurseries containing from 250 to 500 acres.

Other important industries are cotton and paper mills; oil refineries; boot and shoe, clothing,
furniture, perfumery and tobacco manufactories.

A feature that attracts thousands of visitors daily, is the great Powers Art Gallery, the private
property of Mr. D.W. Powers, occupying the greater part of the two upper floors pertaining
to the Powers Building.

In fact, a plentitude of resources makes the city interesting to the tourist.

The next day, when "morn was blushing in the sky," we bade farewell to Rochester; and, sailing
on the other sixty-mile level, we continued our journey through a charming region past Greece,
Spencerport, King & Adams, Cooley's Basin, and arrived at the attractive village of Brockport.
Beautifully situated in the midst of a country teeming with abundance and inhabited by a prosperous
and contented population, it contains many features of interest. Here is located a State Normal
School, and also several extensive manufactories of agricultural implements.

Passing Holley, Hulberton and Hindsburg, we came to Albion, the capital of Orleans County.
The latter village is nicely laid out with wide streets and shaded by large trees. It contains
many handsome residences and public buildings.

Having proceeded more westward, beyond Eagle Harbor and Knowlesville, we caught sight of the
pleasant town of Medina, about midway between Rochester and Buffalo, noted for its quarries
of dark-red sandstone. Located in the midst of a fine fruit country, it has the reputation
of being one of the best fruit markets in the State. Speeding through the thriving villages
of Middleport, Reynall's Basin and Cataract Springs, we neared a deep ravine, through which
the Erie Canal passes, following a natural waterway. Here we met the most remarkable drop of
the canal, in its chain of five continuous double locks, resembling a flight of stairs. 

May it be Thy good pleasure, O my God, that the time may come in which I may be able to pay one
farthing at least, of the heavy debt I owe Thee! Do Thou, O Lord, so dispose matters according
to Thy will, that this Thy servant may do Thee some service. Other women there have been who did
heroic deeds for Thee; I am good only to talk; and so it has not
been Thy pleasure, O my God, that I should do any thing: all ends
in talk and desires--that is all my service.



Going on shore, we visited Lockport, a prosperous city with about 20,000 inhabitants, which
is the center of a large paper and pulp industry.

A five hours' journey on Saturday morning, July 29th, past Pendleton, Picardsville, Martinsville,
Tonawanda and Lower Black Rock, completed our charming trip on the Erie Canal, which has from
Schenectady to Buffalo a length of 323 miles.

The construction of this great artificial waterway, in all nearly 350 miles long, having an
elevation of about 500 feet above tide water, made by seventy-two locks, was commenced in 1817,
and its completion took place in 1825. Although this immense undertaking has caused an expense
of $50,000,000, the State of New York has made an excellent investment with that sum of money;
since by means of the Erie Canal the domestic trade between the large western inland towns
and the eastern seaports, especially the metropolis, is considerably facilitated. This traffic
will receive a still greater importance, and can be more advantageously carried on, when the
plan of utilizing the electric current for the driving power of canal-boats--a project recently
tested by experiments--has been successfully executed.

Prior to 1857, this waterway was used for both trade and passenger transportation. Since the
introduction of railroad communication, however, the canal has been the medium of conveying
merchandise only; wherefore, our interesting trip on the steam-yacht "Marguerite" is one of
a few exceptions to the ordinary routine of the Erie Canal.

CHAPTER II.

SOJOURN IN BUFFALO AND VISIT TO NIAGARA FALLS, FROM JULY 29TH, 1.30 P.M., TO AUGUST 2ND, 7 A.M.

It was a bright and sunny day; the atmosphere being purified by a strong but refreshing breeze.
As the noonday sun poured his brilliant rays on the towering hills which adorn the luxuriant
banks of the canal, it was announced that in the distance there could be discerned the dark
line which indicated our approach to the verdant tract encompassing the thriving city of Buffalo,
the terminus of our voyage on the Erie Canal.

While the boat was speeding along, this point upon which our attention was chiefly fixed, became
more cognizable with every minute. Rising upwards to our left we could perceive domes of the
most graceful proportions, towering structures, for number and form beyond my power to describe.
On the other side, there lay spread before us, in vast expanse, the unrivaled water front which
skirts the city of Buffalo, extending two and one-half miles along the shore of Lake Erie and
two and one-half miles along Niagara River.

As we entered the harbor of Buffalo, which is considered the largest and finest on the lake,
we were soon made acquainted with scenes and incidents that have no common fascination; in
fact, one must be surprised at the tremendous amount of activity displayed here. The scores
of huge grain elevators, having a total capacity of 8,000,000 bushels, and the mammoth warehouses
lining the water fronts reminded one of New York and Brooklyn. 

In this manner she ran on for several minutes, concluding at last, that it was pity so very
few had such generous minds joined to immense fortunes.

Booth, instead of making a direct answer to what Amelia had said, cried coldly, "But do you
think, my dear, it was right to accept all those expensive toys which
the children brought home? And I ask you again, what return we are
to make for these obligations?"

"Indeed, my dear," cries Amelia,
"you see this matter in too serious a light. There we saw the trim and dainty shell, with its arrow-like prow, darting through
the quiet coves; the saucy catamaran shooting, half submerged, out before the wind; the cozy
little steam-launches, all ready to take their passengers to some suburban pleasure-ground;
excursion steamers, with flying banners and bands of music going and coming, and mammoth propellers
destined to carry thousands of tourists to the El Dorado on Lake Michigan's blue waters.

It will not be difficult to understand why Buffalo has attained commercial supremacy in Western
New York, if you add to this never ceasing activity, betokening business, the enormous canal
traffic; for it is here where innumerable canal-boats are weighted with the rich products of
the west, carrying a large floating population of boatmen's families.

Before selecting our mooring place in Buffalo Creek, which can be navigated for about one mile,
we sailed to the breakwater, a solid wall several feet high, having a length of 4,000 feet,
which was erected at the expense of some millions of dollars for the protection of the city
from being flooded by the unruly waters of Lake Erie.

While the tanks of the yacht were being filled with the limpid water of the lake, we ascended
the stairs leading to the top of the protecting wall; for we all were anxious to become acquainted
with the nature of the billows that were to carry us many miles westward and nearer to our
far destination.

It was a glorious sight unfolded before our eyes. We glanced at a huge sheet of water, about
268 miles long, varying from thirty to nearly sixty miles in width, with an area of 9600 square
miles, whose elevation from tide water is judged to be 564 feet.

This majestic spectacle, as animated as it was, imparted to us an adequate conception of a
boisterous inland sea. The surface of the lake was in wild uproar; the advancing and retreating
waves were beating themselves into angry foam, and dashed their spray pearls almost to our
feet; their opulent azure hue being dimmed by the violent agitation. The inexperienced eye
has no idea of the imposing impression caused by the extremely subitaneous changes to which
these waters are subjected. The wide bosom of the lake that sometimes lies motionless and glassy,
without a breath of air to cause the slightest undulation, in a very short time may be scourged
by a sudden gale. The wild gambols of the waves, accompanied by the roar of the disturbed elements,
may well cause the timid to fear; for, as the swell lifts, you would think the bases of the
earth are rising beneath it; and, again, when it falls, you would imagine the foundation of
the deep had given away.

Though the billows before us now were beaten by a powerful breeze, breaking with angry roar
upon the barrier upon which we stood, yet not the slightest feeling of fear found place within
our hearts. On the contrary, as we left the breakwater in order to return to Buffalo, I felt
my heart palpitating with joy as I thought of the pleasing prospect to be tossed by those grand
waves.

Having chosen a place at the foot of Main Street for our stay, the orders to secure the "Marguerite"
were instantly carried out; and immediately a multitude of curious beholders had gathered around
the yacht, viewing her with evident expression of admiration.

Since it was yet early in the afternoon we decided to go on shore, in order to view the points
of interest in this important city.

A ride in the electric railway, traversing it in every direction, made us acquainted with a
good portion of Buffalo, which contains a population of nearly 300,000, being the third city
in size in the Empire State. It is handsomely laid out with broad and well shaded streets.
One hundred and three miles are paved with asphalt, and 133 miles with stone. We saw many fine
residences with attractive grounds, and numerous public squares. Delaware Avenue, the leading
street for elegant mansions, is about three miles long, and is lined with a double row of trees.

The city possesses a superb system of parks and pleasure grounds, designed and laid out by
Frederick Law Olmsted, the architect of Central Park in New York City. It comprises three sections,
situated respectively in the northern, western, and eastern parts of Buffalo, which, with the
connecting boulevard, afford a drive of nearly ten miles.

Main Street, the principal trading thoroughfare, has many substantial business blocks.

Of the prominent public buildings, the city and county hall deserves being mentioned in the
first place. It is an imposing structure, of Maine granite, in the form of a double Roman cross,
with a tower 245 feet high, surmounted by four statues. This magnificent edifice is fronting
on Franklin Street, and was completed in 1880 at a cost of nearly $1,500,000.

Other handsome buildings are the U.S. custom house and postoffice, at the corner of Washington
and Seneca Streets; the Buffalo library, on Lafayette Square; the State arsenal, in Broadway;
the Erie County penitentiary, one of the six penal establishments of New York; the general
hospital, in High Street; and the State asylum for the insane, an edifice which cost about
$3,000,000, located in Forest Avenue, adjoining the Buffalo Park. 

I do not think that I am doing anything myself--certainly I do not;
for I see distinctly that all this is the work of our Lord.

For this reason, it seems to me that the soul in which our Lord worketh these graces,--if it
walks in humility and fear, always acknowledging the work of our Lord, and that we ourselves
can do, as it were, nothing,--may be thrown among any companions,
and, however distracted and wicked these may be, will neither be hurt
nor disturbed in any way; on the contrary, as I have just said, that
will help it on, and be a means unto it whereby it may derive much
greater profit.

15. Those souls are strong which are chosen by our Lord to do good to others; still, this their
strength is not their own.


The industrial works comprise four blast furnaces, large rolling mills, machine shops, car
shops, iron ship-yards, stove foundries, tanneries, flour mills, and manufacturing of agricultural
implements.

Early on Monday morning, I abandoned the land of dreams in order to appear on deck in good
season; since arrangements had been made for going into dry-dock that very morning.

Reader, have you ever been there? I hear you answer negatively. Well, that is just what I expected;
for it is a rather unusual and rare experience for ladies, even in the eyes of a shipwright,
a man who is constantly employed in that place, that a boat enters the dry-dock with her passengers
on board.

It was partly a matter of necessity, and partly of circumspection, that caused us to abide
in the dry-dock for a few hours.

In consequence of the numerous low bridges that span the canal, the spars, rigging, and smoke-stack
belonging to the complete equipment of the "Marguerite" would have made her journey on that
artificial waterway absolutely impossible; therefore it was necessary to replace these parts
in their appropriate positions.

The picture in the frontispiece gives evidence of that fact; as the "Marguerite" presented
a very different picture completely rigged.

Now, on the point of sailing on the Great Lakes, it was requisite to dress the yacht in her
proper array, with her high tapering masts; the cords of her rigging stretching from spar to
spar with the beautiful accuracy of a picture; and so equipped, as to give her the appearance
of a majestic, white winged sea-bird resting gracefully on the water.

For the purpose of bestowing upon her such an outfit, as well as for having her bottom examined,
she was docked in Mill's dry-dock. The latter motive, I must add, was effected by a mere act
of precaution; since no components of the propelling machinery had been injured or damaged.

But Mr. James, our ever thoughtful commodore, wished to be assured that he could direct the
"Marguerite" on her westward course with everything pertaining to her in complete order.

These docks may be in communication either with a wet dock or a tidal harbor. I observed that
the dry-dock we entered had a pontoon gate, floated in or out of place as desired. There being
no tides in the lakes, this style of gate--less liable to leak under continuous pressure--is
invariably used; for the only method of emptying the docks here is by pumping, for which purpose
a steam-engine and pumps, with a well and water channel leading to it, were employed.

We scarcely had made our entry into it, ere many busy hands worked to give the keel of the
yacht a secure rest on wooden blocks which were fastened down to prevent them floating. They
were of such a height as to permit the shipwright getting under the vessel's bottom. Then side
shores were put in to keep the boat in an upright position. This being accomplished, I could
notice that the pumping machinery was brought into full operation. Soon I found that the level
of the water became lower and lower, and after the expiration of about one-half hour the dock
was almost dry.

The sides of the dock generally consist of stone steps--called altars--for the purpose of fixing
the lower ends of the shores, and also for the convenience of supporting the workmen's scaffold.

Mr. James and family, including myself, left the yacht to the crew and workmen, while we further
explored the city of Buffalo in carriages, thoughtfully provided for us.

The day after our entering dry-dock, August 1st, was eventful, as it was arranged we should
make an excursion to view one of Nature's greatest wonders--Niagara Falls--a sight unlike any
other on the surface of the globe. The indescribable grandeur of the whole overwhelms the soul--to
contemplate that tremendous torrent which never stops! No rest in the ages of the past--no
promise of a moment's stay in all the years to come--but on, on, with resistless force!

Our thoughts become like the mists that rise above this awful scene, and we are mute--Pigmies
of an hour! To feel that after what we are becomes a little dust, that solemn roar will echo
in the ears of millions now unborn!

Though I had read diverse descriptions portraying the grandeur and magnificence of Niagara
Falls, still I was aware that they had failed in conveying a clear and succinct outline of
their wonderful proportions and great sublimity. My conclusions that, in older to be properly
appreciated these gigantic cataracts must be visited, were confirmed, and, re vera, when once
viewed the recollection of that glorious sight will linger long in memory.

An hour's ride in the cars brought us to the village of Niagara Falls, a splendid manufacturing
point, having all modern improvements and unsurpassed railway facilities of various kinds.
The village was incorporated in 1848, and has about 4,000 inhabitants.

The average annual number of visitors to this beautiful place is estimated to be 400,000.

At the station of Niagara Falls, Mr. James engaged vehicles which afforded accommodations for
all of us--a party of ten--including the steward, who accompanied us, carrying a bountiful repast.

The drivers of Niagara Falls are excellent ciceroni. We drove through the handsome village
to Prospect Park, a property owned by the State of New York, and included in the Niagara Reservation,
which the State acquired by purchase in 1885. All the unsightly buildings, heretofore obstructing
the view, have been removed, and a terrace was erected for a distance of half a mile, affording
uncountable attractions to the visitor with its venerable trees, comfortable seats, and delightful
views.

The main entrance is a tasty structure at the foot of Cascade Street. The point of land at
the brink of the falls is called Prospect Point. Since it commands a fine view, which is the
feature of the park, our drivers advised us to abandon the carriages and to step nearer to
the long stone wall running for some distance along the edge of the gorge.

