Found note from Evans to say the second return party passed through safely at 2.30 on January
14--half a day longer between depots than we have been. The temperature is higher, but there
is a cold wind to-night.

Well, we have come through our 7 weeks' ice camp journey and most of us are fit, but I think
another week might have had a very bad effect on Evans, who is going steadily downhill.

It is satisfactory to recall that these facts give absolute proof of both expeditions having
reached the Pole and placed the question of priority beyond discussion.

Thursday, February 8.--R. 22. Height 6260. Start Temp. -11°; Lunch Temp. -5°; Supper, zero.
9.2 miles. Started from the depot rather late owing to weighing biscuit, &c., and rearranging
matters. Had a beastly morning. Wind very strong and cold. Steered in for Mt. Darwin to visit
rock. Sent Bowers on, on ski, as Wilson can't wear his at present. He obtained several specimens,
all of much the same type, a close-grained granite rock which weathers red. Hence the pink
limestone. After he rejoined we skidded downhill pretty fast, leaders on ski, Oates and Wilson
on foot alongside sledge--Evans detached. We lunched at 2 well down towards Mt. Buckley, the
wind half a gale and everybody very cold and cheerless. However, better things were to follow.
We decided to steer for the moraine under Mt. Buckley and, pulling with crampons, we crossed
some very irregular steep slopes with big crevasses and slid down towards the rocks. The moraine
was obviously so interesting that when we had advanced some miles and got out of the wind,
I decided to camp and spend the rest of the day geologising. It has been extremely interesting.
We found ourselves under perpendicular cliffs of Beacon sandstone, weathering rapidly and carrying
veritable coal seams. From the last Wilson, with his sharp eyes, has picked several plant impressions,
the last a piece of coal with beautifully traced leaves in layers, also some excellently preserved
impressions of thick stems, showing cellular structure. In one place we saw the cast of small
waves on the sand. To-night Bill has got a specimen of limestone with archeo-cyathus--the trouble
is one cannot imagine where the stone comes from; it is evidently rare, as few  specimens occur
in the moraine. There is a good deal of pure white quartz. Altogether we have had a most interesting
afternoon, and the relief of being out of the wind and in a warmer temperature is inexpressible.
I hope and trust we shall all buck up again now that the conditions are more favourable. We
have been in shadow all the afternoon, but the sun has just reached us, a little obscured by
night haze. A lot could be written on the delight of setting foot on rock after 14 weeks of
snow and ice and nearly 7 out of sight of aught else. It is like going ashore after a sea voyage.
We deserve a little good bright weather after all our trials, and hope to get a chance to dry
our sleeping-bags and generally make our gear more comfortable.

Friday, February 9.--R. 23. Height 5,210 ft. Lunch Temp.   +10°; Supper Temp. +12.5°. About
13 miles. Kept along the edge of moraine to the end of Mt. Buckley. Stopped and geologised.
Wilson got great find of vegetable impression in piece of limestone. Too tired to write geological
notes. We all felt very slack this morning, partly rise of temperature, partly reaction, no
doubt. Ought to have kept close in to glacier north of Mt. Buckley, but in bad light the descent
looked steep and we kept out. Evidently we got amongst bad ice pressure and had to come down
over an ice-fall. The crevasses were much firmer than expected and we got down with some difficulty,
found our night camp of December 20, and lunched an hour after. Did pretty well in the afternoon,
marching 3 3/4 hours; the sledge-meter is unshipped, so cannot tell distance traversed. Very
warm on march and we are all pretty tired. To-night it is wonderfully calm and warm, though
it has been overcast all the afternoon. It is remarkable to be able to stand outside the tent
and sun oneself. Our food satisfies now, but we must march to keep in the full ration, and
we want rest, yet we shall pull through all right, D.V. We are by no means worn out.

Saturday, February 10.--R. 24. Lunch Temp.  +12°; Supper Temp. +10°. Got off a good morning
march in spite of keeping too far east and getting in rough, cracked ice. Had a splendid night
sleep, showing great change in all faces, so didn't get away till 10 A.M. Lunched just before
3. After lunch the land began to be obscured. We held a course for 2 1/2 hours with difficulty,
then the sun disappeared, and snow drove in our faces with northerly wind--very warm and impossible
to steer, so camped. After supper, still very thick all round, but sun showing and less snow
falling. The fallen snow crystals are quite feathery like thistledown. We have two full days'
food left, and though our position is uncertain, we are certainly within two outward marches
from the middle glacier depot. However, if the weather doesn't clear by to-morrow, we must
either march blindly on or reduce food. It is very trying. Another night to make up arrears
of sleep. The ice crystals that first fell this afternoon were very large. Now the sky is clearer
overhead, the temperature has fallen slightly, and the crystals are minute.

Sunday, February 11.--R. 25. Lunch Temp. -6.5°; Supper -3.5°. The worst day we have had during
the trip and greatly owing to our own fault. We started on a wretched surface with light S.W.
wind, sail set, and pulling on ski--horrible light, which made everything look fantastic. As
we went on light got worse, and suddenly we found ourselves in pressure. Then came the fatal
decision to steer east. We went on for 6 hours, hoping to do a good distance, which in fact
I suppose we did, but for the last hour or two we pressed on into a regular trap. Getting on
to a good surface we did not reduce our lunch meal, and thought all going well, but half an
hour after lunch we got into the worst ice mess I have ever been in. For three hours we plunged
on on ski, first thinking we were too much to the right, then too much to the left; meanwhile
the disturbance got worse and my spirits received a very rude shock. There were times when
it seemed almost impossible to find a way out of the awful turmoil in which we found ourselves.
At length, arguing that there must be a way on our left, we plunged in that direction. It got
worse, harder, more icy and crevassed. We could not manage our ski and pulled on foot, falling
into crevasses every minute--most luckily no bad accident. At length we saw a smoother slope
towards the land, pushed for it, but knew it was a woefully long way from us. The turmoil changed
in character, irregular crevassed surface giving way to huge chasms, closely packed and most
difficult to cross. It was very heavy work, but we had grown desperate. We won through at 10
P.M. and I write after 12 hours on the march. I think we are on or about the right track now,
but we are still a good number of miles from the depôt, so we reduced rations to-night. We
had three pemmican meals left and decided to make them into four. To-morrow's lunch must serve
for two if we do not make big progress. It was a test of our endurance on the march and our
fitness with small supper. We have come through well. A good wind has come down the glacier
which is clearing the sky and surface. Pray God the wind holds to-morrow. Short sleep to-night
and off first thing, I hope.

Monday, February 12.--R. 26. In a very critical situation. All went well in the forenoon, and
we did a good long march over a fair surface. Two hours before lunch we were cheered by the
sight of our night camp of the 18th December, the day after we made our depôt--this showed
we were on the right track. In the afternoon, refreshed by tea, we went forward, confident
of covering the remaining distance, but by a fatal chance we kept too far to the left, and
then we struck uphill and, tired and despondent, arrived in a horrid maze of crevasses and
fissures. Divided councils caused our course to be erratic after this, and finally, at 9 P.M.
we landed in the worst place of all. After discussion we decided to camp, and here we are,
after a very short supper and one meal only remaining in the food bag; the depot doubtful in
locality. We must get there to-morrow. Meanwhile we are cheerful with an effort. It's a tight
place, but luckily we've been well fed up to the present. Pray God we have fine weather to-morrow.

[At this point the bearings of the mid-glacier depôt are given, but need not be quoted.]

Tuesday, February 13.--Camp R. 27, beside Cloudmaker. Temp. -10°. Last night we all slept well
in spite of our grave anxieties. For my part these were increased by my visits outside the
tent, when I saw the sky gradually closing over and snow beginning to fall. By our ordinary
time for getting up it was dense all around us. We could see nothing, and we could only remain
in our sleeping-bags. At 8.30 I dimly made out the land of the Cloudmaker. At 9 we got up,
deciding to have tea, and with one biscuit, no pemmican, so as to leave our scanty remaining
meal for eventualities. We started marching, and at first had to wind our way through an awful
turmoil of broken ice, but in about an hour we hit an old moraine track, brown with dirt. Here
the surface was much smoother and improved rapidly. The fog still hung over all and we went
on for an hour, checking our bearings. Then the whole place got smoother and we turned outward
a little. Evans raised our hopes with a shout of depot ahead, but it proved to be a shadow
on the ice. Then suddenly Wilson saw the actual depot flag. It was an immense relief, and we
were soon in possession of our 3 1/2 days' food. The relief to all is inexpressible; needless
to say, we camped and had a meal.

Marching in the afternoon, I kept more to the left, and closed the mountain till we fell on
the stone moraines. Here Wilson detached himself and made a collection, whilst we pulled the
sledge on. We camped late, abreast the lower end of the mountain, and had nearly our usual
satisfying supper. Yesterday was the worst experience of the trip and gave a horrid feeling
of insecurity. Now we are right up, we must march. In future food must be worked so that we
do not run so short if the weather fails us. We mustn't get into a hole like this again. Greatly
relieved to find that both the other parties got through safely. Evans seems to have got mixed
up with pressures like ourselves. It promises to be a very fine day to-morrow. The valley is
gradually clearing. Bowers has had a very bad attack of snow blindness, and Wilson another
almost as bad. Evans has no power to assist with camping work.

Wednesday, February 14.--Lunch Temp. 0°; Supper Temp. -1°. A fine day with wind on and off
down the glacier, and we have done a fairly good march. We started a little late and pulled
on down the moraine. At first I thought of going right, but soon, luckily, changed my mind
and decided to follow the curving lines of the moraines. This course has brought us well out
on the glacier. Started on crampons; one hour after, hoisted sail; the combined efforts produced
only slow speed, partly due to the sandy snowdrifts similar to those on summit, partly to our
torn sledge runners. At lunch these were scraped and sand-papered. After lunch we got on snow,
with ice only occasionally showing through. A poor start, but the gradient and wind improving,
we did 6 1/2 miles before night camp.

