CHAPTER XXXV.

M. de Lauzun and Mademoiselle de Montpensier.--Marriage of the One and Passion of the Other.--The
King Settles a Match.--A Secret Union.--The King Sends M. de Lauzun to Pignerol.--The Life
He Leads There.--Mademoiselle's Liberality.--Strange Way of Acknowledging It.

They are forever talking about the coquetry of women; men also have their coquetry, but as
they show less grace and finesse than we do, they do not get half as much attention.

The Marquis de Lauzun, having one day, noticed a certain kindly feeling for him in the glances
of Mademoiselle, endeavoured to seem to her every day more fascinating and agreeable.  The
foolish Princess completely fell into the snare, and suddenly giving up her air of noble indifference,
which till then had made her life happy, she fell madly in love with a schemer who despised
and detested her.

Held back for some months by her pride, as also by the exigencies of etiquette, she only disclosed
her sentimental passion by glances and a mutual exchange of signs of approval; but at last
she was tired of self-restraint and martyrdom, and, detaining M. de Lauzun one day in a recess,
she placed her written offer of marriage in his hand.

The cunning Marquis feigned astonishment, pretending humbly to renounce such honour, while
increasing his wiles and fascinations; he even went so far as to shed tears, his most difficult
feat of all.

Mademoiselle de Montpensier, older than he by twelve or fourteen years, never suspected that
such a disparity of years was visible in her face. When one has been pretty, one imagines that
one is still so, and will forever remain so.  Plastered up and powdered, consumed by passion,
and above all, blinded by vanity, she fancied that Nature had to obey princes, and that, to
favour her, Time would stay his flight.

Though tired and bored with everything, Lauzun, the better to excite her passion, put on timid,
languid airs, like those of some lad fresh from school.  Quitting the embraces of some other
woman, he played the lonely, pensive, melancholy bachelor, the man absorbed by this sweet,
new mystery of love. There he saw the face of his lost mother, bright and smiling. There was pale and
sick and in his last days, but beautiful and young. She confided her troubles night and sorrows
of the day, and she, on waking, encouragement and affection sought to fulfill their duties.

In this way the child lived, as monitored by his mother, trying to please her in everything
as when he lived, and always taking care not to do anything that
would grieve her or make her angry.

Its content was pure look in the mirror and say:

- Mother, today
I was like you want me to be.

Said Father, after all, that the girl looked blameless in the mirror
every morning and night and it seemed like talking to him. Then he
asked the cause of this strange behavior.

He asked if, on the family coat-of-arms, the husband's coronet was to figure, or the wife's;
but, as she would not change her name, her arms, she decided, could remain as heretofore,--the
crown, the fleur-de-lis, and so forth.

He inquired if the children of the marriage would rank as princes, and she said that she saw
nothing to prevent this.  He also asked if he would be raised higher in the peerage, and might
look to being made a prince at last, and styled Highness as soon as the contract had been signed.

This caused some doubt and reflection.  "The King, my cousin," said Mademoiselle, "is somewhat
strict in matters of this sort.  He seems to think that the royal family is a new arch-saint,
at whom one may look only when prostrate in adoration; all contract therewith is absolutely
forbidden.  I begin to feel uneasy about this; yes, Lauzun, I have fears for our love and marriage."

"Are you, then, afraid?"  asked Lauzun, quite crestfallen.

"I knew how to point the Bastille cannon at the troops of the King," she replied; "but he was
very young then.  No matter, I will go and see him; if he is my King, I am his cousin; if he
has his crotchets, I have my love and my will.  He can't do anything, my dear Lauzun; I love
you as once he loved La Valliere, as to-day he loves Montespan; I am not afraid of him.  As
for the permission, I know our history by heart, and I will prove to him by a hundred examples
that, from the time of Charlemagne up to the present time, widows and daughters of kings have
married mere noblemen.  These nobleman may have been most meritorious,--I only know them from
history,--but not one of them was as worthy as you."

So saying, she asked for her fan, her gloves, and her horses, and attended by her grooms-in-waiting,
she went to the King in person.

The King listened to her from beginning to end, and then remarked, "You refused the Kings of
Denmark, Portugal, Spain, and England, and you wish to marry my captain of the guard, the Marquis
de Lauzun?"

"Yes, Sire, for I place him above all monarchs,--yourself alone excepted."

"Do you love him immensely?"

"More than I can possibly say; a thousand, a hundred thousand times more than myself."

"Do you think he is equally devoted to you?"--"That would be impossible," she tranquilly answered;
"but his love for me is delicate, tender; and such friendship suffices me."

"My cousin, in all that there is self-interest.  I entreat you to reflect.  The world, as you
know, is a mocking world; you want to excite universal derision and injure the respect which
is due to the place that I fill."

"Ah, Sire, do not wound me!  I fling myself at your feet.  Have compassion upon M. de Lauzun,
and pity my tears.  Do not exercise your power; let him be the consolation of my life; let
me marry him."

The King, no longer able to hide his disgust and impatience, said, "Cousin, you are now a good
forty-four years old; at that age you ought to be able to take care of yourself.  Spare me
all your grievances, and do what pleases you."

On leaving Mademoiselle, he came to my apartment and told me about all this nonsense.  I then
informed him of what I had heard by letter the day before.  Lauzun, while still carrying on
with the fastest ladies of the Court and the town, had just wheedled the Princess into making
him a present of twenty millions,--a most extravagant gift.

"This is too much!" exclaimed the King; and he at once caused a letter to be despatched to
Mademoiselle and her lover, telling them that their intimacy must cease, and that things must
go no farther.

But the audacious Lauzun found means to suborn a well-meaning simpleton of a priest, who married
them secretly the very same day.

The King's indignation and resentment may well be imagined.  He had his captain of the guard
arrested and sent as a prisoner to Pignerol.

On this occasion, M. de Lauzun complained bitterly of me; he invented the most absurd tales
about me, even saying that he had struck me in my own apartments, after taunting me to my face
with "our old intimacy."

That is false; he reproached me with nothing, for there was nothing to reproach.  Shortly after
the Princess's grand scene, he came and begged me to intercede on his behalf.  I only made
a sort of vague promise, and he knew well enough that, in the great world, a vague promise
is the same as a refusal. - Excuse the gentleman, I promised for today at seven in the evening. Ie, completed and ironed
a whole. Because the gentleman should be aware that my shop does not leave room without all budgerigars
and ringo ranges.

Such sorrowing and chagrin made her lose the little beauty that still remained to her; nothing
seemed more incongruous and ridiculous than to hear this elderly grand lady talking perpetually
about "her dearest darling, the prisoner."

At the time I write he is at Pignerol; his bad disposition is forever getting him into trouble.
She sends him lots of money unknown to the King, who generally knows everything.  All this
money he squanders or gambles away, and when funds are low, says, "The old lady will send us some."

CHAPTER XXXVI.

Hyde, the Chancellor.--Misfortune Not Always Misfortune.--Prince Comnenus.--The King at Petit-Bourg.--His
Incognito.--Who M. de Vivonne Really Was.

The castle of Petit-Bourg, of which the King made me a present, is situate on a height overlooking
the Seine, whence one may get the loveliest of views.  So pleasant did I find this charming
abode, that I repaired thither as often as possible, and stayed for five or six days. One balmy
summer night, I sat in my dressing-gown at the central balcony, watching the stars, as was
my wont, asking myself whether I should not be a thousand times happier if I should pass my
life in a retreat like this, and so have time to contemplate the glorious works of Nature,
and to prepare myself for that separation which sooner or later awaited me. Reason bade me
encourage such thoughts, yet my heart offered opposition thereto, urging that there was something
terrifying in solitude, most of all here, amid vast fields and meadows, and that, away from
the Court and all my friends, I should grow old, and death would take me before my time.  While
plunged in such thoughts, I suddenly heard the sound of a tocsin, and scanning the horizon,
I saw flames and smoke rising from some hamlet or country-house.  I rang for my servants, and
told them instantly to despatch horsemen to the scene of the catastrophe, and bring back news.

The messengers started off, and soon came back to say that the fire had broken out at the residence
of my lord Hyde, Chancellor of England, who was but lately convalescent.  They had seen him
lying upon a rug on the grass, some little distance from the burning mansion.  I forthwith
ordered my carriage to be sent for him, and charged my surgeon and secretary to invite him
to take shelter at my castle.

My lord gratefully accepted the invitation; he entered my room as the clock struck twelve.
As yet he could not tell the cause of the disaster, and in a calm, patriarchal manner observed,
"I am a man marked out for great misfortune.  God forbid, madame, that the mischance which
dogs my footsteps touch you also!"

"I cannot bear to see a fire," said I, in reply to the English nobleman, "for some dreadful
accident always results therefrom.  Yet, on the whole, they are of good augury, and I am sure,
my lord, that your health or your affairs will benefit by this accident."

Hearing me talk thus, my lord smiled.  He only took some slight refreshment,--a little soup,--and
heard me give orders for all my available servants to be sent to the scene of disaster, in
order to save all his furniture, and protect it as well.

After repeated expressions of his gratitude, he desired to withdraw, and retired to rest. 
Next day we learnt that the fire had been got under about one o'clock in the morning; one wing
only of the chateau had been destroyed, and the library, together with all the linen and plate,
was well-nigh intact.  Lord Hyde was very glad to hear the news.  They told him that all the
labourers living near had gladly come to the help of his servants and mine.  As his private
cashbox had been saved, owing to their vigilance and honesty, he promised to distribute its
contents among them when he returned.

Hardly had he got the words out, when they came to tell me that, on the highroad, just in front
of my gates, a carriage, bound for Paris, had the traces broken, and the travellers persons
of distinction begged the favour of my hospitality for a short while.  I consented with pleasure,
and they went back to take the travellers my answer.

"You see, madame," said the Chancellor, "my bad luck is contagious; no sooner have I set foot
in this enchanting abode than its atmosphere deteriorates.  A travelling-carriage passes rapidly
by in front of the gates, when lo! some invisible hand breaks it to pieces, and stops it from
proceeding any further."

Then I replied, "But how do you know, monsieur, that this mishap may not prove a most agreeable
adventure for the travellers to whom we are about to give shelter?  To begin with, they will
have the honour of making your acquaintance, and to meet with an illustrious person is no common
or frivolous event."

The servants announced the Princes Comnenus, who immediately entered the salon.  Though dressed
in travelling-costume, with embroidered gaiters, in the Greek fashion, it was easy to see what
they were.  The son, a lad of fourteen, was presented to me by his father, and when both were
seated, I introduced them to the Chancellor.

"The name is well known," observed the Prince, "even in Greece.  My lord married his daughter
to the heir-presumptive to the English throne, and England, being by nature ungrateful, has
distressed this worthy parent, while robbing him of all his possessions." Both are provided water from the ditch
real, which crossed the ride (and he still crosses) in front of the Botanical Garden station today
Main railway from Havana to Guines, and the trench was to shed their turbid waters at the
bottom of the harbor, next to the Arsenal. Much later, at the southern end del Prado, which was originally
the marble statue of Carlos III, Don Miguel Tacon moved in 1835 to his military tour, he built
at his own expense in 1837 the Conde de Villanueva the beautiful fountain in India or Havana.

The
new Prado consisted of a mile long, more or less at an angle almost
imperceptible 80 degrees, facing the square where the fountain rustic
rose Neptune.

We were four rows of common trees of the forest of Cuba, some with very old stout, and improper
all malls. Down the street from the center, the widest, could run four carriages paired, the two
sides, narrower, with a few seats of stone served for ordinary people, men only, who in the
days of gala feast formed in long lines along the promenade. Most of these, especially Sunday, consisted
of Spanish waiters employed in retail trade in the city government offices in the navy and army,
due to its quality singles and their occupations, could not use carriage and visit the Prado
in ordinary days. It also noted that at the time of ride, it was forbidden even through Prado
in rental car, and when a stranger she did out of ignorance of the rule or consent sergeant of dragoons
picket guard was there, was struck and excited general laughter from the public.


"But they are in rough-and-ready plight as well," I answered; "so your Majesties must mutually
excuse each other."

"Are you in fun or in earnest?" asked his Majesty.  "Have you really got some king stowed away
in one of your rooms?"

"Not a king, Sire, but an emperor,--the Emperor of Constantinople and Trebizond, accompanied
by the Prince Imperial, his son.  You shall see two Greek profiles of the best sort, two finely
cut noses, albeit hooked, and almond-shaped eyes, like those of Achilles and Agamemnon."

Then the King said, "Send for your groom of the chambers at once, and tell him to give orders
that my incognito be strictly observed.  You must introduce me to these dignitaries as your
brother, M. de Vivonne.  Under these conditions, I will join your party at table; otherwise,
I should be obliged to leave the castle immediately."

The King's wishes were promptly complied with; the footmen were let into the secret, and I
introduced "Monsieur de Vivonne" to my guests.

The talk, without being sparkling, was pleasant enough until dessert. When the men-servants
left us, it assumed a very different character. The King induced the Chancellor to converse,
and asked him if his exile were owing to the English monarch personally, or to some parliamentary
intrigue.

"King Charles," replied his lordship, "is a prince to gauge whose character requires long study.
Apparently, he is the very soul of candour, but no one is more deceitful than he.  He fawns
and smiles upon you when in his heart of hearts he despises and loathe you.  When the Duke
of York, unfortunately, became violently enamoured of my daughter, he did not conceal his attachment
from his brother, the King, and at last asked for his approval to join his fortunes to my daughter's,
when the King, without offering opposition, contented himself by pointing out the relative
distance between their rank and position; to which the Duke replied, 'But at one time you did
everything you possibly could to get Olympia Mancini, who was merely Mazarin's niece!'  And
King Charles, who could not deny this, left his brother complete liberty of action.

"As my daughter was far dearer and more precious to me than social grandeur, I begged the Duke
of York to find for himself a partner of exalted rank.  He gave way to despair, and spoke of
putting an end to his existence; in fact, he behaved as all lovers do whom passion touches
to madness; so this baleful marriage took place.  God is my witness that I opposed it, urged
thereto by wisdom, by modesty, and by foresight.  Now, as you see, from that cruel moment I
have been exiled to alien lands, robbed of the sight of my beloved child, who has been raised
to the rank of a princess, and whom I shall never see again.  Why did my sovereign not say
to me frankly, I do not like this marriage; you must oppose it, Chancellor, to please me?

"How different was his conduct from that of his cousin, the French King! Mademoiselle d'Orleans
wanted to make an unsuitable match; the King opposed it, as he had a right to do, and the marriage
did not take place."

My "brother," the King, smiled as he told his lordship he was right.

Prince Comnenus was of the same opinion, and, being expressly invited to do so, he briefly
recounted his adventures, and stated the object of his journey to Paris.

"The whole world," said he, "is aware of the great misfortunes of my family.  The Emperors
Andronicus and Michael Comnenus, driven from the throne of Constantinople, left their names
within the heart and memory of Greece; they had ruled the West with a gentle sceptre, and in
a people's grateful remembrance they had their reward.  My ancestors, their descendants, held
sway in Trebizond, a quicksand which gave way beneath their tread.  From adversity to adversity,
from country to country, we were finally driven to seclusion in the Isle of Candia, part of
the quondam Minos territory.  Venice had allowed Candia to fall before Mahomet's bloody sword.
Europe lost her bulwark, the Cross of the Saviour was thrown down, and the Candian Christians
have been massacred or forced to flee.  I have left in the hands of the conqueror my fields
and forests, my summer palace, my winter palace, and my gardens filled with the produce of
America, Asia, and Europe.  From this overwhelming disaster I managed to save my son; and as
my sole fortune I brought away with me the large jewels of Andronicus, his ivory and sapphire
sceptre, his scimitar of Lemnos, and his ancient gold crown, which once encircled Theseus's brow.

"These noble relics I shall present to the King of France.  They say that he is humane, generous,
fond of glory, and zealous in the cause of justice.  When before his now immovable throne he
sees laid down these last relics of an ancient race, perhaps he will be touched by so lamentable
a downfall, and will not suffer distress to trouble my last days, and darken the early years
of this my child."

During this speech I kept watching the King's face.  I saw that he was interested, then touched,
and at last was on the point of forgetting his incognito and of appearing in his true character.

"Prince," said he to the Greek traveller, "my duties and my devotion make it easy for me to
approach the King of France's person very closely. In four or five days he will be leaving
Fontainebleau for his palace at Saint Germain.  I will tell him without modification all that
I have just heard from you.  Without being either prophet or seer, I can guarantee that you
will be well received and cordially welcomed, receiving such benefits as kings are bound to
yield to kings.

"Madame, who respects and is interested in you, is desirous, I feel certain, for me to persuade
you to stay here until her departure; she enjoys royal favour, and it is my sister herself
who shall present you at Court.  You shall show her, you shall show us all, the golden crown
of Theseus, the sceptre of Adronicus, and this brow which I gaze upon and revere, for it deserves
a kingly diamond.

"As for you, my lord," said his Majesty to the English nobleman, "if the misfortune of last
night prove disastrous in more ways than one, pray wait for a while before you go back to the
smouldering ashes of a half-extinguished fire.  My sister takes pleasure in your company; indeed,
the Marquise is charmed to be able to entertain three such distinguished guests, and begs to
place her chateau at your disposal until such time as your own shall be restored.  We shall
speak of you to the King, and he will certainly endeavour to induce King Charles, his cousin,
to recall you to your native country."

Then, after saying one or two words to me in private, he bowed to the gentlemen and withdrew.
We went out on to the balcony to see him get into his coach, when, to the surprise and astonishment
of my guests, as the carriage passed along the avenue, about a hundred peasants, grouped near
the gateway, threw off their hats and cried, "Long live the King!"

Prince Comnenus and his son were inconsolable; I excused myself by saying that it was at the
express desire of our royal visitor, and my lord admitted that at last he recollected his features,
and recognised him by his grand and courtly address.

Before I end my tale, do not let me forget to say that the King strongly recommended Prince
Comnenus to the Republic of Genoa, and obtained for him considerable property in Corsica and
a handsome residence at Ajaccio. He accepted five or six beautiful jewels that had belonged
to Andronicus, and caused the sum of twelve hundred thousand francs to be paid to the young
Comnenus from his treasury.

CHAPTER XXXVII

The Universal Jubilee.--Court Preachers.--King David.--Madame de Montespan is Obliged to go
to Clagny.--Bossuet's Mission.--Mademoiselle de Mauleon.--An Enemy's Good Faith.

I do not desire to hold up to ridicule the rites of that religion in which I was born and bred.
Neither would I disparage its ancient usages, nor its far more modern laws.  All religions,
as I know, have their peculiarities, all nations their contradictions, but I must be suffered
to complain of the abuse sometimes made in our country of clerical and priestly authority.

A general jubilee was held soon after the birth of my second son, and among Christian nations
like ours, a jubilee is as if one said, "Now all statutes, divine and earthly, are repealed;
by means of certain formula recited, certain visits paid to the temples, certain acts of abstinence
practised here and there, all sins, misdemeanours, and crimes are forgiven, and their punishment
cancelled."  It is generally on the occasion of the proclamation of a new pontificate at Rome
that such great papal absolutions are extended over the whole universe.

The jubilee having been proclaimed in Paris, the Court preachers worked miracles.  They denounced
all social irregularities and friendships of which the Church disapproved.  The opening sermon
showed plainly that the orator's eloquence was pointed at myself.  The second preacher showed
even less restraint; he almost mentioned me by name.  The third ecclesiastic went beyond all
bounds, actually uttering the following words:

"Sire, when King David was still but a shepherd, a heifer was stolen from his flocks; David
made complaint to the patriarch of the land, when his heifer was restored to him, and the thief
was punished.

"When David came to the throne, he carried off his servant's wife, and as an excuse for such
an odious deed, he pleaded the young woman's extreme beauty.  The wretched servant besought
him to obey the voice, not of passion, but of justice, and the servant was disgraced and perished
miserably.  Oh, David, unhappy David!"

The King, who had found it hard to sit quiet and hear such insults, said to me that evening:

"Go to Clagny.  Let this stormy weather pass by.  When it is fine again, you must come back."

Having never run counter to the wishes of the father of my children, I acquiesced, and without
further delay gladly departed.

Next day, Madame de Montausier came to see me at my country-house; she told me of the general
rumour that was afloat at Court.  The news, said she, of my retirement had begun to get about;
three bishops had gone to congratulate the King, and these gentlemen had despatched couriers
to Paris to inform the heads of the various parishes, inviting them to write to the prince
sympathising references touching an event which God and all Christendom viewed with complete
satisfaction.

Madame de Montausier assured me that the King's bearing was fairly calm on the whole, and she
also added that he had granted an interview of half an hour at least to the Abbe Bossuet, who
had discoursed to him about me in a strain similar to that of the other clerics.

She was my sincere friend; she promised to come to Clagny every evening, driving thither incognito.

She had hardly been gone an hour, when my footman announced "Monsieur Bossuet, Bishop of Condom."

At the mention of this name, I felt momentarily inclined to refuse to see its owner; but I
conquered my disgust, and I did well.  The prelate, with his semi-clerical, semi-courtly air,
made me a low bow.  I calmly waited, so as to give him time to deliver his message.  The famous
rhetorician proceeded as follows:

"You know, madame, with what health-giving sacrifices the Church is now engaged.  The merits
of our Lord doubtless protect Christians at all times, but the Church has appointed times more
efficacious, ceremonies more useful, springs yet more abounding.  Thus it is that we now celebrate
the grand nine days of the jubilee.

"To this mystic pool herdsman and monarchs alike receive summons and admission.  The most Christian
King must, for his own sake, accomplish his own sanctification; his sanctification provides
for that of his subjects.

"Chosen by God to this royal priesthood, he comprehends the duties imposed upon him by such
noble office.  The passions of the heart are maladies from which man may recover, just as he
recovers from physical disease.  The physicians of the soul have lifted up their voice, have
taken sage counsel together; and I come to inform you of the monarch's miraculous recovery,
and at his request, I bring you this important and welcome news.

"For convalescents, greater care is required than for others; the King, and the whole of France,
beseech you, with my voice, to have respect and care for the convalescence of our monarch,
and I beg you, madame, to leave at once for Fontevrault."

"For Fontevrault?" I cried, without betraying my emotion.  "Fontevrault is near Poitiers; it
is too far away.  No, I would rather go to Petit-Bourg, near the forest of Fontainebleau."

"Fontainebleau is but eighteen leagues from the capital," he answered; "such proximity would
be dangerous.  I must insist upon Fontevrault, madame."

"But I cannot take my children to Fontevrault," I retorted; "the nuns, and the Abbess herself,
would never admit them.  You know better than I do that it is a nunnery."

"Your children," said he, "are not necessary to you; Madame de la Valliere managed to leave
here for good and all."

"Yes; and in forsaking them she committed a crime," I answered; "only ferocious-hearted persons
could have counselled her or commanded her to do so."  And saying this, I rose, and gave him
a glance of disdain.

He grew somewhat gentler in manner as he slowly went on, "His Majesty will take care of your
children; it behoves you to save their mother. And, in order to prove to you that I have not
come here of my own accord, but that, on the contrary, I am executing a formal command, here
is a letter of farewell addressed to you by the King."

I took the letter, which was couched in the following terms:

It is but right, madame, that on so solemn an occasion I should set an example myself.  I must
ask you henceforth to consider our intimacy entirely at an end.  You must retire to Fontevrault,
where Madame de Montemart will take care of you and afford you distraction by her charming
society.  Your children are in good hands; do not be in the least uneasy about them.  Farewell.
I wish you all the firmness and well-being possible.  LOUISON.

In the first flush of my indignation I was about to trample under foot so offensive a communication.
But the final phrase shocked me less than the others.

I read it over again, and understood that if the King recommended me to be firm, it was because
he needed to be firm himself.  I soon mastered my emotion, and looked at things in their real
light.  It was easy to see that sanctimonious fanatics had forced the King to act.  Bossuet
was not sanctimonious, but, to serve his own ends, proffered himself as spokesman and emissary,
being anxious to prove to his old colleagues that he was on the side of what they styled moral
conduct and good example.

For a while I walked up and down my salon; but the least exertion fatigues me.  I resumed my
armchair or my settee, leaving the man there like a sort of messenger, whom it was not necessary
to treat with any respect.  He was bold, and asked me for a definite answer which he could
take back to his Majesty.  I stared hard at him for about a minute, and then said: "My Lord
Bishop of Condom, the clerics who have been advising the King are very pleased that he should
set an example to his people of self-sacrifice.  I am of their opinion; I think as they do,
as you do, as the Pope does; but feeling convinced that to us, the innocent sheep, the shepherds
ought first to show an example, I will consent to break off my relationship with his Majesty
when you, M. de Condom, shall have broken off your intimacy with Mademoiselle de Mauleon des
Vieux!"

By a retort of this kind I admit that I hoped greatly to embarrass the Bishop, and enjoy seeing
his face redden with confusion.  But he was nowise disconcerted, and I confess to-day that
this circumstance proved to me that there was but little truth in the rumours that were current
with regard to this subject.

"Mademoiselle de Mauleon!" said he, smiling half-bitterly, half-pityingly.  "Surely, madame,
your grief makes you forget what you say. Everybody knows that she is an acquaintance of my
youth, and that, since that time, having confidence in my doctrines and my counsel, she wished
to have me as spiritual monitor and guide.  How can you institute a comparison between such
a relationship and your own?"  Then, after walking up and down for a moment, as if endeavouring
to regain his self-possession, he continued:

"However, I shall not insist further; it was signally foolish of me to speak in the name of
an earthly king, when I should have invoked that of the King of Heaven.  I have received an
insulting answer.  So be it.

"Farewell, madame.  I leave you to your own conscience, which, seemingly, is so tranquil that
I blame myself for having sought to disturb it."

With these words he departed, leaving me much amazed at the patience with which a man, known
to be so arrogant and haughty, had received such an onslaught upon his private life and reputation.

I need scarcely say that, next day, the species of pastoral letter which my lords the Bishops
of Aleth, Orleans, Soissons, and Condom had dictated to the King was succeeded by another letter,
which he had dictated himself, and by which my love for him was solaced and assured.

He begged me to wait patiently for a few days, and this arrangement served my purpose very
well.  I thought it most amusing that the King should have commissioned M. de Bossuet to deliver
this second missive, and I believe I said as much to certain persons, which perhaps gave rise
to a rumour that he actually brought me love-letters from the King. But the purveyors of such
gossip could surely know nothing of Bossuet's inflexible principles, and of the subtlety of
his policy.  He was well aware that by lending himself to such amenities he would lose caste
morally with the King, and that if by his loyalty he had won royal attachment and regard, all
this would have been irretrievably lost. Thus M. de Bossuet was of those who say, "Hate me,
but fear me," rather than of those who strive to be loved.  Such people know that friendships
are generally frail and transient, and that esteem lasts longer and leads further.  He never
interfered again with my affairs, nor did I with his; I got my way, and he is still where he was.

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

Madame de Montespan Back at Court.--Her Friends.--Her Enemies.--Edifying Conversions.--The
Archbishop of Paris.

Eight days after the conclusion of the jubilee I returned to Versailles. The King received
me with every mark of sincere friendship; my friends came in crowds to my apartments; my enemies
left their names with my Swiss servant, and in chapel they put back my seat, chairs, and footstools
in their usual place.

Madame de Maintenon had twice sent my children to Clagny with the under- governess; but she
did not come herself, which greatly inconvenienced me.  I complained to her about this, and
she assured me the King had dissuaded her from visiting me, "so as to put curious folk off
the scent;" and when I told her of my interview with M. de Bossuet, she neatly avoided being
mixed up in the matter by omitting to blame anybody.  The most licentious women, so she told
me, had distinguished themselves by pious exercises during the observance of the jubilee. She
informed me that the Comtesse de Soissons, the Princesse de Monaco, Madame de Soubise, and
five or six virtuous dames of this type, had given gold, silver, and enamelled lamps to the
most notable churches of the capital.  The notorious Duchesse de Longueville talked of having
her own tomb constructed in a Carmelite chapel.  Six leaders of fashion had forsworn rouge,
and Madame d'Humieres had given up gambling.  As for my lord the Archbishop of Paris, he had
not changed his way of life a jot, either for the better or for the worse.

[The splendid Chateau de Clagny (since demolished) was situated on the beautiful country surrounding
Versailles, near the wood of Millers d'Avrai.--EDITOR's NOTE.]

CHAPTER XXXIX.

Attempted Abduction.--The Marquise Procures a Bodyguard.--Her Reasons for So Doing.--Geography
and Morals.

The youthful Marquis d'Antin--my son--was growing up; the King showed him the most flattering
signs of his attachment, and as the child had lived only with me, he dreaded his father's violent
temper, of which he had often heard me speak.  In order to have the custody of his son, the
Marquis de Montespan had appealed to Parliament; but partisans of the King had shelved the
matter, which, though ever in abeyance, was still pending.  I had my son educated under my
care, being sure of the tender attachment that would spring up between himself and the princes,
his brothers.  At the Montespan chateau, I admit, he would have learned to ride an unbroken
horse, as well as to shoot hares, partridges, and big game; he would also have learned to talk
loud, to use bad language, to babble about his pedigree, while ignorant of its history or its
crest; in fine, he would have learned to despise his mother, and probably to hate her.  Educated
under my eyes, almost on the King's lap, he soon learned the customs of the Court and all that
a well-born gentleman should know. He will be made Duc d'Antin, I have the King's word for
it,--and his mien and address, which fortunately sort well with that which Fate holds in store
for him, entitle him to rank with all that is most exalted at Court.

The Procureur-General caused a man from Barn to be arrested, who had come to abduct my son.
This individual, half-Spanish and half-French, was detained in the Paris prisons, and I was
left in ignorance of the matter. It was imprudent not to tell me, and almost occasioned a serious
mishap.

One day I was returning from the neighbourhood of Etampes with only my son, his tutor, and
my physician in the carriage.  On reaching a steep incline, where the brake should be put on,
my servants imprudently neglected to do this, and I felt that we were burning the roadway in
our descent.  Such recklessness made me uneasy, when suddenly twelve horsemen rode headlong
at us, and sought to stop the postilions.  My six horses were new ones and very fresh; they
galloped along at breakneck speed. Our pursuers fired at the coachman, but missed him, and
the report of a pistol terrified the horses yet further.  They redoubled their speed.  We gave
ourselves up for lost, as an accident of some sort seemed bound to ensue, when suddenly my
carriage reached the courtyard of an inn, where we obtained help.

Baulked of their prey, the horsemen turned about and rode away.  They had been noticed the
day before, hanging about and asking for Madame de Montespan.

We stayed that night at the inn, and next day, provided with a stout escort, we reached Saint
Germain.

The King regretted not having provided against similar attempts.  He rewarded my postilions
for their neglect to use the brake (a neglect which, at first, I was going to punish), saying
to me, "If they had put the brake on, you would have been captured and whisked off to the Pyrenees.
Your husband is never going to give in!"

"Such a disagreeable surprise," added he, "shall not occur again. Henceforth you shall not
travel without an adequate escort.  In future, you shall have a guard of honour, like the Queen
and myself."  I had long wished for this privilege, and I warmly thanked his Majesty.

Nevertheless, people chose to put a completely false construction upon so simple an innovation,
and my sentiments in the matter were wholly misunderstood.  It was thought that vanity had
prompted me to endeavour to put myself on a level with the Queen, and this worthy princess
was herself somewhat nettled thereat.  God is my witness that, from mere motives of prudence,
this unusual arrangement had to be made, and I entirely agreed to it.  After all, if the Infanta
of Spain gave birth to the Dauphin, Athenais de Mortemart is the mother of several princes.

In France, a Catholic realm, for the King to have a second wife is considered superfluous by
the timorous and shrivelled-brained.  In Constantinople, Alexandria, and Ispahan, I should
have met with only homage, veneration, respect.  Errors of a purely geographical nature are
not those which cause me alarm; to have brought into the world so perfect a being as the Duc
du Maine will never, as I take it, incur blame at the tribunal of Almighty God.

Mademoiselle de Nantes, his charming sister, has from her cradle been destined to belong to
one of the royal branches.  Mademoiselle de Blois will also become the mother of several Bourbon
princes; I have good grounds for cherishing such flattering hopes.

The little Comte de Toulouse already bids fair to be a worthy successor to M. du Maine.  He
has the same grace of manner, and frank, distinguished mien.

When all these princes possess their several escorts, it will seem passing strange that their
mother alone should not have any.  That is my opinion, and it is shared by all people of sense.

CHAPTER XL.

Osmin, the Little Moor.--He Sets the Fashion.--The Queen Has a Black Baby.--Osmin is Dismissed.

I have already told how the envoys of the King of Arda, an African prince, gave to the Queen
a nice little blackamoor, as a toy and pet. This Moor, aged about ten or twelve years, was
only twenty-seven inches in height, and the King of Arda declared that, being quite unique,
the boy would never grow to be taller than three feet.

The Queen instantly took a great fancy to this black creature.  Sometimes he gambolled about
and turned somersaults on her carpet like a kitten, or frolicked about on the bureau, the sofa,
and even on the Queen's lap.

As she passed from one room to another, he used to hold up her train, and delighted to catch
hold of it and so make the Queen stop short suddenly, or else to cover his head and face with
it, for mischief, to make the courtiers laugh.

He was arrayed in regular African costume, wearing handsome bracelets, armlets, a necklace
ablaze with jewels, and a splendid turban.  Wishing to show myself agreeable, I gave him a
superb aigrette of rubies and diamonds; I was always sorry afterwards that I did so.

The King could never put up with this little dwarf, albeit his features were comely enough.
To begin with, he thought him too familiar, and never even answered him when the dwarf dared
to address him.

Following the fashion set by her Majesty, all the Court ladies wanted to have little blackamoors
to follow them about, set off their white complexions, and hold up their cloaks or their trains.
Thus it came that Mignard, Le Bourdon, and other painters of the aristocracy, used to introduce
negro boys into all their large portraits.  It was a mode, a mania; but so absurd a fashion
soon had to disappear after the mishap of which I am about to tell.

The Queen being pregnant, public prayers were offered up for her according to custom, and her
Majesty was forever saying: "My pregnancy this time is different from preceding ones.  I am
a prey to nausea and strange whims; I have never felt like this before.  If, for propriety's
sake, I did not restrain myself, I should now dearly like to be turning somersaults on the
carpet, like little Osmin.  He eats green fruit and raw game; that is what I should like to
do, too.  I should like to--"

"Oh, madame, you frighten us!"  exclaimed the King.  "Don't let all those whimsies trouble
you further, or you will give birth to some monstrosity, some freak of nature."  His Majesty
was a true prophet.  The Queen was delivered of a fine little girl, black as ink from head
to foot.  They did not tell her this at once, fearing a catastrophe, but persuaded her to go
to sleep, saying that the child had been taken away to be christened.

The physicians met in one room, the bishops and chaplains in another. One prelate was opposed
to baptising the infant; another only agreed to this upon certain conditions.  The majority
decided that it should be baptised without the name of father or mother, and such suppression
was unanimously advocated.

The little thing, despite its swarthy hue, was most beautifully made; its features bore none
of those marks peculiar to people of colour.

It was sent away to the Gisors district to be suckled as a negro's daughter, and the Gazette
de France contained an announcement to the effect that the royal infant had died, after having
been baptised by the chaplains.

[This daughter of the Queen lived, and was obliged to enter a Benedictine nunnery at Moret.
Her portrait is to be seen in the Sainte Genevieve Library of Henri IV.'s College, where it
hangs in the winter saloon.--EDITOR'S NOTE.]

The little African was sent away, as may well be imagined; and the Queen admitted that, one
day soon after she was pregnant, he had hidden himself behind a piece of furniture and suddenly
jumped out upon her to give her a fright.  In this he was but too successful.

The Court ladies no longer dared come near the Queen attended by their little blackamoors.
These, however, they kept for a while longer, as if they were mere nick-hacks or ornaments;
in Paris they were still to be seen in public.  But the ladies' husbands at last got wind of
the tale, when all the little negroes disappeared.

CHAPTER XLI.

Monsieur's Second Marriage.--Princess Palatine.--The Court Turnspit.--A Woman's Hatred.--The
King's Mistress on a Par with the First Prince of the Blood.--She Gives His Wife a Lesson.

In order to keep up appearances at his Palais Royal, Monsieur besought the King to consent
to his remarriage after the usual term of mourning was at an end.

"Whom have you in view?"  asked his brother.  He replied that he proposed to wed Mademoiselle--the
grande Mademoiselle de Montpensier--on account of her enormous wealth!

Just then Mademoiselle was head over ears in love with Lauzun.  She sent the Prince about his
business, as I believe I have already stated. Moreover, she remarked: "You had the loveliest
wife in all Europe,--young, charming, a veritable picture.  You might have seen to it that
she was not poisoned; in that case you would not now be a widower. As it is not likely that
I should ever come to terms with your favourites, I shall never be anything else to you but
a cousin, and I shall endeavour not to die until the proper time; that is, when it shall please
God to take me. You can repeat this speech, word for word, to your precious Marquis d'Effiat
and Messieurs de Remecourt and de Lorraine. They have no access to my kitchens; I am not afraid
of them."

This answer amused the King not a little, and he said to me: "I was told that the Palatine
of Bavaria's daughter is extremely ugly and ill-bred; consequently, she is capable of keeping
Monsieur in check.  Through one of my Rhenish allies, I will make proposals to her father for
her hand. As soon as a reply comes, I will show my brother a portrait of some sort; it will
be all the same to him; he will accept her."

Soon afterwards this marriage took place.  Charlotte Elizabeth of Bavaria, though aware of
the sort of death that her predecessor died, agreed to marry Monsieur.  Had she not been lucky
enough to make this grand match, her extreme ugliness would assuredly have doomed her to celibacy,
even in Bavaria and in Germany.  It is surely not allowable to come into the world with such
a face and form, such a voice, such eyes, such hands, and such feet, as this singular princess
displayed.  The Court, still mindful of the sweetness, grace, and charm of Henrietta of England,
could not contemplate without horror and disgust the fearful caricature I have just described.
Young pregnant women--after the Queen's unfortunate experience--were afraid to look at the
Princess Palatine, and wished to be confined before they reappeared at Court.

As for herself, armed with robust, philosophical notions, and a complete set of Northern nerves,
she was in no way disconcerted at the effect her presence produced.  She even had the good
sense to appear indifferent to all the raillery she provoked, and said to the King:

"Sire, to my mind you are one of the handsomest men in the world, and with few exceptions,
your Court appears to me perfectly fitted for you. I have come but scantily equipped to such
an assemblage.  Fortunately, I am neither jealous nor a coquette, and I shall win pardon for
my plainness, I myself being the first to make merry at it."

"You put us completely at our ease," replied the King, who had not even the courage to be gallant.
"I must thank you on behalf of these ladies for your candour and wit."  Ten or twelve of us
began to titter at this speech of hers.  The Robust Lady never forgave those who laughed.

Directly she arrived, she singled me out as the object of her ponderous Palatine sarcasms.
She exaggerated my style of dress, my ways and habits.  She thought to make fun of my little
spaniels by causing herself to be followed, even into the King's presence-chamber, by a large
turnspit, which in mockery she called by the name of my favourite dog.

When I had had my hair dressed, ornamented with quantities of little curls, diamonds, and jewelled
pins, she had the impertinence to appear at Court wearing a huge wig, a grotesque travesty
of my coiffure.  I was told of it.  I entered the King's apartment without deigning to salute
Madame, or even to look at her.

I had also been told that, in society, she referred to me as "the Montespan woman."  I met
her one day in company with a good many other people, and said to her:

"Madame, you managed to give up your religion in order to marry a French prince; you might
just as well have left behind your gross Palatine vulgarity also.  I have the honour to inform
you that, in the exalted society to which you have been admitted, one can no more say 'the
Montespan woman,' than one can say 'the Orleans woman.'  I have never offended you in the slightest
degree, and I fail to see why I should have been chosen as the favoured object of your vulgar
insults."

She blushed, and ventured to inform me that this way of expressing herself was a turn of speech
taken from her own native language, and that by saying "the," as a matter of course "Marquise"
was understood.

"No, madame," I said, without appearing irritated; "in Paris, such an excuse as that is quite
inadmissible, and since you associate with turnspits, pray ask your cooks, and they will tell you."

Fearing to quarrel with the King, she was obliged to be more careful, but to change one's disposition
is impossible, and she has loathed and insulted me ever since.  Her husband, who himself probably
taught her to do so, one day tried to make apologies for what he ruefully termed her reprehensible
conduct.  "There, there, it doesn't matter," I said to him; "it is easier to offend me than
to deceive me.  Allow me to quote to you the speech of Mademoiselle de Montpensier, 'You had
a charming and accomplished wife, you ought to have prevented her from being poisoned, and
then we should not have had this hag at Court.'"

CHAPTER XLII.

Madame de Montespan's Father-confessor.--He Alters His Opinion.--Madame de Maintenon Is Consulted.--A
General on Theology.--A Country Priest.--The Marquise Postpones Her Repentance and Her Absolution.

My father-confessor, who since my arrival at Court had never vexed or thwarted me, suddenly
altered his whole manner towards me, from which I readily concluded that the Queen had got
hold of him.  This priest, of gentle, easy-going, kindly nature, never spoke to me except in
a tone of discontent and reproach.  He sought to induce me to leave the King there and then,
and retire to some remote chateau.  Seeing that he was intriguing, and had, so to speak, taken
up his position, like a woman of experience I took up mine as well, and politely dismissed
him, at which he was somewhat surprised.  In matters of religion, Madame de Maintenon, who
understands such things, was my usual mentor.  I told her that I was disheartened, and should
not go to confession again for ever so long. She was shocked at my resolve, and strove all
she could to make me change my mind and endeavour to lead me back into the right way.

She forever kept repeating her favourite argument, saying, "Good gracious! suppose you should
die in that state!"

I replied that it was not my fault, as I had never ceased to obey the precepts of the Holy
Church.  "It was my old father-confessor," said I, "the Canon of Saint Thomas du Louvre, who
had harshly refused to confess me."

"What he does," replied she, "is solely for your own good."

"But if he has only my well-being in view," I quickly retorted, "why did not he think of this
at first?  It would have been far better to have stopped me at the outset, instead of letting
me calmly proceed upon my career.  He is obeying the Queen's orders, or else those of that
Abbe Bossuet de Mauleon, who no longer dares attack me to my face."

As we thus talked, the Duc de Vivonne came into my room.  Learning the topic of our discussion,
he spoke as follows: "I should not be general of the King's Galleys and a soldier at heart
and by profession if my opinion in this matter were other than it is.  I have attentively read
controversies on this point, and have seen it conclusively proved that our kings never kept
a confessor at Court.  Among these kings, too, there were most holy, most saintly people, and--"

"Then, what do you conclude from that, Duke?"  asked Madame de Maintenon.

"Why, that Madame will do well to respect his Majesty the King as her father-confessor."

"Oh, Duke, you shock me!  What dreadful advice, to be sure!"  cried the governess.

"I have not the least wish to shock you, madame; but my veneration for D'Aubigne--your illustrious
grandfather--is too great to let me think that he is among the damned, and he never attended
confession at all."

[Theodore Agrippa, Baron d'Aubigne, lieutenant-general in the army of Henri IV.  He persevered
in Calvinism after the recantation of the King.--EDITOR'S NOTE.]

"Eternity hides that secret from us," replied Madame de Maintenon. "Each day I pray to God
to have mercy upon my poor grandfather; if I thought he were among the saved, I should never
be at pains to do this."

"Bah, madame! let's talk like sensible, straightforward people," quoth the General.  "The reverend
Pere de la Chaise--one of the Jesuit oracles--gives the King absolution every year, and authorises
him to receive the Holy Sacrament at Easter.  If the King's confessor--thorough priest as he
is--pardons his intimacy with madame, here, how comes it that the other cleric won't tolerate
madame's intimacy with the King?  On a point of such importance as this, the two confessors
ought really to come to some agreement, or else, as the Jesuits have such a tremendous reputation,
the Marquise is entitled to side with them."

Hemmed in thus, Madame de Maintenon remarked "that the morals of Jesuits and lax casuists had
never been hers," and she advised me to choose a confessor far removed from the Court and its
intrigues.

The next day she mentioned a certain village priest to me, uninfluenced by anybody, and whose
primitive simplicity caused him to be looked upon as a saint.

I submitted, and ingenuously went to confess myself to this wonderful man; his great goodness
did not prevent him from rallying me about the elegance of my costume, and the perfume of my
gloves, and my hair.  He insisted upon knowing my name, and on learning it, flew into a passion.
I suppress the details of his disagreeable propositions.  Seated sideways in his confessional,
he stamped on the floor, abused me, and spoke disrespectfully of the King.  I could not stand
such scandalous behaviour for long; and, wearing my veil down, I got into my coach, being thoroughly
determined that I would take a good long holiday.  M. de Vivonne soundly rated me for such
cowardice, as he called it, while Madame de Maintenon offered me her curate-in-chief, or else
the Abbe Gobelin.

But, for the time being, I determined to keep to my plan of not going to confession, strengthened
in such resolve by my brother Vivonne's good sense, and the attitude of the King's Jesuit confessor,
who had a great reputation and knew what he was about.

CHAPTER XLIII. 

In effect, brought the brandy, and each drank two glasses. The opinions were divided. There Chinchón
who voted and who voted for Villalegre there, but as everyone drank at least second glass
of brandy which he thought best, the result came to be that went to three or four cups apiece.

Everything
was then joy and mutual affection, and proved that both were altruistic
spirits and were endowed with equal spirit sociological.

Then the courtier D. Raymond, thanks to several clear indications, he soon convinced that under
Dona Marcela was not anything to write home or independently, or without autonomy.

A few days later, he returned D. Raimundo the court, now convinced that the innocent idylls no
easier than it in the most rustic and remote locations. In court he forgot Dona Marcela soon, took
aim at excelling as politician, managed to escape deputy and who says there is a man of great promise,
it will become Director General, Ambassador or Minister, and after the Spanish government, or when
the papal grant him the title Conde de Bevel or Hormabella.

Doña Marcela, recognizing that Villalegre is petty grounds for their expansions and purposes Price has
gone to his country, and from Tarifa past Gibraltar, which may recapture right. The truth is that
as the Scipio and other heroes of ancient Rome, surnamed Africanus, the Numantino, the British
and Germanic, as the city that had taken or as a nation that had
subjugated her, still never be the sun in Tarifa, the surname of Gibraltar,
and as such is known and held in the five parts of the world.

Rosita has distinguished itself and has prospered since it is less independent, but not asleep
into the straw. Keep up the tobacco and snuff buy, even those who did not smoke before, and smoke,
and Tabacalera Villalegre done in double or triple business. By buying stamps villalegrino mail
is not to write more letters today he used to write. And finally, Rosita sells both stamped
paper which is wonderful.

To explain it rationally, there are those who is considered certain that she does not receive or accept
any loving statement if it is not written in folios of the peseta.

Dona
Ramona and Currito meantime, having become a teacher, are becoming
more adventurous and prosper corambres making and selling a lot. All did him the justice to affirm that while
there he behaved like a hero.  When the fortress had to capitulate, and Candia was lost to
the Christians forever, our officers returned to France.  Madame was still alive when the young
Count rejoined his family.  He met the Princess once or twice in society, without being able
to approach her person, or say a single word to her.

Soon afterwards, she gave birth to a daughter.  A few days later, certain monsters took her
life by giving her poison.  This dreadful event made such an impression upon the poor Comte
de Guiche, that for a long while he lost his gaiety, youth, good looks, and to a certain extent,
his reason.  After yielding to violent despair, he was possessed with rash ideas of vengeance.
The Marechal de Grammont had to send him away to one of his estates, for the Count talked of
attacking and of killing, without further ado, the Marquis d'Effiat, M. de Remecourt, the Prince's
intendant, named Morel, and even the Duc d'Orleans himself.

[Morel subsequently admitted his guilt in the matter of Madame's death, as well as the commission
of other corresponding crimes.  See the Letters of Charlotte, the Princess Palatine.--EDITOR'S
NOTE.]

His intense agitation was succeeded by profound melancholy, stupor closely allied to insanity
or death.

One evening, the Comte de Guiche went to the Abbey Church of Saint Denis. He hid himself here,
to avoid being watched, and when the huge nave was closed, and all the attendants had left,
he rushed forward and flung himself at full length upon the tombstone which covers the vast
royal vault.  By the flickering light of the lamps, he mourned the passing hence of so accomplished
a woman, murdered in the flower of her youth. He called her by name, telling her once more
of his deep and fervent love. Next day, he wandered about in great pain, gloomy and inconsolable.

One day he came to see me at Clagny, and talked in a hopeless, desolate way about our dear
one.  He told me that neither glory nor ambition nor voluptuous pleasures could ever allure
him or prove soothing to his soul. He assured me that life was a burden to him,--a burden that
religion alone prevented him from relinquishing, and that he was determined to shut himself
up in La Trappe or in some such wild, deserted place.

I sought to dissuade him from such a project, which could only be the cause of grief and consternation
to his relatives.  He pretended to yield to my entreaties, but the next night he left home
and disappeared.

At length he came back.  Luckily, the Trappist Abbe de Ranch wished to take away from him the
portrait on enamel of Henrietta of England, so as to break it in pieces before his eyes.  So
indignant was the Count that he was upon the point of giving the hermit a thrashing.  He fled
in disgust from the monastery, and this fresh annoyance served, in some degree, to assuage
his grief.  Life's daily occupations, the excitements of society, the continual care shown
towards him by his relatives, youth, above all, and Time, the irresistible healer, at last
served to soothe a sorrow which, had it lasted longer, would have been more disastrous in its
results.

The Comte de Guiche consented to marry a wife to whom he was but slightly attached, and who
is quite content with him, praising his good qualities and all his actions.

CHAPTER XLIV.

Mexica.--Philippa.--Molina.--The Queen's Jester.

In marrying Maria Theresa, Infanta of Spain, the King had made an advantageous match from a
political point of view.  For through the Infanta he had rights with regard to Flanders; she
also provided him with eventual claims upon Spain itself, together with Mexico and Peru. But
from a personal and social point of view, the King could not have contracted a more miserable
alliance.  The Infanta, almost wholly uneducated, had not even such intellectual resources
as a position such as hers certainly required, where personal risk was perpetual, where authority
had to be maintained by charming manners, and respect for power ensured by elevation of tone
and sentiment, which checks the indiscreet, and imbues everybody with the spirit of consideration
and reverence.

Maria Theresa, though a king's daughter, made no more effect at Court than if she had been
a mere middle-class person.  The King, in fact, by his considerateness, splendour, and glory,
served to support her dignity. He hoped and even desired that she should be held in honour,
partly for her own sake, in a great measure for his.  But as soon as she started upon some
argument or narration where force of intellect was needed, she always seemed bewildered, and
he soon interrupted her either by finishing the tale himself, or by changing the conversation.
This he did good-naturedly and with much tact, so that the Queen, instead of taking offence,
was pleased to be under such an obligation to him.  From such a wife this prince could not
look to have sons of remarkable talent or intellect, for that would have been nothing short
of a miracle.  And thus the little Dauphin showed none of those signs of intelligence which
the most ordinary commonplace children usually display.  When the Queen heard courtiers repeat
some of the droll, witty sayings of the Comte de Vegin, or the Duc du Maine, she reddened with
jealousy, and remarked, "Everybody goes into ecstasies about those children, while Monsieur
le Dauphin is never even mentioned."

She had brought with her from Spain that Donna Silvia Molina, of whom I have already spoken,
and who had got complete control over her character. Instead of tranquillising her, and so
making her happy, Donna Silvia thought to become more entertaining, and above all, more necessary
to her, by gossiping to her about the King's amours.  She ferreted out all the secret details,
all the petty circumstances, and with such dangerous material troubled the mind and destroyed
the repose of her mistress, who wept unceasingly, and became visibly changed.

La Molina, enriched and almost wealthy, was sent back to Spain, much to the grief of Maria
Theresa, who for several days after her departure could neither eat nor sleep.

At the same time, the King got rid of that little she-dwarf, named Mexica, in whose insufferable
talk and insufferable presence the Queen took delight.  But the sly little wretch escaped during
the journey, and managed to get back to the princess again, hidden in some box or basket. The
Queen was highly delighted to see her again; she pampered her secretly in her private cabinet
with the utmost mystery, giving up every moment that she could spare.

One day, by way of a short cut, the King was passing through the Queen's closet, when he heard
the sound of coughing in one of the cupboards. Turning back, he flung it open, where, huddled
up in great confusion, he found Mexica.

"What!" cried his Majesty; "so you are back again?  When and how did you come?"

In a feeble voice Mexica answered, "Sire, please don't send me away from the Queen any more,
and she will never complain again about Madame de Montespan."

The King laughed at this speech, and then came and repeated it to me.  I laughed heartily,
too, and such a treaty of peace seemed to contain queer compensation clauses: Madame de Montespan
and Mexica were mutually bound over to support each other; the spectacle was vastly droll, I vow.

Besides her little dwarf, the Queen had a fool named Tricominy.  This quaint person was permitted
to utter everywhere and to everybody in incoherent fashion the pseudo home-truths that passed
through his head. One day he went up to the grande Mademoiselle de Montpensier, and said to
her before everybody, "Since you are so anxious to get married, marry me; then that will be
a man-fool and a woman-fool."  The Princess tried to hit him, and he took refuge behind the
Queen's chair.

Another time, to M. Letellier, Louvois's brother and Archbishop of Rheims, he said, "Monseigneur,
do let me ascend the pulpit in your Cathedral, and I will preach modesty and humanity to you."
When the little Duc d'Anjou, that pretty, charming child, died of suppressed measles, the Queen
was inconsolable, and the King, good father that he is, was weeping for the little fellow,
for he promised much.  Says Tricominy, "They're weeping just as if princes had not got to die
like anybody else.  M. d'Anjou was no better made than I am, nor of better stuff."

Tricominy was dismissed, because it was plain that his madness took a somewhat eccentric turn;
that, in fact, he was not fool enough for his place.

The Queen had still a Spanish girl named Philippa, to whom she was much attached, and who deserved
such flattering attachment.  Born in the Escurial Palace, Philippa had been found one night
in a pretty cradle at the base of one of the pillars.  The palace guards informed King Philip,
who adopted the child and brought it up, since it had been foisted upon him as his daughter.
He grew fond of the girl, and on coming to Saint Jean de Luz to marry the Infanta to his nephew
the King, he made them a present of Philippa, and begged them both to be very good to her.
In this amiable Spanish girl, the Infanta recognised a sister.  She knew she was an illegitimate
daughter of King Philip and one of the palace ladies.

When Molina left the Court, she did everything on earth to induce Philippa to return with her
to Spain, but the girl was sincerely attached to the Queen, who, holding her in a long embrace,
promised to find her a wealthy husband if she would stay.  However, the Queen only gave her
as husband the Chevalier de Huze, her cloak-bearer, so as to keep the girl about her person
and to be intimate with her daily.  Philippa played the mandolin and the guitar to perfection;
she, also sang and danced with consummate grace.

CHAPTER XLV.

Le Bouthilier de Ranch, Abbe de la Trappe.

The Abbe le Bouthilier de Rance,--son of the secretary of state, Le Bouthilier de Chavigny,--after
having scandalised Court and town by his public gallantries, lost his mistress, a lady possessed
of a very great name and of no less great beauty.  His grief bordered upon despair; he forsook
the world, gave away or sold his belongings, and went and shut himself up in his Abbey of La
Trappe, the only benefice which he had retained.  This most ancient monastery was of the Saint
Bernard Order, with white clothing.  The edifice spacious, yet somewhat dilapidated was situated
on the borders of Normandy, in a wild, gloomy valley exposed to fog and frost.

The Abbe found in this a place exactly suitable to his plan, which was to effect reforms of
austere character and contrary to nature.  He convened his monks, who were amazed at his arrival
and residence; he soundly rated them for the scandalous laxity of their conduct, and having
reminded them of all the obligations of their office, he informed them of his new regulations,
the nature of which made them tremble.  He proposed nothing less than to condemn them to daily
manual labour, the tillage of the soil, the performance of menial household duties; and to
this he added the practices of immoderate fasting, perpetual silence, downcast glances, veiled
countenances, the renouncement of all social ties, and all instructive or entertaining literature.
In short, he advocated sleeping all together on the bare floor of an ice-cold dormitory, the
continual contemplation of death, the dreadful obligation of digging, while alive, one's own
grave every day with one's own hands, and thus, in imagination, burying oneself therein before
being at rest there for ever.

As laws so foolish and so tyrannical were read out to them, the worthy monks--all of them of
different character and age openly expressed their discontent.  The Abbe de Rance allowed them
to go and get pleasure in other monasteries, and contrived to collect around him youths whom
it was easy to delude, and a few elderly misanthropes; with these he formed his doleful wailing
flock.

As he loved notoriety in everything, he had various views of his monastery engraved, and pictures
representing the daily pursuits of his laborious community.  Such pictures, hawked about everywhere
by itinerant vendors of relics and rosaries, served to create for this barbarous reformer a
reputation saintly and angelic.  In towns, villages, even in royal palaces, he formed the one
topic of conversation.  Several gentlemen, disgusted either with vice or with society, retired
of their own accord to his monastery, where they remained in order that they might the sooner die. In no woman ever remained glassy more delicate and virgin modesty. Some talks,
now current, the offended, could not refer in his presence or directly or indirectly to some
rough issues. He said nothing, because it was prudent personified natural and shy, but she looked
flushed, restless, wanting to retire. So clean and so neat was of body and soul. He liked to dress
elegantly and looked after with refinements, not used in Peñascosa, of his person. Those who
knew her as a child, said which was not pretty, but passable, and now, with his white hair, his
fresh meat and cheeks, was more beautiful than ever, why had remained unmarried Ms Theodora possessing
a nice figure and a regular flow? It was said he held very fine love Romantic Arapiles a lieutenant
who was killed in action Branches. The day before the battle was fired from her through a letter
written on a drum: the heart told him the next day "a treacherous bullet cut the thread of his
existence, but die with the name Theodora on the lips. "This kept the letter as a precious relic
and also kept his heart faithful to the memory of the brave and romantic lieutenant. However,
for many years had a regular lover. D. Juan Casanova, that gentleman of aquiline and majestic that
we talked about, going home every night without fail, eight eleven. This was enough to make the
villa is believed, not that it was her lover, no one doubted the chastity of Ms Theodora, but their
platonic love, and sooner or later would end up marrying her.


Madame Cormeil, wishing to have a good look at the man, sent to inform him of her illness.
Would-be saints are much afraid of words with a double meaning.  In no whit disconcerted, he
replied that he had devoted his entire zeal to the poor in spirit, and that Madame Cormeil
was not of their number.

CHAPTER XLVI.

The Court Goes to Flanders.--Nancy.--Ravon.--Sainte Marie aux Mines.--Dancing and Death.--A
German Sovereign's Respectful Visit.--The Young Strasburg Priests.--The Good Bailiff of Chatenoi.--The
Bridge at Brisach.--The Capucin Monk Presented to the Queen.

Before relating that which I have to say about the Queen and her precautions against myself,
I would not omit certain curious incidents during the journey that the King caused us to take
in Alsatia and Flanders, when he captured Maestricht and Courtrai.

The King having left us behind at Nancy, a splendid town where a large proportion of the nobility
grieved for the loss of Messieurs de Lorraine, their legitimate sovereigns, the Queen soon
saw that here she was more honoured than beloved.  It was this position which suggested to
her the idea of going to Spa, close by, and of taking the waters for some days.

If the Infanta was anxious to escape from the frigid courtesies of the Lorraine aristocracy,
I also longed to have a short holiday, and to keep away from the Queen, as well for the sake
of her peace of mind as for my own.  My doctor forbade me to take the Spa waters, as they were
too sulphurous; he ordered me those of Pont-a-Mousson.  Hardly had I moved there, when orders
came for us all to meet at Luneville, and thence we set out to rejoin the King.

Horrible was the first night of our journey spent at Ravon, in the Vosges Mountains.  The house
in which Mademoiselle de Montpensier and I lodged was a dilapidated cottage, full of holes,
and propped up in several places.  Lying in bed, we heard the creaking of the beams and rafters.
Two days afterwards the house, so they told us, collapsed.

From that place we went on to Sainte Marie aux Mines, a mean sort of town, placed like a long
corridor between two lofty, well-wooded mountains, which even at noonday deprive it of sun.
Close by there is a shallow, rock-bound streamlet which divides Lorraine from Alsace.  Sainte
Marie aux Mines belonged to the Prince Palatine of Birkenfeld.  This Prince offered us his
castle of Reif Auvilliers, an uncommonly beautiful residence, which he had inherited from the
Comtesse de Ribaupierre, his wife.

This lady's father was just dead, and as, in accordance with German etiquette, the Count's
funeral obsequies could not take place for a month, in the presence of all his relatives and
friends, who came from a great distance, the corpse, embalmed and placed in a leaden coffin,
lay in state under a canopy in the mortuary chapel.

Our equerries, seeing that the King's chamber looked on to the mortuary chapel, took upon themselves
to blow out all the candles, and for the time being stowed away the corpse in a cupboard.

We knew nothing about this; and as the castle contained splendid rooms, the ladies amused themselves
by dancing and music to make them forget the boredom of their journey.

The King looked in upon us every now and then, saying, in a low voice, "Ah! if you only knew
what I know!"

And then he would go off, laughing in his sleeve.  We did not get to know about this corpse
until five or six days afterwards, when we were a long way off, and the discovery greatly shocked
us.

The day we left Sainte Marie aux Mines, a little German sovereign came to present his homage
to the King.  It was the Prince de Mont-Beliard, of Wurtemberg, whom I had previously met in
Paris, on the occasion of his marriage with Marechal de Chatillon's charming daughter.  The
luxurious splendour of Saint Germain and Versailles had certainly not yet succeeded in turning
the heads of these German sovereigns.  This particular one wore a large buff doublet with big
copper-gilt buttons.  His cravat was without either ribbons or lace.  His rather short hair
was roughly combed over his forehead; he carried no sword, and instead of gold buckles or clasps,
he had little bows of red leather on his black velvet shoes. His coach, entirely black, was
still of old-fashioned make; that is to say, studded with quantities of gilt nails.  Wearing
mourning for the Empress, his six horses were richly, caparisoned, his four lackeys wearing
yellow liveries faced with red.  An escort of twenty guardsmen, dressed similarly, was in attendance;
they seemed to be well mounted, and were handsome fellows.

A second carriage of prodigious size followed the ducal conveyance; in this were twelve ladies
and gentlemen, who got out and made their obeisance to the King and Queen.

The Prince de Mont-Beliard did not get into his coach again until ours were in motion.  He
spoke French fairly well, and the little he said was said with much grace.  He looked very
hard at me, which shocked the Queen greatly, but not the King.

A little further on, their Majesties were greeted by the delegates of the noble chapter of
Strasburg.  These comprised the Count of Manderhall and two canons.  What canons, too!  And
how astonished we were!

The old Count was dressed in a black cassock, and his hair looked somewhat like a cleric's,
but his cravat was tied with a large flame-coloured bow, and he wore ill-fitting hose of the
same hue.  As for the two canons, they were pleasant young men, good-looking and well-made.
Their light gray dress was edged with black and gold; they wore their hair long in wavy curls,
and in their little black velvet caps they had yellow and black feathers, and their silver-mounted
swords were like those worn by our young courtiers.  Their equipment was far superior to that
of the deputation of the Prince de Mont-Beliard.  It is true, they were churchmen, and churchmen
have only themselves and their personal satisfaction to consider.

These gentlemen accompanied us as far as Chatenoi, a little town in their neighbourhood, and
here they introduced the bailiff of the town to the King, who was to remain constantly in attendance
and act as interpreter.

The bailiff spoke French with surprising ease.  He had been formerly tutor at President Tambonneaux's,
an extremely wealthy man, who entertained the Court, the town, and all the cleverest men of
the day. The King soon became friends with the bailiff, and kept him the whole time close to
his carriage.

When travelling, the King is quite another man.  He puts off his gravity of demeanour, and
likes to amuse his companions, or else make his companions amuse him.  Believing him to be
like Henri IV. in temper, the bailiff was for asking a thousand questions.  Some of these the
King answered; to others he gave no reply.

"Sire," said he to his Majesty, "your town of Paris has a greater reputation than it actually
deserves.  They say you are fond of building; then Paris ought to have occasion to remember
your reign.  Allow me to express a hope that her principal streets will be widened, that her
temples, most of them of real beauty, may be isolated.  You should add to the number of her
bridges, quays, public baths, almshouses and infirmaries."

The King smiled.  "Come and see us in four or five years," he rejoined, "or before that, if
you like, and if your affairs permit you to do so. You will be pleased to see what I have already
done."

Then the bailiff, approaching my carriage window, addressed a few complimentary remarks to myself.

"I have often met your father, M. de Mortemart," said he, "at President Tambonneaux's.  One
day the little De Bouillons were there, quarrelling about his sword, and to the younger he
said, 'You, sir, shall go into the Church, because you squint.  Let my sword alone; here's
my rosary.'"

"Well," quoth the King, "M. de Mortemart was a true prophet, for that little Bouillon fellow
is to-day Cardinal de Bouillon."

"Sire," continued the worthy German, "I am rejoiced to hear such news. And little Peguilain
de Lauzun, of whom you used to be so fond when you were both boys,--where is he?  What rank
does he now hold?"

Hereupon the King looked at Mademoiselle, who, greatly confused, shed tears.

"Well, M. Bailiff," said his Majesty, "did you easily recognise me at first sight?"

"Sire," replied the German, "your physiognomy is precisely the same; when a boy, you looked
more serious.  The day you entered Parliament in hunting-dress I saw you get into your coach;
and that evening the President said to his wife, 'Madame, we are going to have a King.  I wish
you could have been there, in one of the domes, just to hear the little he said to us.'"

Whereupon the King laughingly inquired what reply the President's wife made.  But the bailiff,
smiling in his turn, seemed afraid to repeat it, and so his Majesty said:

"I was told of her answer at the time, so I can let you know what it was. 'Your young King
will turn out a despot.' That is what Madame la Presidente said to her husband."

The bailiff, somewhat confused, admitted that this was exactly the case.

The huge bridge at Brisach, across the Rhine, had no railing; the planks were in a rickety
condition, and through fissures one caught sight of the impetuous rush of waters below.  We
all got out of our coaches and crossed over with our eyes half shut, so dangerous did it seem;
while the King rode across this wretched bridge,--one of the narrowest and loftiest that there
is, and which is always in motion.

Next day the Bishop of Bale came to pay his respects to the Queen, and was accompanied by delegates
from the Swiss cantons, and other notabilities.  After this I heard the "General of the Capucins"
announced, who had just been to pay a visit of greeting to the German Court.  He was said to
be by birth a Roman.  Strange to say, for that Capucin the same ceremony and fuss was made
as for a sovereign prince, and I heard that this was a time-honoured privilege enjoyed by his
Order. The monk himself was a fine man, wearing several decorations; his carriage, livery,
and train seemed splendid, nor did he lack ease of manner nor readiness of conversation.  He
told us that, at the imperial palace in Vienna, he had seen the Princesse d'Inspruck,--a relative
of the French Queen, and that the Emperor was bringing her up as if destined one day to be
his seventh bride, according to a prediction.  He also stated that the Emperor had made the
young Princess sing to him,--a Capucin monk; and added genially that she was comely and graceful,
and that he had been very pleased to see her.

The King was very merry at this priest's expense.  Not so the Queen, who was Spanish, and particularly
devoted to Capucin friars of all nationalities.

CHAPTER XLVII.

Moliere.--Racine.--Their Mutual Esteem.--Racine in Mourning.

The King had not much leisure, yet occasionally he gave up half an hour or an hour to the society
of a chosen few,--men famous for their wit and brilliant talents.  One day he was so kind as
to bring to my room the celebrated Moliere, to whom he was particularly attached and showed
special favour.  "Madame," said the King, "here you see the one man in all France who has most
wit, most talent, and most modesty and good sense combined.  I thank God for letting him be
born during my reign, and I pray that He may preserve him to us for a long while yet." The organist played a fandango loud.

Rosita Doña Marcela and danced with grace and elegance, clattering castanets.

The teacher Raymond, Aunt Ramona Doña Pepa and clapped. It was such a din put together that
it appeared that there had been seven but seven hundred people.

    
    
    When stopped clapping and castanets
    and guitar just sounded, a voice sang Currito sentimental and soft
the following couplet:

Tie me to a hair sticks to your bed, and although
the hair to break there is no fear that I go.
He spoke very little about himself, but at great length, and with evident admiration, about
the young poet Racine.

The King asked if he thought that Racine had strength sufficient to make him the equal of Corneille.
"Sire," said the comic poet, "Racine has already surpassed Corneille by the harmonious elegance
of his versification, and by the natural, true sensibility of his dialogue; his situations
are never fictitious; all his words, his phrases, come from the heart.  Racine alone is a true
poet, for he alone is inspired."

The King, continuing, said: "I cannot witness his tragedy of 'Berenice' without shedding tears.
How comes it that Madame Deshoulieres and Madame de Sevigne, who have so much mind, refuse
to recognise beauties which strike a genius such as yours?"

"Sire," replied Moliere, "my opinion is nothing compared to that which your Majesty has just
expressed, such is your sureness of judgment and your tact.  I know by experience that those
scenes of my comedies which, at a first reading, are applauded by your Majesty, always win
most applause from the public afterwards."

"Is Racine in easy circumstances?" asked the King.

"He is not well off," replied Moliere, "but the tragedies which he has in his portfolio will
make a rich man of him some day; of that I have not the least doubt."

"Meanwhile," said the King, "take him this draft of six thousand livres from me, nor shall
this be the limit of my esteem and affection."

Five or six months after this interview, poor Moliere broke a blood-vessel in his chest, while
playing with too great fervour the title part in his "Malade Imaginaire."  When they brought
the news to the King, he turned pale, and clasping his hands together, well-nigh burst into
tears. "France has lost her greatest genius," he said before all the nobles present.  "We shall
never have any one like him again; our loss is irreparable!"

When they came to tell us that the Paris clergy had refused burial to "the author of 'Tartuffe,'"
his Majesty graciously sent special orders to the Archbishop, and with a royal wish of that
sort they were obliged to comply, or else give good reasons for not doing so.

Racine went into mourning for Moliere.  The King heard this, and publicly commended such an
act of good feeling and grateful sympathy.

CHAPTER XLVIII.

Madame de Montausier and the Phantom.--What She Exacts from the Marquise.--Her Reproaches to
the Duke.--Bossuet's Complacency.

Those spiteful persons who told the Queen how obliging the Duchesse de Montausier had shown
herself towards me were also so extremely kind as to write an account of the whole affair to
the Marquis de Montespan.

At that time he was still in Paris, and one day he went to the Duchess just as she was getting
out of bed.  In a loud voice he proceeded to scold her, daring to threaten her as if she were
some common woman; in fact, he caught hold of her and endeavoured to strike her.

The King would not allow M. de Montausier to obtain redress from the Marquis for such an insult
as this.  He granted a large pension to the Duchess, and appointed her husband preceptor to
the Dauphin.

Such honours and emoluments partly recompensed the Duchess, yet they scarcely consoled her.
She considered that her good name was all but lost, and what afflicted her still more was that
she never recovered her health.  She used to visit me, as our duties brought us together, but
it was easy to see that confidence and friendship no longer existed.

One day, when passing along one of the castle corridors, which, being so gloomy, need lamplight
at all hours, she perceived a tall white phantom, which glared hideously at her, and then approaching,
vanished.  She was utterly prostrated, and on returning to her apartments was seized with fever
and shivering.  The doctors perceived that her brain was affected; they ordered palliatives,
but we soon saw that there was no counting upon their remedies.  She was gradually sinking.

Half an hour before she died the Duchess sent for me, having given instructions that we should
be left alone, and that there should be no witnesses.  Her intense emaciation was pitiful,
and yet her face kept something of its pleasant expression.

"It is because of you, and through you," she exclaimed in a feeble, broken voice, "that I quit
this world while yet in the prime of life. God calls me; I must die.

"Kings are so horribly exacting.  Everything that ministers to their passions seems feasible
to them, and righteous folk must consent to do their pleasure, or suffer the penalty of being
disgraced and neglected, and of seeing their long years of service lost and forgotten.

"During that unlucky journey in Brabant, you sought by redoubling your coquetry and fascinations
to allure La Valliere's lover.  You managed to succeed; he became fond of you.  Knowing my
husband's ambitious nature, he easily got him to make me favour this intrigue, and lend my
apartments as a meeting-place.

"At Court nothing long remains a secret.  The Queen was warned, and for a while would not believe
her informants.  But your husband, with brutal impetuousness, burst in upon me.  He insulted
me in outrageous fashion. He tried to drag me out of bed and throw me out of the window.  Hearing
me scream, my servants rushed in and rescued me, in a fainting state, from his clutches.  And
you it is who have brought upon me such scandalous insults. All the villagers ate the soup off and stew for
two in the afternoon. Was not surprising, therefore, that participants in the gathering they had
hearty appetite at about eleven o'clock at night they served dinner.

It was marinated pork preserved in lard, like liquid rubies by the red color lent him the dressing.
There was also roast turkey and anchovies, fine wine of Moriles and,
for dessert, fruit and Piñonate. The pomp and grandeur which surround you and
intoxicate you would seem but a little thing did you but look at them as now I do, upon my
bed of death.

"The Queen hates me; she is right.  She despises me, and justly, too. I shall elude her hatred
and disdain, which weigh thus heavily upon my heart.  Perhaps she may deign to pardon me when
my lawyer shall have delivered to her a document, signed by myself, containing my confession
and excuses."

As she uttered these words, Madame de Montausier began to vomit blood, and I had to summon
her attendants.  With a last movement of the head she bade me farewell, and I heard that she
called for her husband.

Next day she was dead.  Her waiting-maid came to tell me that the Duchess, conscious to the
last, had made her husband promise to resign his appointment as governor to the Dauphin, and
withdraw to his estates, where he was to do penance.  M. de Meaux, a friend of the family,
read the prayers for the dying, to which the Duchess made response, and three minutes before
the final death-throe, she consented to let him preach a funeral sermon in eulogy of herself
and her husband.

When printed and published, this discourse was thought to be a fine piece of eloquence.

Over certain things the Bishop passed lightly, while exaggerating others. Some things, again,
were entirely of his own invention; and if from the depths of her tomb the Duchess could have
heard all that M. de Meaux said about her, she never would have borne me such malice, nor would
her grief at leaving life and fortune have troubled her so keenly.

The King thought this funeral oration excellently well composed.  Of one expression and of
one whole passage, however, he disapproved, though which these were he did not do me the honour
to say.

