"But she was beginning to talk rather strangely," the poor fool Marion had continued. "I think
she's altered very much lately."

"Do you know, I was thinking so myself," Peacey had answered reflectively. "I wonder if she's
got anything on her mind. I wish I could find out. One doesn't like a 'ome of friends not to
share its worries with you, without giving you a fair chance to 'elp. I must see whether I
can get it out of 'er."

Oh, he was a kind man. He was certainly very kind. She put down her cup and braced her body
and her soul, and said, "Mr. Peacey...."

The world had deceived her utterly that day; and yet there was one in that cottage who had
suffered more than she, for by her suffering she had bought no Richard. Poor Mrs. Cliffe! She
was a woman of sixty now, white-haired, and fine-featured with the anxious fineness of one
who has for long lived out of favour with herself and has laboured hard for re-establishment;
but the fear still dwelt in her. Most times that Marion passed down Roothing High Street, and
saw the old woman sitting knitting in the garden while her old blind husband shuffled happily
here and there, they would but bow and smile and look away very quickly. But every now and
then, perhaps once a year, she would put down her knitting so soon as Marion came in sight
and come into the road to meet her and would give her nervous, absent-minded greetings. Then
she would draw her into the furthest edge of the pavement, because the blind have such sharp
hearing, and she would whisper:

"Have you heard from him lately?"

"No."

"He's still at Dawlish?"

"They say so."

"Do you think he will ever come back?"

"No. He will never come back."

"Ah." She would stand looking past Marion with her face cat's-pawed by memory and her fingers
teasing the fringe of her shawl, till from the garden the blind old man would cry lovingly
and querulously, "Trixy, where are you?" and she would answer, "Coming, dearie." As she turned
away she would murmur: "I shouldn't like him to come back...."

Poor Trixy Cliffe! She should have known only the sorrow of pure femalehood, such sorrow as
makes the eyes of heifers soft. Women like her should be harvested like corn in their time
of ripening, stored in good homes as in sound barns, and ground in the mill of wifehood and
motherhood into the flour that makes the bread by which the people live. But there must have
been some beauty working in her soul, for Peacey went only where he saw some opportunity to
cancel some movement towards the divine, being a missionary spirit. So she had been delivered
over to that terror which survived for ever. Even in the exorcised blue territory of a good
old woman's eyes. "Oh, poor Trixy, poor Trixy!" moaned Marion, weeping. But it struck her that
she was enjoying herself, and she sat up rigidly and searched her soul for the smuggled insincerity.
"I must be lying," she said aloud with loathing. "I really cannot be pitying Trixy Cliffe because
in my heart of hearts I care for no one but Richard. I would knead the flesh of anyone on earth
and bake it in the oven if that were the only food I could give him. What am I doing this for?
Ah, I see. I am hanging about this fictitious emotion simply because I do not wish to go on
and remember Roger." She held out her hands into the blackness and cried out, "Oh, Roger, forgive
me for shutting you out of my memory as I have shut you out of everything else. I will remember
everything, I will!" She lay down and let all pictures reappear before her eyes, but her mouth
was drawn down at the corners.

CHAPTER V

It was no use wondering now whether or not Peacey had really murmured "Good day, ma'am," as
they parted at the door of the church after their furtive marriage. She had certainly thought
she had heard this ironic respectfulness, and she had stared after him with a sudden dread
that under the cream of benignity there might after all be a ferment of malign intention. But
that gait, which was so light and brisk for such a heavy man, had already taken him some distance
from her, and he was now entering the yew alley that was the private way from Torque Hall to
the churchyard. The sunlight falling through the interstices of the dark mossy trees cast liver-coloured
patches on his black coat. She had turned and looked down, as she always did when human complexities
made her seek reassurance as to the worth of this world, on the shiny mud-flats, blue-veined
with the running tides, and green marshes where the redshanks choired. Her misgiving had weakened
at that beauty, for with the logic of the young she thought that if the universe was infinitely
good it could not also be infinitely evil, and it had been utterly dispelled by his considerate
conduct during the following weeks.

He did not try to see her at all until a day or two before the birth of her child was expected.
Then he came at twilight. He would not let Grandmother put a match to the lamp in the parlour,
and Marion knew from his quiet urgency that he was doing this so that she might continue to
wear the dusk as a cloak. He sat down by the window, his shoulders black against the sunset,
and his fat hands, with their appealing air of shame at their own fatness, laid on the little
table beside him an old; carved coral rattle and a baby's dress precious with embroideries.
These he had bought, he said, up in London, where he had had to go for a day to do business
with the wine merchants. He had not seemed to listen to her thanks. But his hunched shape against
the primrose light and the gleaming of his thick white fingers playing nervously with the fragile
gifts spoke of a passionate concern for her. No doubt that concern was sincere. They told her
after her confinement that during the day and night through which her child was slowly torn
from her he had not left the house, and at her cries a sweat had run down his face. That was
not unnatural. An incomplete villainy would vex its designer as any unfinished work of art
vexes the artist. But she interpreted it in the sense that he, knowing what delusions youth
has regarding the human capacity for love, had foreseen that she would.

She let him see her before anyone else, and he had made the most of that ideal occasion when
her being was so sensitive that it responded to everything, and so well pleased at having safely
borne her son that she saw everything as evidence of creation's virtue. He had added stroke
to stroke with the modest confused smile with which he entered the room, as if he felt his
vast bulk ridiculous in this room of small rosebud patterns; the uneasy laughter with which
he disguised his embarrassment when they could find no chair big enough for him; the shy wonder
with which he put out his hand and hooded the tiny black head with it, and uncurled the little
hand with his obese forefinger; the reticence with which he checked his remark that he had
always wanted to have a child of his own. And he perfected the picture that he desired her
to see by the assurance he gave murmurously from the darkness of the open door. "Get well soon....
You needn't be afraid of me. We made a bargain. I mean to stick to it." He had caught the very
tune that dogged sincerity plays on the voice's chords. She lay happy after he had gone because
she and her child had so true a friend.

It was, of course, from no malice against her that he set out to deceive her, but from the
natural desire to protect his being from alterations hostile to its quality. Long after, sitting
with Richard in a café in Rio de Janeiro, she had looked at the men who were taking the lovely
painted women to themselves, and she detected behind the gross mask that the prospect of physical
enjoyment set on the faces an expression of harsh spiritual defensiveness; and thenceforward
she had understood why Peacey had practised this fraud on her. He had known, as all men know,
that there is a beneficent magic in the relationship between men and women; the evil man, at
war with all but himself, cannot but admit that for his supremest pleasure he depends on one
other than himself, and by his gratitude to her is tainted with altruism and is no longer single-minded
in his war on others. Such men uphold prostitution because it exorcises sex of that magic.
It is not a device to save sensuality, for love with a stranger is like gulping new spirit,
and love with a friend is drinking old wine. Its purpose is indeed this very imperfection of
the embraces that it offers, for they leave the soul as it was.

Peacey, she understood in the light of this discovery, had desired her with a passion that,
uncircumvented, would have swept him on to love and a life on which his laboriously acquired
technique of villainy would have been wasted, so it had been the problem set his virtuosity
to create a situation which would let him fulfil his body's hunger for her and at the same
time kill for ever all possibility of love between them. She could imagine him seated under
the little window in the butler's pantry, polishing a silver teapot with paste and his own
fingers, as old-fashioned butlers do, for he was scrupulous in all matters of craftsmanship;
holding his fat face obliquely, so that it seemed as unrelated to anything but space as a riding
moon, save when he looked down and smiled to see the blue square of the window and the elm
top shine upside down and distorted in the bulbous silver: thinking his solution out to its
perfect issue.

It had been quite perfect. By that visit, and by his abstention from any later visit, he had
induced in her just that mood of serenity and confidence which would be most shocked by the
irruption of his passion. The evening when it all happened she had been so utterly given up
to happiness. She had taken the most preposterously long time to put Richard to bed. He had
had a restless day, and had been so drowsy when she went to feed him in the evening that she
had put him back in his cradle in his day clothes, but about half-past eight he had awakened
and called her, and she found him very lively and roguish. She had stripped him and then could
not bear to put his night-clothes on, he looked so lovely lying naked in her lap. He was not
one of those babies who are pieces of flesh that slowly acquire animation by feeding and sleeping;
from his birth he had seemed to be charged with the whole vitality of a man. He was minute
as a baby of three months is, he was helpless, he had not yet made the amazing discovery that
his hand belonged to him, but she knew that when she held him she held a strong man. This babyhood
was the playful disguise in which he came into the world in order that they might get on easy
terms with one another and be perfect companions. Never would he be able to feel tyrannous
because of his greater strength, for he would remember the time when she had lifted him in
her weak arms, and that same memory would prevent her from ever being depressed into a sense
of inferiority, so that they would ever move in the happy climate of a sense of equality. And
every moment of this journey towards that perfect relationship was going to be a delight.

She bent over him, enravished by the brilliant bloom of his creamy skin and the black blaze
of his eyes, which had been black from birth, as hardly any children's are; turned him over
and kissed the delicate crook of his knees and the straight column of his spine and the little
square wings of his shoulder-blades, and then she turned him back again and jeered at him because
he wore the phlegmatic, pasha-like smile of an adored baby. She became vexed with love for
him, and longed to clasp him, to crush him as she knew she must not. She put on his night-clothes,
kissing him extravagantly and unsatedly, and when she finished he wailed and nuzzled to her
breast. "Oh, no, you greedy little thing," she cried, for it was a quarter of an hour before
he should have been fed again, but a wave of love passed through her and she took him to her.
They were fused, they were utterly content with one another. He finished, smacking his lips
like an old epicure. "Oh, my darling love!" she cried, and put him back into the cot and ran
downstairs. If she stayed longer she would keep him awake with her kisses and play. She was
brightened and full of silent laughter, like a girl who escapes from her sweetheart.

Grandmother sat very quietly at her sewing and soon went upstairs. Grandmother was getting
very old. When she said "Good-night" she seemed to be speaking out of the cavern of some preoccupation,
and when she went upstairs her shawl fell from her shoulders and trailed its corner on the
ground. Marion hoped that the old lady had not worn herself out by worrying about her, and
she pulled out the sewing that had been shut up in the work-basket and meditated finishing
it, but she was too tired. Nowadays she knew a fatigue which she could yield to frankly, as
it was honourable to her organism, and meant that her strength was going into her milk and
not into her blood. She folded her arms on the table and laid her head on them and thought
of Richard. It was his monthly birthday to-day. He was three months old. She grieved to think
that she could feed him for only six months more. How could she endure to be quite separate
from him? Sometimes even now she regretted that the time had gone when he was within her, so
that each of her heartbeats was a caress to him, to which his little heart replied, and she
would feel utterly desolate and hungry when she could no longer join him to her bosom. But
she would always be able to kiss him. She imagined herself a few years ahead, calling him back
when he was running off to play, holding his resistant sturdiness in her arms while he gave
her hasty, smudged kisses and hugged his ball for more loving. But she reflected that, while
the character of those kisses would amuse her, they would not satisfy her craving for contact
so close that it was unity with his warm young body, and she must set herself to be the most
alluring mother that ever lived, so that he would not struggle in her arms but would give her
back kiss for kiss. She flung her head back, sighing triumphantly because she knew she could
do it, but as her eyes met her image in the mirror over the mantelpiece she was horrified to
see how little like a mother she was looking. Lips pursed with these long imaginary kisses
were too oppressive for a child's mouth; she had lost utterly that sacred, radiating lethargy
which hushes a house so that a child may sleep: on a child's path her emanations were beginning
to cast not light but lightning.

She called out to herself: "You fool! If you really love Richard you will let him run out to
his game when he wants to, that he shall grow strong and victorious, and if you call him back
it must be to give him an orange and not a kiss!" But it seemed to her that this would be a
sacrifice until, staring into the glass, she noticed that she was now more beautiful than she
had ever been, and then she saw the way by which she could be satisfied. Harry must come back;
she knew he was coming back, for they had intercepted his letter to her, and they would not
have done that if it had been unloving. After she had weaned Richard she must conceive again
and let another child lift from him the excessive burden of her love: then her mind and soul
could go on in his company without vexing him with these demands that only the unborn or the
nursling could satisfy. Then this second child would become separate from her, and she must
conceive again and again until this intense life of the body failed in her and her flesh ceased
to be a powerful artist exulting in the creation of masterpieces. It must be so. For Richard's
sake it must be so. Her love would be too heavy a cloak for one child, for it was meant to
be a tent under which many should dwell. Again as in the wood she laid her hand on her body
and felt it as an inexhaustible treasure. Again she was instantly mocked.

There had come, then, a knock at the door. She had felt a little frightened, for since her
stoning in Roothing High Street she had felt fear at any contact with the external world; she
knew now that rabies is endemic in human society, and that one can never tell when one may
not be bitten by a frothing mouth. But it was not late, and it was as likely as not that this
was Cousin Tom Stallybrass come to say how the Frisian calf had sold at Prittlebay market,
so she opened it at once.

Peacey stood there. He stood quite still, his face held obliquely, his body stiff and jointless
in his clothes, like a huge, fat doll. There was an appearance of ceremony about him. His skin
shone with the white lacquer of a recent washing with coarse soap, he was dressed very neatly
in his Sunday broadcloth, and he wore a black-and-white check tie which she had never seen
him wear before, and his fingers looked like varnished bulging pods in tight black kid gloves.

He did not speak. He did not answer her reluctant invitation that he should enter. She would
have thought him drunk had not the smell that clung about him been so definitely that of soap.
From the garden behind him, which was quilted by a thick night fog, noises as of roosting birds
disturbed. His head turned on the thick hill of his neck, his lids, with their fringe of long
but sparse black lashes, blinked once or twice. When the sound had passed, his face again grew
blank and moonish and he stepped within. He laid his bowler hat on the table and began to strip
off his gloves. His fleshy fingers, pink with constriction, terrified her, and she clapped
her hands at him and cried out: "Why have you come?"

But he answered nothing. Speech is human, and words might have fomented some human relationship
between them, and he desired that they should know each other only as animals and enemies.
He continued to take off his gloves, while round him fragments of fog that had come in with
him hung in the warm air like his familiar spirits, and then bent over the lamp. She watched
his face grow yellow in the diminishing glare, and moaned, knowing herself weak with motherhood.
Then in the blackness his weight threshed down on her. Even his form was a deceit, for his
vast bulk was not obesity but iron-hard strength. All consciousness soon left her, except only
pain, and she wandered in the dark caverns of her mind. Her capacity for sexual love lay dead
in her. She saw it as a lovely naked boy lying with blue lips and purple blood pouring from
his side, where it had been jagged by the boar who still snuffled the fair body, sitting by
with its haunches in a spring. She cried out to herself: "You can rise above this! This is
only a physical thing," but her own answer came: "Yes, but the other also was only a physical
thing. Yet it was a sacrament and gave you life. There is white magic and black magic. This
is a black sacrament, and it will give you death." Her soul fainted into utter nothingness.

She woke and heard Richard crying for her upstairs. She dragged herself up at once, but remembered
and fell grovelling on the floor and wept. But Richard continued to call for her, and she struggled
to her feet and made her way up the stairs, clinging to the banisters. She looked over her
shoulder at the loathed room and was amazed to see that this mawkish early morning light showed
it much tidier than it had been by the glow of the lamp the night before. It was evident that
Peacey had set it in order before he let himself out, and had even neatly folded the sewing
she had left crumpled on the table. At this manifestation of his peculiar quality she flung
her arm across her face and fled to her son's room. But when she got there a sense of guilt
overcame her and she was ashamed to go to him, though she knew he needed her, and staggered
first to the window to look out at the sea and the shining plain, whose beauty had through
all previous agonies reassured her. But the eastern sky was inflamed with such a livid scarlet
dawn as she had never seen before, and the full tide was milk streaked with blood, and the
sails of the barges that rode there were as rags that had been used to staunch wounds. Unreasonably
she took this as confirmation that there had happened to her one of earth's ultimate evils,
a thing that no thinking on could make good. But turning to her child to still his crying,
she saw the tiny exquisite hands waving in rage and the dark down rumpled on the monkeyish
little skull, and the black eyes in which all the beauty and high temper that were afterwards
to be Richard were condensed, and she ran to him. She caught him up in her arms and laughed
into the criminal face of the morning.

From that day on Marion and Richard lived together in the completest isolation. She had meals
with her family, she moved among them doing what part of the household and dairy work that
she had always done, but she never spoke to them unless it was necessary; for she realised
now why Grandmother had been so preoccupied that she let the tail of her shawl trail on the
ground as she went upstairs that night, and why Cousin Tom Stallybrass had not come in to tell
how the calf had gone at Prittlebay market. When one afternoon she came to the head of the
stairs and saw Aunt Alphonsine gesticulating in her tight dame de compagnie black in the parlour
below, stretching out her long lean neck like the spout of a coffee-pot to Grandmothers' ear,
she stood quite still, staring at the two women and hating them till they saw her and fell
silent. She did not take her gaze from them until Aunt Alphonsine put up her hand to cover
her scar. Then she knew that this wretched woman was at last afraid of her and would let her
alone, and she turned contentedly to the room where Richard was.

But later on a misgiving seized her lest her aunt might have come as envoy from Peacey, and
since she perceived that, her rage against the world was so visibly written on her that she
inspired fear; she thought it best to give her boy into the charge of Peggy and to go over
to Torque Hall herself. She waited in the courtyard outside the servants' quarters while they
fetched him, and stood with her head high, so that the faces peering at her from the windows
should see nothing of her torment, at the corner of the gardens that was visible through the
gracious Tudor archway. There was nothing showing save a few pale mauve clots of Michaelmas
daisies standing flank-high in the slanting dusty shafts of evening sunshine, and the marble
Triton, glowing gold in answer to the sunset, with gold autumn leaves scattered on his pedestal.
But she knew very well how fair it all must be beyond, where she could not see--the broad grass
walk stretching between the wide, formal flowerbeds, well tended but disordered with the lateness
of the year, to the sundial and the chestnut grove. How could Harry, who had loved her, possess
all this and not want to share it with her? She could have sobbed like a child whose playmate
is not kind, had not Peacey stood at her elbow. "I want to give you warning that if ever you
come near me again I will kill you," she said. He looked sharply at her and she saw that he
was convinced and discomfited. But suddenly he smiled. She went home, wondering uneasily why
he should have smiled, but came to the conclusion that this was simply one of his mystifications
and that he had simply been trying to cover his defeat. It was an extraordinary fact that there
never once occurred to her that possibility, the thought of which, she afterwards realised,
had made Peacey smile. The truth was that she never thought directly of that night's horror,
but, perhaps because of that fantasy about the wounded youth which had vexed her delirium,
she always disguised it in her mind as an encounter with a wild beast, and the expectation
of human issue no more troubled her than it would a woman who had been gored by a boar.

It was partly for this reason, and partly because of a certain ominous peculiarity of her physical
condition, that she did not know for some months that she was going to have Peacey's child.
It was indeed a rainy December morning when she heard a knock at the door and knew it was little
Jack Harken, because he was whistling "Good King Wenceslas," as he always did, and would not
go to answer him, although she knew Grandmother and Peggy were both in the dairy, because she
was distraught with her own degradation. Her encounter with Peacey had been like being shown
some picture from a foul book and being obliged to stare at it till it was branded on her mind,
so that whenever she looked at it she saw it also, stamped on the real image like the superscription
on a palimpsest. But now she felt as if she herself had become a picture in a foul book. And
she was quite insane with a sense of guilt towards Richard. This discovery had, of necessity,
meant that she must wean him, and her obsession interpreted their conflict between them that
had naturally followed as a wrangle between them as to her responsibility for this evil. Now
he was lying in his cot screaming with rage, his clean frock and the sheets running with the
rivulets of milk that he had spat out and struck from the teat of the bottle she was forcing
on him, and she was sobbing, for this sort of thing had been going on for days, "I can't help
it, darling, I can't help it."

Then Jackie began to thump rhythmically on the door below, and she ran down, maddened with
so much noise, and snatched the letter he held out to her. At the writing on the envelope her
heart stood still. She recanted all she had lately thought of Harry. Hatred and resentment
fell from her. The promise of her lover's near presence came on her like a south wind blowing
over flowers. At his message that he was waiting for her on the marshes under the hillside
she remembered what love is--a shelter, a wing, a witty clemency that finds the perfect unguent
for its mate's hurt as easily as a wit finds jests, a tender alchemy that changes the dark
evil subsistence of the universe to bright, valuable gold. In her light shoes, and with her
black hair loose about her shoulders, she ran out into the rainy yard, fled round the house
quickly so that none might see her and spy on them, and plunged down the thaw-wet hillside,
crying out with joy, even when she slipped and fell, because her lover's arms would so soon
be round her.

She was amazed, for she had not yet had leisure or the heart to look out of the window, that
beneath her the marshes crackled white with sunlit snow, and a blue sea stretched to the rosy
horizon that girdles bright frosty days. Even as this beauty had lain unseen under her windows,
so had her happiness waited unsuspected. She did not see him till she was close upon him, for
he was striding up and down between the last two trees of the elm hedge. Her heart ached when
she saw him standing, brilliantly lovely as the glistening snow-laden branches above him, for
it was plain from the confident set of his shoulders and the loose grip of his hand on his
stick that he was unaware that any situation existed which was not easily negotiable. They
had evidently told him nothing at Torque Hall to destroy the impression she must have created
by her last letter to him in which she had described her acceptance of Peacey's offer of a
formal marriage. They had not dared, for they knew how terrible he would be when he moved to
avenge her. But he lifted his eyes and ran to her and took her in his arms, and did not cease
to kiss her till she sobbed out what they had done to her. Then it was as if a wind had blown
and the snow had fallen from the branches, leaving them but dark, gnarled wood.

"But why did you marry him?"

"The people stoned me in the street and I could get no peace at home."

"Couldn't you have tried to stand it?"

"I was afraid for the boy."

"Then why couldn't you have gone away?"

"How could I when I was so ill? Why did not you come back?"

"How could I leave the prince and princess?"

She was aghast to find them quarrelling, and while he drew a shuddering breath between his
teeth, she interrupted: "Oh, Richard is so lovely! You must see him soon. Oh, such a boy!"

But he had paid no heed and shakingly poured out words since it was so like the harmless spite
of a child that beats young to old, her blood from that of a loved girl to a hating woman.
He found the situation, she had thought at the time, and still thought after thirty years,
far less negotiable than a high love would have done. It did not occur to him that he might
take her away. He took it for granted that thereafter they must be lost to each other. But
save for his desire to blame her for these mischances, which did not offend her, since it was
so like the harmless spite of a child that beats his racquet because it has sent his ball into
the next garden, he seemed not to be thinking of her part in that loss at all. It was his extreme
sense of his own loss that was making him choke with tears. It appeared that love was not always
a shelter, a wing, a witty clemency, a tender alchemy. She stood half asleep with shock until
a sentence, said passionately in his delightful voice which made one see green water running
swiftly, and at first refused admission to her mind by her incredulous love, confirmed itself
by reiteration. "Damn it all," he was saying, "you were unique!" At that she cried out, "Oh,
you are Peacey too! I will go back to Richard," and turned and stumbled up the wet hillside.

It is true that Harry's desertion nearly killed her--that there was a moment, as she breasted
the hill-top and found herself facing the malevolent red house where they had always told her
that he did not really love her, when she thought she was about to fall dead from excess of
experience and would have chosen to die so, if Richard had not waited for her. Yet it was also
true that for long she hardly ever thought of Harry. Such fierce and unimagined passions and
perplexities now filled her, that the simple and normal emotions she felt for him became imperceptible,
like tapers in strong sunlight.

The day after their meeting she had found Aunt Alphonsine all a dry frightened gibber, holding
a whitefaced conference with Grandmother in the parlour, and they had asked her if she had
known that Peacey had left Torque Hall that morning. She had shaken her head and given a dry-mouthed
smile, for she saw how terrified they were lest all that had had a hand in her marriage were
to be made to pay for it; but because the child in her arms laughed, and the child in her womb
had moved, she was so torn between delight and loathing that she had no time to speculate whether
Harry had done this thing sweetly out of love for her or cruelly out of bodily jealousy of
Peacey. Nor, when a few weeks later it was announced that for the first time in its history
Torque Hall had been let furnished, and that the family was going to spend the next twelve
months abroad and in London, did her heart ache to think he must be sad to leave the grey,
salt Essex which he loved. She thought of it, indeed, but negligently. She could imagine well
how he had walked with his dogs among the dripping woods and had set his face against a tree-trunk
near some remembered place, and had wept (for like most very virile men, he wept in sorrow);
and when he had gone home, thick-lipped and darkly flushed with misery, he had flung down his
stick on the chest in the hall and muttered, while frightened people watched from the shadows
of the armour or listened at doors held ajar, "I must get out of this." No doubt it was very
sad, but it was simple; it was brother to the grief of the yard dog when she lost her puppies.
It was not like her agony. Nothing was simple there. Destiny had struck her being a blow that
had shivered it to fragments, and now all warred so that there was confusion, and the best
things were bad.

Her body was full of health and she was very beautiful. Richard, who was beginning to take
notice, took great pleasure in her. He used to point his fingers at her great lustrous eyes
as he did at flowers, and he would roll his face against the smooth skin of her neck and shoulders;
and when he was naked after his bath he liked her to let down her hair so that it hung round
him like a dark, scented tent. But as she bent forward, watching his little red gums shine
in his laughing mouth, guilt constricted her heart. For she knew that no woman who was going
to have a child had any right to be as well as she was. She knew that it meant that she was
giving nothing to the child, that the blood was bright in her cheeks because she was denying
every drop she could to the child, that her flesh was nice for Richard to kiss because she
was electric with the force she should have spent in making nerves for the child. She knew
that she was trying to kill the thing to which she had been ordered to give life; that the
murder was being committed by a part of her which was beyond the control of her will did not
exonerate her. In these matters, as she had learned in the moment when she had discovered that
her baby had conceived without the consent of her soul, the soul cannot with honour disown
the doings of the body. The plain fact was that she was going to have a child, and that she
was trying to kill it. Remorse dragged behind her like a brake on the swift movements of her
happy motherhood; and at night she lay wide-eyed and whispered to some judge to judge her and
bring this matter to an end.

It was no wonder that even when a solicitor came to see her and told her that Harry had settled
on her and Richard a sum so large that she knew he must be deeply concerned for her, since,
like many men of his type, he had such an abundant sense of the pleasures which can be bought
with money that to part with it unnecessarily was a real sacrifice, she thought of him with
only such casual pity as she had felt when the yard-dog howled. Well, that had all been set
right, long afterwards on that day of which she had told nobody.

But she had cheered herself in all those nights that she would make up for her body's defection
by loving the child very much when it was born. She knew she would have no passion for it as
she had for Richard, but she foresaw herself being consciously and slantingly tender over it,
like a primitive Madonna over the Holy Child. There was, of course, no such solution of the
problem. It became plain that there was not going to be in that hour when she knew the unnatural
horror of a painless parturition. She had not been at all shocked by the violence she had endured
at Richard's birth. It had seemed magnificently consistent with the rest of nature, and she
had been comforted as she lay moaning by a persistent vision of a harrow turning up rich earth.
But contemplating herself as she performed this act of childbirth without a pang was like looking
into eyes which are open but have no sight and realising that here is blindness, or listening
to one who earnestly speaks words which have no meaning and realising that here is madness.

She was going through a process that should have produced life: but because of the lack of
some essence which works through pain, but nevertheless is to the breeding womb what sight
is to the eye or sanity to the brain, it was producing something that was as much at variance
with life as death. The old women at her bedside chuckled and rubbed their hands because she
was having such an easy time, but that was because they were old and had forgotten. If a young
woman had been there she would have stood at the other side of the room between the windows,
as far away from the bed as she could, and her lips would have pursed, as if she felt the presence
of uncleanness. So were her own, when they showed her the pale child. She had indeed done an
unclean and unnatural thing when she had brought forth a child that lived yet was unloved;
who was born of a mother that survived and looked at it, and who yet had no mother, since she
felt no motion towards it, but a deep shiver of her blood away from it; who aroused no interest
in the whole universe save her own abhorrence; who was, as was inevitable in one so begotten
and so born, intrinsically disgusting in substance.

"Well, I have Richard to help me bear this," she said to herself, but her heart reminded her
that though she had Richard, this child had no one. Pitifully she put out her arms and drew
it to her breast, but detected for herself the fundamentally insincere kindness that a stranger
will show to a child, confident that before long it will be claimed by its own kin.

She always remembered how good the little thing had been as it lay in her arms, and how distasteful.
Those were always to remain its silent characteristics. It was so good. "As good," the nurses
used to say, "as if he were a little girl." It hardly ever cried, and when it did it curiously
showed its difference from Richard. He hated being a baby and subject to other people's wills,
and would lie in a cot and roar with resentment; but this child, when it felt a need that was
not satisfied, did not rebel, but turned its face to the pillow and whined softly. That was
a strange and disquieting thing to watch. She would stand in the shadow looking at the back
of its little head, so repellently covered with hair that was like fluff off the floor, and
listening to the cry that trailed from its lips like a dirty piece of string; and she would
wonder why it did this, partly because she really wanted to know, and partly because it fended
off the moment when she had to take it in her arms. Perhaps, she reflected, it muted its rage
because it knew that it was unlovable and must curry favour by not troubling people. Indeed,
it was as unlovable as a child could be. It was not pleasant naked, for its bones looked at
once fragile and coarse, and its flesh was lax, and in its clothes it was squalid, for it was
always being sick or dribbling. Then her heart reproached her, and she admitted that it cried
softly because it had a gentle spirit, and she would move forward quickly and do what it desired,
using, by an effort of will, those loving words that fluttered to her lips when she was tending
Richard. Time went on, but her attitude to it never developed beyond this alternate recognition
of its hatefulness and its goodness.

She had called it Roger after her own father in a desperate effort to bring it into the family,
but the name, when she spoke it, seemed infinitely remote, as if she were speaking of the child
of some servant in the house whom she had heard of but had never seen. When he was out of her
sight, she ejected the thought of him from her mind, so that when her eyes fell on him again
it was a shock. He did not become more seemly to look at. Indeed, he was worse when he grew
out of frocks, for knickerbockers disclosed that he had very thin legs and large, knotty knees.
He had a dull stare, and there seemed always to be a ring of food round his mouth. He had no
pride. When she took the children on a railway journey Richard would sit quite still in his
seat and would speak in a very low voice, and if any of the other passengers offered him chocolates
or sweets he would draw back his chin as an animal does when it is offered food, and would
shake his head very gravely. But Roger would move about, falling over people's legs, and would
talk perpetually in a voice that was given a whistling sound by air that passed through the
gap between his two front teeth, and when he got tired he would whine. He was unexclusive and
unadventurous. He liked playing on the sands at Prittlebay in summer when they were covered
with trippers' children. He hated Richard's passion for bringing the names of foreign places
into the games. When Richard was sitting on his engine and roaring, "I'm the Trans-Andean express,
and I don't half go at a pace!" Roger would stand against the wall opposite and cry over and
over again in that whistling voice: "Make it the London, Tilbury and Prittlebay train! Make
it the London, Tilbury and Prittlebay train!" When he felt happy he would repeatedly jump up
in the air, bringing both his feet down on the ground at once, but a little distance apart,
so that his thin legs looked horrible, and he would make loud, silly noises. At these times
Richard would sit with his back to him and would take no notice. Always he was insolent to
the other child. He would not share his toys with him, though sometimes he would pick out one
of the best toys and give it to his brother as a master might give a present to a servant.
He was of the substance of his mother, and he knew all that she knew, and he knew that this
child was an intruder.

They clenched themselves against him. They were kind to him, but they would silently scheme
to be alone together. If they were all three in the garden, she sitting with her needlework,
Richard playing with his engine and Roger making daisy-chains, there would come a time when
she would arise and go into the house. She would not look at Richard before she went, for in
externals she forced herself to be loyal to Roger. When she got into the house she would linger
about the rooms at factitious operations, pouring out of the flower-glasses water that was
not stale, or putting on the kettle far too soon, until she heard Richard coming to look for
her, lightfootedly but violently, banging doors behind him, knocking into furniture. He would
halt at the door and stand for a moment, twiddling the handle round and round, as if he had
not really been so very keen to come to her, and she would go on indifferently with her occupation.
But presently she would feel that she must steal a glance at the face that she knew would be
looking so adorable now, peering obliquely round the edge of the door, the lips bright with
vitality as with wet paint and the eyes roguish as if he felt she were teasing life by enjoying
it so, and the dear square head, browny-gold like the top of a bun, and the little bronze body
standing so fresh and straight in the linen suit. So her glance would slide and slide, and
their eyes would meet and he would run to her. If he had anything on his conscience he would
choose this moment for confession. "Mother, I told a lie yesterday. But it wasn't about anything
really important, so we won't talk about it, will we?"

Then he would clamber over her, like a squirrel going up a tree-trunk, until she tumbled into
some big chair and rated him for being so boisterous, and drew him close to her so that he
revelled in her love for him as in long meadow-grass. Even as she imagined that night before
Peacey came, he did not struggle in her arms but gave her kiss for kiss. They would be sphered
in joy, until they heard a sniff and saw the other child standing at the open door, resting
its flabby cheek on the handle, surveying them with wild eyes. There would be a moment of dislocation.
Then she would cry, "Come along, Roger!" and Richard would slip from her knee and the other
child would come and very gratefully put its arms round her neck and kiss her. It would go
on kissing and kissing her, as if it needed reassurance.

But she had always done her duty by Roger. That had not been so very difficult a matter at
first, for Grandmother had made a great fuss of him and taken him off her hands for most of
the day. Marion had never felt quite at ease about this, for she knew that he was receiving
nothing, since the old woman was only affecting to find him lovable in order that it might
seem that something good had come of the marriage which she had engineered. But the problem
was settled when he was eighteen months old, for then Grandmother died. Marion did not feel
either glad or sorry. God had dreamed her and her grandmother in different dreams. It was well
that they should separate. But it had the immediate disadvantage of throwing her into perpetual
contact with the other child. She looked after it assiduously, but she always felt when she
had been with it for an hour or two that she wanted to go a great distance and breathe air
that it had not breathed. Perpetually she marvelled at its contentedness and gentleness and
unexigent hunger for love, and planted seeds of affection for it in her heart, but they would
never mature.

The relationship became still more galling to her after yet another eighteen months, when Harry
came back to live with his family at Torque Hall, who had returned there the year before. No
communication passed between them, but sometimes by chance he met her in the lanes when she
was out with the children. The first time he tried to speak to her, but she turned away, and
Richard said, "Look here, you don't know us," so after that they only looked at one another.
They would walk slowly past each other with their heads bent, and as they drew near she would
lift her eyes and see him, beautiful and golden as a corn of wheat, and she would know from
his eyes that, dark for his fair, she was as beautiful, and they would both look at Richard,
who ran at her right side and was as beautiful as the essence of both their beauties. It seemed
as if a band of light joined the bodies of these three, as if it were contracting and pulling
them together, as if in a moment they would be pressed together and would dissolve in loving
cries upon each other's breasts. But before that moment came, Harry's eyes would stray to the
other child. Its socks would be coming down round its thin legs; it would be making some silly
noises in its squalid, whistling voice; its features would be falling apart, unorganised into
a coherent face by any expression, as common children's do. The situation was trodden into
the mud. They would pass on--their hearts sunk deeper into dingy acquiescence in their separation.

Nevertheless she did not fail in her duty towards Roger. So far as externals went she was even
a better mother to him than to Richard. Frequently she lost her temper with Richard when he
ran out of the house into the fields at bedtime, or when he would not leave his tin soldiers
to get ready for his walk, but she was always mild with Roger, though his habit of sniffing
angered her more than Richard's worst piece of naughtiness. She took Richard's illnesses lightly
and sensibly. But when Roger ailed--which was very often, for he caught colds easily and had
a weak digestion--she would send for the doctor at once, and would nurse him with a strained
impeccability, concentrating with unnecessary intensity on the minutiæ of his treatment and
diet as if she were attempting to exclude from her mind some thought that insisted on presenting
itself at these times. When they came to her on winter evenings and wet days and asked for
a story, she would choose more often to tell them a fairy-tale, which only Roger liked, rather
than to start one of the sagas which Richard loved, and would help to invent, concerning the
adventures of the family in some previous animal existence, when they had all been rabbits
and lived in a burrow in the park at Torque Hall, or crocodiles who slooshed about in the Thames
mud, or lions and tigers with a lair on Kerith Island. She never gave any present to Richard
without giving one to Roger too; she dressed him as carefully in the same woollen and linen
suits, although in nothing did he look well. Never had she lifted her hand against him.

As time went on she began to make light of her destiny and to declare that there was no horror
in this house at all, but only a young woman living with her two children, one of whom was
not so attractive as the other. It was true that sometimes, when she was sewing or washing
dishes at the sink, she would find herself standing quite still, her fingers rigid, her mind
shocked and vacant, as if some thought had strode into it and showed so monstrous a face that
all other thoughts had fled; and she would realise that she had been thinking of something
about Roger, but she could not remember what. Usually this happened after there had arrived--as
there did every six months--parcels of toys, addressed to him and stamped with the Dawlish
postmark and containing a piece of paper scrawled "With love from father."

She would be troubled by such moments when they came, for she was growing distantly fond of
Roger. There was something touching about this pale child, whose hunger for love was so strong
that it survived and struggled through the clayey substance of its general being which had
smothered all other movements of its soul; who was so full of love itself that it accepted
the empty sham of feeling she gave it and breathed on it, and filled it with its own love,
and was so innocent that it did not detect that nobody had really given it anything, and went
on rejoicing, thus redeeming her from guilt. He would come and stand at the door of any room
in which she was sitting, and she would pretend not to know he was there, so that she need
caress him or say the forced loving word; but when at length, irritated by his repeated sniffs,
she turned towards him, she would find the grey marbles of his eyes bright with happiness,
and he would cry out in his dreadful whistling voice, "Ah, you didn't know I was watching you!"
and run across undoubtingly to her arms. There would be real gratitude in the embrace she gave
him. His trust in her had so changed the moment that she need not feel remorse for it.

It had seemed quite possible that they could go on like this for ever, until the very instant
that all was betrayed. She had had a terrible time with Richard, who was now seven years old.
After their midday meal he had asked permission to go and spend the afternoon playing with
some other boys on the marshes, and she had given it to him with a kiss, under which she had
thought he seemed a little sullen. When Roger and she had nearly finished their tea he had
appeared at the door, had stood there for a minute, and then, throwing up his head, had said
doggedly: "I've had a lovely time at the circus." She had left the bread-knife sticking in
midloaf and sat looking at him in silence. This was real drama, for she had refused to take
them to the circus and forbidden him to go by himself because there was a measles epidemic
in the neighbourhood. It flashed across her that by asking for permission to play with the
boys on the marshes when he meant to go to the circus he had told her a lie. The foolish primitive
maternal part of her was convulsed with horror at his fault. Because he was more important
than anybody else, it seemed the most tremendous fault that anybody had ever committed, and
because he was her son it seemed quite unlike any other fault and far more excusable. Her detached
wisdom warned her that she must check all such tendencies in him, since what would in other
children be judged a shortcoming natural to their age, would in him be ascribed to the evil
blood of his lawless begetting, and he would start life under the powerful suggestion of a
bad reputation. She resolved to punish him. The core of her that was nothing but love for Richard,
that would have loved him utterly if they had not been mother and son, but man and woman, or
man and man, or woman and woman, cried out with anguish that she should have to hurt him to
guard against the destiny which she herself had thrust upon him.

She said in a strained voice: "How dare you tell a lie to me and pretend that you were going
to the marshes?" He answered, his eyebrows meeting and lying in straight, sullen bars: "I had
to do that so's you wouldn't worry about me not coming home. And I paid for myself with the
sixpence that was over from the five shillings Cousin Tom gave me at Christmas. And you know
it doesn't really matter about the measles, because I'm strong and don't always go catching
things like Roger does."

He made as if he were going to sit down at the table, but she said: "No, you mustn't have any
tea. Go to your room and undress. You've lied and you've disobeyed. I'll have to whip you."
Her heart was thumping so that she thought she was going to faint. He lifted his chin a little
higher and said: "Very well, the circus was very good. It was quite worf this." He marched
out of the room and left her sick and quivering at her duty. After she had heard him bang his
door, she realised that Roger was asking her again and again if he might have some more cherry
jam, and she answered, sighing deeply, "No, dear, it's too rich. If you have any more you'll
be ill," and she rose from the table and took the jar into the larder. She decided to clear
away tea first, but that only meant carrying the tray backwards and forwards twice, and after
a few moments she found herself standing in the middle of the kitchen, shaking with terror,
while the other child whined about her skirts and stretched up its abhorrent little arms. She
pushed it aside, qualifying the harsh movement with some insincere endearment, and went to
Richard's room and walked in blindly, saying: "I must whip you--you've broken the law, and
if you do that you must be punished." Out of the darkness before her came the voice of the
tiny desperado: "Very well. It was quite worf this. Mother, I'm ready. Come on and whip me."
She pulled down the blinds and set herself to the horrid task, and kept at it hardly, unsparingly,
until she felt she had really hurt him. Then she said, with what seemed to be the last breath
in her heart-shattered body: "There, you see, whenever you break the law people will hurt you
like this. So take notice." She moved about the room, leaving it as it should be left for the
night, opening the windows and folding up the counterpane, while he lay face downwards on his
pillow. Just as she was closing the door he called softly:

"Mummie!"

She continued to close it, and he cried:

"Mummie!"

But she remained quite quiet so that he thought she had gone. After a minute she heard him
throw himself over in the bed and kick the clothes and sob fiercely, "Gah! Why can't she come
when I call her?"

She was back by his bedside in a second, and his arms were round her neck and he was sobbing:

"Mummie, mummie, I know I've been naughty!" And as he felt the wetness of her face he cried
out, "Oh, mummie, have I made you cry? I will be good! I will be good! I'll never make you
cry again! I know I was a beast to go 'cos you really were frightened of us getting measles,
but oh, mummie, I did so want to see a tiger!"

They clung to each other, weeping, and he said things into her neck that were far more babyish
than usual and yet fiercely manly, and they almost melted into each other in the hot flow of
loving tears.

"You were quite right to whip me," he told her. "I wouldn't have believed you were really cross
if you hadn't hurt me." Presently, when he was lying quietly in her arms, all sticky sweetness
like toffee, he sighed, "Oh, darling, the circus was lovely! There were such clever people.
There was a Cossack horseman who picked up handkerchiefs off the ground when he was riding
at full speed, and there was a most beautiful lady in pink satin. Mummie, you'd look lovely
in pink satin!--and she'd bells on her legs and arms, and she waggled them and it made a tune.
That was lovely, but I liked the animals best. Oh, darling, the lions!"

She rebuked him for his continued enjoyment of an illicit spectacle that ought now to be regarded
only as material for repentance, but he protested: "Mummie, you are mean. Now you've whipped
me for going, surely I've a right to enjoy it." But he lay back and just gave himself up to
loving her. "Oh, you beautiful mummie. You've such lots and lots of hair. If there were two
little men just as big as my fingers, they could go into your hair, one at each ear, and walk
about it like people do in the African forests, couldn't they? And they'd meet in your parting,
and one would say to the other, 'Mr. Livingstone, I presume?'" They both laughed and hugged
each other, and he presently fell asleep as suddenly as children do.

She lingered over him for long, peering at him through the dusk to miss nothing of his bloomy
brownness. He curled up when he slept like a little animal, and his breath drove through him
deeply and more serenely than any adult's. At last she felt compelled to kiss him, and, without
waking up, he shook his head about and said disgustedly, "Wugh!" as she rose and left him.

Twilight was flooding the house, and peace also, and she moved happily through the dear place
where she lived with her dear son, her heart wounded and yet light, because though she had
had to hurt him, she knew that henceforward he would obey whatever laws she laid upon him.
He had been subject to her when he was a baby; it was plain that he was going to be subject
to her now that he was a boy; she might almost hope that she would never lose him. "I must
make myself good enough to deserve this," she said prayingly. As she went downstairs she looked
through the open front door into the crystalline young night, tinged with purple by some invisible
red moon and diluted by the daylight that had not yet all poured down the sluice of the west,
and resolved to go out and meditate for a little on how she must live to be worthy of this
happy motherhood.

She walked quickly and skimmingly about the dark lawns, exalted and humble. In a gesture of
joy she threw out her arms and struck a clump of nightstock, and the scent rushed up at her.
A nightingale sang in the woods across the lane. These things seemed to her to be in some way
touchingly relevant to the beautiful destiny of her and her son, and her eyes were filled with
tears of gratitude for nature's sympathy. She went round the house, walking softly, keeping
close to the wall, to eavesdrop on the lovely, drowsy, kindly world. The silence of the farmyard
was pulsed with the breath of many sleeping beasts. The dark doors and windows of the cattle-sheds
looked out under the thick brows of their thatched eaves at the strange fluctuating wine-like
light as if they were consciously preserving their occupants from the night's magic. As she
walked to the garden's edge, the crickets chirped in the long grass and the ballet of the bats
drove back and forwards in long streaks. The round red moon hung on the breast of a flawless
night, whose feet were hidden in an amethystine haze that covered the marshes and the sea,
and changed the lit liners going from Tilbury to floating opals; and within the house was Richard.
All was beauty.

Surely it would be given to her to deserve to be his mother? She stood there in an ecstasy
that was hardly at all excitement, until it blew cold and she remembered that she had left
the fire unmended, and went back to the house.

She went in by the kitchen, and was amazed to see that the larder door was open and giving
out a faint ray of light. She pulled it open and saw the other child standing on a chair and
spooning cherry jam out of the jar into his mouth. A candle, which it had put on the shelf
below it, threw on the ceiling an enormous shadow of its large, jerry-built skull. It turned
on her a pale and filthy face and dropped the jar, so that gobs of jam fell on its pinafore,
the paper-covered shelf, the chair, the floor. She lifted the child down and struck it. It
gave her the most extraordinary pleasure to strike it. She struck it three times, and each
time it was as good as drinking wine. Then she fell forward on her knees and covered her face
with her hands. The child ceased to howl and put its jammy arms forgivingly about her while
she wept, but its touch only reminded her how delicious it had been to beat it. Still, she
submitted to its embrace, and muttered in abasement: "Oh, lovey, mummy shouldn't have done that!"

The child was puzzled, for it knew it ought not to have stolen the jam, and as always, it was
so full of love that it could not believe that anybody had behaved badly to it. There was nothing
to do but to give it a kiss and take it off to bed. When she saw its horrid little body stripped
for the bath, heat ran through her throat, and she remembered again how exquisite it had been
to hurt him, and she speculated whether very much force would be needed to kill it. All the
time it knelt at her knee saying its prayers she was wondering whether, when he was a little
older, he would not get caught by the tide out on the flats. "You vile woman!" she exclaimed
in amazement. "You murderess!" But that was merely conversation which did not alter the established
fact that her profounder self still hated the child it had brought forth, as it had done before
he was born, and now, as then, was plotting to kill it, and that some check which her consciousness
had always exerted on that hatred had for some reason been damaged, and that he was in active
danger from her.

All night she lay awake, and in the morning she went up to the bailiff's office at Torque Hall
and asked them to send for Harry. She waited in an inner room, her heart quite calm with misery,
and when Harry appeared in the doorway she did not care one way or another that he was white
and shaken. Without delaying to greet him, she told him that she loathed Peacey's child so
much that it must be taken away from her, at least for some time, and that she had wondered
if she ought to give him a chance of finding affection with his father, who had, after all,
never stopped sending him presents.

There was a silence, and she turned her eyes on him and found him looking disapproving. Plainly
he thought it very unnatural of her to dislike her own child, and was daring to doubt if his
own son was safe with her. He--he of all men--who by his disloyalty had brought on her this
monstrous birth that had deformed her fate! She clenched her fists and drew in a sharp breath
and her eyes blazed. He moved forward suddenly in his chair, and she saw that this display
of her quality had drawn him to her, as always the moon of her being had drawn the fluid tides
of his, and that he wanted to touch her. Nearly he desired her. That also was insolence. Her
acute hating glance recorded that whereas desire had used to make his face hard and splendid
like a diamond, like a flashing sword, it now made it lax, and she realised with agony, though,
of course, without surprise, that he had been unfaithful to their love times without number.
But she looked into his eyes and found them bereaved as her heart was. She turned aside and
sobbed once, drily. After that, they spoke softly, as if one they had both loved lay dead somewhere
close at hand. He told her that Peacey had set up for himself in an inn, and that a widowed
sister of his, named Susan Rodney, who also had been in the Torques' service, was keeping house
for him. She was a really good sort, he declared, although she was Peacey's sister, and very
motherly; indeed, she had been terribly upset by the loss of her only child, a little boy of
nine, so she would doubtless welcome the charge of Roger. At any rate, there would be no harm
in letting the child go to her for a three months' visit.

"I'll settle the whole thing," he said. "You'd better not write; he may want to meet you."

With distaste she perceived that although he had never done anything useful for her, he was
still capable of being jealous of her, and she abruptly rose to go. But she delayed for a moment
to satisfy a curiosity that had vexed her for years.

"Tell me," she asked. "How did you get rid of Peacey? Was it money?"

He shrugged his shoulders. "Not altogether. You see, I found out something about him...."

She walked home slowly, with her head bent, wondering what blood she had perpetuated.

So, a week later, Susan Rodney came. Her visit was a great humiliation. She was a woman of
thirty-five, strangely and reassuringly unlike her brother, having a fair, sun-burned skin
with a golden down on her upper lip, and slow-moving eyes, the colour of a blue sky reflected
in shallow floods. She was as clean and useful as a scrubbed deal table. And because she was
wholesome in her soul, she abhorred this woman who was sending away her own child. During the
twenty-four hours she was at Yaverland's End she ate sparingly, plainly because she felt reluctance
at accepting hospitality from Marion, and rose very early, as if she found sleeping difficult
in the air of this house. This might have been in part due to the affection she evidently felt
for her brother, which was shown in the proud and grudging responses to Marion's enquiries
as to how he was getting on at Dawlish.

"He's doing ever so well, and he's made the place a picture," she would begin volubly, and
then would toss her head slowly like a teased heifer, and decide that Marion did not deserve
to hear tidings of the glorious man she had slighted. But the greater part of her loathing
was that which a woman with a simple heart of nature must feel for one who hated her child,
which the sound must feel for the leprous.

Marion could have mitigated that feeling in a great part, not by explaining, for that was impossible,
but by simply showing that she had suffered, for Susan was a kind woman. Instead she did everything
she could to encourage it. She told no lies, although by now her efforts to win over the neighbourhood,
so that she could get a servant easily and be able to give her whole time to the children,
had made her coldly sly in her dealings with humanity. She liked Susan too much for that. Merely
she made no attempt to disguise her personality. After the children had gone to bed she sat
by the hearth and held her head high under the other's ruminant stare, knowing that because
of the times she had been subject to love and to lust her beauty was lip-marked as a well-read
book is thumb-marked, and that that would seem a mark of abomination to this woman in the salty
climate of whose character passion could not bloom. She knew, too, that to Susan, who every
Sunday since her babyhood had gone to church and prayed very hard, with her thick fair brows
brought close together, to be helped to be good, the pride of her bearing would seem terribly
wicked to a sinner who had broken one of the Ten Commandments.

Marion kept down her eyes so that the other should not see that the eyeballs were strained
with agony, and should think that she was a loose and conscienceless woman. She hated doing
this. She liked Susan so much, and she was terribly lonely. She would like to have thrown her
arms round Susan's neck and cried and cried, and told her how terribly difficult she found
life, and how she hated people being nasty to her, and asked her if sometimes she did not long
for a man to look after her. But instead she sat there rigidly alienating her. For she had
seen that because Susan disliked her she was precipitating herself much more impulsively than
she would otherwise have done into affection for the child whom she suspected was being maltreated
by this queer woman in this queer house. In any case she would have admitted Roger to her heart,
for it was plainly very empty since the loss of her son, whom she had loved so dearly that
she did not speak of him to Marion, but being slow of movement she might have taken her time
over it; and it was necessary that these two should love each other at once. At any moment
Roger might understand his mummie hated him, and that would break his poor little heart, which
she knew was golden, unless he had some other love to which to run. She was so glad when she
found herself seeing them off at Paddington, although it was a horrible scene. Susan had primly,
and with an air of refusing to participate in the spoils of vice, declined to let Marion buy
her a firstclass ticket, so the parting had to take place in a crowded thirdclass compartment.
Roger shrieked and kicked at leaving her, and leaned howling from the window, while Marion
said over and over again, "Mummy's so sorry ... it's only that just now she isn't well enough
to look after you both ... and Richard's the eldest, so he must stay ... and you'll be back
ever so soon.... And there's such lovely sands at Dawlish...."

All the people in the corner-seats had looked with distaste at this plain, ill-behaved child
and had cast commending glances on Richard, who stood by her side on the platform, absorbedly
watching the porters wheeling their trucks along, but always keeping on the alert so that he
never got in anyone's way. She couldn't bear that. She wanted to scream out: "How dare you
look like that at this poor little soul who has been sinned against from the moment of his
begetting? Think of it, his mother hates him!"

She looked wildly at Susan for some comfort, but found her pink with grave anger. Well, it
was better for Roger that Susan should feel thus about her. So she went on with these murmurs,
which she felt the child might detect as insincere at any moment, until the green flag waved.
She watched the diminishing train with a criminally light heart. Richard began to jump up and
down. "Mummie! Won't it be lovely--just us two!"

It was lovely. It was iniquitously lovely. In the morning Richard ran into her room and flung
himself, all dewy after the night's long sleep, into her bed and nuzzled into her and gave
her endless love which did not have to be interrupted because the other child was standing
at the head of the bed, its pale eyes asking for its share of kisses. When he went to school,
she stood at the door and watched him run along the garden to the gate, flinging out his arms
and legs quite straight as a foal does, and was exultingly proud of being a mother as she had
not been when there ran behind him Roger on weak, ambling limbs. When he returned, they had
their meal together to the tune of happy laughter, for there was now no third to spill its
food or say it was feeling sick suddenly or babble silly things. In the afternoon she had to
drive him out to go and play games with the other boys. Much rather would he have stayed with
her, and when she called him back for a last hug he did not struggle in her arms but gave her
back kiss for kiss. She always changed her dress for tea, and arranged her hair loosely like
a woman in a picture, and went out into the garden to gather burning leaves and put them in
vases about the room, and when it fell dark she set lighted candles on the table because they
were kinder than the lamp to her pain-flawed handsomeness and because they left corners of
dusk in which these leaves glowed like fire with the kind of beauty that she and Richard liked.
She would arrange all this long before he came in, and sit waiting in a drowse of happiness,
thinking that really she had lost nothing by being cut off from the love of man, for this was
much better than anything she could have had from Harry. When Richard came in he would hold
his breath because it was so nice and forget to tell her about the game from which he was still
flushed; and after tea they would settle down to a lovely warm, close evening by the fire,
when they would tell each other all the animal stories that Roger had not liked.

On Saturday afternoons they always went down to the marshes together, and they were glad that
now was the ebbing of the year, for both found the beauty of bad weather somehow truer than
the beauty of the sunshine. They loved to walk under high-backed clouds that the wind carried
horizonwards in pursuance of some feud of the skies. They liked to see Roothing Castle standing
up behind a salt mist, pale and flat as if it were cut out of paper. They liked to sit, too,
at the point where there met together the three creeks that divided Roothing Marsh, the Saltings,
and Kerith Island. That was good when the tide was out, and the sea-walls rose black from a
silver plain of mud, valleyed with channels thin and dark as veins. They would wait until the
winter sunset kindled and they had to return home quickly, looking over their shoulders at
its flames.

Lovely it was to find that he liked all the things she did: loneliness and the sting of rain
on the face and the cry of the redshanks; and lovely it was to find in watching his liking
what a glorious being it was that she had borne. The eyes of his soul glowed like the eyes
of his body. She had loved Harry's love for her because it made him quick and unhesitant and
unmuddied by half-thought thoughts and half-felt feelings as ordinary people are, but this
child was like that all the time. Pride ruled his life, so that she never had to feel anxious
about his behaviour, knowing that he would pull himself up into uncriticisable conduct just
as he always held his head high, and all the forces of his spirit were poured out into his
passion for her. She had always known these things, and now the knowledge of them was not balanced
by the knowledge that her faith held weight for weight of infamy and glory. For now that Roger
was not here there was nothing to remind her that the man to whom she had given her virginity
had not come to her help when she was going to have his child and had left her to be trodden
into the mud by the fat man Peacey. Now she only knew that she was the beloved mother of this
splendid son. What had happened to the man with whom, according to the indecent and ridiculous
dispensation of nature, she had had to be enmeshed in a net of hot excitements and undignified
physical impulses in order to obtain this child, mattered nothing at all. He had been so much
less splendid than his son.

She grew well with happiness. She became plumper, and there was colour on her cheeks as well
as in her lips. People ceased to treat her with the hostility that the happy feel for the unhappy.
Presently she knew that she would soon regain complete self-control and would be able to keep
shut the trap-door of her hidden self, and that it would be quite safe for her to have Roger
back at the end of three months. She began to speak of it to Richard. "Roger will be with us
for Xmas," she used to say. "We must think out some surprises for him...." To which Richard
would answer tensely, "I s'pose so." That always chilled her, and she would drop the subject,
feeling that after all there was no need to speak of it just yet. But once, as the days passed
into December, she tried to have it out with him, and followed it up by saying: "You might
try to be a little more pleased about it. I do want you and Roger to be nice to each other."
He answered, looking curiously grown up, "Oh, Roger will always be nice to me--you needn't
worry about that."

As she heard the tone, with its insolent allusion to Roger's natural slavishness, she realised
why the vicar and the teachers in the village school, and many of the other people with whom
he came in contact, disliked him. There was something terrifying about this cold-tempered judgment
coming from a child. She had wondered, looking at the beauty of his contemptuous little face
and at the extraordinary skill with which his small brown hands were whittling a block of wood
into a figure, whether it was not a sound instinct on the part of the race to persecute illegitimate
children. Either they were conceived more lethargically than other children, of women who yielded
through feeble-wittedness or need of money to men who did not love them enough to marry them,
and so were born below the average of the race, dullards that made life ugly, or parasites
that had to be kept on honest people's money in prisons or workhouses. Or, like, Richard, they
had been conceived more intensely than other children, of love so passionate that it had drawn
together men and women separated by social prohibitions. So they were born to rule like kings
over the lawfully begotten, so that married folk raged to see that, because they had known
no more than ordinary pleasure, their seed was to be penalised by servitude. Richard would
always be adored by all but the elderly and the impotent.

Because vitality itself had been kneaded into his flesh by his parents' passion he would not
die until he was an old, old man and needed rest after interminable victories; and because
it played through his mind like lightning, he would always have power over men and material,
and even over himself. Since he had been begotten when beauty, like a strong goddess, pressed
together the bodies of his father and mother, she would disclose more of her works to him than
to other sons of men with whose begetting she was not concerned. Even now, every time Marion
let him take her to the turn of the road past Roothing, where he could show her the oak cut
like a club on a playing-card and aflame with autumn that stood on the hill's edge, against
the far grey desolation of Kerith Island and the sunless tides, he knew such joy as one would
have thought beyond a child's achievement. He would get as much out of life as any man that
ever lived. At the thought of the contrast between this heir to everything and the other child,
that poor waif who all his life long would be sent round to the back door, tears rushed to
her eyes, and she cried indignantly, "Oh, I do think you might be nice to Roger." Richard looked
at her sharply. "What, do you really mind about it, mummie?" The surprise in his tone told
her the worst about her forced and mechanical kindnesses to Roger. "Oh, more than anything,"
she almost sobbed. "Very well, I'll be nice to him," he answered shortly, adding after a minute,
with a deliberate impishness, as if he hated the moment and wanted to burlesque it, "After
all, mums, I never do hit him...." But for the rest of the evening the golden glow of his face
was clouded with solemnity, and when she was tucking him up that night he said, in an off-hand
way, "You know prob'ly Roger's got much older while he's been away, and I'll be able to play
with him more when he comes back." She laughed happily. If he was going to help her to frustrate
her unnatural hatred of Roger, she would succeed.

CHAPTER VI

Then, a week later, Harry died. That might have meant grief, wrecking and inexpressible, for
she discovered that she was still his. Love lay in her, indestructible as an element. It was
true that passion was gone from her for ever, but that had been merely an alloy added to it
by nature when she desired to use it as currency to buy continuance, and love itself had survived.
She might have lacerated herself with mourning for the fracture of their marriage and the separation
of their later years had it not been for the beautiful thing that had happened the afternoon
before he died. It was so beautiful that she hardly ever rehearsed its details to herself,
preferring to guard it in her heart as one guards sacred things, preserving it immaculate even
from her own thoughts. It had lifted the shame from her destiny. She perceived that the next
day, when Richard came in and stood stumbling with the handle of the door, instead of running
to the table, though she had arranged it specially, as if this were a birthday, with four candles
instead of two, and had baked him a milk loaf for a treat, and had cut the last Michaelmas
daisies from the garden and set them in blanched mauve clouds about the dark edges of the room.

"Mother, the squire's dead," he said at length. That she knew already. She had divined it early
in the afternoon, when the village people began to go past the house in twos and threes, walking
slowly and turning their faces towards her windows. "Yes, dear," she answered evenly. "Mother,
is it true that the squire was my father? All the other boys say so." She had anticipated this
moment for years with terror, because always before it had seemed to her that when it came
she must break down and tell him how she had been shamed and abandoned and cast away to infamy,
and she had dreaded that this might make him frightened of life. But because of what had happened
the day before she was able to smile, as if they were talking of happy things, and say slowly
and delightedly, "Yes, you are his son." He walked slowly across the room, knitting his brows
and staring at her with eyes that were at once crafty and awed, as children's are when they
perceive that grown-ups are concealing some important fact from them, and harbour at once a
quick, indignant resolution to find out what it is as soon as possible, and a slow, acquiescent
sense that the truth must be a very sacred thing if it has to be veiled. At her knee he halted,
and shot sharp glances up at her. But the peace in her face made him feel foolish, and he said
in an off-hand manner: "Mummie, Miss Lawrence says my map of the Severn is the best," and then
turned to look at the tea-table. "Ooh, mums, milk-loaf!" She could see as he continued that
all was well with him. The squire had been his father: but it evidently was not anything to
make a fuss about; it seemed funny that he and mother hadn't lived together, but grown-ups
were always doing funny things; anyway, it seemed to be all right....

As she sat and teased him for making such an enormous meal, and rejoicing silently because
he had passed through this dangerous moment so calmly, it struck her that Roger also would
participate in the benefits brought by the beautiful happening of the day before. Now that
her past life had been made not humiliating, but only sad, she would no longer feel angry with
him because he reminded her of it. That night she wrote to Susan Rodney and asked her to bring
him back during the week before Christmas.

       *       *       *       *       *

Marion, groaning, pressed the button of the electric clock that stood on the table by her bedside,
and looked up at the monstrous white dial it threw on the ceiling. Half-past one. She rolled
over and cried into the pillow, "Richard! Richard!" She had already been three hours in bed.
There were six more hours till morning, six more hours in which to remember things, and memory
was a hot torment, a fire lit in her brainpan.

       *       *       *       *       *

When, three days later, she received Peacey's letter saying that he would not allow the child
to go back to her she felt nothing but relief. It was disgusting, of course, to get that letter,
to have to read so many lines in that loathsome, large, neat, inflated handwriting, but she
took it that it meant that those toys which he had sent Roger every six months were not, as
she thought, mere attempts to torture her by reminding her of his existence, but signs that
he had really wanted to be a father to his son, and that now that Harry was dead he was declaring
his desire freely. That made her very happy, for she knew that love from the worst man on earth
would be more nourishing for the boy than her insincerity. She did not tell Richard, because
she could not have borne to see how pleased he would look, but she went about the house light-heartedly
for winter days, bursting with song, and then penitently checking herself and planning to send
Roger extravagant presents for Christmas, until Susan Rodney's letter came. She had sat with
it open on her lap, feeling sick and wondering in whose care she could leave Richard while
she went down to Dawlish and fetched the poor little thing away, for quite a long time, before
it occurred to her that Harry had never told her the secret by which he held Peacey in subjection.
Immediately she realised that Peacey knew this. Out of his cold, dilettante knowledge he had
known that when she and Harry met they would not be able to speak his name for more than one
minute. She wished she were the kind of woman who fainted from fear. The clock ticked, and
not less steadily beat her heart, and nothing came to distract her from looking into the face
of this fact that she had now no power over Peacey and he knew it.

Then she huddled forward towards the fire, which no longer seemed to heat her, and Susan's
letter fell from her lap into the fender. She picked it up, crying, "Oh, my baby, how little
I care for you!" and struck herself on the forehead as she reflected how many expedients would
have suggested themselves to her if it had been Richard who was being maltreated down at Dawlish.
She sat down and wrote a lying letter to Peacey, threatening him with the disclosure of the
secret she did not know, and then, because the grandfather clock twanged out three and she
knew the post was collected five minutes past, she ran out into the windy afternoon bareheaded.
The last part of the distance, down the High Street, she ran, but she got into the grocer's
shop too late and found Mr. Hemming just about to seal the bag. "Oh, Mr. Hemming!" she gasped.
The three women in the shop turned round and looked at her curiously, and she perceived that
if she betrayed her agony now she would lose all the ground she had gained during the past
few years by her affectation of well-being. If it leaked out, as it certainly would, unless
she at once lowered the present temperature of the moment, that a few days after Harry's death
she had been excitedly sending a letter to Peacey, the village people would go through her
story all over again to try to find out what this could possibly mean, and would remember that
it was a tragedy, and once more she would be the victim of that hostility which the happy feel
for the unhappy. Yet she found herself making a queer distraught mask of her face and saying
theatrically, "Oh, Mr. Hemming, please, please let this letter go ..." and, when he granted
the favour, as she knew quite well he would have done to just half as much imploration, she
went out of the shop breathing heavily and audibly.

"Why am I like this?" she asked herself. "Ah, I see! So that I can say afterwards that I did
everything I could to get him back, even to the extent of turning people against me, and can
settle down to being happy with Richard. Oh, Roger, I am a cold devil to you...." She was indeed.
For when she received Peacey's letter saying blandly that there was nothing in his life of
which he need feel ashamed, and realised that the game was up and she was powerless, she was
glad. She sat down and wrote her bluffing answer, a warning that if the child was not sent
back within a week she would come down to Dawlish and fetch it, with an infamous fear lest
it might be efficacious. And when Peacey wrote back, pointing out that Richard was legally
his child, and that he would be taken out of her custody if she went on making this fuss about
Roger, she chose immediately. She tore the letter into small pieces and dropped them into the
heart of the fire, and knelt by the grate until the flame died. Though the boy was still out
at school she lifted up her voice and cried out seductively, serenely, "Richard! Richard!"

What is this thing, the soul? It blows hot, it blows cold, it reels with the drunkenness of
exaltation for some slight event no denser than a dream, it hoods itself with penitence for
some act that the mind can hardly remember; and yet its judgments are the voice of absolute
wisdom. She did not care at all for Roger. When at nights she used to see in the blackness
the little figure standing in his shirt, beating the dark air with his fists, as Susan told
her he used to do when Peacey woke him suddenly out of his sleep to frighten him, her pity,
was flavourless and abstract. That she had unwittingly sent the child to its doom caused her
no earthquake of remorse but a storm of annoyance. Yet she knew every hour of the day that
her soul had taken a decision to mourn the child in some way that would hurt her.

One afternoon, a month or so after their happy, lonely Christmas, when she was playing balls
in the garden with Richard, the postman came up and handed her another letter from Susan Rodney.
Though Peacey had forbidden her to write to Susan Rodney, so that she had never been able to
explain why she did not come and fetch Roger, he allowed Susan to write to her. Weekly Marion
received letters cursing her cruelly in not coming, written in an honest writing that made
them hurt the more. She took it and smiled in the postman's face. "Well, how is Mrs. Brown
getting on with the new baby?" When he had gone she gave it to Richard and told him to go and
drop it in the kitchen fire. While he was away she stood and stared down at the acid green
of the winter grass, and wondered what she had missed by not reading the letter, what story
of blows delivered cunningly here and there so that they did not mark, or of petting that skilfully
led up to a sudden feint of terrifying temper; and suddenly she was conscious of a fret in
the air, and said wonderingly, "It is far too early for the Spring. We are hardly into February
yet." But the fret had been not in the air but in herself, and the change of season it had
foreboded had been in her own soul.

That very night she had begun to have bad dreams. In the morning she woke sweating like an
overdriven horse, and said to herself, "This is the worst night I have spent in all my life.
Pray God I may never spend another like it."

But henceforward half her nights were to be like that. By day her soul walked like a peacock
on its green lawn, proudly, pompously, struttingly, because she was the mother of this gorgeous
son. There was no moment of her waking life that he did not gild, for either he had not long
gone out and had turned at the gate to wave good-bye with a gesture so dear that when she thought
of it she dug her nails into her palms in an agony of tenderness, or he was just coming back
and she must get something ready for him. Even after he had gone to school he built her a bulwark
against misery which endured till the night fell, for in the few hours that remained after
she had finished the work she had now undertaken on the farm she read his letters over and
over again. They were queer and disturbing and delicious letters, and they hinted that there
was a content in their relationship which had never yet been put into words, for they were
full of records of his successes in class and at games.

Now he had that complete lack of satisfaction in his own performance which superficial people
think to be modesty, though it springs instead from the sword-stiff extreme of pride; when
he made his century in a school match he was galled by the knowledge that he was not as good
a player as Ranji, and when he was head of the science side his pleasure was mitigated to nearly
nothing by his sense that still he did not know as much about these things as Lord Kelvin.
That he gave her every detail of all his successes meant, she began to suspect, that he knew
they were both under a ban, and that he was handing her these evidences of his superiority
over the other people as an adjutant of a banished leader might hand him arrows to shoot down
on the city that had exiled him. When he was home for the holidays he said nothing that confirmed
this suspicion, but she noticed that only when he was with her was his mouth limpid and confident
as a boy's should be; in the presence of others he pressed his upper lip down on his lower
so that it looked thin, which it was not, with an air of keeping a secret before enemies. She
loved this sense of being entrenched quite alone with him in a fortress of love. She would
not have chosen another destiny, for she did not think that she would ever have liked ordinary
people even if they had been nice to her.

But that was only her daylight destiny. In the night she staggered down Roothing High Street
under stones, or sat in the brown sunshine of the dusty room and watched Peacey stroking his
fat thigh and talking of his dear dead mother; or felt his weight thresh down on her like the
end of the world; or took into her arms for the first time the limp body of the other child.
It did not avail her if she fought her way out of sleep, for then she would continue to re-endure
the scene in a frenzy of memory, and either way she knew the agony that the experience had
given her with its first prick, coupled with the woe that came of knowing that those things
would go on and on, until in the end a little figure in a nightshirt beat the dark with its fists.

For a time she found solace in thinking that perhaps she was expiating her involuntary sin
in hating her child, and indeed it seemed to her that when she evoked that little figure she
felt something in her heart which, if she and the frozen substance of her were triturated a
little more by torture, might grow into that proper loving pain which she coveted more than
any pleasure. But that process, if it ever had begun, was stopped when Richard was fifteen.

It happened, two days after he had come home for the summer holidays, that in the early part
of the night she had again been stoned and that she had started up, crying out, "Harry! Harry!"
She heard the latch of the door lift, and someone stood on her threshold breathing angrily.
Half asleep, she mumbled, "Harry, it can't be you?..." A voice answered haltingly, "No," and
a match scratched, and Richard crossed the room and lit the candle by her bedside. She could
not see him, for the light was too strong after the darkness, and she could not quite climb
out of her dream, but she rocked her head from side to side and muttered, "Go to bed, I'm all
right, all right." But he sat down on her bed and took her hand in his, and said sullenly,
"You've been calling out for my father. Why are you doing that?" She whimpered, "Nothing. I
was only dreaming." But he went on, terrifying her through her veil of sleep. "I know all about
it, mother. The other boys told me about it. And Goodtart said something once." His hand tightened
on hers. "You used to meet him up at that temple." For a minute he paused, and seemed to be
shuddering, and then persisted, "What is it? Why do you cry almost every night? I've heard
you ever so often. You've got to tell me what's the matter."

She stiffened under the fierce loving rage in his tone and stayed rigid for a moment. Through
her drowsiness there was floating some idea that the salvation of her soul depended on keeping
stiff and silent, but because she was still netted in the dream, and the beating of the tin
cans distracted her, she could not follow it and grasp it, and soon she desired to tell him
as much as she had always before feared it. In her long reticence she felt like a suspended
wave forbidden to break on the shore by a magician's spell, and she lifted her hands imploringly
to him so that he bent down and kissed her. It was as if the heat of his lips dissolved some
seal upon her mouth, and she sobbed out: "It's when the boy touches me with a stick that I
can't bear it!"

"What boy did that?"

"I think it was Ned Turk. When I was stoned down Roothing High Street."

"Mother, mother. Tell me about that."

She wailed out everything, while the hand that held hers gradually became wet with sweat. At
the end of her telling she drew her hair across her face and looked up at him through it. "Have
I lost him?" she wondered. "Harry did not like me so much after horrible things had happened
to me." Then as she looked at him her heart leaped at the sight of his beauty and his young
maleness, and she cried out to herself, "Well, whether I have lost him or not, I have borne him!"

But she had him always, for presently he bent forward and laid his face against her hand, and
began to kiss it. Then he pulled himself up and sat hunched as if the story he had heard were
a foe that might leap at him, and almost shouted in his queer voice, which was now breaking,
"Mother, I would like to kill them all! Oh, you poor little mother! I love you so, I love you
so...." He buried his face in the clothes for one instant and seemed about to weep, and then,
conscious of her tears, slipped his arm behind her and raised her up, and covered her with
kisses, and muttered little loving, comforting things. She crooned with relief, and until the
sky began to lighten and she had to send him back to bed, sobbed out all the misery she had
so long kept to herself. He did not want to go. That she liked also; and afterwards she slipped
softly into dreamless sleep.

Yet strangely, for surely it was right that a mother should be solaced by her son? There shot
through her mind just before she slept a pang of guilt as if she had done some act as sensual
as bruising ripe grapes against her mouth. How can one know what to do in this life? Surely
it is so natural to escape out of hell that it cannot be unlawful; and by calling "Richard!
Richard!" she could now bring her worst and longest dream to an end. Surely she had the right
to make Richard love her; and she knew that by the disclosure of her present and past agonies
she was binding his manhood to her as she had bound his boyhood and his childhood. Yet after
every time that she had called him to save her from a bad dream she had this conviction of
guilt. She could not understand what it meant. It was partly born of her uneasy sense that
in these nights she was unwillingly giving Richard a false impression of her destiny which
laid the blame too heavily on poor Harry; because she could not yet tell the boy of all Peacey's
villainy, he was plainly concluding that what had broken her was Harry's desertion. But it
was a profounder offence than this that she was in some way committing. She did not know what
it was, but it robbed her torment of any expiatory quality that it might ever have had. For
now, when she evoked the little figure in a nightshirt beating the dark with its fists, she
felt nothing. There was not the smallest promise of pain in her heart. As much as ever Roger
was an orphan.

But worst of all it was to have had the opportunity to settle this matter for once and for
all and to expunge all evil, and to have missed it. For Roger came back. Richard was seventeen,
and had gone to sea. How proud she had felt the other day when Ellen had asked why he had gone
to sea! He might do many things for his wife, but nothing comparable to that irascible feat
of forcing life's hand and leaping straight from boyhood into manhood by leaving school and
becoming a sailor at sixteen so that he should be admirable to his mother. During the holidays,
when he formed the intention, she had watched him well from under her lids and had guessed
that his pride was disgusted at his adolescent clumsiness and moodiness and that he wanted
to hide himself from her until he felt himself uncriticisable in his conduct of adult life.
She had had to alter that opinion to include another movement of his soul when, as they travelled
together to London the day he joined his ship, he turned to her and said: "My father never
saw any fighting, did he?" She had met his eyes with wonder, and he had pressed the point rather
roughly. "He was in the army, wasn't he? But he didn't see any fighting, did he?" She had stammered:
"No, I don't think so." And he had turned away with a little stiff-lipped smile of satisfaction.
That had distressed her, but she had a vague and selfish feeling that she would imperil something
if she argued the point. But whatever his motives for going had been, she was glad that he
went, for though she herself was not interested in anything outside her relationships, she
knew that travel would afford him a thousand excitements that would evoke his magnificence.
The Spring day when he was expected to come home she had found her joy impossible to support
under the eyes of the servant and the farm-men, for she had grown very sly about her fellow-men,
and knew that it was best to hide happiness lest someone jealous should put out their hand
to destroy it. So she had gone down to the orchard and sat in the crook of a tree, looking
out at an opal estuary where a frail rainstorm spun like a top in the sunshine before the variable
April gusts. She wondered how his dear brown face would look now he had outfaced danger and
had been burned by strange suns. She had heard suddenly the sound of steps coming down the
path, and she had turned in ecstasy; but there was nobody there but a pale young man who looked
like one of the East-End trippers who all through the summer months persistently trespassed
on the farm lands. As he saw her he stopped, and she was about to order him to leave the orchard
by the nearest gate when he flapped his very large hands and cried out, "Mummie! Mummie!" There
was a whistling quality in the cry that instantly convinced her. She drew herself taut and
prepared to deal with him as a spirited woman deals with a blackmailer, but as he ran towards
her, piping exultantly, "Now I'm sixteen I can say who I want to live with--the vicar says
so," she remembered that he was her son, and suffered herself to be folded in his arms, which
embraced her closely but without suggestion of strength.

That day, at least, she had played her part according to her duty: she had corrected so far
as possible the sin of her inner being. It had not been so very difficult, for Roger had shown
himself just as goldenhearted as he had been as a child. He would not speak of the years of
ill-treatment from which he had emerged, save to say tediously, over and over again, with a
revolting, grateful whine in his voice, how hard Aunt Susan had worked to keep the peace when
father had one of his bad turns. It appeared that for the last two years he had been an apprentice
in a draper's shop at Exeter, and though there he had been underfed and overworked and imprisoned
from the light and air, all that he complained of was that the "talk was bad." Tears came into
his light eyes when he said that, and she perceived that there was nothing in his soul save
sickly, deserving innocence, and of course this inexterminable love for her. There would never
be any end to that. All through the midday meal he kept on putting down his fork with lumps
of meat sticking on it and would say whistlingly: "Ooh, mummie, d'you know, I used to think
it must be my imagination you had such a wonderful head of hair. I don't think I've ever seen
such another head of hair."

But he was so good, so good. He said to her in the afternoon as they walked along the lanes
to Roothing High Street, a scene the memory of which he had apparently cherished sentimentally,
"You know, mummie, when I told Aunt Susan that I was going to run away and find you, she said
that I had better try my luck, but I mustn't be disappointed if you didn't want me. But I knew
you would, mummie...."

Her heart was wrung, not so much by his faith in her, which was indeed a kind of idiocy, as
by the sense that, if Susan thought he had better try his luck with her, his life with his
father must have been a hell, and that he was not complaining of it. Flushing, she muttered,
"I'm glad you knew how I felt, dear," and all day she did not flinch. When it was past eight,
and Richard had not come, she cut for Roger the pastry that she had baked for the other, and
laughed across the table at him as they ate; and when the door opened and the son she loved
moved silently into the room, looking sleepy and secret as he always did when he was greatly
excited, she stood up smiling, and loyally cried, "Look who's here, Richard!" She thought as
she said it how like she was to a wife who defiantly faces her husband when one of her relations
whom he does not like has come to tea, and she tried to be amused by the resemblance. But Richard's
eyes moved to the stranger's gaping, welcoming face, hardened with contempt, and returned to
her face. He became very pale. It evidently seemed to him the grossest indecency on her part
to allow a third person to be present at their meetings, and indeed she herself felt faint,
as she had used to do when she met Harry is front of other people. But she pulled out of herself
a clucking cry that might have come from some happy mother without a history: "Richard! don't
you see it's Roger!"

Surely, after having been able to keep the secret of what she felt for him through that torturing
moment when she found Richard's displeasure, she had the right to expect that all would go
well. It was loathsome having him in the house, and she and Richard were hardly ever alone.
But her bad dreams left her. This was life simple as the Christians said it was, in which one
might hug serenity by the conscientious performance of a disagreeable duty. Yet there came
a day, about three weeks after his coming, when Roger sat glumly at the midday meal and did
not talk, as he had ordinarily done, about the chaps at Exeter, and how there was one chap
who could imitate birds' calls so that you couldn't hardly tell the difference, and how another
chap had an uncle who was a big grocer and used to send him a box of crystallised fruit at
Christmas; and immediately the meal was finished he rose and left the room, instead of waiting
about and saying, "I s'pose you aren't going for a walk, are you, mummie?" Relieved by his
departure, she had leaned back in her chair and smiled up at Richard, saying, "How brown you
are still!" when suddenly there had flashed across her a recollection of how Roger's shoulders
had looked as he went out of the room, and she started up to run out and find him. He was in
one of the outhouses, clumsily trying to carpenter something that was to be a surprise to somebody.
He did not look up when she came in, though he said with a funny lift in his voice, "Hello,
mummy!" She stood over him, watching his work till she could not bear to look at his warty
hands any longer, and then asked: "Roger, dear, is there anything the matter?" She spoke to
him always without any character in her phrases, like a mother in books. He mumbled, "Nothing,
mummie," but would not lift his head; and after a gulping minute whimpered: "I want to go back
to the shop." "Back to the shop, dear? But I thought you hated it. Darling, what is the matter?"
He remained silent, so she took his face between her hands and looked into his eyes. Perhaps
that had not been a very wise thing to do.

Marion had dropped her hands and gone back to Richard, and said with simulated fierceness:
"You haven't done anything to Roger that would make him think that we don't like having him
here?" He glanced sharply at her and recognised that their destiny was turning ugly in their
hands, and he answered: "Of course not. I wouldn't do anything to a chap who's been through
such a rotten time." She thought, with shame, that if his face had become cruel at her question,
and he had answered that he thought it was time the other went, she would have bowed to his
decision, because he was her king, and she realised that it was no wonder that Roger had found
out. That moment of which she was so proud because she had said heartily, "Richard, don't you
see it's Roger?" without showing by any wild yearning of the eye that she would have given
anything to be alone with him, had been instantly followed by a betrayal. For when he had lifted
his lips from her cheek and had turned to greet Roger with courtesy that was at once kind and
insincere, he had left one hand resting on her shoulder as it had been when they embraced,
and his thumb stretched out to press on the pulse that beat at the base of her throat. If she
had been completely loyal she would have moved; but she had stood quite still, letting him
mark how she was not calm and rejoicing at all, but shaken as by a storm with her disgust at
this loathsome presence. His hand had relaxed and he had passed it caressingly up her neck.
She had let herself sigh deeply; she might as well have said, "I am so glad you understand
I hate him." That was the first of a thousand such betrayals. The words said between souls
are not heard by the eavesdropping ear, but the soul also can eavesdrop, and tells in its time.
That morning there must have come a moment to the poor pale boy, as he worked at his silly
present in the little shed, when it was plain to him that the mother and the brother whom he
had thought so kind were vulpine with love of each other, vulpine with hate of him.

There was no disputing his discovery, since it was true. The only thing to do was to try to
arrange some way of life for him in which he would have a chance to become an independent person
who could form new and unspoiled relationships. It was, of course, out of the question to send
him back to the shop, but the problem of disposing of him was one that raised innumerable difficulties
which Marion was the less able to face because her bad dreams had begun again. He had so little
schooling that it was impossible to send him in for any profession. He, himself, who was touchingly
grateful because they were not sending him back to the shop, chose to be trained as a veterinary
surgeon, and he was apprenticed to old Mr. Taylor at Canewdon. But it turned out that though
he had a passionate love for animals he had no power over them. After he had been chased round
a field three times and severely bitten by a stallion with whom he had sat up for two nights,
Mr. Taylor pronounced that it was hopeless and sent him home. They tried him as a chemist's
assistant next, and he did well for ten months, until there was that awful trouble about the
prescription. There had been nothing to do after that save to put him to work as a clerk and
give him an allowance that with his wages would enable him to live in comfort and try to seem
glad when he came home for his holidays.

For he was still not quite sure. His suspicion that his mother did not love him was so strong
that, half because his sweetness of nature made him not want to bother her if his presence
really gave her pain, and half because he could not bear to put the matter to a test, he would
not take a situation anywhere near Roothing. But he liked to come home for his fortnight's
holidays at Christmas, and sit by the hearth and look at his wonderful mother and comfort himself
by thinking that if they were so kind he must have been wrong. Best of all, perhaps, he liked
the Bank Holidays, when he travelled half the day in a packed carriage to get there and had
only a few hours to spend with her; it was easier to keep things going when he stayed such
a short time, and there was less misgiving on his face when he waved good-bye from the carriage
window than there was after any of his longer visits. But so far as she was concerned, all
his visits were in essence the same, in that at the end of each of them she was left standing
on the platform with her eyes following the retreating train and a fear coiling tighter round
her heart. She had always known, of course, that this life for which she was responsible, and
by whose fate she would be judged, would blunder to ruin, and as the years went on there came
intimations, faint as everything connected with Roger, but nevertheless convincing, which confirmed
her dread. He was always changing his situation and moving from suburb to suburb, for he would
never take a job in the city, because the noise and crowds in the narrow streets frightened him.

From a bludgeoned look about him, which became more and more marked, she was sure that he was
being constantly dismissed for incompetence, but he would never admit that. "I'm a funny chap,
mummie," he would say bravely, "I can't bear being shut up in the same place for long." And
she would nod understandingly and say, "Do as you like, dear, as long as you're happy," because
he wanted her to believe him. But she would be sick with visions of this blanched, misbegotten
thing standing smiling and wriggling under the gibes of normal and brutal men throughout the
inexorably long workday, and then creeping to some mean room where it would sit and snivel
till the night fell across the small-paned window. And through the sallow mist of her unavailing
and repugnant pity there flashed suddenly the lightning of certainty that some day the thing
would happen. But what thing? She would put her hand to her head, but she was never able to
remember.

And when he was twenty-two and living at Watford something did happen; though it was not, she
instantly recognised, the thing. She herself had never been angered by it, although she hated
telling Richard about it, but had instantly perceived the pathos of the situation; her mind
had always done its duty by Roger. It told, of course, the most moving story of loneliness
and humiliation and hunger for respect and love that he should have represented himself to
the girl with whom he had been walking out as a man of wealth and that after a rapturous afternoon
at a flower show he should have taken her to the best jeweller's in Watford and given her a
diamond brooch and earrings, for which, even with his allowance, he could not possibly pay.

The visit to Watford she had to make to clear things up had seemed at first the happiest event
of all her relationship with Roger. It had been unpleasant to find him grey with weeping and
disgrace, but there had been victory in forcing herself to comfort him with an exact imitation
of the note of love. It had been ridiculous to face the angry lady in the case, who wore nodding
poppies in her hat and had an immense rectangular bust and hips like brackets, but it was pleasant
to murmur, "Oh, but he was speaking the truth. I'm quite comfortably off. I've come to pay
the jeweller," and watch the look of amazement on the hot, high-coloured face giving place
to anger and regret as it penetrated into her that she had really had the chance of marrying
a wealthy man, and that after the things she had said that chance would be hers no longer.
Marion liked hurting the girl because she had hurt Roger. Marion felt with satisfaction that
the pleasure was a feeling a mother ought to feel.

She liked, too, going into the jeweller's shop and sitting there under the goggling eyes of
the tradesman and speaking in the right leisurely voice that she had learned from her lover:
"Yes, but I don't want you to take them back. I want to pay for them. There seems to have been
some misunderstanding. There is no difficulty about the money at all. My son only wanted you
to wait till his quarter's allowance came. I have the money here in notes. If you would count
it...." She was playing a mother's part well; and she rejoiced because the jeweller's eyes
were examining with approval and conviction her beautiful clothes. For she had begun lately
to take great pains over her dressing, partly because it was pleasant for her who was so smirched
with criticism both from within and without to be above reproach in any matter, but mostly
because she liked to look well in Richard's eyes; that this had served Roger's end seemed to
lift from her a part of her guilt. She hurried back to give Roger the receipt, and took him
in her arms and rocked him as he sobbed out his ridiculous story: "Oh, mummie, I never would
have done it if I hadn't gone mad. You see, mummie, Queenie's such a glorious woman...."

But the soul has the keenest ears of any eavesdropper. He sat up suddenly and lifted her arms
off his shoulders and looked at her with pale, desperate eyes. She clapped her hand across
her face and then took it away again, and said softly: "What is it, dear?" But he had sunk
into a stupor, and had dropped his protruding gaze on the pattern of the oilcloth on the floor,
which he was tracing with the toe of his boot. She could get nothing out of him. He obviously
did not want her to stay two or three days with him, as she had proposed to do, but, on the
other hand, he said over and over again as they waited on the platform for her train, "Mummie,
I do love you, mummie. I do love you. And thank you, mummie...." But she knew that these alterations
and inconsistencies of his mood did not matter to their lives any more than the pitch and roll
of a steamer travelling through rough weather affects its course. For since that moment when
he had stared into her eyes and seen she did not love him she had known that somewhere, far
off, beyond time and space, there had been set a light to the fuse of that event which she
had always feared ... the event that would destroy them all....

But had it? For after all, nothing dreadful had happened. Roger had written to her the next
day telling her that he would not take his allowance any more because he did not think he deserved
it, and he must try and be a man and shift for himself, and saying that he was taking a situation
in another town which he did not name. That was the last they heard of him for a long time,
for he came no more to Roothing for his holidays. Presently, with an exultant sense of release,
but with an increasing liability to bad dreams, she went abroad to join Richard, at first at
the post he held at the Romanones Mines in Andalusia, and then in Rio de Janeiro. There she
was happy. She was one of those Northerners to whom the South belongs far more truly than it
does to any of its natives. For over those the sun has had power since their birth, consuming
their marrows and evaporating their blood so that they became pithless things that have to
fly indoors for half the day and leave the Southern sun blazing insolently on the receptive
Southern earth. But with blood cooled and nerves stabilised by youth spent on the edge of the
grey sea, she could outface all foreign seasons. She could walk across the silent plaza when
its dust lay dazzling white under the heat-pale sky and the city slept; the days of heavy rain
and potent pervasive dampness pleased her by their prodigiousness; and when the thunderstorm
planted vast momentary trees of lightning in the night she was pleased, as if she was watching
someone do easily what she had always impotently desired to do.

And Richard was so wonderful to watch in this new setting that matched his beauty, easily establishing
his dominion over the world as he had established it over her being from the moment of his
conception. There was a conflict raging in him which, since it never resulted in hesitancy,
but in simultaneous snatchings at life by both of the warring forces, gave him the appearance
of the calmest exultation. He loved riding and dancing and gambling so much that his face was
cruel when he did those things, as if he would kill anybody who tried to interrupt him in his
pleasure. But he gave the core of his passion to his work and disciplined all his days to the
routine of the laboratory, so that he was always cool and remote like a priest. It gave him
pleasure to be insolent as rich men are, but all his insolence was in the interests of fineness
and humility. He was ambitious, so fastidious about the quality of his work that he rejected
half the world's offers to him. And always he turned aside from his victories and smiled secretively
at her, as if they were two exiles who had returned under false names to the country that had
banished them and were earning great honours. She wished this life could go on for ever.

But one day Richard came to her as she sat in the dense sweetness of the flowering orange grove
and tossed a letter into her lap. She did not open it for a little, but lay and looked at Richard
through her lashes. His swarthiness was burned by the sun, and his body was slim like an Indian's
in his white suit, and his lips and his eyes were deceitful and satisfied, as they always were
when he had been with Mariquita de Rojas. That did not arouse any moral feeling in her, because
she did not think of Richard's actions as being good or bad, but only as being different in
colour and lustre, like the various kinds of jewels; there are pearls, and there are emeralds.
But it made her feel lonely, and she turned soberly to opening her letter. It was from Roger.
He was in trouble; he had been out of a job for some months; his savings were gone, and the
woman was bothering for her rent; he asked for help. At first she did not think that she would
tell Richard, but recognising that that was a subtle form of disloyalty to Roger, she said
evenly: "Richard, how can I cable money to Roger? He wants it quickly. And, Richard, I think
I should go home and look after him." Richard had set his eyes on the far heat-throbbing seas
and, after a moment's quivering silence, had broken into curses. "Oh, don't speak of poor Roger
like that!" she had cried out, and he had answered terribly: "I'm not speaking of him; I'm
speaking of my father, who let you in for all this." She had muttered protestingly, but because
of the hatred in his face she was not brave enough to tell him that she had made her peace
with his father before he died. Not even for Harry's sake would she imperil the love between
her and her son.

She had gone home a few months later, but, of course, it had been useless. Roger would never
come back to live with her. All she could do was to sit at Yaverland's End, ready to receive
him when he turned up, as he always did when he had got a new post, to boast of how well he
was going to do in the future. Usually on these occasions he brought her a present, something
queer that wrung the heart because it revealed the humility of his conception of the desirable;
perhaps a glass jar of preserved fruit salad which had evidently impressed him as looking magnificent
when he saw it in the grocer's shop. She would kiss him gratefully for it, though every time
he came back he was more like the grey and hopeless men, cousins to the rats, who hang round
cab-ranks in cities.

A regular routine followed these visits. First he wrote happy letters home every Sunday; then
he ceased to write so often; then there was silence; and then he wrote asking for help, because
he had lost his job and owed money to the landlady. Then she would seek him out, wherever he
was, and pay the landlady, who was usually well enough disposed towards Roger unless he had
tried to win her affections by being handy about the house, in which case there were extra
charges for the plumber and an irremovable feeling of exasperation. And she would ask him to
come home with her, and not bother about working, but just be a companion to her. At that,
however, he always slowly shook his small, mouse-coloured head. For he was still not quite
sure ... and he feared that he might become so if he went back and lived with her. As things
were, he could interpret her prompt answer to his call as a sign of affection. Moreover, he
had his poor little pride, which was not a negligible quality; he never would have sent to
her for money if he had not felt so sorry for his landladies. To admit that he could not earn
a bare living when his brother was making himself one of the lords of the earth would have
broken his spirit.

Knowing these things, she could not beg him over-much to come to her, but that left dreadfully
little to say in the hours they had to spend together on these occasions. There fell increasingly
moments of silence when, unreminded by his piteousness and her obligations by the good little
pipe of her voice, she was aware of nothing but his unpleasantness. For he was becoming more
and more physically horrible. As was natural when he lived in these mean lodgings, he was beginning
to look, if not actually dirty, at least unwashed; and there was something else about his appearance,
something tarnished and disgraceful, which she could not understand till the landlady at Leicester
said to her: "I do think it's such a pity that a nice young man like Mr. Peacey sometimes don't
take more care of himself like he ought to." Drunkenness seemed to her worse than anything
in the world, because it meant the surrender of dignity; she would rather have had her son
a murderer than a drunkard. She had wondered if the truth need ever reach Richard, and there
had floated before her mind's eye a newspaper paragraph: "Roger Peacey, described as a clerk,
fined forty shillings for being drunk and disorderly and obstructing the police in the course
of their duty...." She had asked quickly, "What is he like? Does he get violent?" The woman
had answered: "Oh no, mum; just silly-like," and had laughed, evidently at the recollection
of some ridiculous scene.

Oh God, oh God! When she struggled out of her bad dreams she awoke to something that, having
had this confirmation, was now no longer fear, but a shudder under the breath of a stooping,
searching evil. She had always known that the existence of Richard and herself and Roger was
conditional upon their maintenance of a flawless behaviour. There was somewhere in the dark
conspiring ether that wraps the world an intention to destroy her for her presumption in being
Richard's mother and him for daring to be Richard--an intention that was vindictive against
beauty and yet was fettered by a harsh quality resembling justice. It could not strike until
they themselves became tainted with unworthiness and fit for destruction. Now they had become
tainted. She knew that Roger's drunkenness would be obscenely without dignity; she knew that
she would side with her triumphant son and against her son who needed her pity. They would
all be unworthy and they would all be destroyed. Nothingness would swallow up her Richard.
To free herself from her fear she leaped out of bed and ran to the window, and stared on the
white creeks that lay under the moonlight among the dark marsh islands with a brightness that
seemed like ecstasy, as if they were receiving pleasure from it. Her thoughts ran along the
hillside to the man who lay high above and excluded from this glittering world in his marble
tomb. "Oh, Harry," she cried, "I'm not blaming you, but if you'd stuck to me it would have
been so different...."

If he had been loyal to her she would have awakened now in a great house, with many rooms in
which, breathing deeply and evenly, there slept beautiful people who had begun their being
in her womb. Harry would not have died if he had been with her. The procreative genius of her
body would have kept him in life to give her more. Her last-born child would still have been
quite young. It was to him she would have gone now; if she had wakened she would have found
him in the end room, a boy fair as his father, and having the same look of integrity in joy,
of immunity from sorrow or profound thinking. She would have watched his face, infantile and
pugnacious with dreams of the day's game, until she longed too strongly to touch him and kiss
him. Then she would have turned and went back along the corridor, between the glorious young
men and women who lay restoring their might for the morrow, not one of them threatened, not
one of them doomed....

Love could have made that of her life if it had not been beaten away. The thought was bitter.
She stared with thin lips at the happy gleaming tides until it struck her suddenly that love
had come back into her house. It was here now, attending on the red-haired girl, and it would
not be beaten off; it would be cherished, it would be given sacrifices. Surely if it could
have made beautiful her own life, which without it had been so hideous, it could exorcise Richard's
destiny. She fixed her eyes on the high moon and said as if in prayer, "Ellen.... Ellen...."

There sounded, in the recesses of the house, the ping of an electric bell.

She looked at the clock by her bedside. It was three o'clock. She said to herself, with that
air of irony which people to whom many strange things have happened assume when they fear that
yet another is approaching, so that they shall not flatter Fate by their perturbation, "It's
late for anyone to call."

But the ping sounded again; and then the thud of blows upon the door.

She cried out, "Ah, yes!" She knew who it was. It was Roger, come in rags, come in an idiot
hope of escaping justice, after some fatuous and squalid crime, to destroy Richard and herself.
She hurried over to her wardrobe and drew out her warm dressing-gown and thrust her feet into
slippers, while her lips practised saying lovingly, "Roger, Roger, Roger! ... Why, it's you,
Roger!... Come in. Come in, my boy.... What is it, my poor lad?..."

She went down through the quiet house and laid her fingers on the handle of the door; delayed
for a moment, and raised her hand to her face and smoothed from it certain lines of loathing.
Bowing her head, she murmured a remonstrance to some power.

But when she opened the door it was Richard who stood there.

CHAPTER VII

He could not at once discern in the darkness who it was that opened the door, and he remained
an aloof black shape against the moon-glare, lifting his cap and saying, "I am sorry to knock
you up at this hour," so for a minute Marion had the amusing joy of seeing him as he appeared
to other people, remote and vigilant and courteous and really more hidalgoesque than the occasion
demanded. She laughed teasingly. The hard line of him softened, and he said, "Mother," and
stepped over the threshold and folded her in his arms, and kissed her on the lips and hair.
She rested quietly within his groping, pressing love. This indoor darkness where they stood
was striped with many lines of moonlight coming through cracks in doors and the margins of
blinds, so that it seemed to have no more substance than a paper lanthorn, and outside the
white boles and branches of the lit leafless trees were as luminous stencillings on the night.
There was nothing solid in the world but their two bodies, nothing real but their two lives.

She did not ask him why he had come at this hour. There was indeed nothing so very unusual
in it, for more than once when he was a sailor she had been wakened by the patter of pebbles
on her window and had looked down through the darkness on the whitish oval of his face, marked
like a mask with his eagerness to see her; and later, in southern countries, he had often walked
quietly into the dark, cool room where she lay having her siesta, though she had thought him
a hundred miles away, and it had seemed as if nothing could move in the weighty heat outside
save the writhing sea. It had always seemed appropriate to their relationship that he should
come to her thus, suddenly and without warning and against the common custom. Thus had he come
to be born.

She pushed him away from her. "Have you put your motor-cycle in the shed?" she asked indifferently.

"No. It's outside the gate."

"Put it in. There may be frost by the morning."

He turned away to do it. To him it was always heaven, like the peace of dreamless sleep, to
hand over to her the heavy sword of his will.

She watched him go out into the white ecstatic glare and pass behind the illuminated twiggy
bareness of the hedge, which looked like the phosphorescent spine of some monstrous stranded
fish. This was a strange night, crude as if some coarse but powerful human intelligence were
co-operating with nature. She had a fancy that if she strained her ears she might hear the
whirr of the great dynamo that served this huge electric moon. But however the night might
be, this strange, dangerous son of hers was a match for it. She looked gloatingly after him
as he passed out of her sight, and then turned and went into the kitchen. It was easy to prepare
him a meal, for there was a gas-stove and the stores lay at her hand, each in its own place,
since in her five minutes' visit to the cook every morning she imposed the same nervous neatness
here and kept the rest of the house rectangular and black and white.

She heard the closing of the front door and his steps coming in search of her. She liked to
think of him finding his way to her by the rays of light warmer than moonlight through half-open
doors. If it had been anyone else in the world that was coming towards her she would have gathered
up her thick plaits and pinned them about her head. But from him she need not hide the signs,
which made all other people hate her, that she had been beautiful and had been destroyed.

When he came in she said, "Light the other gas-jets. Yes, both of them."

Now there was a lot of light. She could see the bird's-wing brilliance of his hair, the faint
bluish bloom about his lips, that showed he had not shaved since morning, the radiance of his
eyes and the flush on his cheeks that had come of his enjoyed ride through the cold moony air.
The queer things men were, with their useless, inordinate, disgusting yet somehow magnificent
growth of hair on their faces, and their capacity for excitements that have nothing to do with
emotion....

He came and stood beside her and slipped his arm round her waist and murmured, "Well, Marion?"
and laughed. Always he had loved calling her that, ever since as a little boy he had found
her full name written in an old book and had run to her, crying, "Is that really your lovely
name?" Even more than by the name itself had he been pleased by the way it was written, squintwise
across the page and in a round hand, exactly as he himself was then writing his own name in
his first school books. It made him see his mother as a little girl, and helped him to dream
his favourite dream that he and she were just the same age and could go to school and play
games together. It still gave him an inexplicable glow of pleasure, the memory of that brownish
signature staggering across the flyleaf of "Jessica's First Prayer."

She perceived that he was violently excited at coming back to her, but she took the toast from
under the grill, buttered it, set it on the warm plate, and poured the eggs on it with an ironical
air of absorption. These two went very carefully and mocked each other perpetually so that
the gods should not overhear and be jealous. "Now, eat it while it's hot!" she said, holding
out the plate.

He put it down on the kitchen table and gathered her into his arms.

"Well, mother?" he murmured, looking down at her, worshipping her.

"Oh, my boy," she whispered, "you've lost your brown, up there in Scotland."

"Oh, I'm all right. But you?"

"As well as well can be."

"But, mother dear, you look as if you'd been having those bad dreams."

"No, I've had none, none at all."

"That means not too many. Does it?"

They kissed, and he said tenderly yet harshly: "Roger hasn't been bothering you?"

"Ah, the poor thing, don't speak of him like that," she said. "No, but I've not heard from
him for six weeks. Not even at Christmas. I'm a little anxious. But it may be all right. You
remember last Christmas there was a time when he didn't write. I expect it'll be all right."
But with her eyes she abandoned herself to fear, so that he should soothe her and stroke her
hands with his, which were trembling in spite of their strength because he was so glad to see her.

"Mother, darling, I have hated leaving you alone. But it was necessary. I've done good work
this winter." He made with one hand a stiff and sweeping movement that expressed his peculiar
kind of arrogance, which stated that his was the victory, now and for ever, and yet took therefrom
no pride for himself. "I've pulled it off," he said jeeringly, and smiled at her derisively
but with tight lips, as if they must take this thing lightly or some danger would spring. "Where
I get my brains from I don't know," he muttered teasingly, and put out his hand and traced
the interweaving strands in one of her plaits. "What hair you've got!" he said. "I've never
seen a woman with ..." He started violently and was silent.

She cried out, "What is it?" But he answered, speaking clippedly, "Oh, nothing, nothing...."

So evidently was he overcoming a moment of utter confusion that she turned away and busied
herself with the coffee.

Behind her his voice spoke falsely, uplifted in a feint of the surprised recollection which
at its first coming had struck him dumb the previous moment. "And Ellen! I'm a nice sort of
lover to be five minutes in the house without asking for my Ellen! How is she? How have you
been getting on together?"

"Oh, your dear Ellen!" she cried fervently. But her heart went cold within her. He was right.
It was against nature that he should have forgotten the woman he loved when he came under the
roof where she was sleeping her beautiful sleep. Could it be that Ellen was not the woman he
loved and that his engagement to her was some new joke on the part of destiny? She whirled
round to have a look at him, exclaiming to make time, "Oh, she is the most wonderful creature
who ever lived." But he had forgotten his embarrassment now, and was standing with bent head,
thinking intently, and on his face there was the dazzled and vulnerable look of a man who is
truly in love. Well, if that were so, why could it not be pure and easy joy for them both,
as it was for other sons and mothers when there were happy marriage afoot? Why must their life,
even in such parts of it as escaped the shadow of Peacey or Roger, be so queer in climate?
This time it was Richard's fault. She had been willing to be lightly, facilely happy over it
like other people. Her spirit snarled at him, and she cried out impatiently, "Go and eat your
eggs before they're cold." As Richard took his seat, moving slowly and trancedly, and began
to eat his food with half indifference because of his dreams, she took the chair at the other
end of the table, and, cupping her chin in her hands, stared at him petulantly.

"Why didn't you tell me in your letters how beautiful she was?" she demanded.

He answered mildly, "Didn't I?"

"No, you didn't," she told him curtly. "You said you thought her pretty. Thought her pretty,
indeed, with that hair and that wonderful Scotch little face!..."

She caught her breath in irritation at the expression on his face, the uneasy movement from
side to side of his eyes which warred with the smile on his lips. Why, when he thought of his
love, need he have an air as if he listened to two voices and was distressed by the effort
to follow their diverse musics? But she could not quarrel with him for long, for he was wearing
the drenched and glittering look which was given him by triumph or hard physical exercise and
which always overcame her heart like the advance of an army. His flesh and hair seemed to reflect
the light as if they were wet, but neither with sweat nor with water. Rather was it as if he
were newly risen from a brave dive into some pool of vitality whose whereabouts were the secret
that made his mouth vigilant. Even he had the dazed, victorious look of a risen diver. Utterly
melted, she cried out, "I am so glad you have come home."

He started, and came smiling out of his dream. "I am so glad to be here," he said. They laughed
across the table; the strong light showed them the dear lines they knew on one another's faces.
"That's why," he cried brilliantly, "I've come at this ungodly hour. I had to be here. I got
into London at nine o'clock and I went and had some dinner at the Station Hotel. But I felt
wretched. Mother, I'm getting," he announced with a naïve triumph, "awfully domestic. I got
the hump the minute Ellen left Edinburgh. I felt I must come down to you at once, so I went
and got the cycle and started off straight away, and I would have been here by midnight if
I hadn't had a smash at Upminster. No, I wasn't hurt. Not a scrap. It was at the beginning
of that garden suburb. God, it must be beastly living in those new houses; like beginning to
colour a pipe. I'm glad we live in this old place. Well, a chap who'd bought some timber at
an auction down in Surrey, and was taking it home to Laindon, dropped a log off his lorry,
and I smashed into it and burst a tyre and broke half a dozen spokes in my front wheel, so
I had to hunt round till I found a garage, and when I did I had to spend hours tinkering the
machine up. The man who owned the place came down in his pyjamas and a dressing-gown and sat
talking about his wife. She hadn't wanted to let him come down because it was so late. 'Is
that a woman who'll help a man in his business, I ask you?' he kept on saying. Mustn't it be
queer to have womenfolk with whom one doesn't feel identical?" They exchanged a boastful look
of happiness, the intensity of which, however, seemed the last effort he found possible. For
his lids drooped, and he supported his head on his hand and took a deep drink, and said drowsily,
"I'm glad to be here."

She went and stood beside him and stroked his hair. "I should have come to you at Aberfay,"
she grieved. "But I knew I couldn't stand the winter, and I would only have been a nuisance
to you if I had been ill all the time. Did the woman feed you properly, dear?"

He said, without looking up, "I wouldn't have let you come. It was a God-forsaken hole. I couldn't
have stood it if it hadn't been for"--he gave it out with an odd hesitancy, almost as if he
were boyishly shy--"Ellen. And I had to stand it, so that I could pull this thing off."

She asked, "What thing, my dear?" though she was not so very greatly interested. By daylight
her ambition for him was fanatic and without limit. But in this stolen hour, when no one knew
that they were together, she let herself feel something like levity about his doings. It seemed
enough, considering how glorious he was, that he should merely be.

He began to eat again and told the story tersely between mouthfuls. "You know the reason that
I stayed up in Edinburgh after I'd sent off Ellen was that I thought I had to show the directors
what I'd been doing at Aberfay next Thursday. They were to come on to me after they'd paid
their visit to the Clyde works. Well, they came yesterday instead. Sir Vincent has to go to
America sooner than he expected, so he wanted to get it over. When they saw what I'd been trying
for during the last six months they got excited. As a matter of fact it is pretty good. I wish
I could tell you about it, but you know I can't. Also I had told McDermott that Dynevors, the
Birmingham people, had heard my contract was up in March, and wanted to buy me. So they got
frightened, and offered me a new contract that they thought would keep me." He had finished
his meal, and he pushed away his plate and stretched himself, looking up at her and smiling
sleepily.

"Have you taken it?"

"Rather. It couldn't have been better."

"What is it?"

"They've doubled my screw and given me an interest in the business."

"How?"

He shook his head, yawning. "A permanent agreement ...percentages ...I'm too woolly-headed
to tell you now."

"But what does it mean? You don't care about money or position as a rule. When you are ready to
enter your third suit for foreclosure, I'll drop round to your attorney's office, accept service
of the summons, appear in court, and confess judgment." Fell a silence. Then, "Do you enjoy
the study of people, sir?" Don Miguel demanded, apropos of nothing.

"Not particularly, Mr. Farrel. Of course, I try to know the man I'm doing business with, and
I study him accordingly, but that is all."

"I have not made myself explicit," his host replied. "The racial impulses which I observed cropping
out in my father--first Irish, then Spanish--and a similar observance of the raised impulses of
the peons of this country, all of whom are Indian, with a faint admixture of Spanish blood--always
interested me. I agree with Pope that 'the proper study of mankind is man.' I find it most
interesting."

"For instance?" Parker queried.

He had a feeling that in any conversation other than business which he might indulge in with this
young man he would speedily find himself, as it were, in deep water close to the shore.

"I was thinking of my father. In looking through his effects last night, I came across indubitable
evidence of his Celtic blood. Following the futile pursuit of an enemy for a quarter of a century,
he died and left the unfinished job to me. Had he been all Spanish, he would have wearied of
the pursuit a decade ago."

"I think every race has some definite characteristics necessary to the unity of that race,"
Parker replied, with interest.

"Hate makes the Irish cohesive; pride or arrogance prevents the sun from setting on British
territory; a passionate devotion to the soil has solidified the French republic in all its wars,
while a blind submission to an overlord made Germany invincible in peace and terrible in war."

"I
wonder what spiritual binder holds the people of the United States together, Mr. Parker?" Don
Miguel queried naively.

"Love of country, devotion to the ideals of liberty and democracy," Parker replied promptly,
just as his daughter joined them.

Farrel rose and surrendered to her his chair, then seated himself on the edge of the porch with his
legs dangling over into a flower-bed. His face was grave, but in his black eyes there lurked
the glint of polite contempt.

"Did you hear the question and the answer, Miss Parker?" he queried.

She nodded brightly.

"Do you agree with your father's premise?" he pursued.

"Yes, I do, Don Mike."

"I do not. The mucilage in our body politic is the press-agent, the advertising specialist, and
astute propagandist. I wonder if you know that, when we declared war against Germany, the reason
was not to make the world safe for democracy, for there are only two real reasons why wars are
fought. One is greed and the other self-protection. Thank God, we have never been greedy or jealous
of the prosperity of a neighbor. National aggrandizement is not one of our ambitions."

Kay stared at him in frank amazement.

"Then you mean that we entered the late war purely as a protective
measure?"

"That's why I enlisted. As an American citizen, I was unutterably weary of having our hand
crowded and our elbow joggled. I saw very clearly that, unless we interfered, Germany was going
to dominate the world, which would make it very uncomfortable and expensive for us. I repeat
that for the protection of our comfort and our bank-roll we declared war, and anybody who tells
you otherwise isn't doing his own thinking, he isn't honest with himself, and he's the sort of citizen
who is letting the country go to the dogs because he refuses to take
an intelligent interest in its affairs."

"What a perfectly amazing speech from an ex-soldier!" Kay protested.

He smiled his sad, prescient smile.

"Soldiers deal with events, not theories. They learn to call a spade a spade, Miss Parker. I
repeat: It wasn't a war to make the world safe for democracy. That phrase was just a slogan
in a business campaign--the selling of stock in a military enterprise to apathetic Americans.
We had to fight or be overrun; when we realized that, we fought.

Are not the present antics of the Supreme Council in Paris sufficient
proof that saving democracy was just another shibboleth?

Is not a ghastly war to be followed by a ghastly peace? The press-agents and orators popularized
the war with the unthinking and the hesitant, which is proof enough to me that we lack national
unity and a definite national policy.

We're a lot of sublimated jackasses, sacrificing our country to ideals that are worn at elbow and
down at heel. 'Other times, other customs.' But we go calmly and stupidly onward, hugging
our foolish shibboleths to our hearts, hiding behind them, refusing
to do to-day that which we can put off until to-morrow.

That is truly an Anglo-Saxon trait. In matters of secondary importance, we yield a ready acquiescence
which emboldens our enemies to insist upon acquiescence in matters
of primary importance.

And quite frequently they succeed. I tell you the Anglo-Saxon peoples are the only ones under
heaven that possess a national conscience, and because they possess it, they are generous enough
to assume that other races are similarly endowed."

"I believe," Parker stuck in, as Don Miguel ceased from his passionate denunciation, "that all this
is leading quite naturally to a discussion of Japanese emigration."

"I admit that the sight of Mr. Okada over in the corner of the patio, examining with interest the
only sweet-lime tree in North America, inspired my outburst," Farrel answered smilingly.

"You speak of our national shibboleths, Don Mike Farrel," Kay reminded him. "If you please, what
might they be?"

"You will recognize them instantly, Miss Parker. Let us start with our Declaration of Independence:
'All men are created equal.' Ah, if the framers of that great document had only written, 'All
men are created theoretically equal!' For all men are not morally, intellectually, or commercially
equal: For instance, Pablo is equal with me before the law, although I hazard the guess that
if he and I should commit a murder, Pablo would be hanged and I would be sentenced to life
imprisonment; eventually, I might be pardoned or paroled. Are you willing to admit that Pablo
Artelan is not my equal?" he challenged suddenly.

"Certainly!" Kay and her father both cried in unison.

"Very well. Is Mr. Okada my equal?"

"He is Pablo's superior," Parker felt impelled to declare.

"He is not your equal," Kay declared firmly. "Dad, you're begging the question."

"We-ll, no," he assented, "Not from the Anglo-Saxon point of view.

He is, however, from the point of view of his own nationals."

"Two parallel lines continued into infinity will never meet, Mr. Parker.

I am a believer in Asia for Asiatics, and, in Japan, I am willing to accord a Jap equality with
me. In my own country, however, I would deny him citizenship, by any right whatsoever, even by birth,
I would deny him the right to lease or own land for agricultural or other purposes, although
I would accord him office and warehouse space to carry on legitimate commerce. The Jap does
that for us and no more, despite his assertions to the contrary. I would deny the right of
emigration to this country of all Japanese, with certain exceptions necessary to friendly intercourse
between the two countries; I would deny him the privilege of economic competition and marriage
with our women. When a member of the great Nordic race fuses with a member of a pigmented
race, both parties to the union violate a natural law. Pablo is a splendid example of mongrelization."

"You
are forgetting the shibboleths," Kay ventured to remind him.

"No; I am merely explaining their detrimental effect upon our development. The Japanese are an
exceedingly clever and resourceful race.

Brilliant psychologists and astute diplomatists, they have taken advantage of our pet shibboleth,
to the effect that all men are equal. Unfortunately, we propounded this monstrous and half-baked
ideal to the world, and a sense of national vanity discourages us
from repudiating it, although we really ought to.

And as I remarked before, we possess an alert national conscience in international affairs, while
the Jap possesses none except in certain instances where it is obvious that honesty is the best
policy.

I think I am justified, however, in stating that, upon the whole,
Japan has no national conscience in international affairs.

Her brutal exploitation of China and her merciless and bloody conquest
of Korea impel that point of view from an Anglo-Saxon.

When, therefore, the Tokyo government says, in effect, to us: 'For one hundred and forty-four
years you have proclaimed to the world that all men are equal. Very well. Accept us. We are a
world-power.

We are on a basis of equality with you,' and we lack the courage to repudiate this pernicious
principle, we have tacitly admitted their equality. That is, the country in general has, because
it knows nothing of the Japanese race--at least not enough for moderately practical understanding
of the biological and economic issues involved. Indeed, for a long time, we Californians dwelt
in the same fool's paradise as the remainder of the states. Finally, members of the Japanese
race became so numerous and aggressive here that we couldn't help noticing them. Then we began
to study them, and now, what we have learned amazes and frightens us, and we want the sister
states to know all that we have learned, in order that they may cooperate with us. But, still,
the Jap has us tiron in other ways."

"Has us what?" Parker interrupted.

"Tiron. Spanish slang. I mean he has us where the hair is short; we're hobbled."

"How?" Kay demanded.

His bright smile was triumphant.

"By shibboleths, of course.

My friends, we're a race of sentimental idiots, and the Japanese
know this and capitalize it.

We have promulgated other fool shibboleths which we are too proud or too stupid to repudiate.
'America, the refuge for all the oppressed of the earth!' Ever hear that perfectly damnable
shibboleth shouted by a Fourth of July orator? 'America, the hope of the world!' What kind of
hope? Hope of freedom, social and political equality, equality of opportunity? Nonsense! Hope
of more money, shorter hours, and license misnamed liberty; and when
that hope has been fulfilled, back they go to the countries that denied
them all that we give.

How many of them feel, when they land at Ellis Island, that the ground
whereon they tread is holy, sanctified by the blood and tears of a
handful of great, brave souls who really had an ideal and died for it.

Mighty few of the cattle realize what that hope is, even in the second generation."

"I fear," quoth Parker, "that your army experience has embittered you."

"On the contrary, it has broadened and developed me.

It has been a liberal education, and it has strengthened my love for my country."

"Continue with the shibboleths, Don Mike," Kay pleaded. Her big, brown eyes were alert with interest
now.

"Well, when Israel Zangwill coined that phrase: 'The Melting-Pot,' the title to his play caught
the popular fancy of a shibboleth-crazy nation, and provided pap for the fanciful, for the theorists,
for the flabby idealists and doctrinaires. If I melt lead and iron and copper and silver and
gold in the same pot, I get a bastard metal, do I not? It is not, as a fused product, worth
a tinker's hoot.

Why, even Zangwill is not an advocate of the melting-pot. He is a Jew, proud of it, and extremely
solicitous for the welfare of the Jewish race. He is a Zionist--a leader of the movement to
crowd the Arabs out of Palestine and repopulate that country with Jews. He feels that the Jews
have an ancient and indisputable right to Palestine, although, parenthetically speaking, I do not
believe that any smart Jew who ever escaped from Palestine wants to go back. I wouldn't swap the
Rancho Palomar for the whole country."

Kay and her father laughed at his earnest yet whimsical tirade.

Don Miguel continued:

"Then we have that asinine chatter about 'America, the land of fair play.' In theory--yes.
In actual practice--not always. You didn't accumulate your present assets, Mr. Parker, without
taking an occasional chance on side-tracking equity when you thought
you could beat the case.

But the Jap reminds us of our reputation for fair play, and smilingly asks us if we are going
to prejudice that reputation by discriminating unjustly against him?"

"It appears," the girl suggested, "that all these ancient national brags come home, like curses,
to roost."

"Indeed they do, Miss Parker! But to get on with our shibboleths.

We hear a great deal of twaddle about the law of the survival of the fittest. I'm willing to
abide by such a natural law, provided the competition is confined
to mine own people--and I'm one of those chaps, who, to date, has
failed to survive.

But I cannot see any common sense in opening the lists to Orientals.

We Californians know we cannot win in competition with them." He paused and glanced at Kay.
"Does all this harangue bore you, Miss Parker?"

"Not at all. Are there any more shibboleths?"

"I haven't begun to enumerate them.

Take, for instance, that old pacifist gag, that Utopian dream that is crystallized in the words:
'The road to universal peace.' All the long years when we were not bothered by wars or rumors
of wars, other nations were whittling each other to pieces. And these agonized neighbors, longing,
with a great longing, for world-peace, looked to the United States as the only logical country
in which a great cure-all for wars might reasonably be expected to germinate. So their propagandists
came to our shores and started societies looking toward the establishment of brotherly love, and thus
was born the shibboleth of universal peace, with Uncle Sam heading the parade like an old bell-mare
in a pack train. What these peace-patriots want is peace at any price, although they do not
advertise the fact. We proclaim to the world that we are a Christian nation. Ergo, we must avoid
trouble.

The avoidance of trouble is the policy of procrastinators, the vacillating, and the weak. For
one cannot avoid real trouble. It simply will not be avoided; consequently, it might as well
be met and settled for all time."

"But surely," Parker remarked, "California should subordinate herself to the wishes of the majority."

"Yes,
she should," he admitted doggedly, "and she has in the past.

I think that was before California herself really knew that Oriental
emigration was not solely a California problem but a national problem
of the utmost importance.

Indeed, it is international.

Of course, in view of the fact that we Californians are already on the firing-line, necessarily
it follows that we must make some noise and, incidentally, glean some real first-hand knowledge
of this so-called problem. I think that when our fellow citizens know what we are fighting, they
will sympathize with us and promptly dedicate the United States to the unfaltering principle that
ours is a white man's country, that the heritage we have won from the wilderness shall be held
inviolate for Nordic posterity and none other."

"Nevertheless, despite your prejudice against the race, you are bound to admire the Japanese--their
manners, thrift, industry, and cleanliness." Parker was employing one of the old stock protests,
and Don Miguel knew it.

"I do not admire their manners, but I do admire their thrift, industry, and cleanliness. Their
manners are abominable. Their excessive courtesy is neither instinctive nor genuine; it is
camouflage for a ruthless, greedy, selfish, calculating nature. I have met many Japanese, but
never one with nobility or generosity of soul. They are disciples of the principles of expediency.
If a mutual agreement works out to their satisfaction, well and good. If it does not, they present
a humble and saddened mien. 'So sorry. I zink you no understand me. I don't mean zat.' And
their peculiar Oriental psychology leads them to believe they can get away with that sort of
thing with the straight-thinking Anglo-Saxon. They have no code of sportsmanship; they are irritable
and quarrelsome, and their contractual relations are incompatible with those of the Anglo-Saxon.
They are not truthful. Individually and collectively, they are past masters of evasion and
deceit, and therefore they are the greatest diplomatists in the world,
I verily believe.

They are wonderfully shrewd, and they have sense enough to keep their heads when other men are
losing theirs. They are patient; they plan craftily and execute carefully and ruthlessly. Would
you care to graft their idea of industry on the white race, Mr. Parker?"

"I would," Parker declared, firmly.

"It is getting to be the fashion nowadays for white men to do as little work as possible,
and half do that."

"I would not care to see my wife or my mother or my sister laboring twelve to sixteen hours
a day as Japanese force their women to labor.

I would not care to contemplate the future mothers of our race drawn from the ranks of twisted, stunted,
broken-down, and prematurely aged women.

Did you ever see a bent Japanese girl of twenty waddling in from a day of labor in a field? To
emulate Japanese industry, with its peonage, its horrible, unsanitary factory conditions,
its hopelessness, would be to thrust woman's hard-won sphere in modern civilization back to where
it stood at the dawn of the Christian era. Do you know, Miss Parker, that love never enters into
consideration when a Japanese contemplates marriage? His sole purpose in acquiring a mate is
to beget children, to scatter the seed of Yamato over the world, for that is a religious duty.
A Jap never kisses his wife or shows her any evidences of affection. She is a chattel, and
if anybody should, by chance, discover him kissing his wife, he would be frightfully mortified."

"What
of their religious views, Don Mike?"

"If Japan can be said to have
an official religion, it is Shintoism, not Buddhism, as so many Occidental
people believe. Shintoism is ancestor-worship, and ascribes divinity
to the emperor. They believe he is a direct descendant of the sun-god,
Yamato."

"Why, they're a heathen nation!" Kay's tones were indicative
of amazement.

Farrel smiled his tolerant smile.

"I believe, Miss
Parker, that any people who will get down on all fours to worship
the picture of their emperor and, at this period of the world's progress,
ascribe to a mere human being the attributes of divinity, are certainly
deficient in common sense, if not in civilization. However, for the
purpose of insuring the realization of the Japanese national aspirations,
Shintoism is a need vital to the race. Without it, they could never
agree among themselves for they are naturally quarrelsome, suspicious
and irritable. However, by subordinating everything to the state via
this religious channel, there has been developed a national unity
that has never existed with any other race. The power of cohesion
of this people is marvelous, and will enable it, in days to come,
to accomplish much for the race. For that reason alone, our very lack
of cohesion renders the aspirations of Japan comparatively easy of
fulfilment unless we wake up and attend to business."

"How do you
know all this, Mr. Farrel?" Parker demanded incredulously.

"I have
read translations from editorials in Japanese newspapers both in Japan
and California; I have read translations of the speeches of eminent
Japanese statesmen; I have read translations from Japanese official
or semi-official magazines, and I have read translations from patriotic
Japanese novels. I know what I am talking about. The Japanese race
holds firmly to the belief that it is the greatest race on the face
of the globe, that its religion, Shintoism, is the one true faith,
that it behooves it to carry this faith to the benighted of other
lands and, if said benighted do not readily accept Shintoism, to force
its blessings upon them willy-nilly. They believe that they know what
is good for the world; they believe that the resources of the world
were put here to be exploited by the people of the world, regardless
of color, creed, or geographical limitation. They feel that they have
as much right in North America as we have, and they purpose over-running
us and making our country Japanese territory. And it was your purpose
to aid in the consummation of this monstrous ambition," he charged
bluntly.

"At least," Parker defended, "they are a more wholesome
people than southern Europeans. And they are not Mongolians."

Farrel's
eyebrows arched.

"You have been reading Japanese propaganda," he
replied. "Of course they are Mongolians. Everybody who has reached
the age of reason knows that. One does not have to be a biologist
to know that they are Mongolians. Indeed, the only people who deny
it are the Japanese, and they do not believe it. As for southern Europeans,
have you not observed that nearly all of them possess brachycephalic
skulls, indicating the influence upon them of Mongolian invasions
thousands of years ago and supplying, perhaps, a very substantial
argument that, if we find the faintly Mongoloid type of emigrant repugnant
to us, we can never expect to assimilate the pure-bred Mongol."

"What
do you mean, 'brachycephalic'?" Parker queried, uneasily.

"They belong
to the race of round heads. Didn't you know that ethnologists grub
round in ancient cemeteries and tombs and trace the evolution and
wanderings of tribes of men by the skulls they find there?"

"I did
not."

Kay commenced to giggle at her father's confusion. The latter
had suddenly, as she realized, made the surprising discovery that
in this calm son of the San Gregorio he had stumbled upon a student,
to attempt to break a conversational lance with whom must end in disaster.
His daughter's mirth brought him to a realization of the sorry figure
he would present in argument.

"Well, my dear, what are you laughing
at?" he demanded, a trifle austerely.

"I'm laughing at you. You told
me yesterday you were loaded for these Californians and could flatten
their anti-Japanese arguments in a jiffy."

"Perhaps I am loaded still.
Remember, Kay, Mr. Farrel has done all of the talking and we have
been attentive listeners. Wait until I have had my innings."

"By
the way, Mr. Parker," Farrel asked, "who loaded you up with pro-Japanese
arguments?"

Parker flushed and was plainly ill at ease. Farrel turned
to Kay.

"I do not know yet where you folks came from, but I'll make
a bet that I can guess--in one guess."

"What will you bet, my erudite
friend?" the girl bantered.

"I'll bet you Panchito against a box
of fifty of the kind of cigars your father smokes."

"Taken. Where
do we hail from, Don Mike?"

"From New York city."

"Dad, send Mr.
Farrel a box of cigars."

"Now, I'll make you another bet. A tide of exultation surged through her, but she knew that this was the
movement within her of the pride that leads to death. For if Richard went on loving her over-much,
the present would become hideous as she had never thought that the circumstances of her splendid
son could do. The girl would grieve; and she would as soon that Spring itself should have its
heart hurt as dear little Ellen. And there would be no future. She would have no grandchildren.
When she died he would be so lonely.... And it was her own fault. All her life long she had
let him see how she wanted love and how she had been deprived of it by Harry's failure; and
so he had given her all he had, even that which he should have kept for his own needs. "What
can I do to put this right?" she asked herself. "What can I do?"

She found that his eyes were staring up at her from her lap. "Mother, what's the matter?"

"The matter?"

"You were looking at me like a judge who's passing sentence."

"Well, perhaps I am," she said wearily. "Every mother is a judge who sentences the children
for the sins of the father."

His face grew dark, as it always did when he thought of his father. "Well, if you had done
that I should have had a pretty bad time."

It occurred to her that there was a way, an easy way, by which she could free Richard from
his excessive love for her. He would not love her any more if she told him.... "But, oh, I
couldn't tell him that," her spirit groaned. "It is against nature that anyone but me should
know of that. It would spoil it to speak of it." But there was no other way. If she were to
go away from him he would follow her. There was no other way.

She shivered and smiled down on him, into his answering eyes. It was strange to think that
this was the last time they would ever look at each other quite like that. She prepared to
bring herself down like a hammer on her own delicate reluctances.

"Hush, Richard," she said. "You shouldn't talk like that. Perhaps I ought to have told you
long ago that your father and I made it up before he died."

He picked himself up and stood looking down on her.

"Yes, the day before he died we made it up," she began, but fell silent because of the beating
of her heart.

Presently he broke out. "What do you mean? Tell me what you mean."

"Why, let's see, it was like this," she continued. "It was in the afternoon. Half-past two,
I think. I was baking a cake for your tea. Of course that was in the old kitchen, on the other
side of the house, which opened into the farmyard. Well, I looked up and saw your father standing
in the doorway. I knew that meant that something strange was happening. From his coming at
all, for one thing. And because he hadn't got the dogs with him. I knew that meant he'd wanted
to be alone, which he hardly ever did. Those were the two greyhounds he had after Lesbia and
Catullus died. How funny--how funny to think I never knew their names." This measure of how
utterly she and her lover had been exiled from each other's lives filled her eyes with tears.
She encouraged them, so that Richard might see them and be angry with her.

Something about his silence assured her that she had succeeded. She went on chokingly: "He
said, 'Well, Marion?' I said, 'Well, Harry? Come in, if you wish to.' But I went on baking
my cake. He came and stood quite close to me. There was a pile of sultanas on the table, and
he helped himself to one or two. Then, all of a sudden, he said, 'Marion, I've got to have
an operation, and they say I'm pretty bad. I did so want to come and see you.'"

Richard spoke in a voice as quiet as hers. "The whining cur! The snivelling cur! To come to
you when he was afraid, after what he'd left you to for years."

"Oh, hush!" she prayed. "He is dead, and he was your father. Well, I took him into the other
room and gave him a cup of tea, and he told me all about it. Poor Harry! He'd had a lot of
pain. And dying is a dreadful thing, if you aren't old. I'm fifty, but I should be terribly
frightened to die. And Harry was not much over forty. I remember him saying just like a child,
'I wonder, now, if there is another world, will it be as jolly as this?'"

"The brute! The beast! A jolly world he'd made for you!"

"Oh, Richard, don't be too hard on him. And don't you see that he said that sort of thing because
he really was like a child and didn't realise what life was, and consequently he hadn't ever
had any idea what it had been like for me? Really, really he hadn't understood."

"Hadn't understood leaving you to Peacey? Mother--if I'd done that to a woman, what would you
have said?"

"But, dear, of course one has a higher standard for one's son than for one's husband. One expects
much more."

"Why?"

"Perhaps because one's sure of getting it." She tried to smile into his eyes and coquette with
him as she had used to do. But he was like a house with shuttered windows. She trembled and
went on: "Well, we talked. He asked a lot about you. Dear, you can't think what it meant to
him not to have you with him. You don't care about children. I've been worried about that sometimes.
But that'll come. I'm sure it will. But men like him ache for sons. If they haven't got them
they feel like a mare that's missed her spring. Daughters don't matter. That's because a son's
a happier thing than a daughter--there's something a little sad about women, don't you think,
Richard? I suppose it's something to do with this business of having children--and men like
that do so love happiness. He had coveted you most terribly when he saw you about the lanes.
Truly he had. Then he said he felt tired, and he lay down on the couch. I covered him with
a rug, and he had a little sleep. Then he woke up and said he must go because there was a solicitor
coming at four, and he was going to settle everything so that it was all right for you and
me. Then we said good-bye. And on the step he turned round and asked if I thought you would
like a Sealyham pup. And I said I thought you would."

"Mother, it wasn't Punch?"

"Yes. It was Punch."

She noted the murderous gesture of his hands with bitter rapture. He had loved that dog, but
now he wished he could hail it out of death so that he could send it back there cruelly. He
was then capable of rooting up old affections. She was not permitted to hope for anything better.

She pretended anger. "You've taken more than a dog from him. You know that it's his money that's
made life so easy for us."

"I should have had that by right. And you should have been at Torque Hall."

The thought of what Torque Hall would have been at this hour if he had, so full of lovely sleeping
sons and daughters, made her sigh. She went on dully: "Well, that's all. He turned at the gate
and waved good-bye. And the next day when you came in from school you told me he was dead."
For a time she looked down into the depths of her old sorrow. When she raised her eyes, she
was appalled by his harsh refusal to believe that there was any beauty in her story, and she
forgot why she was telling it, and stammered out: "Richard, Richard, don't you understand?
Don't you feel about Ellen that there was a part of you that loved her long before you ever
met? It was like that with Harry and me. There was a part in each of us that loved the other
long before we knew each other--and though Harry left me and I was bitter against him, it didn't
matter. That part of us went on loving all the time, and making something--something--" Her
hands fluttered before her; she gasped for some image to express the high spiritual business
that had been afoot, and her eyes rolled in ecstasy till they met his cold glance. "It is so!"
she cried defiantly.

The silence throbbed and was hot. She dropped her head on her hand and envied the quiet, moonlit
marshes.

He shrugged his shoulders and moved towards the door. "I'm going to bed," he said.

"That's right," she agreed, and rose and began to clear the table. Uneasily he stood and watched
her.

"Where does the Registrar live?" he asked suddenly.

"The Registrar?"

"Yes. I want to go to-morrow and put up the banns, or whatever it is one does."

"Of course, of course. Well, the registrar's named Woodham. He lives in the house next the
school. 'Mizpah,' I think they call it. He's there only in the afternoon. Did you specially
want to go to-morrow?"

"Yes," he said. "Good-night."

When he had gone upstairs she lifted her skirts and waltzed round the table. "Surely I've earned
the right to dance a little now," she thought grimly. But it was not very much fun to dance
alone, so she went up to her room, shielding her eyes with her hand as she passed his door.
She flung herself violently down on the bed, as if it were a well and there would be the splash
of water and final peace. She had lost everything. She had lost Richard. When she had trodden
on that loose board in the passage, that shut door might so easily have opened. She had lost
the memory that had been the sustenance of her inmost, her most apprehensive and despairing
soul. For it was the same memory now that she had spoken of it. Virtue had gone out of it.
But she was too fatigued to grieve, and presently there stood by her bedside a phantom Harry,
a pouting lad complaining of his own mortality. She put out her hand to him and crooned, "There,
there!" and told herself she must not fidget if he were there, for the dead were used to quietness;
and profound sleep covered her.

Suddenly she awoke and found herself staring towards panes exquisite with the frost's engravings,
and beyond them a blue sky which made it seem that this earth was a flaw at the heart of a
jewel. Words were on her lips. "Christ is risen, Christ is risen." It was something she had
read in a book; she did not know why she was saying it. The clock said that it was half-past
eight, so she leaped out of bed into the vibrant cold, and bathed and dressed. Her sense of
ruin was like lead, but was somehow the cause of exultation in her heart as the clapper is
the cause of the peal of a bell. She went and knocked on Ellen's door. There was no answer,
so she stole in and stood at the end of the bed, and looked with laughter on the heap of bedclothes,
the pair of unravelling plaits that were all that was to be seen of the girl.

"Ellen," she said.

The child woke up as children do, stretching and sulking. Marion loved her. She must suffice
instead of the other child, the boy that should have slept in the room of the corridor in Torque
Hall.

"Ellen, something wonderful has happened. Guess what it is."

Ellen lay on her back and speculated sleepily. Her little nose waggled like a rabbit's. Suddenly
she shot up her head.

"I know. We've got the vote."

"Not quite as good as that. But Richard's come."

The girl sat up. "When did he come?"

"Last night."

"Last night? Would I have seen him if I'd stayed up longer?"

"No. He came very late indeed. It was really this morning."

Ellen sighed with relief. "Then the occasion's pairfect, for I've nothing to reproach myself
with." She put her hand on one side and said shyly, "Please, I'd like to get up." Marion still
hovered, till she noticed the girl's eyes were unhappy and that she was holding the sheet high
up to the base of her white throat, and perceived that she was too modest to rise when anyone
else was in the room. "How wise you are, my dear," she thought, and she left the room. "You
are quite right; secrets lose their value when they are disclosed...."

She went down and ate her breakfast before a long window that showed a glittering, rimy world
and in the foreground a plump, strutting robin. Ordinarily she would not have been amused by
his red-waisted convexity, for she regarded animals with an extreme form of that indifference
she felt for all living beings who were not members of her family, but to-day, she scattered
it some crumbs. After that she walked to the end of the garden and looked down on the estuary's
morning face. It was a silver plate on which there lay but a drop of deeply blue water, and
the floating boats seemed like flies settled there to drink. The shining green marshes were
neatly ruled with lines of unmelted frost that scored the unsunned westerly side of every bank,
and the tiny grizzled trees and houses here and there might have been toys made of crockery,
like the china cottages that stand on farmstead mantelpieces. From the chimneys above the rime-checkered
slates of the harbour houses a hundred smoke-plumes stood tenuous and erect, like fastidious
and honest souls, in the crystalline air. This was an undismayed world that had scoured itself
cheerfully for the dawn, no matter what that might bring. She nodded her head, seeing the lesson
that it read to her.

Ellen ran across the lawn to her, beetle-black in her mourning, but capering as foals do.

"I'll not have my breakfast till he does," she announced. "Is there anything I can do for him?"

"Nothing, my dear, I'm afraid. But look at the view. Isn't it lovely?"

The girl clapped her hands. "Oh, it's bonny. And it's neat. It's redded itself up for Richard's
coming."

"'Redded itself up'? What does that mean?"

"Don't you use the word here? English seems to be a terribly poor language. Redding up means
making everything tidy and neat, so that you're ready for anything."

That was what one must do: red oneself up. It was true that it was no use doing that for Richard
any more, and that there was no one else in the world for whom she wished to be ready. But
she must be schooled by the spectacle of the earth, for here it was shining fair, and yet it
had nothing to expect; it was but the icing of a cake destined for some sun's swallowing.

"Is Richard a good riser?" asked Ellen, adopting a severe, servant-engaging tone to disguise
the truth that she was trembling with desire to see her lover.

"Usually, but he may be late to-day since he went to bed such a short time ago. He evidently
isn't up yet, for his blind's still down. That's his room on the left."

But as they gazed the blind went up, and they saw him turning away from the window.

"Oh, why didn't he look at us!" cried Ellen. "Why didn't he look at us?"

"Because he is thinking of nothing but how soon he can get down to breakfast and meet you,"
said Marion; but being aware of the quality of her blood, which was his, she knew that he had
not seen his women and the glittering world because he had risen blind with sullenness.

"Will he be long, do you think?" she pondered. "Not that I'd want him to miss his bath." She
broke into a kind of Highland fling, looking down on the blue and silver estuary and chanting,
"Lovely, lovely," but desisted suddenly and asked: "Mrs. Yaverland, do you think there's a
future life?"

Marion said lazily, "I shouldn't have thought you need to think out that problem yet awhile."

"Oh, I'm not worrying for myself. But on a fine day like this I just hate to think my mother's
not getting the benefit of it somewhere. And seeing your age, I thought you might have begun
to give the matter consideration."

Marion resolved to treasure that remark for repetition to Richard; and was dashed to remember
that it was probable in future they would not share their jokes. "Well, I don't think there's
any evidence for it at all," she said aloud; "but I don't think that proves that there isn't
one. I don't think we would be allowed to know if there was one, for I'm sure that if most
people knew for certain there was going to be another world they wouldn't make the best of
this." But she saw, from the way that Ellen continued to stare down at her toes, that that
abstract comfort had not been of any service, so she parted with yet another secret. "But I
do know that when Richard's father died all the trees round the house seemed to know where
he had gone."

Ellen raised wet but happier eyes. "Why, I felt like that when they brought mother's coffin
out of the Fever Hospital. Only then it was the hills in the distance that knew--the Pentland
Hills. But do you really think that was true?"

"I knew it was then," said Marion. "If I am less certain now it is only because I have forgotten."

They nodded wisely. "After all, there must be something."

"Yes, there must be something...."

Ellen began to dance again. Marion turned aside and tried to lose the profound malaise that
the reticent feel when they have given up a secret in thinking how well worth while it had
been, since Ellen was such a dear, young, loving thing. She found consolation in this frost-polished
morning: the pale, bright sky in which the light stood naked, her abandoned veil of clouds
floating above the horizon; the swoop and dance over the marshes of the dazzling specks that
were seagulls; the fur of rime that the dead leaves on the hedgerow wore, and the fine jewellery-work
of the glistening grass tufts in its shadow. The world had neglected nothing in its redding up.

At her elbow Ellen spoke shyly. "Richard's come down at last. May I go in to him, Mrs. Yaverland?"

"Of course you may. You can do anything you like. From now onwards he's yours, not mine."

Ellen ran in and Richard came to the window to meet her. As he drew her over the threshold
by both hands he called down the garden, "Good morning, mother." But Marion had perceived that
from the moment of seeing her his face had worn the dark colour of estrangement. She turned
and walked blindly away, not noticing that Mabel had come out to bring her the morning post,
and was following at her heels, till the girl coughed.

There were four letters. She opened them with avidity, for they were certificates that there
were other things in life as well as Richard with which she could occupy herself. Two were
bills, the first from her dressmakers and the other from the dealer who had sold her some coloured
glass a few weeks before; and there was a dividend warrant for her to sign and send to her
bankers. Sweeping about the lawn as on a stage, she resolved to buy clothes that would make
her look like other untormented women, and more hangings and pictures and vases to make her
house look gay. Then she observed that the fourth envelope was addressed in the handwriting
of the son whom she could not love.

She looked towards the house and saw the son whom she loved, but he did not see her. Ellen's
red head was close to his shoulder.

It was horrible handwriting outside and inside the envelope: a weak running of ink that sagged
downwards in the second half of every line and added feeble flourishes to every capital that
gave the whole an air of insincerity. It had the disgusting appearance of a begging letter,
and indeed that was what it was. It begged for love, for condonation of the writer's loathsomeness.
She held it far off as she read:

"DEAR MOTHER,

"You will be wondering why I had not written to you. You will know soon that something you
would not have expected has happened to me. I am not sure how you will take it. But I will
be with you in two days, and then you will see for yourself. I hope you will not harden your
heart against me, dear mother.

"Your loving son,

"ROGER."

There was no address, but the postmark was Chelmsford. No doubt he had written in the cells.
For the letter could have no other meaning but that the disgrace she had foreseen had at last
arrived.

She could not bear to be out there alone on that wide lawn, in the bright light, in the intense
cold. She ran to the window, and not daring to look in lest they should be very close together,
she called, "Richard, Roger is coming."

There was a noise of a chair being pushed back, and Richard stood over her, asking: "When?
Has he written?"

She held out the letter.

There was the rustling of paper crushed in the hand, and she looked up into his burning and
compassionate eyes. Her head dropped back on her throat; she grew weak with happiness. He was
her own once more, if she would but disclose in what great fear and misery she stood. But in
the room behind there sounded the chink of china. Little Ellen was bending over the table,
putting the tea-cosy over Richard's egg.

Marion said levelly: "Well, I shall be glad of Roger's company while you're occupied with Ellen."
She added reprovingly, as if she were speaking to a child: "You mustn't be jealous of the poor
thing. I saw last night that you can be jealous...."

His eyes blazed at the indecency. He stepped back from the window.

CHAPTER VIII

Ellen was very glad that Marion was going out for the whole of the afternoon, for then she
would be alone with Richard; and though they had been out together all the morning, there had
been that in the atmosphere which made a third. The whole time it had been apparent that the
coming of this Roger, who must be an awful man, was upsetting him terribly. When he had taken
her out into the garden after breakfast he had looked up into the vault of the morning and
had put his hand to his head, making a sound of envy, as if he felt a contrast between its
crystal quality and his own state of mind. He had liked standing with her at the edge of the
garden and setting names to the facets of the landscape, which he plainly loved as he had never
told her that he did. He really cared for the estuary as she did for the Pentlands; she need
never be afraid of telling him anything that she felt, for it had always turned out that he
felt something just like it. But that pleasure had not lasted long. He had shown her the gap
where the Medway found its way among the low hills on the Kentish coast, and had told her that
the golden filaments the sunlight discovered over the water were the masts and funnels of great
ships, and he was pointing westward to the black gunpowder hulks that lay off Kerith Island,
when his forefinger dropped. Something in the orchard below had waylaid his attention. Ellen
looked down the steep bank to see what it was, and saw Marion sitting in the low crook of an
apple-tree. She snatched at contemptuous notice of the way that the tail of the woman's gown,
which anyway was far too good for any sensible person to wear just going about the house and
garden in the morning, was lying in a patch of undispersed frost; but fear re-entered her heart.
Marion was sitting quite still with her back to them, yet the distant view of her held the
same terrifying quality of excess as her near presence.

There could be no more looking at this brilliant and candid face of the earth, because there
was not anywhere so much force as in this squat, stubborn body, clayish with middle-age.

Richard said: "No, she isn't crying. She isn't moving. I should feel a fool if I went down
and she didn't want me." And because his voice was thin and husky like a nervous child's, and
because he was answering a question that she had not asked, Ellen was more afraid. This woman
was throwing over them a net of events as excessive as herself....

       *       *       *       *       *

But these were only the things that one thought about life. As soon as one stopped thinking
about them they ceased to be. The world was not really tragic. When he drew her back to the
middle of the lawn where they could not see Marion she was happy again, and hoped for pleasure,
and asked him if it were not possible to go boating on the estuary even now, since the water
looked so smooth. He answered that winter boating was possible and had its own beauty, and
told her, with an appreciation that she had to concede was touched with frenzy in its emphasis,
but which she welcomed because it was an escape from worry, of a row he had had one late December
afternoon. He spoke of finding his way among white oily creeks that wound among gleaming ebony
mud-banks over which showed the summits of the distant hills that had been skeletonised by
a thin snowfall; and of icy air that was made glamorous as one had thought only warmth could
be by the blended lights of the red sun on his left and the primrose moon on the right. She
leaped for joy at that, and asked him to take her on the water soon, and he told her if she
liked he would take her down to Prittlebay and show her his motorboat which was lying up in
the boathouse of the Thamesmouth Yacht Club there.

Their ambulations had brought them to the orchard gate again, but he turned on his heel and
said, with what struck her as a curious abandonment of the languor by which he usually asserted
to the world that he refused to hurry, "Go and put on your hat and we'll start at once." So
they went out and hastened through the buoyant air down to the harbour and along the cinder-track
to Prittlebay esplanade, where she forgot everything in astonishment at the new, bright, arbitrary
scene. There was what seemed to her, a citizen of Edinburgh, a comically unhistoric air about
the place. The gaily-coloured rows of neat dwellings that debouched on the esplanade, and the
line of hotels and boarding-houses that faced the sea, were as new as the pantomime songs of
last Christmas or this year's slang. One might conceive them being designed by architects who
knew as little of the past as children know of death, and painted by fresh-faced people to
match themselves, and there was a romping arbitrariness about the design and decoration of
the place which struck the same note of innocence.

The town council who passed the plans for the Byzantine shoulder the esplanade thrust out on
to the sand on the slender provocation of a bandstand, the man who had built his hotel with
a roof covered with cupolas and minarets and had called it "Westward Ho!" must, Ellen thought,
be lovely people, like Shakespearean fools. She liked it, too, when they came to the vulgarer
part of the town and the place assumed the strange ceremented air that a pleasure city wears
in winter. The houses had fallen back, and the esplanade was overhung now by a steep green
slope on which asphalt walks linked shelters, in which no one sat, and wandered among brown
and purple congregations of bare trees, at its base were scattered wooden chalets and bungalows,
which offered to take the passer-by's photograph or to sell ice-cream. The sea-salt in the
air had licked off the surface of the paint, so that they had a greyish, spectral appearance.
The photographs in the cracked show-cases were brown and vaporous, and the announcements of
vanilla ice-cream were but breaths of lettering, blown on stained walls. It seemed a place
for the pleasuring of mild, unexigent phantoms, no doubt the ghosts of the simple people who
lived in the other part of the town.

She was amused by it all, and was sorry when they came to the Thamesmouth Yacht Club, a bungalow
glossy with new paint which looked very opaque among the phantasmic buildings. With its verandah,
that was polished like a deck, and its spotless life-belts and brilliant port-hole windows,
it had the air of a ship which had been exiled to land but was trying to bear up; and so, too,
had the three old captains, spruce little men, with sea-reflecting eyes and pointed, grizzled
beards, whom Richard brought out of the club after he had got the boathouse keys. Ellen liked
them very much indeed. She had never before had any chance of seeing the beautiful and generous
emotion that old men who have lived bravely feel for young men whom they see carrying on the
tradition of brave life, and it made her want to cry to see how crowsfeet of pleasure came
at the corners of their eyes when they looked at Richard, and how they liked to slap his strong
back with their rough hands, which age was making delicate with filigree of veins and wrinkles.
And she could see, too, that they liked her. They looked at her as if they thought she was
pretty, and teased her about the Votes-for-Women button she was wearing, but quite nicely.

When they were standing under the dark eaves of the boathouse, looking up at the gleaming tawny
sides of the motor-launch, one of the old men pointed at the golden letters that spelt "Gwendolen"
at the prow, and said, "Well, Yaverland, I suppose you'll have forgotten who she is these days."
Another added: "He'd better, if he's going to marry a Suffragette." And all broke into clear,
frosty laughter. She cried out in protest, and told them that Suffragettes were not really
fierce at all, and that the newspapers just told a lot of lies about them, and that anyway
it was only old-fashioned women who were jealous, and they listened with smiling, benevolent
deference, which she enjoyed until her eyes lighted on Richard, and she saw that he was more
absorbed in her effect on his friends than in herself.

For a moment she felt as lonely as she had been before she knew him, and she looked towards
the boat and stared at the reflection of the group in the polished side and wished that one
of the dim, featureless shapes she saw there had been her mother, or anyone who had had a part
in her old life in Edinburgh. She turned back to the men and brought the conversation to an
end with a little laughing shake of the head, giving them the present of an aspect of her beauty
to induce them to let her mind go free. Again she felt something that her commonsense forbade
to be quite fear when he did not notice for a minute that she was wistfully asking him to take
her away. It was all right, of, course.

When they had said good-bye to the happy old men and were walking along the promenade, he asked:
"What was the matter, darling? Didn't you like them? They're really very good old sorts"; and
understood perfectly when she answered: "I know they are, but I don't want anybody but you."
There was indeed vehemence in his reply: "Yes, dear, we don't want anybody but ourselves, do
we?" Undoubtedly there was a change in the nature of the attention he was giving her. Instead
of concentrating in that steady delighted survey of herself to which she was accustomed, he
alternated between an almost excessive interest in what she was saying and complete abstraction,
during which he would turn suddenly aside and drive his stick through the ice on the little
pools at the sagging outside edge of the promenade, his mouth contracting as if he really hated
it. She hovered meekly by while he did that. If one went to see a dear friend, whose charm
and pride it was to live in an exquisitely neat and polished home, and found him pacing hot-eyed
through rooms given up to dirt and disorder, one would not rebuke him, but one would wait quietly
and soothingly until he desired to tell what convulsion of his life explained the abandonment
of old habit. But her eyes travelled to the luminous, snow-sugared hills that ran by the sea
to the summit where Roothing Church, an evanescent tower of hazily-irradiated greyness, overhung
the shining harbour; and her thoughts travelled further to the hills hidden behind that point,
and that orchard where there sat the squat woman who was so much darker and denser in substance
than anything else in the glittering, brittle world around her.

Ellen drooped her head and closed her eyes; the crackle of the ice under Richard's stick sounded
like the noise of some damage done within herself. She found some consolation in the thought
that people were always more moderate than the pictures she made of them in their absence,
but she lost it when she went back into the high, white, view-invaded dining-room at Yaverland's
End. For Marion stood by the hearth looking down into the fire, and as Richard and Ellen came
in she turned an impassive face towards them, and asked indifferently, "Have you had a nice
walk?" and fell to polishing her nails with the palm of her hand with that trivial, fribbling
gesture that was somehow more desperate than any other being's outflung arms. She was all that
Ellen had remembered, and more. And she had infected the destiny of this house with her strangeness
even to such small matters as the peace of the midday meal. For Mabel came in before they had
finished the roast mutton, and said: "Please, ma'am, there's a man wanting to see you." And
Marion asked, with that slightly disagreeable tone which Ellen had noticed always coloured
her voice when she spoke to the girl: "Who is he?" Mabel answered contemptuously: "He won't
give his name. He's a very poor person, ma'am. His boots is right through, and his coat's half
off his back. And he says that if he told you his name you mightn't see him. Shall I tell him
to go away?"

But Marion had started violently. Her eyes were looking into Richard's. She said, calmly: "Yes,
I'll see him. Tell him I'll come through in a minute."

Mabel had left the room. Marion and Richard continued to stare at each other queerly.

She murmured indistinctly, casually: "It may be. Both Mabel and cook haven't been with me long.
They never saw him here. They probably haven't seen him since he was a boy."

"It is the kind of thing," said Richard grimly, "that Roger would say at the back door to a
servant just to make his arrival seem natural and unsuspicious."

Marion's head drooped far back on her throat; her broad, dark face suffused with the bloom
of kind, sad passion, and lifted towards her son's pitying eyes, made Ellen think of a pansy
bending back under the rain. But her mouth, which had been a little open and appealing, as
if she were asking Richard not to be bitter but to go on being pitiful, closed suddenly and
smiled. She seemed to will and to achieve some hardening change of substance. An incomprehensible
expression irradiated her face, and she seemed to be brooding sensuously on some private hoard
of satisfaction. Lightly she rose, patting the hand Richard had stretched out to her as if
it were a child's, and went out into the kitchen.

"Richard!" breathed Ellen.

He went on eating.

"Richard," she insisted, "why did she look like that? So happy. Does she want it to be Roger?"

"God knows, God knows," he said in a cold, sharp-edged voice. "There are lots of things about
her that I don't understand."

Some moments passed before Marion came back. Her face was easy, and she said placidly: "My
purse, my purse. I want my purse."

"It's on the desk," said Richard, and rose and found it for her. He stood beside her as she
opened it and began taking out the money slowly, coin by coin, while she hummed under her breath.
"Mother!" he burst out suddenly. "Who is it?"

"A ten-shilling piece is what I want," she murmured. "Yes, a ten-shilling piece. I thought
I had one.... Oh, who is it? Oh, it's Henry Milford. Do you remember poor Milford? He was the
last cattleman but one in the old days when we ran the farm. I had to send him away because
he drank so terribly. Since then he's gone down and down, and now he's on the road. I must
give him something, poor creature. Such a nice wife he had--he says she's in Chelmsford workhouse.
I'll send him on to old Dawkins at Dane End; I'll get him to give the poor wretch a few days'
work."

Ellen disliked her as she left the room. She looked thick and ordinary, and was apparently
absorbed in the mildly gross satisfaction of a well-to-do woman at being bountiful. Moreover,
she had in some way hurt Richard, for his face was dark when he came back to the table.

But an amazement struck Ellen as she thought over the scene. "Richard," she exclaimed excitedly,
"is it not just wonderful that this man should come to your mother for help after she'd put
him to the door? I'm sure she'd make a body feel just dirt if she was putting them to the door.
It would be a quiet affair, but awful uncomfortable. But she's such a good woman that, even
seeing her like that, he knew she was the one to come to when he was really in trouble. Do
you not think it's like that?"

"Oh yes," he almost groaned. "Even when she's at her worst you know that she's still better
than anyone else on this earth."

When Marion came back she sat down at the table without noticing what seemed to Ellen his obvious
dejection, and began to talk about this man Milford, telling of the power he had over his beasts
and how a prize heifer that they then had, by the name of Susan Caraway, had fretted for three
weeks after he had left. She said that he gained this power over animals not by any real love
for them, for he was indifferent to them except when he was actually touching them, and would
always scamp his work without regard for their comfort, but simply by some physical magnetism,
and pointed out that there it resembled the power some men have over women. It surprised Ellen
that she laughed as she said that, and seemed to find pleasure in the thought of such a power.
When the meal was over she sat for a moment, gathering together the breadcrumbs by her plate,
and said pensively: "Yes, it might quite easily have been Roger." Ellen wondered how it was
that Richard had always spoken of his mother as if she needed his protection, when her voice
was so nearly coarse with the sense of being able to outface all encounterable events, and
she felt a flash of contempt for his judgment. She wished, too, that when Marion rose from,
the table he had not followed her so closely upstairs and hovered round her as she took up
her stand on the hearthrug, with her elbow on the mantelpiece and her foot in the fender, and
kept his eyes on her face as she settled down in an armchair. It was just making himself cheap,
dangling after a woman who was perched up on herself like a weathercock.

When she said, "I'm going to walk over to Friar's End. Old Butterworth wants me to do some
repairs which I don't feel inclined to do, so I want to have a look at the place for myself,"
the announcement was so little tinged by any sense of the persons she was addressing that she
might as well have held up a printed placard. Ellen thought he was a little abject to answer,
"So far as I can remember, Butterworth's rather a rough specimen. Wouldn't you like us to come
with you?" and almost deserved that she did not hear. Such deafness argued complete abstraction;
and indeed, as she turned towards them and stood looking out towards the river, her face again
wore that incomprehensible expression of secret and even furtive satisfaction. The sight of
it fell like a whip on Richard. He lowered his head and sat staring at the floor. Ellen cried
out to herself, "She's an aggravating woman if ever there was one. It's every bit as bad as
not saying what you feel, this not saying what you look," and tried to pierce with her eyes
the dreamy surface of this gloating. But she could make nothing of it, and looked back at Richard;
and shuddered and drew her hands across her eyes when she saw that he had lifted his head and
was turning towards her a face that had become the mirror of his mother's expression. He, too,
was wrapped in some exquisite and contraband contentment. She raised her brows in enquiry,
and mockingly he whispered back words which he knew she could not hear.

"I think I'll go now," said Marion, from her detachment, and left them. Ellen stretched out
her arms above her head and cried shudderingly: "Why are you looking at me like that?" But
he would not answer, and began to laugh quietly. "Tell me!" she begged, but still he kept silence,
and seemed to be fingering with his mind this pleasure that he knew of but would not disclose.
It struck her as another example of Marion's dominion over the house that her expression should
linger in this room after she had left it and that it should blot out the son's habitual splendid
look, and she exclaimed sobbingly: "Oh, very well, be a Cheshire cat if you feel called to
it," and went and pretended to look for a volume in the bookcase. It was annoying that he did
not come after her at once and try to comfort her, but he made no move from his seat until
there sounded through the house the thud of the closing front door.

She saw, a second after that, the reflection of his face gleaming above the shoulder of her
own image in the glass door of the bookcase, and was at first pleased and waited delightfully
for reconciling kisses; but because the brightness of its gleam told her that he was still
smiling, she wished again, as she had that morning when she had stood beside the smooth, sherry-coloured
boat, that among the dim shapes of the mirrored world might be one that was her mother. She
knew that it was too much to ask of this inelastic universe that she should ever see her mother
again in this world, standing, as she had lived, looking like a brave little bird bearing up
through a bad winter but could not understand how God could ever have thought of anything as
cruel as snow. "And quite right too," she said to herself. "If there were ghosts we would spend
all our time gaping for a sight of the dead, and we'd not do our duty by the living. But surely
there'd be no harm just for once, when I'm so put about with this strange house, in letting
me see in the glass just the outline of her wee head on her wee shoulders...." But there was
nothing. She sobbed and caught at Richard's hands, and was instantly reassured. For the hand
is truer to the soul than the face: it has no moods, it borrows no expressions, and she read
the Richard that she knew and loved in these long fingers, stained by his skeely trade and
scored with cuts commemorative of adventure and bronzed with golden weather, and the broad
knuckles that were hollowed between the bones as usually only frail hands are, just as his
strong character was fissured by reserve and fastidiousness and all the delicacies that one
does not expect to find in the robust. "You've got grand hands!" she cried, and kissed them.
But he wrested them away from her and closed them gently over her wrists, and forced her backwards
towards the hearth, keeping his body close to her and shuffling his feet in a kind of dance.
She was astonished that she should not like anything that he did to her, and felt she must
be being stupid and not understanding, and submitted to him with nervous alacrity when he sat
down in the armchair and drew her on to his knee and began to kiss her.

But she did not like it at all. For his face wore the rapt and vain expression of a man who
is performing some complicated technical process which he knows to be beyond the powers of
most other people, and she had a feeling that he was not thinking of her at all. That was absurd,
of course, for he was holding her in his arms, and whispering her name over and over again,
and pressing his mouth down on hers, and she told herself that she was being tiresome and pernickety
like the worst kind of grown-up, and urged herself to lend him a hand in this business of love-making.
But she could not help noticing that these were the poorest kisses he had ever given her. Each
one was separate, and all were impotent to constrain the mind to thoughts of love; between
them she found herself thinking clearly of such irrelevancies as the bare, bright-coloured,
inordinate order of the room and the excessive view of tides and flatlands behind the polished
window-panes. The kisses had their beauty, of course, for it was Richard who was giving them,
but it was the perishing and trivial beauty of cut flowers, whereas those that he gave her
commonly had been strongly and enduringly beautiful like trees.

Always when he took her in his arms and she lifted her mouth to his it was like going into
a wood, or, rather, creating a wood. For at first there was darkness, since one closed one's
eyes when one kissed as when one prayed; and then it seemed as if at each kiss they were being
a tree, for their bodies were pressed close together like a tree-trunk, and their trembling,
gripping arms were like branches, and their faces where love lived on their lips were like
the core of foliage where the birds nest. She would see springing up in the darkness around
her the grove of the trees that their kisses had created: the silver birches that were their
delicate, unclinging kisses; the sturdy elms that were their kisses when they loved robustly
and thought of a home together; the white-boled beeches with foliage of green fire that they
were when they loved most intensely. But to-day they did not seem to be making anything; he
was simply moving his lips over her skin as a doctor moves his stethoscope over his patient's
chest. And, like the doctor, he sometimes hurt her. She hated it when he kissed her throat,
and was glad when he thought of something he wanted to say and stopped.

"Next time I go to London," he said, "I'm going to buy you a jade necklace, or malachite if
I can get it. The green will look so good against your white, white skin."

"That's verra kind of you, but the money may as well lie by," she told him wisely, "for I couldn't
go wearing a green necklace when I'm in mourning."

"But you won't be in mourning much longer."

"Six months in full mourning, six months half. That's as it should be for a mother."

"But what nonsense!" he exclaimed irascibly. "When you're a young little thing you ought to
be wearing pretty clothes. It doesn't do your mother any good, your going about in black."

"I know well it doesn't, but, remember, mother was old-fashioned Scotch, and she was most particular
about having things just so. Specially on melancholy occasions. I remember she was most pernickety
about her blacks after my father's death. And though she's entered into eternal life, we've
no guarantee that that makes a body sensible all at once." She saw on his face an expression
which reminded her that he had been careful never to acquiesce when she spoke of the possibility
of a future life, and she cried out: "You needn't look so clever. I'm sure she's going on somewhere,
and why you should grudge it to the poor woman I don't know. And your mother thinks there's
something after death, too. She told me this morning in the garden that she was quite certain
of it when your father died. She said that all the trees round the house seemed to know where
he had gone."

"Oh, she said that, did she?" His arms released her. He stared into her face. "She said that,
did she?" he repeated in an absent, faintly malevolent murmur; and clasped her in his arms
again and kissed her so cruelly that her lips began to bleed.

"Let me go, let me go!" she cried. "You're not loving me, you're just taking exercise on me!"

He let her go, but not, she knew from the smile on his face, from any kindness, but rather
that he might better observe her distress and gloat over it. She moved away from the heat of
the fire and from that other heat which had so strangely been engendered by these contacts
which always before engendered light, and went to the window and laid her forehead against
the cold glass. The day had changed and lost its smile, for the sky was hidden by a dirty quilt
of rain-charged clouds and the frost had seeped into the marshes and left them dark, acid winter
green, yet she longed to walk out there in that unsunned and water-logged country, opening
her coat to the cold wind brought by the grey, invading tides, making little cold pools where
she dug her heels into the sodden ground, getting rid of her sense of inflammation, and being
quite alone. That she should want not to be with Richard, and that she should not be perfectly
pleased with what pleased him, seemed to her monstrous disloyalty, and she turned and smiled
at him. But there was really something wrong with this room and this hour, for as she looked
at him she felt frightened and ashamed, as if he were drunk, though she knew that he was sober;
and indeed his face was flushed and his eyes wet and winking, as if smoke had blown in them.
For some reason that she could not understand he reminded her of Mr. Philip.

She cried out imploringly. "Take me down to the marshes, Richard!"

He shook his head and laughed at some private joke. She felt desolate, like a child at school
whom other children shut out from their secrets, and drooped her head; and heard him say presently:
"We are going out this afternoon, but not on the marshes."

"Where?"

He was overcome with silent laughter when she stamped because he would not answer. She ran
over to him and began to slap him, trying to make a game of it to cover her near approach to
tears. Then he told her, not because he was concerned with her distress, but because her touch
seemed to put him in a good humour. "We're going to the registrar, my dear, to fix up everything
for our marriage in three weeks' time."

The sense of what he had said did not reach her, because she was gazing at him to try and find
out why he was still reminding her of Mr. Philip. He was, for one thing, wearing an expression
that would have been more suitable to a smaller man. Oh, he was terribly different to-day!
His eyes, whose wide stare had always worked on her like a spell, were narrow and glittering,
and his lips looked full. She screamed "Oh, no! Oh, no!" without, for a second, thinking against
what thing she was crying out.

He laughed and pulled her down on his knees. He was laughing more than she had ever known him
laugh before. "Why, don't you want to, you little thing?"

Her thoughts wandered about the world as she knew it, looking for some reason. But nothing
came to her save the memory of the cold, wet, unargumentative cry of the redshanks that she
had heard on the marshes. She said feebly, as one who asks for water: "Please, please take
me down to the sea-wall."

His voice swooped resolutely down with tenderness. "But why don't you want to come and see
about our marriage? Are you frightened, dear?"

Now, strangely enough, he was reminding her of Mr. Mactavish James, as he used to be in those
long conversations when he seemed so kind, and said: "Nellie, ma wee lassie, dis onything ail
ye?" and yet left her with a suspicion that he had been asking her all the time out of curiosity
and not because he really cared for her. She was dizzied. Whoever was speaking to her, it was
not Richard. She muttered: "Yes, a little."

He pressed her closer to him, covering her with this tenderness as with a hot cloth rug, heavy
and not fine. "Frightened of me, my darling?"

She pulled herself off his knee. "I don't know, I don't know."

"Why? Why?"

She moved into the middle of the room and looked down on the sea and the flatlands with a feeling
like thirst; and turned loyally back to Richard, who was standing silently on the hearth-rug
watching her. The immobility of his body, and the indication in his flickering eyes and twitching
mouth that, within his quietness, his soul was dancing madly because of some thought of her,
recalled to her the night when Mr. Philip had stood by the fire in the office in Edinburgh.
That man had hated her and this one loved her, but the difference in their aspects was not
so great as she would have hoped. She could bear it no longer, and screamed out: "Oh! Oh! That's
how Mr. Philip looked!"

It took him a minute to remember who she meant. Then his face shadowed. "Don't remind me of
him, for God's sake!" he said through his teeth. "Go and put on your things and come out with
me to the registrar."

She drew backwards from him and stood silent till she could master her trembling. He was very
like Mr. Philip. Softly she said: "You sounded awful, as if you were telling me."

"I was."

She began to want to cry. "I'll not do anything that I'm told."

He made a clicking noise of disgust in his throat. It struck her as a mark of debasement that
their bodies were moving more swiftly than their minds, and that each time they spoke they
first gesticulated or made some wordless sound. He burst out, more loudly than she had ever
heard him before: "Go and put on your things."

"Away yourself to the registrar," she cried more loudly still, "and tell him he'll never marry
you to me."

The ringing of her own voice and his answering clamour recalled something to her that was dyed
with a sunset light and yet was horrible. She drew her hands across her face and tried to remember
what it was; and found herself walking in memory along a street in Edinburgh towards a sunset
which patterned the west with sweeping lines of little golden feathers as if some vain angel,
forbidden to peacock it in heaven, had come to show his wings to earth. On the other side,
turned to the colour of a Gloire de Dijon rose, towered the height of the MacEwan Hall, that
Byzantine pile which she always thought had an air as if it were remembering beautiful music
that had been played within it at so many concerts; and at its base staggered a quarrelling
man and woman. The woman was not young and wore a man's cloth cap and a full, long, filthy
skirt. They were moving sideways along the empty pavement about a yard apart, facing one another,
shouting and making threatening gestures across the gap. At last they stopped, put their drink-ulcerated
faces close together, and vomited coarse cries at one another; and she had looked up at the
pale golden stone that was remembering music, and at the bright golden sky that was promising
that there was more than terrestrial music, as one might look at well-bred friends after some
boor had stained some pleasant occasion with his ill manners. Then she had been sixteen. Now
she was seventeen, and she and a man were shouting across a space. Could it be that vileness
was not a state which one could choose or refuse to enter, but a phase through which, being
human, one must pass? If that were so, life was too horrible. She cried out through his vehemence:
"No, I'm not going to marry you."

"Don't be stupid. You're being exactly like all other women, silly and capricious. Go and put
your things on."

"I will not. I'm going away."

"Don't talk nonsense! Where are you going?"

"Back to Edinburgh." She made a hard line of her trembling mouth. "My mind's made up."

He made a sound that expressed pure exasperation untouched with tenderness, and his eyes darted
about her face in avaricious appraisement of this property that was trying to detach itself
from him with a display of free will that might not be tolerated in property. She could see
him resolving to take it lightly, and thought to herself: "Maybe it's just as well that it's
to be broken off, for I doubt I'm too clever for marriage. I would read him like a book and,
considering what's in him"--a convulsion of rage shook her--"he'd be annoyed at that."

He had been saying with deliberate flippancy: "Oh, you silly little Ellen," but at that convulsion
a change came over him. Delight transfigured him. He jerked his head back as she had done,
as if he would like to continue the violent rhythm of her movement through his own body, and
blood and laughter rushed back to his face. Taking a step towards her, he called softly: "Oh,
my Ellen, don't let us quarrel! Come here."

But she remembered then how that scene at the base of the golden stone had ended. The pair
had swung apart and had staggered their several ways, shrieking over their shoulders; and had
suddenly pivoted round and stood looking at each other in silence. Then they had run together
and joined in a rocking embrace, a rubbing of their bodies, and had put their mouths to each
other's faces so munchingly that it had looked as if they must turn aside some time and spit
out the cores of their kisses. She would have no such reconciliation. "I won't! I tell you
I hate you!" she cried, and escaped his arm.

Rage came into his face without displacing his intention to make love to her. That was against
nature, unless nature was utterly perverse! She could not bear it. She struck him across the
mouth and ran out of the room.

There was a moment of confusion on the landing when she could not tell which of the white doors
on the right and left led into her bedroom. The first one she opened showed her a table piled
with heavy books; a vast wardrobe with glass doors showing a line of dresses coloured like
autumn and of fabrics so exquisite that they might be imagined sentient; under a shelf beneath
it a long straight line, regular as the border plants in a parterre, of glossy wooden shoe-trees
rising out of rather large shoes made from many kinds of leather and velvets and satins; and
in the carpets and the hangings a profound and vibrant blue. Accusingly she exclaimed into
the emptiness, "Marion!" and darted into her own room just as Richard burst out into the passage.
She flung herself on the bed and lay quite still while he knocked on the door. Twice he called
her name. Nothing in her desired to answer. That was both relief and the loss of all. Three
times again he knocked, and there penetrated through the panels one of those wordless noises
that had been disgusting her all the afternoon. After a moment's silence she heard him go downstairs.
She leaped up and dragged her trunk from a corner into the middle of the room, but instead
of beginning to pack she fell on her knees and wept on to the comfortingly cool and smooth
black surface.

"I did so mean to be happy when I got among the English," she sobbed. "I thought England was
a light-minded, cheerful kind of place. But I'll just go back to Edinburgh." She jumped up
and went to the wardrobe and looked at her dresses hanging there, and cried: "It'll waste them
terribly if I pack them without tissue paper, and I can't ring with my face in this pickle."
There was not even a newspaper by to stuff into her shoes. Suddenly she wanted her mother,
who had always packed and found things for her and who had been so very female, so completely
guiltless of this excess of blood that was maleness. It would be dreadful to go back to Edinburgh
and find no mother; and it would be dreadful to leave Richard. The light of reason showed that
as a necessary and noble journey towards economic and spiritual independence it somehow proved
her, she felt, worthy of having a vote. But her flesh, which she curiously felt to be more
in touch with her soul than was her mind, was appalled by her intention. It would be an unnatural
flight. What had been between Richard and herself had mingled them in some real way, so that
if she went back and lived without him she would be crippled, and that, too, in a real way:
so real that she would suffer pain from it every day until she died, and that children would
notice it and laugh at it when she got to be old and walked rusty and unmarried about the town.

Yet she could not stay here now when she had seen Richard red and glazed and like those wranglers
in the street, and not pale and fine-grained and more splendid and deliberate than kings. She
could not tell what her life might come to if she trusted it into the sweaty hands of this
man whom, as it turned out, she did not know. Which of these horrid paths to disappointment
must she tread? In her brooding she stared at her face in the glass which Marion had bought
for her and noted how inappropriate the sad image was to the gay green and gold wood that framed
it. It struck her how typical it was of Marion that the gaiety of a gift from her should, a
day after the giving, become a wounding irony, and she was overwhelmed by a double hatred of
this home and what had just happened to her in it.

She flung herself again on the bed and tried to lose herself in weeping, but had to see before
her mind's eye the gorgeous seaworthy galleon that her love had been till this last hour. It
seemed impossible that a vessel that had so proudly left the harbour could already have foundered.
Hope freshened her whole body, till she remembered how the galleon of her mother's hopes had
been wrecked and had sunk in as many fathoms as the full depth of misfortune. Certainly there
were those who died God's creditors, and she had no reason to suppose she was not one of them.

She was lying with her face to the window, and it occurred to her that it was the plethora
of light let in by that prodigious square of glass which was making her think and think and
think. That the device of a dead Yaverland's spite against his contemporaries should work on
the victim of a living Yaverland gave her a shuddering sense of the power of this family. She
rolled over and covered her head with the quilt and wept and wept, until she fell asleep.

It was the slow turning of the doorhandle that woke her. Instantly she remembered the huge
extent to which life had gone wrong during the past few hours, and rolled back to face the
window, which was now admitting a light grown grave with the lateness of the afternoon. It
might be that it was Richard who was coming into her room to say that he did not want to marry
her either; or Marion, who would be quiet and kind, and yet terrifying as if she carried a
naked sword; or one of those superior-looking maids to tell her that tea was ready. She lay
and waited. Her heart opened and closed because these were Richard's steps that were crossing
the room, and they were slow. They were more--they were shy. And when they paused at the foot
of the bed his deep sigh was the very voice of penitence. She shot up out of her pretence of
sleep and sat staring at him. Tears gushed out of her eyes, yet her singing heart knew there
was nothing more irrelevant to life than tears. For he was pale again and fine-grained, and
though he stood vast above her he was pitiful as a child. She stretched out her arms and cried:
"Oh, you poor thing! Come away! Come close to me!"

But he did not. He came slowly round to the side of the bed and knelt down, and began to pick
at the hem of the counterpane, turning his face from her. She was aware that she was witnessing
the masculine equivalent of weeping, and let him be, keeping up a little stream of tender words
and sometimes brushing his tense, unhappy hands with faint kisses.

"Forgive me," he muttered painfully at last. "I was a brute--oh, such a brute. Do, do forgive me."

"Yes, yes," she soothed. "Never heed. I knew you didn't mean it."

"Oh, I was foul," he groaned, and turned his head away again.

"But don't grieve so over it, darling; it's over now," she said softly, and took his face between
her hands and kissed it. Its bronze beauty and the memory that she had struck it pierced her,
and she cried, "Oh, my love, say I didn't hurt you when I hit you!"

He broke into anguished laughter. "No, you wee little thing!" He strained her to him and faltered
vehemently: "You generous dear! When I've insulted and bullied you and shouted at you, you
ask me if you've hurt me! I wish you had. It would have given me some of the punishment I deserve.
Oh, keep me, you wonderful, strong, forgiving dear! Keep me from being a hound, keep me from
forgetting--whatever it is we've found out. You've seen what I'm like when I've forgotten it.
Oh, love me! Love me!"

"I will, I will!"

They clung together and spent themselves in reconciling kisses.

"It was my fault, too," she whispered. "I was awful hard on you. And maybe I took you up too
quick."

"No, it was all my fault," he answered softly. "I was worried and I lost my head."

"Worried? What are you worried about, my darling? You never told me that."

"Oh, there's nothing to tell, really. It's not a definite worry. It's to do"--his dark eyes
left her and travelled among the gathering shadows of the room--"with my mother."

If he had kissed her now he would not have found her lips so soft. "Your mother?" she repeated.

"Yes," he said petulantly. It struck her that there was something infantile about his tone,
a shade of resentment much as a child might feel against its nurse. "She's been the centre
of my whole life. And now ... I don't know whether she cares for me at all. I don't believe
she ever cared for anybody but my father. It's puzzling."

His eyes were fixed on the shadows. He had quite forgotten her. She leant back on the pillows,
closing her eyes to try and master a feeling of faintness, and stretched out her hand towards
his lips.

He dropped a kiss on it and went on: "So, you see, I fell back on you for consolation, and
somehow at that moment love went out of me. It's funny the change it makes in everything. I
became--so conventional. When you ran in here and slammed the door on me, I didn't follow you
because I was conscious that I oughtn't to come into your room. Afterwards, when suddenly I
loved you again and I wanted to come and be forgiven by you, I didn't care a damn for any rule."
Their lips met again. She had to dissemble a faint surprise that at this moment he should think
about anything so trivial as the rule that a man should not come into a woman's bedroom. "Ellen,
it was beastly. Really, I don't get any more fun out of it than you did. I lost my soul. I
didn't feel anything for you that I've ever felt. I simply felt a sort of generalised emotion
... that any man might have felt for any woman.... It wasn't us...." The corners of his mouth
were drawn down by self-disgust. "Perhaps I am like my father," he said loathingly. "He was
a vile man." Again he forgot her, and again she laid her hand on his lips. When his thoughts
came back to her he looked happier, though he had to think of her penitently. "I was a beast,"
he went on, "the coldest, cruellest beast. Do you know why I raged at you when you mentioned
that little snipe you call Mr. Philip? I knew it was the roughest luck on you to have gone
through that time with him. But I wasn't sorry for you. I was jealous. I felt you might have
protected yourself from being looked at by any other man in the world except me, though I knew
perfectly you had to earn your living, and I ought to make it my business to see that you're
specially happy to make up for those months you spent up in that office with those lustful
old swine."

She checked him. He was speaking out of that special knowledge which she had not got and for
lack of which she felt inferior and hoodwinked, and what he said to her suggested to her that
a part of her life which she had thought she had perfectly understood was a mystery from which
she was debarred by ignorance. "What do you mean?" she cried deridingly, as if there were no
such knowledge. "Why do you call them lustful?"

In his excitement he spoke on. "Of course they both wanted you. I could see that little snipe
Philip did. And everything you told me about them proves it. And the old man liked to think
how he would have wanted you if he'd been young."

Ellen repeated wistfully, "They wanted me." She did not know what it meant, but accepted it.

A sudden hush fell on his vehemence. He turned away from her again, and began to pick at the
hem of the counterpane. "Don't you know what that means?"

She shook her head.

"Oh, Lord!" he said. "I wasn't sure. How frightened you must be."

In the thinnest thread of sound, she murmured: "Sometimes. A little."

He was trembling. "You poor thing. You poor little thing. Yet I can't tell you."

She clapped her hands over her ears. "Ah, no. I couldn't bear to listen if you did." They sank
into a trembling silence. Her black eyes, fixed on the opposite wall, saw the shape of mountains,
against the white evening of a dark sky; the dark red circle of a peat-stained pool lying under
the shadow of a rock; the earth of a new-ploughed field over which seagulls ambled white in
heavy air, under a cloud-felted sky; and other sombre appearances that moved the heart strangely,
as if it discerned in them proofs that the core of life was darkness. There came on her suddenly
a memory of that fierce initiatory pain which she had felt when she first drank wine, when
she first was kissed by Richard. She remembered it with a singular lack of dismay. There ran
through her on the instant a tingling sense of pride and ambition towards all new experience,
and she leapt briskly from the bed, crying out in placid annoyance, as if it were the only
care she had, because her hair had fallen down about her shoulders. They stood easily together
in the light of the great window, she feeling for the strayed hairpins in her head, he looking
down on the disordered glory.

"But what's that for?" he asked, pointing at the open trunk in the middle of the floor.

Her eyes filled with tears. "I was packing to go back to Edinburgh."

"Oh, my dear, my dear!" he said solemnly. "I came near to imperilling a perfect thing." He
took her face between his hands and was going to kiss her, but she started away from him.

"Oh, maircy! What cold hands!" she exclaimed.

"I've been out in the shed working at my motor-bicycle. It was freezing. And I made an awful
mess of it, too, because I was blind and shaking with rage."

"You poor silly thing!" she cried lovingly. "Give me yon bits of ice!" She took both his hands
and pressed them against her warm throat.

For a little time they remained so, until her trembling became too great for him to bear, and
he whispered: "This is all it is! This is all it is!"

"What do you mean?" she murmured.

"What you fear ... is just like this. You will comfort my whole body as you are comforting
my hands...."

She drooped, she seemed about to fall, but joy was a bright light on her face, and she answered
loudly, plangently: "Then I shall not be afraid!" They swayed together, and she told him in
earnest ecstasy: "I will marry you any day you like." When he answered, "No, no, I will wait,"
she jerked at his coat-lapels like an impatient child, and cried: "But I want to be married
to you!" Then their lips met in a long kiss, and they travelled far into a new sphere of love.

It amazed her when, in the midst of this happiness, he broke away from her. She felt sick and
shaken, as if she had been sitting in an express train and the driver had suddenly put on the
brakes, and it angered her that he once more made one of those wordless sounds that she detested.
But her anger died when she saw that he was staring over her shoulder out of the window at
some sight which had made his face white and pointed with that grave alertness which is the
brave man's form of fear. She swung round to see what it was.

A man and a woman were standing in the farmyard looking up at them. Their attitude of surprise
and absorbed interest made it evident that the width and depth of the window had enabled them
to see clearly what was happening in the room; and for a moment Ellen covered her face with
her hands. But she was forced to look at them again by a sense that these people were strange
in a way that was at once unpleasant and yet interesting and exciting. They were both clad
in uniforms cut unskilfully out of poor cloth, the man in a short coat with brass buttons,
braided trousers, and a circular cap like a sailor's, and the woman in an old-fashioned dress
with a tight-fitting bodice and a gored skirt; and round his cap and round the crown of her
poke-bonnet were ribbons on which was printed: "Hallelujah Army."

The odd unshapeliness of their ill-built bodies in their ill-fitting clothes, the stained and
streaky blue of the badly-dyed serge, and the shallow, vibrating magenta of the ribbon made
it very fitting that they should stand in the foreground of the mean winter day which had coloured
the farmyard and its buildings sour, soiled tones of grey. Their perfect harmony with their
surroundings, even though it was only in disagreeableness that they matched them, gave Ellen
a kind of pleasure. She felt clever because she had detected it, and she stared down into their
faces, partly because she was annoyed by their steady inspection and wanted to stare them out,
and partly because she wanted to discover what these people, who were behaving so oddly, were
like in themselves. There was nothing very unusual about the woman, save that she united several
qualities that one would not have thought could be found together. She was young, certainly
still in her middle twenties, yet worn; florid yet haggard; exuberant and upstanding of body,
yet bowed at the shoulders as if she were fragile. But the man was odd enough. He was pale
and had a very long neck, and wore an expression of extreme foolishness. From the frown with
which he was accompanying his gaping stare it was evident that his mind was so vague and wandering
that he found it difficult to concentrate it; she was reminded of an inexpert person she had
once seen trying to put a white rabbit into a bag. She looked again at the girl, with that
contempt she felt, now that she had Richard, for all women who let themselves mate with unworthy
men, and found that her dark eyes were fixed sullenly, almost hungrily, on Richard. She laid
her hand on Richard's arm and cried: "If it's not impudence, it's the next thing to it, staring
like that into a pairson's room! They're collecting, I suppose. Away and give them a penny."

"No," said Richard. "They are not collecting. That is Roger."

CHAPTER IX

Ellen could not understand why Richard whispered explosively as they turned away from the window:
"Pin up your hair! Quickly! We must go down at once!" or why he hurried her downstairs without
giving her time to use her brush and comb. When they got down into the old parlour Richard
went to the side door that opened into the farmyard and flung it open, beginning a sentence
of greeting, but there was nothing to be seen but the grey sheds, the wood-pile, and the puddle-pocked
ground. He uttered an exasperated exclamation, and drew it to, saying to Ellen: "Open the front
door! Please, dear." She did so, but saw nothing save the dark and narrow garden and the black
trees against the white north sky. "What in Christ's name are they doing?" Richard burst out,
and flung open the side door again. Both put their heads out over the threshold to see if the
two visitors were standing about anywhere, and a gust of wind that was making the trees beat
their arms darted down on the house and turned the draught between the two open doors into
a hurricane. Ellen squealed as her door banged and struck her shoulder before she had time
to steer clear of it. "Oh, my poor darling!" said Richard, and he was coming towards her, when
they heard the glug-glug-glug of water dripping from the table to the floor, and saw that the
draught had overturned a vase filled with silver boughs of honesty. He picked it up and uttered
another bark of exasperation, for it had cracked across and he had cut his hand on the sharp
edge of the china.

"Oh, damn! oh, damn! oh, damn!" he cried, in a voice that rage made high-pitched and childish,
sucking his finger in between the words. "What a filthy mess!" He looked down on the wet tablecloth
and the two halves of the vase lying in the bedabbled leaves with an expression of distaste
so far out of proportion to its occasion that Ellen remembered uneasily how several times that
day she had noticed in him traces of a desperate, nervous tidiness like Marion's. "If you ring
for one of the maids she'll soon clear it up," she said soothingly, and moved towards the bell.
But he took his bleeding finger away from his lips and waved it at her, crying: "No! no! I
don't want either of the servants round till I've found that fool and that woman! This is some
new folly--probably I'll have to get him away before mother comes! Come on! Perhaps they're
hanging about the garden, though God knows why!" After making a savage movement towards the
broken vase, as if he could not bear to leave the disorder as it was, and checking it abruptly,
jarringly, he rushed into the dining-room, and Ellen followed him.

The two were there, their faces pressed against the window-panes. Behind them the grey waste
of stormy shallow waters, and the salt-dimmed pastures, and the black range of the Kentish
hills, hung with grape-purple rainclouds, made it apparent how much greater dignity belongs
to the earth and sea than to those who people them. As Richard and Ellen halted at the door
the faces receded from the glass. The woman stepped backwards and, looking as if she were being
moved on by a policeman, passed suddenly out of sight beyond the window's edge. Richard crossed
the room and opened the French window, but by the time he had unlocked it the man in uniform,
who had been beckoning to his companion with long bony hands, had gone in search of her. As
Richard put his head round the door to bid them enter, the wind, which was now rushing round
the house, made itself felt as a chill commotion, an icy anger of the air, in which both he
and Ellen shivered. Presently the pair in uniform appeared again, but at some distance across
the lawn, and too intensely absorbed in argument to pay any attention to him.

"Oh, damn! oh, damn!" sobbed Richard. The wind was blowing earth-daubed leaves off the flowerbeds
through the open door into the prim room. He stepped into the gale and shouted: "Roger! Roger!
Come in!"

Roger waved his arms, which were too long for the sleeves of his coat, and from his mouthings
it was evident that he was shouting back, but the wind took it all. In anger Richard stepped
back into the room and made as if to close the doors, and at that the two on the lawn ran towards
the house, with that look which common people have when they run for a train, as if their feet
were buckling up under them. Richard held the door wide again, but when the couple reached
the path in front of the house they were once more seized with a doubt about entering and came
to a standstill.

"Come in," said Richard; "come in."

The man took off his cap and ran his hands through his pale, long hair. "Is mother in?" he
demanded in a thin, whistling voice.

"Come in," said Richard; "come in."

The man began: "Well, if mother's not in, I don't know--"

Richard fixed his eyes on the woman's face. "Come in," he said softly, brutally, loathingly.
Ellen shivered to hear him speak thus to a woman and to see a woman take it thus, for at once
the stranger moved forward to the window and stepped into the room. As she brushed by him she
cringingly bowed her shoulders a little, and looked up at him as he stood a head and shoulders
higher than herself. He looked back steadily and made no sign of seeing her save by a slight
compression of the lips, until she passed on with dragging feet and stood listlessly in the
middle of the room. It was evident that they completely understood one another, and yet their
understanding sprung from no recollection of any previous encounter, for into the eyes of neither
did there come any flash of recognition. There could be no doubt that Richard was feeling nothing
but contempt for this woman, and her peaked yet rich-coloured face expressed only sick sullenness;
yet Ellen felt a rage like jealousy.

Richard turned again to the garden, and said: "Come in."

"Now don't be high-handed, old man," expostulated the stranger. But then he seemed to remember
something, and stretched out both his arms, held them rigid, and opened his mouth wide as if
to speak very loudly. But no sound came, and his arms dropped, and his long bony hands pawed
the air. Then suddenly his arms shot out again, and he exclaimed very quickly in a high, strained
voice: "Pride has always been your besetting sin, Richard. You aren't a bad chap in any way
that I know of. But you're proud. And it doesn't become any of us to be proud"--his spirit
was shaking the words out of his faltering flesh--"for we're all miserable sinners. You needn't
order me"--he spoke more glibly now, the flesh and the spirit seemed in complete agreement--"to
come out of the garden like that. I wish Poppy hadn't gone in." He caught his breath with something
like a sob; but the woman in uniform made no movement, and turned her eyes to Richard's face
as if it were he that must give the order. "I've got a reason for staying out here. I know
mother's not got Jesus. If she's ashamed of me now that I'm one of Jesus' soldiers, I won't
come in. I'll go and wrestle on my knees for her soul, but I won't hurt her by coming in. So
here I stay till she tells me to come in."

"But she's out," said Richard.

The man in uniform was discomfited. The light went out of his face and his mouth remained open.
He shifted his weight from one foot to the other and muttered: "Ooh-er, is she?"

"Yes," said Richard pleasantly. "She's gone over to Friar's End, but she'll be back any time
now. I wish you'd come in. I haven't seen you for years, and I'd like to swap yarns with you
about what we've been doing all the time."

"You'd have the most to tell," answered the other wistfully. "You've been here, there, and
everywhere in foreign parts. And I haven't been doing nothing at all. Except--" he added, brightening
up, "being saved."

"That's your own fault," Richard told him. "I've often wondered why you didn't try your luck
abroad. You'd have been sure to hold your own. Well, anyway, come in and have some tea. I don't
know what mother would say to me if she came in and found I'd let you stay out in the cold.
She'd be awfully upset."

"Do you think she would?" the man in uniform asked, and seemed to ponder. He looked up at the
grey sky and shivered. "'Tis getting coldish. And the cloth this uniform is made from isn't
the sort that keeps out cold weather. God knows I don't want to grumble at the uniform I wear
for Jesus' sake, but me having been in the drapery, I can't help noticing when a thing is cheap."
He stared down at his toes for a time, lifting alternately his heels and pressing them down
into the wet gravel; then raised his head and said nonchalantly: "Well, old man, I think I
will come in after all." But he halted yet again when he got one foot over the threshold. "Mind
you, I'm not coming in just because it's cold," he began, but Richard, exclaimed, "Yes, yes!
Of course I know you're not!" and gripped him by the arm and pulled him into the room. He did
not seem to resent the rough treatment at all, and went over at once to the woman in uniform,
and, looking happily about him, cried: "Isn't this a lovely home? I always say there's nobody
got such a nice home as my mother."

His voice whistled; and Ellen in her mind's eye saw a vision of some clumsy, half-bestial creature
wandering in primeval swamps, feeling joy and yet knowing no joyful word or song, and so plucking
a reed and breathing down it, and in his ignorance being pleased at the poor noise. She felt
pity and loathing, and looked across the room at Richard, meaning to tell him by a smile that
she would help him to be kind to Roger. But Richard was still occupying himself with the window,
examining with an air of irascibility a stain of blood which his cut finger had left on the
white paint near the lock. His eyes travelled from it to the muddy footprints of the two who
had come in from the garden and to the spatter of earth-daubed leaves on the polished floor,
and his mouth drew down at the corners in a grimace of passion that made Ellen long to run
to him and kiss him and bid him not give way to the madness of order so prevalent in this house.
But he did not even look at her, so she could do nothing for him.

He went forward to Roger, determinedly sweetening his face, and shook his hand heartily. "It's
good that you should have turned up just at this moment, for I'm going to be married before
long to Miss Melville, whom I met in Scotland when I was working at Aberfay. Ellen, this is
my brother, Roger."

Roger took Ellen's hand and then seemed to remember something. After exchanging a portentous
glance with the woman in uniform, he looked steadfastly into her face and said sombrely: "I
hope all's well with you, sister! I hope all's well with you!"

"Pairfectly," answered Ellen; and after a pause added, shyly: "And I'm pleased to meet you.
I hope anyone that's dear to Richard will be friends with me."

He flung his head backwards and cried, in that whistling voice: "Yes, I'll be that! And I'm
a friend worth having now I've got Jesus! And He's given me Poppy too! Aha, old man!" With
a little difficulty he put both his thumbs inside the corked edge of his armholes and began
to stride up and down, taking steps unnaturally long for thin legs. "You aren't the only man
who's thought of getting married! Great minds think alike, they say!" With a flourish he stretched
out his hand, and it was plain that he thought he would touch the woman in uniform, though
he was some feet away. Richard's and Ellen's eyes met; it was repulsive to see a man dizzied
by so small a draught of excitement. "Richard, Miss Melville, this is Lieutenant Poppy, who's
going to be my wife."

It was difficult to know what to do, for the woman in uniform, although she made a murmuring
noise, preserved that unillumined aspect which conveyed, more fully than silence could have
done, that her soul was glumly silent. But they went and greeted her, and looked into the matted
darkness of her eyes.

"We're going to be married as soon as I've served my year of probation. That's a long time
ahead, for I've only been at it a fortnight. I expect you'll be getting married much sooner.
Things always went easier with you than me," he complained. "But it'll be a happy day when
it comes, and I get the two blessings at the same time, becoming a full soldier of Jesus and
marrying Poppy. She's nearly a full soldier already. She joined the Army seven months ago."

"Do you preach in the streets?" asked Richard.

Roger's eyes filled with water. Ellen reflected that he must be curiously sensitive for one
so dull-witted, for the rage and disgust behind the question had hardly shown their heads.
"Yes, I do!" he said pettishly. "And if Jesus doesn't object, I don't see why you should."

"I don't object at all," Richard assured him amiably. "I only wondered what sort of work you
did. I suppose you haven't come to work at the Hallelujah Colony here, have you?"

"That's just what I've done!" answered Roger joyfully. "I joined up at Margate and I've laboured
there for three weeks. I didn't do so bad. Did I, Poppy? Not for a start? No one could exactly
shine at street preaching at first, you know. They will laugh so. But I didn't do worse than
other people when they begin, did I, Poppy? However, they've transferred me over here to the
Colony, to do clerk work." He added with a touch of defiance: "And, of course, they'll want
me to take services too, sometimes. In fact I'm going to take a service this evening."

"How long are you to be here?"

"Maybe always. They may feel I do the best work for Jesus here." He drew a deep, shuddering
breath, and took his cap off and threw it on the table with a convulsive gesture. "If mother
doesn't turn me away because I've given myself to Jesus," he said with that whistling note,
"I'll be able to see her every day."

"She won't turn you away."

There was folly, there was innocence in Roger's failure to notice that Richard was speaking
not in reassurance but in grimness, as one might speak who sees a doom, fire or flood travelling
down on to the place where he stood. "You ought to know, old chap," he murmured hopefully.
"She's always shown her heart to you, like she never has to me.... I don't know.... Oh, I've
prayed...."

"Well, you'll know for yourself in a minute," said Richard. "I heard the front door open and
close a second ago."

Ellen felt a thrill of pride because he had such keen senses, for the sound had been so soft
that she had not heard it, and yet it had reached him in the depth of his horrified absorption
of his brother's being. She longed to smile at him and tell him how she loved him for this
and all the other things, but again he wouldn't pay attention to her. Indeed, he could not,
for, as she saw from his white mask, he was wholly given up to pain and apprehension. Her heart
was wrung for him, for she saw the case against Roger. He was sickening like something that
has been fried in insufficient fat; and that his loathsomeness proceeded from no moral flaw
made it all the more sinister. If there was not vileness in his will to account for the impression
he made, then it must be kneaded into his general substance, and meanness be the meaning of
his pallor, and treachery the secret of the darkness of his hair. She looked at him accusingly
as he stood beside the buxom, sullen woman, who in a slum version of the emotion of embarrassment
was sucking and gnawing one of her fingers, and she found shining in his face the light of
love; true love that keeps faith and does service even when it is used despitefully. Perplexed,
she doubted all judgment.

The doorhandle turned, and Richard stepped in front of Roger. But when Marion slowly came into
the room she did not see him or anyone else, because she was looking down on a piece of broken
china which she held in her hand.

There was stillness till Richard whispered: "Mother."

She lifted her dark eyes and said, with inordinate melancholy, "Oh, Richard, someone has broken
the Lowestoft jug I used for flowers in the parlour."

He answered softly: "No one broke it. The wind blew it down when I opened the door to Roger."

Her eyes did not move from his. Her mouth was a round hole. He put out his hand to take the
piece of china from her. They both gazed down on it, as if it were a symbol, and exchanged
a long glance. She gave it to him and, bracing herself, looked around for Roger. When she found
him she started, and stared at the braid on his coat, the brass buttons, and the brass studs
on his high collar. Then she became aware of the woman, and, with a faint, mild smile of distracted
courtesy, took stock of her uniform. His cap, lying on the table, caught her eye, and she picked
it up and turned it round and round on her hand, reading the black letters on the magenta ribbon.

"So you've joined the Hallelujah Army, Roger?" she said, in that muffled, indifferent tone.

"Yes," he murmured.

"Do you preach in the streets?" Her voice shook.

"Yes," he whispered.

She gave the cap another turn on her hand. "Are you happy?" she asked, again indifferently.

"Yes," he whispered.

She flung the cap down on the table and stretched out her arms to him. "Oh, my boy!" she cried.
"Oh, my boy, I am so glad you are happy at last!" Love itself seemed to have spread its strong
wings in the room, and the others gazed astonished until they saw her flinch, as Roger crumpled
up and fell on her breast, and visibly force herself to be all soft, mothering curves to him.

Ellen cast down her eyes and stared at the floor. Roger's sobbing made a queer noise. Ahé ...
ahé ... ahé.... It had an unmechanical sound, like the sewing-machine at home before it quite
wore out, or Richard's motor-bicycle when something had gone wrong; and this spectacle of a
mother giving heaven to her son by forgery of an emotion was an unmechanical situation. It
must break down soon. She looked across at Richard and found him digging his nails into the
palms of his hands, but not so dejected as she might have feared. It struck her that he was
finding an almost gross satisfaction in the very wrongness of the situation which was making
her grieve--which must, she realised with a stab of pain, make everyone grieve who was not
themselves tainted with that wrongness. He would rather have things as they were, and see his
mother lacerating her soul by feigning an emotion that should have been natural to her, and
his half-brother showing himself a dolt by believing her, than see them embracing happily as
uncursed mothers and their children do. Uneasily she shifted her eyes from his absorbed face
to the far view of the river and the marshes.

"Oh, mother!" spluttered Roger, coming up to the surface of his emotion. "I'm a rich man now!
I've got Jesus, and you, and Poppy! Mother, this is Poppy, and I'm going to marry her as soon
as I can."

The woman in uniform looked at the window when Marion turned to her, as if she would have liked
to jump through it. One could imagine her alighting quite softly on the earth as if on pads,
changing into some small animal with a shrew's stringy snout, and running home on short hindlegs
into a drain. She moistened her lips and mumbled roughly and abjectly: "I didn't want to come."

Marion answered smoothly: "But now that you are here, how glad I am that you have," and took
her two hands and patted them. Looking round benevolently at Ellen and back at Lieutenant Poppy,
she exclaimed: "I'm a lucky woman to have two daughters given me in one week." She was behaving
like an old mother in an advertisement, like the silver-haired old lady who leads the home
circle in its orgy of eating Mackintosh's toffee or who reads the Weekly Telegraph in plaques
at railway-stations. The rapidity with which she had changed from the brooding thing she generally
was, with her heavy eyes and her twitching hands perpetually testifying that the chords of
her life had not been resolved and she was on edge to hear their final music, and the perfection
with which she had assumed this bland and glossy personality at a moment's notice, struck Ellen
with wonder and admiration. She liked the way this family turned and doubled under the attack
of fate. She was glad that she was going to become one of them, just as a boy might feel proud
on joining a pirate crew. She went over and stood beside Richard and slipped her arm through
his. Uneasily she was aware that now she, too, was enjoying the situation, and would not have
had it other than it was. She drooped her head against Richard's shoulder, and hoped all might
be well with all of them.

"You see, mother, since I saw you I've had trouble--I've had trouble--" Roger was stammering. 

Eliot asked, With what? She answered, With Puppies. Eliot asked, Where she heard of it, for he
had heard nothing of it? She rejoined, About the Town.

Altho' Kembal had mentioned the Matter to no Creature living.

VIII. William Brown testifi'd, That Heaven having blessed him with a most Pious and Prudent Wife,
this Wife of his, one day met with Susanna Martin; but when she approach'd just unto her, Martin
vanished out of sight, and left her extreamly affrighted. The parlourmaid came in and, over her shoulder, Marion said easily:
"Tea now, Mabel. There're five of us. And we'll have it down here at the table."

She waved her visitors towards chairs and herself moved over to an armchair at the hearth.
All her movements were easy and her face wore a look of blandness as she settled back among
the cushions, until it became evident that she was to be disappointed in her natural hope that
Roger would see the necessity of stopping his babble while the servant was going in and out
of the room. It was true that he did not speak when she was actually present, but he began
again on his whistling intimacies the minute she closed the door, and when she returned cut
himself short and relapsed into a breathy silence that made it seem as if he had been talking
of something to the discredit of them all. Ellen felt disgust in watching him, and more of
this perverse pleasure in this situation, which she ought to have whole-heartedly abhorred,
when she watched Marion. She was one of those women who wear distress like a rose in their
hair. Her eyes, which wandered between the two undesired visitors, were star-bright and aerial-soft;
under her golden, age-dusked pallor her blood rose crimson with surprise; her face was abandoned
so amazedly to her peril that it lost all its burden of reserve, and was upturned and candid
as if she were a girl receiving her first kiss; her body, taut in case she had to keep up and
restrain Roger from some folly of attitude or blubbering flight, recovered the animation of
youth. It was no wonder that Richard did not look at anybody but his mother.

"You see, mother, it was Poppy who brought me to Jesus," Roger said, a second before the door
closed. "I ... I'd had a bit of trouble. I'd been very foolish.... I'll tell you about that
later. It isn't because I'm cowardly and unrepentant that I won't tell it now. I've told it
once on the Confession Bench in front of lots of people, so I'm not a coward. And I don't believe,"
he declared, casting a look of dislike at Richard and Ellen, "that the Lord would want me to
tell anybody but you about it." The servant returned, and he fell silent; with such an effect
that she looked contemptuously at her mistress as she might have if bailiffs had been put into
the house. When she had gone he began again: "It was this way Poppy did it. After my trouble
I was walking down Margate Broadway--"

The woman in uniform made so emphatic a noise of impatience that they all turned and looked
at her. "There isn't a Broadway in Margate!" she nearly snarled. "It's High Street, you mean.
The High Street. Broadways they call them some places. But not at Margate, not at Margate."

"Neither it is," said Roger adoringly. "What a memory you're got, Poppy!"

Marion rose from the table, laying her hand on the woman's braided shoulders as she passed.
"Let's come to the table and have some tea; and take your hat off, dear. Yes, take it off.
That close bonnet can't be very comfortable when one's tired."

Ellen stared like a rude child as the woman slowly, with shapeless red fingers, untied her
bonnet-strings and revealed herself as something at once agelessly primitive and most modernly
degenerate. The frizzed thicket of coarse hair which broke into a line of tiny, quite circular
curls round her low forehead made Ellen remember side-streets round Gorgie and Dalry, which
the midday hooters filled with factory girls horned under their shawls with Hinde's curlers;
yet made her remember also vases and friezes in museums where crimped, panoplied priestesses
dispensed archaic rites. Her features were so closely moulded to the bone, her temples so protuberant,
and her eyes sunk in such pits of sockets that one had to think of a skull, a skull found in
hot sand among ruins. The ruins of some lost Nubian city, the mind ran on, for the fulness
of her lips compared with the thinness of her cheeks gave her a negroid look; yet the smallness
and poor design of her bones marked her as reared in an English slum. But her rich colour declared
that neither that upbringing, nor any of the mean conditions which her bearing showed had pressed
in upon her since her birth, had been able to destroy her inner resource of vitality. The final
meaning of her was, perhaps, primitive and strong. When she had stood about the room there
had been a kind of hieratic dignity about her; she had that sanctioned effect upon the eye
which is given by someone adequately imitating the pose of some famous picture or statue. There
flashed before Ellen's mind the tail of some memory of an open place round which women stood
looking just like this; but it was gone immediately.

"Well," said Roger, "I was telling you how I got Jesus. I was going along Margate High Street,
and I saw a crowd, and I heard a band playing. I didn't take any particular notice of it and
I was going to pass it by--think of it, mother, I was going to pass it by!--when the band stopped
and a most beautiful voice started singing. It was Poppy. Oh, mother, you must hear Poppy sing
some day. She has such a wonderful voice. It's a very rich contralto. Before she was saved
she sang on a pier. Well, I got into the crowd, and presently I got close and I saw her." A
dreadful coyness came on him, and he turned to Poppy and, it was plain to all of them, squeezed
her hand under the table. She looked straight in front of her with the dumb malignity of a
hobbled mule that is being teased. "Well, I knew at once. I've often envied you and mother
for going to Spain and South America, and wondered if the ladies were really like what you
see in pictures. All big and dark and handsome, but when Poppy came along I saw I didn't have
to go abroad for that! And you know, mother, Poppy is Spanish--half. Her name's Poppy Alicante.
Her mother was English, but she married a Spanish gentleman, of very good family he was. In
fact, he was a real don, wasn't he, Poppy? But he died when she was a baby, and as he'd been
tricked out of his inheritance by a wicked uncle, there wasn't much money about, so Poppy's
mother married again, to a gentleman connected with the Navy, who lives just the other side
of the river from over here. Funny, isn't it? But it was a very godless home, and they behaved
disgracefully to Poppy, when a rich man who saw her on the road when he was riding along in
his motor-car wanted to marry her, and she refused because she didn't love him. They were so
cruel to her that she had to leave home and earn her living, though she never expected to.
But she didn't like mixing with rough people, so as she'd always had Jesus she joined the Army.
And that's how we met."

After a pause Marion said, speaking fatuously in order to avoid the appearance of irony: "You're
quite a romantic bride, Poppy."

The woman in uniform bit into her toast and swallowed it unchewed.

"Well, I knew at once I'd met the one woman, as they say, and I hung about just to see if I
couldn't see more of her. And that's how I got Jesus. She brought me to Him. Mother, mother,"
he cried, in a sudden pale, febrile passion, "there's few have such a blessed beginning to
their marriage! We ought to be very happy, oughtn't we?"

"Yes, Roger," she answered him. "You'll be very happy--a husband that any woman would be proud of."

"Oh, I'm not nearly good enough for Poppy," he said deprecatingly. He seemed used to Poppy's
silence, and, indeed, whenever her silent absence from speech was most marked, he bent towards
her in a tender attitude which showed a resolution to regard it as maidenly bashfulness. "Well,
to get back to my story. I stood there peering through the crowd for another look at her, and
an officer began preaching. Captain Harris it was. I didn't take any particular notice of him."
He jerked his whitish face about contemptuously. "He's a poor preacher, isn't he, Poppy? He
never gets a grip on the crowd, does he? And they can't hear him beyond the first few rows.
I don't think I heard more than a few sentences that first evening. If I'd had been in the
Army as many years as he has, and I couldn't preach any better than that, I'd find some other
way of serving Jesus. I would really.

"But after that"--he stopped, looked at some vision in the air before him which filled his
eyes with tears and fire, and sighed deeply--"Captain Sampson preached the gospel. It's Captain
Sampson I've been working under since I joined the Army. Oh, mother, mother, I wish you could
hear him preach. He would give you Jesus. That first evening I heard him I saw Jesus as plain
as I see you. I saw Him then looking fierce like He was when He scourged the moneychangers
out of the temple. But when I'm alone, I see the other Jesus, the way he was most times." He
put his head back and bleated: "'Gentle Jesus, meek and mild.' The One that loves us when we're
weak and when we fall, and loves us all the better for it. Even you"--he looked at Richard
with a faint, malign joyfulness--"must feel the want of Him sometimes. Life can't be a path
of roses for any of us, however strong and clever we are. So I say it's not good preaching
to go on always about fighting for Jesus and being a good soldier, and making it seem as if
religion was just another trouble we had to face." His voice broke with petulance. "It's a
shame not to show people Gentle Jesus."

He checked himself. Remorse ran red under his pale skin. "What am I saying?" he cried out.
"Captain Sampson is a holy man! If he's harsh to those that work under him it's right he should
be. God chasteneth whom He loveth, and it's the same way with Captain Sampson I expect. It's
really a way of showing that he cares about you and is anxious about you. And anyway, he did
give me Jesus that evening. Oh, mother, it was so wonderful!" The words rushed out of him.
"He made you feel all tingling like you do when the fire engine goes past. Oh, it's an evening
to remember! And it gave me Jesus! Oh, mother, you don't know what it's like to find Jesus!
To know"--his voice whistled exultantly over the stricken tea-table--"that there's Somebody
who really loves you!"

For one second Marion covered her face with her hands.

Unseeingly he piped on: "I'm happy now. Always happy." He broke into thin, causeless laughter.
"When I wake up in the middle of the night, instead of feeling miserable like I used to, and
remembering things that happened at Dawlish when I was a kid, and wishing I hadn't ever been
born as I wasn't any good for anything, I just think of Jesus and feel lovely and warm. And
I've got earthly happiness as well. I've got Poppy. Oh, I'm a lucky man, lucky man! And I've
got a lifework instead of being an odd-come-short. I'll always have something to do now. They've
had experience with all sorts of men for years and years, turning them into soldiers for Jesus.
Surely they'll be able to find some work for me, even if they don't want me to preach. Look
at what I'm going to do now. Even if I don't do anything but clerk work, it's helping the Labour
Colony along--helping hundreds of poor souls to earn a decent living under Bible influence
when, if they weren't, there they'd be, roaming about the streets hungry and in sin. I'll be
doing my bit, won't I, mother?"

She smiled beneficently but speechlessly.

Ellen felt contemptuous. She had read about those Hallelujah Army Colonies for the unemployed,
and had heard them denounced at labour meetings, and they were, she knew, mere palliatives
by using which the pious gave themselves the pleasure of feeling that they were dealing with
the immense problem of poverty when they were merely taking a few hundred men and setting them
to work in uneconomic conditions. The very consideration of them brought back the happy spasm
in the throat, the flood of fire through the veins, the conviction that amidst the meadowsweet
of some near field there lurked a dragon whose slaughter (which would not be difficult) would
restore the earth its lost security; and all the hot, hopeful mood which filled her when she
heard talk of revolution. She hated the weak man for aggravating the offence of his unsightliness
by allying himself with the reactionary powers that made this world as unsightly as himself.
And it was like him to talk about teaching the Bible when everybody knew that there were lots
of things that weren't true. The spectacle of this mean little intelligence refusing to take
cognisance of the truths that men like Darwin and Huxley had worked all their lives to discover,
and faced the common hatred to proclaim, seemed to her cruel ingratitude to the great and wanton
contemning of the power of thought, which was the only tool man had been given to help him
break this prison of disordered society. She leaned across the table and demanded in a heckling
tone: "But you must know pairfectly well that these Labour Colonies are only tackling the fringe
of the problem. There's no way of settling the question of unemployment until the capitalist
system's overturned."

He looked at her with wide eyes and assumed an air of being engaged in desperate conflict.
It was evident that his egotism was transforming this conversation into a monstrous wrestling
with Apollyon. "Ah! You're a Socialist. They only think of giving people money. But it isn't
money people need. Oh, no. 'What shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world and lose
his own soul?' It's Jesus they need. Give them the Bible and all their wants will be satisfied,"
he cried in a shrill peewit cry.

"But the Bible isn't final. There's lots of things we know more about than the people who wrote
it. Look at all yon nonsense they put in about Adam and Eve because they didn't know about
evolution. That alone shows it's absurd to rely solely on the Bible...."

She looked round for signs of the others' approval. She knew that Richard agreed with her,
for among his Christmas presents to her had been Huxley's Essays, and when he had talked to
her of science she had seen that research after that truth was to him a shining mystic way
which he would have declared led to God had he not been more reverent than Church men are,
and feared to use that name lest it were not sacred enough for the ultimate sacredness. But
to her amazement he kept his eyes on the crumbs which he was picking up from the tablecloth,
and through his parted lips there sounded the faintest click of exasperation. She looked in
wonder at Marion, and found her eyes also downcast and her forefinger tapping on her chin as
if she were seeking for some expedient to stop this dangerous chatter. Ellen despised them
both. They had been terribly exercised at the thought that Roger was going to preach in the
streets, but they did not care at all that he was delivered over to error. She looked at him
sympathetically over the table, feeling that since these horrid people with whom she had got
entangled did not like him, he might be quite nice, and found him exchanging a long, peculiar
glance with Poppy, which was followed on both sides by a slow, meaning nod.

He looked in front of him again and his round eyes vacillated between Richard and Ellen, growing
rounder at each roll. Presently he swallowed a lump in his throat and addressed himself to
her. "Ah, you're an unbeliever," he said. "Well, Captain Sampson says there's always a reason
for it if people can't believe." He moistened his lips and panted the words out at her. "If
you've been doing anything that's wrong--"

A sob prevented him. "Oh, I can't go and spoil this lovely tea, even if I ought to for Jesus'
sake!" he cried. "We're all so happy, I can't bear to break it up by telling you what it's
my duty to do! Poppy, doesn't mother have everything nice? I've often thought of this tea-table
when I've been eating at places where they did things, roughish. Look at the flowers. Mother
always has flowers on the table, even when it's winter. Jesus wouldn't expect me to break this
up." His face became transfused with light. "I believe Jesus loves everything that's done nicely,
whether it's a good deed or bread-and-butter cut nice and thin. That's why," he mourned, so
wistfully that all of them save the impassive woman in uniform made a kind, friendly bending
towards him, "I mind not to be able to do anything really well. But Jesus loves me all the
same. He loves me whatever I'm like!" His brow clouded. "But because He loves me I owe Him
a debt. I ought to preach Him wherever I am, in and out of season. But I can't spoil this.
Aren't we all happy, sitting here? I'll tell you what. They've asked me to take the Saturday
evening service to-night because the Commandant and the two under him are all down with influenza.
If you'll come and hear me I'll tell you what Jesus wants you to hear. Oh, mother, Richard,
do, do come!"

"Yes, Roger dear, we'll come."

"You won't ... make fun of it?"

"Oh no! Oh no!" Her voice was hesitant, intimate, girlishly shy. "We haven't seen nearly as
much of each other as a mother and son ought. There are lots of things about me you don't know.
For all you know, what you said of Richard a moment ago ... might be true of me...."

"What I said about Richard?..."

"About times when one feels life too difficult and wants Someone to help one...."

She spoke seductively, mysteriously, as if she were promising him a pleasure; and he answered
in a voluptuous whining: "Oh, mother, if I could bring you to Jesus! Oh, Jesus! you are giving
me everything I want!" But in the midst of his rapture his face changed and he started to his
feet, so violently that his chair nearly fell backwards. "Yes," he cried reproachfully, "Jesus
gives me everything, and this is how I reward Him!"

They all stared at him, except Poppy, who was gloomily reading the tea-leaves in her cup.

"I told a lie!" he answered their common mute enquiry.

"A silly, vain lie. I told you they'd asked me to take the Saturday evening service to-night.
They didn't. I offered to take it. Nobody ever asks me to preach. They say I can't. Mind you,
I don't think they're right. I think that if they would let me practise I wouldn't speak so
badly. But that's not the point. I told a lie. I distinctly said they'd asked me to preach
because I wanted to pretend that I was making a success of things like Richard always does.
Oh, what a thing to do to Jesus!"

"But, dear, that was only because you were speaking in a hurry. It wasn't a deliberate lie."

"Oh, mother, you don't understand," he fairly squealed. "You haven't been saved, you see, and
you're still lax about these things. It does matter! It was a lie! I ought to wrestle this
thing out on my knees. Mother, will it put anybody out if I go into the parlour and pray?"

Marion answered tenderly: "My dear, of course you can," but Poppy clicked down her cup into
its saucer and said in a tone of sluggish, considered exasperation: "You haven't time. We ought
to be at the chapel half an hour before the meeting. It's a quarter to six now."

"Oh dear! oh dear! Is it as late as that? I wanted to write on a piece of paper what I'm going
to say! Now I won't have time! Oh, and I did want to preach well! Oh, where's my cap?" He began
to stumble about the room.

Presently he caught his foot in one of the electric light cords and set an alabaster lamp on
the mantelpiece rocking on its pedestal. Richard and Marion watched him and it with that set,
horrified stare which the anticipation of disorder always provoked in them. "Tcha!" exclaimed
Poppy contemptuously. "But it's there! On the armchair!" cried Ellen: she could not bear the
look on Richard's and Marion's faces. "Where?" asked Poppy. It was the first time she had spoken
directly to Ellen. "There! There! Among the cushions," she answered, and rose and went round
the table to pick it up herself. Richard came and helped her.

Roger seemed a little annoyed when Richard and Ellen found the cap for him among the cushions.
Having to thank them spoiled, it could be seen, some valedictory effect which he had planned.
He stood by while they shook hands with Poppy, who turned her head away as if to hide some
scar, and when she had gone across to Marion tried to get in his designed tremendousness. By
the working of his face, which made even his ears move a little, they knew they must endure
something very characteristic of him. But into his weak eyes there bubbled a spring of joyful
tenderness so bright, so clear, so intense that, though it would have seemed more fitting on
the face of a child than of a man, it yet was dignified.

"You make a handsome couple, you two!" he said.

"Richard, you're a whole lot taller than me. When I'm away from you I forget what a difference
there is between us. And the young lady, she's fine, too."

"Come on! Come on!" said Poppy from the door.

He drew wistfully away from them. "I do hope you both come to Jesus," he murmured, and smiled
sweetly over his shoulder. "Yes, Poppy, I'm quite ready. Why, you aren't cross with me over
anything, are you, dear? Well, good-bye, mother."

"Good-bye, Roger. And we'll come to the meeting. I'll let you out myself, my dears."

Very pleased that she and Richard were at last alone together, Ellen sat down on one of the
armchairs at the hearth and smiled up at him. But he would not come to her. He smiled back
through the closed visor of an overmastering preoccupation, and moved past her to the fireplace
and stood with his elbow on one end of the mantelpiece, listening to the sounds that came in
from the parlour through the half-open door: Marion's urbane voice, thin and smooth like a
stretched membrane, the click of the front-door handle, the last mounting squeal from Roger,
which was cut short by a gruff whine from Poppy, and, loudest of all, the silence that fell
after the banging of the door. They heard the turn of the electric switch. Marion must be standing
out there in the dark. But Ellen doubted that even if he had been with her in soul as in body,
and had spoken to her the words she wished, she could have answered him as she ought, for a
part of her soul too was standing out there in the dark with Marion. They were both of them
tainted with disloyalty to their own lives.

When Marion came in she halted at the door and turned out all the lamps save the candlesticks
on the table. She passed through the amber, fire-shot twilight and sat down in the other armchair,
and began to polish her nails on the palm of her hands. They were all of them lapped in dusk,
veiled with it, featureless because of it. Behind them the candlesticks cast a brilliant light
on the disordered table, on the four chairs where Richard and Marion, Roger and Poppy had sat.
Ellen's chair had been pushed back against the wall when she rose; one would not have known
that Ellen had been sitting there too.

Marion kept looking back at the illuminated table as if it were a symbol of the situation that
made them sit in the twilight without words. Suddenly she made a sound of distress. "Oh dear!
Look at the cakes that have been left! Ellen, you can't have had anything to eat."

"I've just had too good a tea," said Ellen, using the classic Edinburgh formula.

"But you must have an éclair or a cream bun. I got them for you. I used to love them when I
was your age." She rose and began to move round the table, bending over the cake-plates. Ellen
was reminded of the way that her own mother used to hover above the debris of the little tea-parties
they sometimes gave in Hume Park Square, cheeping: "I think they enjoyed their teas. Do you
not think so, Ellen?" and satisfying an appetite which she had been too solicitous and interested
a hostess to more than whet in the presence of her friends. That was how a mother ought to
be, little, sweet, and moderate.

Marion brought her an éclair on a plate. She took it and stood up, asking meekly: "Shall I
take it and eat it somewhere else? You and Richard'll be wanting to talk things over."

"Ah, no!" Marion was startled; and Ellen, to her own distress, found herself exulting because
this mature woman, who had dived so deeply into the tides of adult experience in which she
herself had hardly been laved, was facing the situation so inadequately. She scorned her for
the stiffness of the conciliatory gesture she attempted, for the queer notes which her voice
made when she tried to alter it from her customary tone of indifference in saying: "But, Ellen
dear, you're one of us now. We've no affairs that aren't yours too. We only wish they were
a little gayer...." She admired the facility of her own response for not more than a minute,
for, giving her a kind, blindish smile, Marion walked draggingly across the hearthrug and took
up her position at the disengaged side of the fireplace and rested her elbow on the mantelpiece,
even as Richard was doing at its other end. They stood side by side, without speaking, their
firelit faces glowing darkly like rubies in shadow, their eyes set on the brilliantly lit tea-table
and its four chairs. They looked beautiful and unconquerable--this tall man who could assail
all things with his outstretched strength, this broad-bodied woman whom nothing could assail
because of her crouching strength.

Marion stretched out her hand to the fire. Her insanely polished nails glittered like jewels.

She said in that indifferent tone: "Well, it wasn't so bad."

Some passion shook him. "Mother! Mother! To think of him bringing that woman into this house--to
meet you and Ellen!"

"Hush, oh hush! He does not know."

"But, mother! He ought to! Anyone could see--"

"What she was. Yes, poor woman. But remember I made a bad job of Roger. I gave him no brains."

"Mother--it mustn't happen again. She can't come here again."

She grew stern. "Richard, you must say nothing to Roger. Nor to her. She's his love and pride.
So far as he's concerned, she's a better woman than I am. I never put my love and pride in
his life. If you speak to either of them you will ... add to my already heavy guilt. Besides
... how can she hurt Ellen and me? She's very weak. We're very strong."

"But, mother, you saw what she was."

"More than you did. She's had a child not long since."

"A child?" He stared at her curiously, reverently. "How do you know?"

"Some people get a brown stain on their face when they're having a baby, and afterwards it
lingers on. I had it with you. Not with Roger. She has it now." She slowly drew her fingers
over her face, her eyes wide in wonder. "It's a queer thing, birth...."

Ellen tingled with shame because such things were spoken of aloud, by someone old. But Richard
muttered huskily: "I wonder what the story is...."

"Something horrible. She's come from a good home. Her teeth were well looked after when she
was a girl. That hair took some conscientious torturing to make it what it is. She was caught,
I suppose, by her love of beauty. Did you ever hear anything more pathetic than her name--Poppy
Alicante?"

"I don't see anything more in it than it's an obvious lie."

"It was much more than that. Think of her as a little girl going with her mother into a greengrocer's
and hearing about Alicante grapes, and asking what Alicante was, and being told it was in Spain,
and making the most lovely pictures of it in her mind and keeping them there ever since. Oh,
she's a poor, beauty-loving thing. That's how the handsome sailor picked her up in Chatham
High Street on Saturday night."

"No doubt you're right," he said, looking into the fire.

"And she hated giving up the child. That's why she snarls at Roger. Until she gets another
she'll be famished. It was taken over, I expect, by a married sister or brother who've got
no children of their own. She's not allowed to see it now. Not since she left the nice place
that was found for her after she'd got over her trouble. Twenty pounds a year--because of her
lost character; and for the same reason rather more work than the rest of the servants, who
all found out about it. So she ran away."

He interrupted her: "Supposing all that's true. And I know it is. It's like you, mother, to
read from a patch of brown skin on a woman's face things that other people would have found
out only by searching registry records and asking the police. It's like the way you always
turned your back on the barometer and read the sky for news of the weather. You're an old peasant
woman under your skin, mother." His voice was hazed with delight. He had forgotten the moment
in the timeless joy of his love for her. Ellen, in the shadows, stirred and coughed. He broke
out again: "Well, supposing all that's true! Are you going to be honest and be as clear-sighted
about what happened after she ran away? Mother, think of the things that have been done to
her, think of the things she's seen!"

The indifferent tone continued now, although she said: "Think of the horrible things that have
been done to me, think of the horrible things I've seen! Oh, you're right, of course. Unhappy
people are dangerous. They clutch at the happy people round them and drag them down into the
vortex of their misery. But if you're going to hate anybody for doing that, hate me. Look how
I've dominated you with my misfortunes, look how I've eaten up your life by making you feel
it a duty to compensate me for what I've endured. Hate me. But don't hate Poppy. Oh, that poor,
simple creature. Even now, after all that's happened, she'd be pleased like a child if you
took her to a fair where there were merry-go-rounds. Oh, don't hate her. And don't hate Roger."
Wildness flashed through her like lightning through a dense dark cloud. "Don't hate him, Richard!
Take your mind off both of us. We're all right. I can manage everything quite well. I'm hard.
I haven't got all those fine feelings you think I have. I'm quite hard. I can arrange everything
beautifully. Roger's happy in the Hallelujah Army. He's gone to Jesus for the love I ought
to have given him. I know they're thinking of turning him out. But I'll see to it that they
keep him. I'll pretend to have leanings towards their religion, and I'll give them money from
time to time so that they won't dare get rid of him. It will be rather amusing squaring them.
I shall enjoy it. We will be all right. Leave us alone. Don't think of us. Think of Ellen.
Think of Ellen. How you hold back from your happiness!" she cried gibingly. "I tell you, if
I had had your chance of happiness when I was young, neither my mother nor my father would
have held me back from it!"

It was as if her soul had leapt, naked and raging, from out of her mouth when she said that.
Ellen stirred among the cushions, feeling unformulated shame. She wondered how Richard could
endure hearing that hoarse vehemence from the lips of one whom he must wish to be gentle and
unpassionate. But he was gazing at his mother trancedly and with slight movements of his hands
and feet, as if she were dancing and he desired to join her in her spinning rhythm; and she,
mad, changeable woman, shivered and pressed her fingers against her mouth to silence herself,
and looked down on her skirt, drawling lazily: "Well, here I am, standing about in my outdoor
clothes. If there's anything I hate, it's wearing outdoor clothes in the house. However, it'll
save me changing, and I've none too much time if I'm going to be punctual for Roger's meeting."

She moved towards the door. He followed softly, as her shadow, and held it open.

When he made to follow her out of the room she turned sharply. "You needn't come."

"I promised Roger," he said falsely.

"What nonsense!" she blazed. "I'll tell him you had to stay here with Ellen."

She banged the door on him. He stood staring at its panels, which were rosy with firelight,
and Ellen closed her eyes for weariness. After some seconds she heard his tread and felt him
bend over her. "Ellen," he mumbled, "I must go with mother. That fool will be too awful on
the platform. I must see her through."

From the dark fey shape he made against the firelight she knew that he was not thinking of
her, that the life she had given him by her love no longer ran in his veins. She scratched
one of her wrists. If she could have let the life he had given flow out of her veins she would
have done it. "Ay, do," she said. "I like you to be good to your mother. You never know how
long you may have her with you," she added piously and not without cheerfulness.

He left her with a kiss that was dry and spurious like a paper flower. She sank back into the
chair and closed her eyes again, and listened for the closing of the front door which would
leave her free to weep or rage or dance or do whatever would relieve the pressure of the moment
on her brain. She filled in the throbbing tune by thinking of the visitors. It gave her a curious
thrill, such as she might have felt if she had gratified her ambition to carry a heavy-plumed
fan like Sarah Bernhardt's, to reflect that she had sat in the same room with a bad woman.
A desire for unspecified adult things ran through her veins, as if she had just heard the strong
initial blare of a band. Then she checked all thoughts, for from the hall she heard the sound
of argument.

The door was flung open by Marion. She moved towards the hearth with a burly speed which marked
this moment a crisis in the house of languid, inhibited movements, and cast herself down on
a low stool by the fender. Richard followed and stood over her, the firelight driving over
his face like the glow of excited blood, the shadows lying in his eye-sockets like blindness.
She cried up at him: "No, I will not go if you come too. How can I go and sit listening to
him, with you beside me hating him!" He swayed slowly, but did not answer. She stripped herself
of coat and furs and thrust them on him. "There. Take them up to my room. I'm not going. I'll
tell some lie. Better than you hating him like this. And while you're up you'll find some papers
on my desk about the mortgage on Whitewebbs. Attend to these. And don't come back just now.
You drive me mad when you hate Roger so."

When he had softly shut the door she put her hand to her head and said: "Oh, Ellen, what has
happened to me? I have lost all my strength."

But her voice was still level, and she was but a squat, crouching mass against the firelight.
Ellen did not know whether she was really moved, nor, if she were, whether she could feel comradely
with such emotion, since she had seen the woman blench at the thought of her son preaching
in the street yet stay complacid at the prospect of him being lost in intellectual error. So
she did not answer.

"You must go for a long walk with Richard to-morrow," said Marion presently. "Over to Rochford,
perhaps, where Anne Boleyn lived. It's pretty there."

"That would be nice," Ellen answered. She liked it when they talked as if they were merely
strangers. "Do you think it will be fine to-morrow? Richard said you were awful clever at telling
the weather."

"I can't say. I only looked out for a moment. The clouds are going and the moon's rising. But
there's a queer feeling in the air to-night. It's not like the winter or spring or summer or
autumn. It's as if we had come into some fifth season of the year." She fell silent and sat
tapping the floor with her foot; and asked more loudly but in the same tone: "What am I to
do, Ellen, to keep my sons from quarrelling over me?"

Ellen was sure she was being mocked; grown-up people never asked one's advice. She muttered
sullenly: "I don't know"; but as she spoke she heard from Marion's dark shape a sound of discovery
such as a searcher might make when his groping fingers closed on the lost pearl. Its intensity
convinced, and she leaned forward, crying in full friendship: "You've thought of something
to settle them?"

But Marion answered, with that indifference grown nearly to a sneer: "Oh, no.... Oh, no...."

Ellen leaned back, hating these adults that like to keep their secrets from the young.

CHAPTER X

Ellen was still on her knees fiddling with the lock of the French window in an effort to discover
why Marion had found it so difficult to open and shut, when she saw through the lacquer of
reflection which the lit room painted on the uncurtained glass that a dark mass had come to
a halt just outside. It moved, and she perceived that it was a skirt. She stood up to face
the intruder and looked through the glass into Marion's eyes. For a moment she stared back
in undisguised anger. Of course, if the woman had had any sense she would never have formed
this daft idea of going for a dander on the marshes at this hour of the night, whether her
nerves were troubling her or not; but she never ought to have pretended to be so set on it,
and let a body feel sure of having the evening alone with Richard as soon as he had finished
with those beastly papers, if she was going to turn back in five minutes. Then she remembered
that this was Richard's mother, and that for some reason he set great store by her; and she
tried to smile, and laid her fingers on the doorknob to open it. But Marion shook her head
and put out a prohibitory hand with so urgent a gesture that the unlit lantern which hung by
a strap from her wrist bumped against the glass.

Yet she remained for some seconds longer with her face pressed close to the window. She was
peering into the room with an expression of wanting to fix its contents and its appearance
in her memory, which was odd in the owner of the house. Ellen moved aside in order not to impede
her vision, and stood disliking her for her pervasive inexplicability and for her extreme plainness.
She had been very ugly all that evening since she came down to dinner, and now the shining
glass in front of her face was acting in its uncomeliness like a magnifying lens. Her hair
had suddenly become greasy during the last few hours, and it showed in lank loops where her
hat had been carelessly jammed down on her head. In the same short space of time her face seemed
to have grown fatter, and her skin had taken on the pallor of unhealthy obesity. Against it
the dark down on her upper lip looked like dirt. Her eyes were not magnificent to-night. After
she had stared round the room she looked again at Ellen, and gave her a forced smile that looked
the more unpleasant because the corners of her mouth were joined to her nose by deep creases.
It so manifestly did not spring from any joy, that Ellen could not answer it save by just such
another false grin. Her honesty hated this woman who had thus negotiated her into insincerity,
and she turned away. When she looked back the face had gone.

She went back to the fire and sat thinking bitterly what a daft thing it was for a wife to
go wandering round her own house in the night like a thief. But Marion was altogether an upsetting
woman. She had kept the dinner waiting for nearly a quarter of an hour, and when she came down
it was revealed that she had caused this delay, which must have inconvenienced the kitchen
and was sheer cruelty to Richard, who had made next to nothing of a tea, by dressing herself
up in a black and gold brocade affair that it was sheer madness to waste wearing when there
was no company, and putting on jewels which made her stricken plainness look the more soiled
and leaden. Then, once they sat down to the meal she had done her best to spoil, she had eaten
so slowly that it dragged on interminably; and all the while had kept her great eyes fixed
on Richard's face, so that though he sometimes turned aside and spoke to Ellen, he was always
drawn away from her by his sense of that strong, exigent gaze. The minute they had finished,
when there seemed a chance of their settling down in some more easy grouping by the fire, Marion
had curtly and disagreeably asked him if he had gone through the papers about the mortgage;
and when he answered that he had not been able to keep his mind on them she had told him to
go upstairs and finish them just as if he were a child.

Ellen raised her upper lip over her teeth at the thought of Marion's subsequent awkwardness.
There had not, when she announced her plan of taking Richard and Ellen up to town the next
morning and spending the day shopping and going to a theatre, been the least real party-giving
joy in her tone. Her will seemed to be holding her voice in its hands like a concertina and
waving it to and fro and squeezing out of it all sorts of notes; but the sound of generous
happiness would not come. And when Ellen tried to tell her that it was very kind of her, but
for herself she would rather stay quietly in the country and go for a walk with Richard, the
woman had simply lifted her voice to a higher pitch and said: "Oh, but it'll be great fun.
We must go before Sunday is on us." She was evidently one of those managing bodies who are
accustomed to ride rough-shod over the whole world, and often do it under the pretence of kindness.
It was most cunning the way she rang for the cook to try and make it seem that there was a
pressing domestic reason for her taking this jaunt. But cook had let her down badly, staring
in such ingenuous amazement, and blurting out: "Oh Lor', mum, I don't want no aluminium set
now. All I said was I thought our copper saucepans would need re-coppering in a year or so,
and that, considering the trouble and expense that meant, we might as well restock with aluminium."
There had been a hysterical stridency about the way in which Marion had flouted the woman's
protests by repeating over and over again: "Yes, you shall have them now. There's not the smallest
reason why you should wait for them. I shall go up to Harrod's to-morrow morning."

Indeed, Marion was a queer woman in all respects, from her broad face and squat body to her
forced, timbreless voice and her unconvincing gestures. It was only her clumsiness that had
prevented her from opening the French window; the lock was all right. Ellen felt that she would
die if she did not have an hour alone with Richard to relearn that life could be lived easily
and with grace. But it would be just like the creature's untimeliness and awkwardness to be
still hanging about the garden in readiness and pop in just when everything was being lovely.
Ellen crossed to one of the small leaded windows which were on each side of the French window
and looked out of the open pane in its centre. It was as she feared. The light streaming from
the room showed her Marion standing half-way across the lawn, looking up at the top storey
of the house. As the ray found her she lowered her head and made a jerky, embarrassed movement
in the direction of Ellen, who, feeling merciless, continued to hold back the curtain. Marion
drew her cloak collar up about her ears and stepped aside into the darkness. Ellen went and
sat down by the fire. From something in Marion's bearing, she knew that she would not be back
for some time.

It would be beautiful when Richard came down to her. Now that the room was purged of its late
occupant she felt herself becoming again the miracle that Richard's love had made her in the
days before they left Edinburgh. Her heart beat quicker, she was sustained by a general mirth
and needed no particular joke to make her smile. And the Devil so hardens them, that nothing
will awaken their cares about their Souls: How come so many to be Seared in their Sins? 'Tis the
Devil that with a red hot Iron fetcht from his Hell does cauterise them. Thus 'tis, till perhaps
at last they come to have a Wounded Conscience in them, and the Devil has often a share in their
Torturing and confounding Anguishes. The Devil who Terrified Cain, and Saul, and Judas into
Desperation, still becomes a King of Terrors to many Sinners, and frights them from laying hold
on the Mercy of God in the Lord Jesus Christ. In these regards, Wo to us, when the Devil comes down
upon us.

Proposition V. Toward the End of his Time the Descent of the Devil
in Wrath upon the World will produce more woful Effects, than what
have been in former Ages.

The dying Dragon, will bite more cruelly and sting more bloodily
than ever he did before: The Death-pangs of the Devil will make him
to be more of a Devil than ever he was; and the Furnace of this Nebuchadnezzar
will be heated seven times hotter, just before its putting out.

We are in the first place to apprehend that there is a time fixed and stated by God for the Devil
to enjoy a dominion over our sinful and therefore woful World. The Devil once exclaimed in Mat.
8.29. It is plain, that until the second coming of our Lord the Devil must have a time of plagueing
the World, which he was afraid would have Expired at his first. The Devil is by the wrath of
God the Prince of this World; and the time of his Reign is to continue until the time when
our Lord himself shall take to himself his great Power and Reign. Then 'tis that the Devil shall
hear the Son of God swearing with loud Thunders against him, Thy
time shall now be no more!

Then shall the Devil with his Angels receive their doom, which will be, depart into the everlasting
Fire prepared for you.

We are also to apprehend, that in the mean time, the Devil can give
a shrewd guess, when he draws near to the End of his Time.

When he saw Christianity enthron'd among the Romans, it is here said, in our Rev. 12.12. He
knows he hath but a short time. And how does he know it? Why Reason will make the Devil to know
that God won't suffer him to have the Everlasting Dominion; and that when God has once begun
to rescue the World out of his hands, he'll go through with it, until the Captives of the mighty
shall be taken away and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered. But the Devil will have
Scripture also, to make him know, that when his Antichristian Vicar, the seven-headed Beast on
the seven-hilled City, shall have spent his determined years, he with his Vicar must unavoidably
go down into the bottomless Pit. It is not improbable, that the Devil often hears the Scripture
expounded in our Congregations; yea that we never assemble without a Satan among us. As there
are some Divines, who do with more uncertainty conjecture, from a
certain place in the Epistle to the Ephesians, That the Angels do
sometimes come into our Churches, to gain some advantage from our
Ministry.

But be sure our Demonstrable Interpretations may give Repeated Notices to the Devil, That his
time is almost out; and what the Preacher says unto the Young Man, Know thou, that God will
bring thee into Judgment! THAT may our Sermons tell unto the Old
Wretch, Know thou, that thy Judgment is at hand.

But we must now, likewise, apprehend, that in such a time, the woes
of the World will be heightened, beyond what they were at any time
yet from the foundation of the World.

Hence 'tis, that the Apostle has forewarned us, in 2 Tim.

3.1. this know, that in the last days, perillous times shall come.

Truly, when the Devil knows, that he is got into his Last days, he will make perillous times
for us; the times will grow more full of Devils, and therefore more full of Perils, than ever
they were before. Of this, if we would know, what cause is to be assigned; It is not only, because
the Devil grows more able, and more eager to vex the World; but also, and chiefly, because the
World is more worthy to be vexed by the Devil, than ever heretofore.

The Sins of men in this Generation, will be more mighty Sins, than
those of the former Ages; men will be more Accurate and Exquisite
and Refined in the arts of Sinning, than they use to be.

And besides, their own sins, the sins of all the former Ages will also lie upon the sinners of this
generation.

Do we ask why the mischievous powers of darkness are to prevail more
in our days, than they did in those that are past and gone!

'Tis because that men by sinning over again the sins of the former days, have a Fellowship
with all those unfruitful works of darkness.

As 'twas said in Matth. 23.36. All these things shall come upon this generation; so, the men
of the last Generation, will find themselves involved in the gulf of all that went before them.
Of Sinners 'tis said, They heap up wrath; and the sinners of the Last Generations do not only
add unto the heap of sin that has been pileing up ever since the
Fall of man, but they Interest themselves in every sin of that enormous
heap.



"Going down on the marshes at nine o'clock on a freezing night!" He turned on her with a sharpness
that she felt should have been incompatible with their relationship. "Why didn't you come and
tell me she was doing this?"

Her temper spurted. "How should I know there was anything unusual in it? You are all strange
in this house!" For a second they looked at each other in hatred; then eyes softened and they
looked ashamed, like children who have quarrelled over a toy and have pulled it to pieces.
She thought jealously of the woman who was the cause of all this trouble, walking down there
in the quietness of the marshes, where all day she herself had longed to be. Despairingly,
she moved close to him, slipping her hand inside his, and said, trying to hold back the thing
that was drifting away: "I'm sorry. But she said she wanted to clear her head after the day
she'd had. And I could never think she was a woman who'd be afraid of walking in the dark.
And it seemed natural enough. Because it has been a day for her, hasn't it?"

He agreed grimly: "Yes, it's been a day," and looked over his shoulder at the quiet silvern
garden, and shivered. "Tell me," he asked, with a timidity that filled her with fear, since
it was the last quality she had ever expected to colour his tone to her, "what was she like,
before she went out?"

"Oh, verra bright," said Ellen, with conscious acidity. "She was all for making arrangements
for you and me to go up to town with her to-morrow and see a play, and I don't know all what.
And she had the cook in to tell her about some aluminium saucepans that we're going to buy
to-morrow if we go."

"Oh!" He was manifestly relieved. "Well, I suppose it's all right."

"Yes, it's all right," she told him pettishly; and then tried to make amends by speaking sympathetically
of Marion. "I can understand why your mother thought it would do her good to go out. If you've
lived all your life in a place I expect every field and tree gets a meaning for you. No doubt,"
she went on, unconscious of any feeling but contentment that she was so successfully taking
cognisance of Marion's more pathetic aspect, "the poor thing's gone for a walk to some place
where she can get a bit of comfort by remembering the time when she was very young. Richard,
Richard, what have I said?"

He looked at her coldly. "Nothing. What could you have said?" But he went to the window as
if he had been told something that had made him hasten, and opened it and stepped outside.
Against the moonlight he was only a silhouette; but from the hawkishness of the profile he
turned to the west she knew that he was allowing himself to wear again that awful look of rage
which had made her cry aloud. He stepped in again and said: "I'm sorry, Ellen, but I must go
and look for her."

She might have known that she would not have her evening alone with him. "May I come with you?"
she asked through tears.

"No, no, it wouldn't be any fun for you," he answered fussily, "scrambling about these fields
in the dark."

"Let me come with you!" she begged; and guilefully, seeing his brows knit sullenly, she waved
her hand round the room, which she knew must be to him sombre with the day's events, and cried:
"I shall feel afraid, waiting here."

"Very well. Go and put your things on. But be quick."

He had his hat and coat and stick when she came down; and he had grudged the time spent in
waiting for her. Wearily she followed him out of the window. From what her mother had told
her about men, she had always known that even Richard, since he was male, might forget his
habit of worship towards her and turn libellous as husbands are, and pretend that she was being
tiresome when she was not. But she would never have believed that it could come so soon. And
it was spoiling her. She no longer felt possessed of the perfect control of her actions, nor
sure of her own nobility. Only a second or two ago she had betrayed her sex by pretending to
be frightened by assuming one of the base qualities which tradition lyingly ascribed to women,
because she had to be in his presence no matter at what price. There was no knowing where all
this would end.

But in the inventive beauty of the night she found distraction, for it had wrought many fantastical
changes in the dull world the day had handed it. The frost had made the soil that had been
sodden metal-hard, while preserving its roughness, so that to tread the paths was like walking
on beaten silver. Since its rising, the moon had sown and raised a harvest of new plants in
the garden; for the rose-trees, emaciated with leaflessness, had each a shadow that twisted
on the earth like ground-ivy or climbed the wall like a creeper. Through an orchard piebald
with moonbeams and shadow, and a gate, glaring as with new white paint, set in a lichen-grey
hedge, they passed out on the grizzled hillside. He did not take her down the path by which
she and Marion had gone on to the marshes the previous afternoon, but plunged forward into
the short grey fur of the moonlit field, where there was no path, and led her up in a slanting
course towards the top of the elm-hedge that striped the hill. It was rough walking over the
steep frozen hummocks, and she wished he would not walk so fast. But it was lovely going up
like this, and with every step widening the wide, whitely-blazing view. The elm trees stood
like chased toys made by silversmiths where the light struck them; and in the darkness seemed
like harsh twiggy nets hung on tall poles to catch the stars. Scattered over the polished harbour,
the black boats squatted on their shadows and the tide licked towards them with an ebony and
silver tongue. But far out in the fairway a liner and some lesser steamers carried their spilling
cargo of orange brightness, and the further fringe of the night was spoiled by the comprehensive
yellow wink of a lighthouse; and these things tainted the black and white immaculacy of the
hour. It was not on earth but overhead that the essence of the night displayed itself. Light
rushed from the moon into the sky like a strong wind, carrying before it some shining vapours
that might have been angels' clouts blown off a heavenly line. It was as if some horseplay
was going on among the ethereal forces; for the stars, dimmed by the violent brilliance of
the moon, were like tapers seen through glass, and were held, perhaps, by invisible beings
who had been drawn to their windows by the sound of carnival. To its zenith the night was packed
with gaiety.

"Richard, Richard, is it not beautiful?" she cried.

"Yes, yes," he answered.

They reached the topmost elm in the row, and opened a gate into a field which stretched inland
from the hill's brow. Under the shadow of its seaward edge they still walked westerly, the
ploughed earth looking like a patch of grey corduroy lying to their right. It struck her that
he was moving now like a hunter stalking his quarry, as if the lightness of his feet were a
weapon, as if he were looking forward to an exciting kill. At the corner of the field they
stopped before a gap in the hedge. Triple barbed wire crossed a vista of close-cropped grass
running to trees that lifted dark spires against the pale meridian starlight.

"Wait," said Richard.

He went forward and stamped down the long grasses at one side of the gap, and then bent nearly
double and seemed to be pressing against something with his hands and his knee. The barbed
wire began to hum, to buzz excitedly; there was the groan of cracking wood, and the grunt of
his deep, straining breath. She found herself running her hands over her face and down her
body and thinking, "Since he is like that, and I am like this, all will be well." That was
quite meaningless; it must be true that one of the moon's rays was unreason. The barbed wire
danced and fell to the ground, singing angrily. Richard had broken in two the stake which supported
it.

"Come on," he ordered her, and lifted her over the tangle of wires. They walked forward, again
on the hilltop's unscreened edge. The harbour was hidden by the elms, but below lay the frosted
marsh and islands, girdled by the glistening sea-walls and their coal black shadows, and great
wide Kerith, its expanse jewelled here and there by the lights of homesteads. It was beautiful,
but she did not say anything about it to Richard, who was walking on ahead, though there did
not seem any reason why they should walk in single file, for the ground was level and the grass
short. There was indeed a suavity about this place which was not to be found in fields or commons.
The line of trees towards which they were going was only a spur of a dense wood that stretched
inland, and light from some moonflooded place beyond outlined their winter-naked bodies and
showed them beautiful with a formal afforested grace.

"Is this a park?" she whispered, running forward to his side.

"Yes. My father's park."

"Oh!" she breathed in surprise; then, flaming up in loyalty, cried: "What a shame it isn't yours!"

He made an exclamation of anger and disgust, and said coldly: "Can't you understand that I
am glad that nothing which was his is mine?"

Meekly she murmured: "That's natural, that's natural," and fell behind.

They passed the lacy clump of withered bracken, casting a shadow much more substantial than
itself, which was the last dwindled outpost of the screen of trees; and Richard hissed over
his shoulder, "Hush!" though she had not spoken. But nothing could spoil this. The silver forest
waited in a half circle round a clearing that looked marshy with moonbeams; and in the centre
of the arc, set forward from the trees, shone a small temple, looking out to sea. It had four
white pillars, which were vague with excessive light, columns of gleaming mist; and these upheld
a high pediment, covered with deep stone mouldings which cast such shadows and received such
brightness that it looked like a rich casket chased by some giant jeweller. That it should
last longer than a sigh did not seem possible.

But it endured, it endured; until the urgent advocacy of romance which was somehow inherent
in its beauty, and which was not likely to be fulfilled, caused an ache. She caught her breath
in a sob.

"You think it beautiful?" asked Richard, close to her ear.

"Oh, yes! Oh, yes!"

"I had a summer-house in that villa of mine at Rio," he said, hotly and defiantly, "which was
just like this, but much more beautiful."

He stepped forward and began to move towards the temple with that air of stalking a quarry.
She followed him wearily, feeling that it was not right that they should have come here like
this. They should have come in some different way. At each step the temple grew higher before
them, more candid, more immaculate, but its beauty did not soften his inexorable aspect. When
they could see the pale wedges which the moon drove in between the columns he paused and stared,
and drew from his pocket something dark which lay easily in his hand. "What's that? What's
that?" she asked in panic. "Only an electric torch," he muttered, without surprise at her suspicion,
and went with springing, silent, detective gait up the three steps of the temple.

She remained without, drooping. Would he find his mother there? She hoped so, for then they
could all go home and leave this place, which she felt despised her. The tall trees of the
forest, lifting their bare branches like antlers against the stars, seemed to be holding their
heads high in contempt of her defeat. For so to be forgotten was defeat.

No sounds came from the temple, and she timidly went up the steps and passed into the interior,
which was cut by the colonnade into narrow chambers of shadows and broader chambers of light.
At first she could not see him anywhere, and cried in alarm: "Richard!"

"I'm here," he answered. He was standing beside her, leaning against a pillar, but put out
no hand to soothe her fear.

"Have you not found her?" she quavered.

He let the yellow circle of the electric torch travel over the cracked stucco-wall that faced
them, the paintless door at its left extremity, the drift of dead leaves on the stone floor.

"What does that door open on to?" asked Ellen, forgetting the reason for their search in the
queerness of the place.

"A staircase up to the room above."

"What a lovely place," she cried joyfully, trying to remind him of the existence of happiness,
"to play in in the summer! Could one sleep up there, do you think?"

He switched off the light. "I daresay," he said gruffly in the darkness.

"And look!" She pointed to a moonlit niche in the middle of the wall high and deep enough to
hold a life-sized statue. "It would be fun if I stood up there, wouldn't it?"

There was silence; and then amazingly, his voice cracked out on her like a whip. "Why do you
say that? Did anybody tell you about this place? Has she told you anything about it?"

"Why, no!" she stammered. "Nobody's told me a thing of it! I just thought it would be fun if
I were to stand up there like a statue. You take me up too quick."

His passion died suddenly. "No," he said weakly, exhaustedly. You may remember, Sir, that when
I took leave of you with a design of retiring to my native county, there to enjoy the plenty
and leisure for which a few years labour had furnished me with the necessary requisites, I was
advised by an eminent physician to make a very extensive tour through the western part of this
kingdom, in order, by frequent change of air, and continued exercise,
to cure the ill effects of my long abode in the hot and unwholesome
climate of Jamaica, where, while I increased my fortune, I gradually
impaired my constitution; and though one who, like me, has dedicated
all his application to mercantile gain, will not allow that he has
given up the substance for the shadow, yet perhaps it would be difficult
to deny that I thus sacrificed the greater good in pursuit of the
less.



She turned and went down the steps and walked away, holding her hands, close to her eyes like
blinkers, so that she might be the less afflicted by the night, whose beauty was a reproach
to her. A desire to look out towards the sea and the flatlands came on her. This temple set
among the woods was a human place; men had laid the stones, men had planted the trees, men
had thought of it before it was. It was the stage for a scene in the human drama, which she
had not been able to play. But the sea and the flatlands were not made by men; they made humanity
seem a little thing, and human success and failure not reasonable causes for loud laughter
or loud weeping. At the hill's edge she leaned against a tree and gazed down on the moon-diluted
waters, on the moon-powdered lands, and was jealous of the plain, disturbing woman who kept
herself covered with the quietness of the marshes to the distress of others; and saw suddenly,
on the path at the foot of the slope, the far, weak ray of a dancing lantern.

She ran back to the temple. All she cared for really was pleasing him. "Richard, Richard! I've
found her! She's down there on the marshes!"

He was out beside her in a second. "Where? How do you know?"

"I saw her lantern down on the marshes!"

When they got back to the hill's edge the light was still to be seen, bobbing along towards
the elm brow. Richard clipped Ellen's waist to show her how well pleased he was with her. "Ah,
that'll be Marion!" he said. "Nobody else would be on the marshes at this hour." Then a little
wind of anger blew over his voice. "Has she been to his tomb? Can she have been to his tomb
in the time? It's a steep climb for her. I wonder.... I wonder...."

The lantern bobbed out of sight behind the elm row. Feeling that they were again alone together,
Ellen raised her lips to be kissed, but he had already turned away. "Let's go home now!" he
said urgently. "I want to know where she's been."

The place seemed far more beautiful to her than it had done before. "Oh! Now you're sure she's
quite safe, mayn't we stay here a little?" she begged.

"No, no. Some other night. I'll bring you to-morrow night. But not now, not now."

She followed laggingly, looking about her with infatuation. There was something religious about
the scene. Rites of some true form of worship might fitly be celebrated here. All appeared
more majestic and more sacred than in the strained, bickering moments before she showed him
the lantern. Now she perceived that it was the silver circle of trees which was the real temple,
and that the marble belvedere was but a human offering laid before the shrine. It was in there,
along the ebony paths which ran among the glistening thickets, that one would find the presence
of the divinity.

"Oh, Richard! It will never be so beautiful as this on any other night! Let us stay!"

"No. It will be just as good any moonlit night. I swear I'll bring you. But now I want to get
back home."

He slipped her arm through his to make her come. She stumbled along, turning her face aside
towards those mystic woods. At the end of those paths was another clearing, wide but smaller
than this, and girdled all sides by the forest; and there was something there.... Another temple?
A statue? An event? She did not know. But if they found it, they would be happy for ever....

"Richard--"

"No."

He swung her over the tangled wires, and they hurried through the ploughed field. When they
came to the gate at the top of the elm-row they saw below them, on the path up from the marshes
to the orchard gate, the bobbing lantern.

"She's going fairly quickly," he said softly, speculatively. "I wonder if she's been to his
tomb? Do you think she's had time?"

"I don't know," Ellen murmured, disquieted that he should ask her when he must be aware she
could not tell.

"Oh, well!" he exclaimed, with a sudden change to loudness and bluffness, switching on the
electric torch and turning it on the earth at their feet. "We'll find out when we get home.
Let's hurry back."

They ran across the hillside, Ellen following desperately, with a dread that if she tripped
and delayed him he might not be able to behave quite nicely, the circle of light he cast on
the ground for her guidance. The humped and raw-edged frozen earth hurt her feet. The speed
they went at shook the breath out of her lungs. At an easy, comfortable pace, the lantern bobbed
its way into the orchard and up towards the garden. She was the lucky woman, Marion.

"Good," said Richard, as they passed through the gate. "You did that in fine style."

"Why do you need to hurry so?" she protested. "You have all night now to ask her where she
has been."

"I want to find out if she has been to his tomb," he repeated with dull, drilling persistence.

When they came to the end of the garden he drew up sharply. "Why is she standing by the servant's
door? Why the devil is she always doing such extraordinary things?"

Ellen saw in front of her, through a screen of bushes that ran from the left-hand corner of
the house to the left wall of the garden, the steady rays of the lantern come to rest. "You'd
better go and ask her," she said pettishly.

He crossed the lawn quickly and halted before a trellis arch which pierced this screen, and
motioned her to go before him. At that moment there came the sound of knocking near by. He
caught his breath, pressed on her heels impatiently, and when they entered the tiled yard brushed
past her and walked towards the lantern, which was close to the door in the side of the house,
calling querulously: "Mother! Mother!"

The light swung and wavered. "What is the woman up to?" thought Ellen crossly. The strong yellow
rays of the lantern dazzled before them and prevented them from seeing anything of its bearer,
though the moonlight beams were still unclouded.

"Mother!" Richard cried irascibly, and levelled the torch on her like a revolver.

Its brightness showed the dewy roundness, towsled with perplexity, of a doe-eyed girl of Ellen's
age.

"Ach!" said Richard, shouting with rage. "Who are you? Who are you?"

It struck Ellen that his refusal of any recognition of the girl's sweetness was unnatural;
that it would have been more sane and wholesome, though it would have pricked her jealousy,
if he had shown some flush of pleasure at this gentle, bucolic, nut-brown beauty.

"Please, sir," gabbled the girl with her wet, foolish, pretty lips, "I'm Annie Brickett, and
your cook's my auntie, and I come over to say my married sister's had a little baby, and it's
before her time, so would auntie give us the clothes she was making?"

The door opened, and aproned figures looked out of the kitchen brightness at them.

"Where is your mistress?" Richard asked them, cutting into the girl's sweet, silly speech.
"Has she come back?"

The servants all started making twittering, consequential noises. "No, sir, she isn't." "We
didn't know, any of us, you was out till the lady and gentleman come."

"What lady and gentleman?"

The two younger women shrunk back and left the cook to answer. "Mr. Roger Peacey, sir, and
the lady." From the hindmost girl there came a giggle.

That was why they had not heard the knocking at the door. They had all been sitting laughing
at his mother's other son and going over the family history. Ellen shrank back from the light.
Marion's misfortunes made things very ill to deal with; they seemed to bring out the worst
in everybody. And how the whole affair was hurting Richard! He turned on his heel and walked
back to the trellis arch and went through it without waiting for her. By the time she had followed
him round the corner of the house he was opening the French window into the dining-room. He
found it quite easy to open; again she thought with rage and contempt of the way that Marion
had fumbled with the handle. She had to run along the path lest in his forgetfulness he shut
her out into the night.

She found him halted just within the room, pulling off his gauntlets and forcing a white smile
towards Roger, who was standing swaying on the hearthrug, his cheeks dribbled with tears. Poppy
stood beside him, staring sullenly at a blank wall, her mouth a little open with distaste for him.

"So you're giving us another visit," said Richard, in that hollow conscientious tone of kindness
he had used to them in the afternoon.

Roger opened his mouth but could not speak; then flapped his hands to make it plain this was
an occasion of importance, and cried bleatingly: "I've come to say that I forgive you all."

"Forgive us!" exclaimed Richard, swept away to the bleak extremity of rage. Then checked himself.
"Oh, for not coming to your meeting. We hoped you would. Ellen was tired."

"I couldn't bear to think of you p'raps going to bed and feeling that I was harbouring ill
thoughts towards you, not realising that now I've got Jesus I'll forgive anything that anybody
does against me!" His voice wallowed rhapsodically. "So Poppy and I just nipped in here instead
of going straight back to the Colony."

Poppy wriggled her body about in her clothes in an agony of desire to disassociate herself
from him, from the situation.

"That was good of you," said Richard.

"And now"--the whistling tone came back in his speech--"I want to tell mother!"

"You can't do that. She isn't in."

"What, weren't you all out together? Didn't she come home with you?"

"No."

"Then, love o' goodness, where is she at this time of night?"

"Down on the marshes," said Richard casually. "She had a headache. She thought a walk in the
night air would do her good." Slowly and deliberately he smoothed out his gauntlets and laid
them down on the table.

"Oh," murmured Roger, and was silent until Richard put out his hand and straightened the gloves,
making them lie parallel with the grain of the wood. Then suddenly he ran round the table and
looked up into his brother's face. "Here! What's the matter with mother?"

"Nothing! Nothing!" exclaimed Richard in exasperation. "She's down on the marshes, having a walk."

"Oh, but you can't take me in that way!" the pallid creature cried, wringing his hands. "I
can see you're frightened about mother!"

"I'm not," said Richard vehemently.

"You needn't try to fool me. I'm stupid about everything else, but not about mother! And I
could always feel what was going on between you two. Many's the time I've had to leave the
room because you two were loving each other so and I felt out of it. And now I know you're
frightened about her! You are! You are!"

"I'm not!" shouted Richard.

Roger shrank back towards Poppy, who seemed to like the loud noise, and had raised eyes skimmed
of their sullenness by delight. "If you'd got Jesus," he said tartly, "you'd learn to be gentle.
Like He was." He recovered confidence by squeezing Poppy's hand, which she tendered him deceitfully,
looking at Richard the while as if she were waiting for orders. "Now you'd better tell me what
it is about mother that's making you frightened. She'd not be pleased, would she, if she came
in and found you treating me like this, as if I hadn't a right to know anything about her,
and me her own son just as much as you are?"

That argument moved Richard, Ellen could see. He looked down at his white knuckles and unclenched
his hands. "It's really nothing," he told Roger in that false, kind voice. "I went upstairs
after dinner to look over some papers for mother and left her and Ellen down here. When I came
back Ellen told me she'd gone out for a walk on the marshes. It struck me as rather an odd
thing for her to do at this hour, so we went out and had a look round, but couldn't see her
anywhere. There's not the slightest occasion for worry."

Roger stared at him, sucking his front teeth. "But you're frightened!" he said explosively.

"I am not."

"You are. You think she's come to some harm down on the marshes." He slipped past him and flung
open the French window, calling in a thin, whistling voice that could not have been heard fifty
yards away: "Mummie! Mummie!"

A convulsion of rage ran through Richard. With one hand he jerked Roger back into the room
by his coat-collar, with the other he slammed the French window. "Be quiet. I tell you she's
all right. I know where she's gone."

"Where, then?"

"Never mind."

"Where? Where?" His hands fumbled for the doorhandle again.

"Oh, stop that!" Richard loosed hold of him with the expression of one who had grasped what
he thought to be soft grass and finds his palms scored by a fibrous stalk. He said, and Ellen
could see that he liked saying it as little as anything that he had ever said all his life
long: "If you must know, I think she's gone up to my father's tomb."

Roger shook his head solemnly. "No. You're wrong. She hasn't gone there. And she's come to harm."

"Why in God's name do you say that?" burst out Richard.

"I know. I've known all the evening. That's really why I came back here after the service.
That talk about forgiveness was just something I made up as an excuse. I knew quite well that
something was wrong with mummie." His pale eyes sought first Richard and then Ellen. "Don't
you believe a person might know if something happened to another person," he asked wistfully,
"if they loved them enough?"

There was indeed such an infinity of love in that weak gaze that Richard and Ellen exchanged
the abashed look that passes between lovers when it is brought to their notice that they are
not the sole practitioners of the spiritual art. Richard murmured "Oh ... perhaps ... but really,
Roger, she was quite bright before she went out. Ellen, tell Roger...."

But Roger stared out at the empty silver garden and whimpered inattentively: "I can't help
it. I want to go down to the marshes and look for her."

"Very well," agreed Richard, blinking. The sight of the love in those weak eyes made his voice
authentically kind. "We'll go down. She ought to be easy to find as she's carrying a lantern.
You're quite sure she has got a lantern with her, Ellen?"

"Oh yes," said Ellen. "It bumped against the glass when she came back and looked through the
window."

"When she came back and looked through the window? What do you mean?"

"Why," Ellen explained diffidently, not wanting to enlarge on his mother's eccentricity. "She
said good-bye and went out and shut the door. Then in a minute or two I looked up and saw her
face against the glass.... I offered to open the door, but she shook her head and went away."

"But, Ellen! Didn't that strike you as very strange?" She stared in amazement that his eyes
could look into hers like this. He choked back a reproach. "Ellen ... tell me everything ...
everything she said before she went out."

She passed her hand over her forehead, shading her face. It shamed her that he was going to
be interested in what she told him and not at all in her manner of telling it. "I've told you.
She was full of plans about us all going up to-morrow. To a theatre. And she sent for the cook
and talked to her about saucepans."

"What saucepans?"

"Aluminium saucepans."

"But what about them?"

She laughed aloud in the face of his displeasure. An image of the temple in the wood mocked
her mind's eye. Instead of standing in one of the narrow chambers of shadow that lay behind
its pillars with his lips on hers, she was being cross-examined about saucepans. "She reckoned
to get them in the forenoon before we went to the theatre."

For a second he pondered it; then asked with an accent that pierced her because it was so infantine,
so shamelessly mendicant of comfort: "She really was all right, Ellen?"

"Cross my heart, Richard, she was that."

Their hands stole into one another's; from the warm, fluttering pressure of his fingers she
knew that his heart was feeling numberless adoring things about her. If everything had not
happened as she wished, it was not because the dispensation of love had come to an end, but
because it had not endured long enough. There was a golden age ahead. She leaned towards him,
but was arrested by the change in his expression. His face, which had been a white mask of
grief, became vulpine. "Yes, she will most probably be up there ... at his tomb...."

Roger, behind him at the window, fluted miserably: "Mummie! Mummie!" He turned on him with
a gesture of irritation and opened the door. Now to fix the Witchcraft on the Prisoner at the
Bar, the first thing used, was the Testimony of the Bewitched; whereof several testifi'd,
That the Shape of the Prisoner did oftentimes very grievously Pinch
them, Choak them, Bite them, and Afflict them; urging them to write
their Names in a Book, which the said Spectre called, Ours.

One of them did further testifie, that it was the Shape of this Prisoner, with another, which
one day took her from her Wheel, and carrying her to the Riverside, threatned there to Drown her,
if she did not Sign to the Book mentioned: which yet she refused. Others of them did also testifie,
that the said Shape did in her Threats brag to them that she had been the Death of sundry
Persons, then by her named; that she had Ridden a Man then likewise named. Another testifi'd,
the Apparition of Ghosts unto the Spectre of Bishop, crying out,
You Murdered us!

About the Truth whereof, there was in the Matter of Fact but too much suspicion.

II. It was testifi'd, That at the Examination of the Prisoner before the Magistrates, the Bewitched
were extreamly tortured.

If she did but cast her Eyes on them, they were presently struck down; and this in such a manner
as there could be no Collusion in the Business. But upon the Touch of her Hand upon them,
when they lay in their Swoons, they would immediately Revive; and not upon the Touch of any ones
else. Moreover, Upon some Special Actions of her Body, as the shaking of her Head, or the turning
of her Eyes, they presently and painfully fell into the like postures. And many of the like Accidents
now fell out, while she was at the Bar. One at the same time testifying, That she said, She
could not be troubled to see the afflicted thus tormented.

III. There was Testimony likewise brought in, that a Man striking once at the place, where a
bewitched person said, the Shape of this Bishop stood, the bewitched cried out, That he had tore
her Coat, in the place then particularly specifi'd; and the Woman's
Coat was found to be Torn in that very place.

IV.

One Deliverance Hobbs, who had confessed her being a Witch, was now tormented by the Spectres,
for her Confession.

V. To render it further unquestionable, that the Prisoner at the Bar, was the Person truly charged
in THIS Witchcraft, there were produced many Evidences of OTHER Witchcrafts,
by her perpetrated.

VII.

VIII. In the first moments after
she turned out the lights the darkness was brightly painted with pictures of the moonlit temple;
one everywhere she turned her eyes. And once, when she was far gone into drowsiness, she woke
herself by sitting up in bed and crying acidly: "And do you think we will have to spend every
night searching for your mother, Richard?" But very soon she slept.

She woke suddenly and with her mind at attention, as if someone had whispered into her ear.
She sat up and looked through the great window into that not quite full-bodied light of a day
that was overcast and advanced past its dawn only by an hour or two. There was no one in the
farmyard. Yet it came back to her that she had been called by the sound of men's voices; of
Richard's voice, she could be almost sure, for there was a filament of pleasure trailing across
her consciousness. There was no reason why he should be out of doors at this hour, before the
family had been called to breakfast, unless the search for Marion had been unsuccessful. She
jumped out of bed and washed and dressed and ran downstairs, leaving her hair loose about her
shoulders because she begrudged the time for pinning it when he needed her comfort. Mabel,
the parlour-maid, was coming out of the dining-room with an empty tray in her hand. One corner
of her apron-bib flapped loose and there was a smut on her face. Ellen knew that Marion had
not been found, for if she had been in the house, alive or dead, the girl would not have dared
to look like that. They passed in silence, but exchanged a look of horror.

There was no one in the dining-room but Roger and Poppy. Poppy was sitting in an armchair at
the hearth, where she had evidently spent the night. Her uniform was unbuttoned half-way down
her square bust; and on the arms of the chair there rested two objects that looked like sections
of dried viscera, but which Ellen remembered to have seen labelled as pads in hair-dressers'
windows. Roger was kneeling before her, his head on her lap, and weeping bitterly. She was
stroking his hair kindly enough, though her eyes were dwelling on the teapot and ham on the
breakfast-table. The French window was swinging open, admitting air that had the chill of dawn
upon it; and outside on the gravel path stood Richard, listening to a bearded old fisherman
in oilskins. She hovered about the threshold and heard the old man saying: "'Tes no question
o' you putting yourselves about to look for her now. Mostly you don't hear nothin' of them
for three weeks, and then they comes out where they went in. Till the tide brings them back
you can't fetch them." Richard said: "Yes, yes," and held out money to him. She saw he wanted
to send the fisherman away, that he could not bear to hear these things; but he was held rigid
by the obsession, which he and Marion had followed as if it were a law, that one must not betray
emotion. His inhibited hand became more and more talonlike, more and more incapable of making
the gesture of dismissal. To aid him Ellen showed herself at the open door in her wildness
of loose hair and called: "Richard! Richard!"

That made the old man take his money and go away, and Richard stepped back into the room. He
evaded her embrace. "This ghastly light!" he muttered, and went to the corner of the room and
turned on the electric switch. Then he let her take his old, grief-patterned face between her
hands.

"My dear, my dear, what has happened?"

"There's a place ... there's a place ... there's a place on the sea-wall...." He drew his hand
across his forehead. "He is finding it difficult," her heart told her sadly, "to explain it
to a stranger." "In the train, when you came, you must have seen a brick-kiln ... on the right
of the railway ... deserted.... A trolley-line runs from there over a bridge to the sea-wall
... to a jetty. It hasn't been used for years. The planks are half of them rotted away. The
high tide runs right up among the piers. We found her lantern down there on the mud."

Her heart sickened. "Oh, poor, poor Marion!" she wept, and asked foolishly, incredulously,
as if in hopes of finding a flaw in the story, "But when did you find the lantern?"

"An hour ago. We looked for her last night till two. We went all the way along to Canfleet.
They took us in at the signal-box there. Then as soon as it was light we walked back along
the sea-wall. And we found the lantern. Look, it's out on the lawn."

They gazed at the dark object on the edge of the grass as if at any moment it might move or speak.

"But, my dearest, she may not be in the water! She may have dropped the light and been feared
to go further without it, and gone into one of those wee byres on the marshes till the morning,
and not have wakened yet!"

He laughed sleepily, softly. "Yes, certainly she's not wakened yet."

"But, my own dear, it may be so! She may be with us at any moment now!"

He shook his head obstinately. "No. She's dead. I know she's dead. There's something like silence
lying over everything. It means she's dead."

It was her impulse to throw her arms about his neck and bid him weep if he wished on her breast,
but feeling his stillness, his nearly unbreathing immobility, she kept herself from him. To
those who fall and hurt themselves one runs with comfort; by those who lie dangerously stricken
by a disease one sits and waits.

"Sit down and take a bit of breakfast," she bade him softly. He sank into a chair at the table,
lumpishly, as if his limbs had grown thick and lithic, while she poured out a cup of tea and
cut some ham. Her flesh was weeping for Marion, who had been quick, who now was dead; but the
core of her was a void. She cut him a nice feathery slice, unbroken all the way from the bone
to the outer rim of bread-crumb-freckled fat; and through the void there shot the thought,
trivial yet tremendously exultant: "Now that Marion is gone I shall always look after his food."
He drew his brows together and groaned softly. Hawkishly she looked round to see what was distressing
him. It was, of course, Roger howling in Poppy's lap.... "Oh, my darling mummie!" It must be
stopped.

"Roger," she said kindly, "sit forward for your breakfast."

He raised a dispirited nose, red with weeping, and shook his head mournfully. "No, thank you.
It wouldn't be of any use. I couldn't keep a thing on my stomach."

"But what about Miss Poppy?" she asked guilefully. "She must be wearying for her breakfast
after the night she's spent in that chair."

That brought him off his feet, as she had known it would. "Oh, poor Poppy!" he cried. "Oh,
poor Poppy!" and led her to the table.

Richard ate and drank for some moments; he seemed very hungry. Then he laid down his knife
and fork and said: "Ellen, when your mother died did you feel like this? As if ... the walls
of your life had fallen in?"

"Yes, yes, my love, so terribly alone."

"Alone, alone," he repeated. "I am so selfish. I can think of nothing but my own loneliness.
I can't think of her."

"Well, never heed, my dear, my own dear. She wouldn't want you to worry."

"Oh, but I must think this out!" he exclaimed in a shocked, dreary tone. "It's so important...."
He looked up at the electric light and grumbled: "Oh, that damned light makes it worse!" and
rose to restore the room to the sallowness of the morning.

When he sat down again he would not eat, but leaned his head on his hands and his elbows on
the table and watched the other two. Poppy was saying in tones half-maternal, half-disagreeable:
"Eat up your 'am, you silly cuckoo. You know if you don't you'll have one of your sick turns,"
and Roger was obeying. Tears and the ham collided noisily in his throat.

Richard withdrew his eyes from them and looked secretively at Ellen. "She killed herself, of
course," he said in an undertone.

"Oh no!" she cried. "Oh no!"

But there sounded through the room a thunderclap of memory. There had been words drawled there
the night before that now detonated in Ellen's mind.... "What am I to do, Ellen, to keep my
sons from quarrelling over me?"

"Oh no!" she cried again, lest he should take notice that she was deafened and dizzied and
ask why. "Never think that of her, my dearie."

She had thought the woman strident and hysterical and thoughtless for persisting in her plans
for the next day in face of her own faint, barely acquiescent smiles, and a poor, feckless,
fashionless housewife for thrusting those unwanted saucepans on the cook. But these had been
alibis she had sought to establish that she might clear her soul of a charge of lingering at
the brink of dark waters, lest Richard should understand her sacrifice and grieve.

"Her heel may have caught in the rotting wood," she nearly shrieked, so that he should not
overhear the thoughts that rushed in on her silence. "She wore high heels for her age--"

That was why Marion had come back and looked in through the window. She was to shed one by
one the shelters that protected her soul from the chill of the universe: her house, her clothes,
her flesh, her skeleton. This first step had cost her so much that for one shuddering moment
she had gone back on it.

"And things looked so strange last night. If there was a skin of ice on the wood it'd be hard
to tell it from the moonlit water...."

Oh, pitiful dark woman that had stood on the lawn looking up at the room where sat her son,
whom she would never see again. "If I had not gone to the window then," thought Ellen to herself,
"she might have looked much longer."

"She was very ugly last night," muttered Richard. "She was always ugly when she was unhappy."

His speculative tone made her perceive that, unlike herself, he did not know for certain that
Marion had committed suicide. She must conceal her proofs, bury them under a heap of lying
counterproofs. "My dear, you'd never think it if you'd seen her last night...."

"Tell me everything. All she did after I went upstairs."

Grimly she remembered the former rich traffic of their minds. Henceforward he would do nothing
but ask that question; she would do nothing but answer it. It was the third time she had told
this story in the twelve hours. "She was as bright as could be. Talked of going to a theatre,
but said you cared for a good music-hall as much as anything...." Her voice was thin, as liars'
voices are. Surely he must notice it and feel distaste. Oh, fatal Marion! Even in her complete
and final abnegation of her forcefulness she had used such an excess of force that the world
about her was shattered. For Ellen perceived that never again would the relationship of Richard
and herself be the perfect crystal sphere that it had been before they came here, but must
always, till they died, be flawed with insincerity. She would never dare tell him how, thought
over, those trivial plans for the next day's pleasuring were revealed, themselves, as devices
of a tremendous hammering nobility; how, seen with the intelligence of memory, the face at
the window had been the greasy mask of a swimmer in the icy waters of the ultimate fear; how
there had stood on the lawn for a long time what had seemed a loiterer, but was in truth a
pillar of love. If she let his inherited excessiveness learn this he would go mad; and he would
hate her for not reading these signs when they had been given her. All her life she would have
to keep silence concerning something of which he would speak repeatedly. She would become queer
and jerky with strained inhibitions ... charmless.... Perhaps he would go from her to unburdened
women....

"Perhaps you're right," he said wearily when she had finished; "maybe it was an accident."
He began to eat again, but soon pushed away his plate and stood up looking down on the hearth.
"Where did she sit? Which chair?"

"Yon, at your hand."

He drooped over it, caressing the velvet cover. "Will I ever get him out of this house, where
everything will always remind him of her?" she wondered savagely. Really Marion was magnificent,
but she was very upsetting. She was like a cardinal in full robes falling downstairs. And for
what inadequate reason she had caused all this commotion! Just because her two sons quarrelled!
She could have prevented that easily enough if she had brought them up properly and skelped
them when they needed it. Ellen curled her lip as she watched him stroking the soft velvet,
laying his cheek against it.

"And the desk? You say she sat there while she talked to cook?"

"Yes."

She hated the way he sat down in front of it; in a heap, like a tired navvy. By her death Marion
deprived her of her beautiful lightfooted lover. But she must wait. He would come back. She
became aware that Roger was speaking to her. It appeared that he had sobbed in his cup and
had sent jets of tea flying over the tablecloth, and he was now apologising. 

And all his Three Citations were from that one Book of Deuteronomy. What a full Armoury then
have we, in all the sacred Pages that lie before us? Whatever the
Words of the Devil are, drown them with the words of the Great God.



"She ... You didn't notice ... when she was sitting there ... if she was scribbling on the
blotter?"

"Yes, she did. I noticed that."

"Ah ... ah...."

       *       *       *       *       *

She was beside him in the time of a breath. But he had not fainted, though his head had crashed
down on the wood, for his fingers, buried in his hair, still laced and interlaced. She did
not dare touch him; but she grovelled for the blotter, which at the moment of his groan had
fallen to the floor, and stood staring at it. For a second her attention was dispersed by a
shudder of disgust, for she felt Roger's noisy mouth-breathing at her ears. Then the proof
leapt to her eyes. There was a rim of plain paper round the calendar on the inside of the cover,
and this was covered with words and phrases written in the exquisite small script of Marion.
"This is the end. Death. Death. Death. This is the end. I must die. Give him to Ellen. I must die."

Roger tumbled back towards Poppy. "The awful sin of self-destruction!" he wailed.

This proof struck through her with an awful, unifying grief. She had had evidence of Marion's
intention which had convinced her mind, but it was all derived from ugliness: from the awkwardness
of the woman's talk, the plainness of the face against the glass, the intrusive loitering of
a squat figure in the garden. The soul had hearkened to these ugly messengers from reality
since it had desired to know the truth, but it had made them cry their message from as far
off as possible and as briefly as might be. But this lovely black arabesque of letters had
the power of beauty. It ran into the core of her soul and told its story at its leisure. Her
flesh, which before had grieved as any that is living might grieve for any that is dead, now
knew the sorrow appropriate to the destruction of Marion's wide, productive body. For what
her spirit learned and admitted it had always known of that burning thing which had been Marion
she looked round the room in reverence, since she had lived there. The light on the handle
of the French window caught her eye, and she wept. She had been annoyed with Marion because
she could not turn it. But who would not find it difficult to open a door if it was death on
which it opened?

"Richard, I love your mother!" she sobbed. "I love your mother so!"

He muttered something. In case he was speaking to her she bent down and listened. But it is high
time to leave off all Devilism, when the Devil himself is falling upon us: And it is no time for
us to be Censuring and Reviling one another, with a Devilish wrath,
when the wrath of the Devil is annoying of us.

 There was a strong impulse in her to feel nothing but pity for him; to apprehend with
resignation that there might be a period ahead during which he might feel hatred for her, loathing
her for being alive when his mother, who deserved so well, was dead. She stepped backward from
the desk so that he need not be vexed by any sense of her. Yet she had a feeling as she moved
that she was taking a step infinitely rash, infinitely dangerous....

She became aware that behind her Roger was shaking words out of his weeping body. "You ought
to be on your knees, you two! You've killed my mummie with your wickedness!"

"What's that?" she murmured, turning on him. "What's that?" She was not quite attentive. A
picture was forming in her consciousness which, when it was clear, would tell her why it was
perilous to leave Richard to his grief....

"Aw, shut up!" hissed Poppy, and tugged at his arm.

But he faced Ellen bravely and cried: "Yes, you've killed my mummie! She saw there was something
wrong going on between you two. She found out what you'd been doing up there in the bedroom
when Poppy and me caught you. It must have been an awful shock to her. It was to me," he said
pathetically and with relish. "I could hardly believe it myself till Poppy said, 'Well, what
would they be doing together in a bedroom if it wasn't that?' How could you do such filthiness...."

Shame swept over Ellen's body, over Ellen's mind. It was not sexual shame, but shame that they
should both be human, she and this. But when she turned her eyes away from him in loathing
she came on something far worse in Poppy's florid and skull-like face. It would have been appalling
if she had been quite attentive, but she was dreamy, because there was this picture forming
in her consciousness which would explain the danger to her.... Round Poppy's eyes and mouth
there was playing a thirsty look which she seemed to be trying to suppress, for she was glancing
about the room with an expression of prudence as if she were reminding herself that not lightly
must she run the risk of being evicted from this comfort. But the thirst triumphed. She gave
herself the gratification she had desired, and turned on Ellen eyes on whose dull darkness
there floated like oil a glistening look of lewd accusation. It took the form of a wet, twitching
smile. But behind it was every sort of beaten, desolate envy: the envy of the happy which is
felt by the unhappy: the envy of the woman who has a strong and glorious man which is felt
by the woman who cannot disguise from herself that in her arms lies weakness and ignobility:
the envy of one to whom love has come as love which is felt by one to whom it has come as a
deception and a sentence to squalor. And she could not be pitied. One cannot weep over the
dead when they have begun to rot: and she was rotten with resentments. Ellen stared at her
in anger and in misery that there should be one so sad and ill-used whom she could not comfort;
and perceived why at seeing her she had been reminded of an open space round which stood figures.
If she had not been preoccupied with the picture rising in her mind she would have felt fear,
for the ultimate meaning of those women she had always suspected to be danger....

"Making me think evil of my poor mummie too!" Roger sobbed on. "I thought the reason she didn't
come to my meeting this evening was that she was ashamed to see her son professing Jesus. I
thought hardly of her for not bringing you two along as she promised, because I didn't see
you weren't there, and I preached on the sin of impurity specially for you, and it was a real
sacrifice for me to do it, because the officers thought it was a forward subject for me to
choose, and it my first service here. Martin. I don't know.

Magistrate. But what do you think ails them?

Martin. I don't desire to spend my Judgment upon it.

Magistrate.
Don't you think they are bewitch'd?

Martin. No, I do not think they
are.

Magistrate. Tell us your Thoughts about them then. I suppose you two wouldn't
come to my meeting because you wanted to stay here and play your tricks, and she saw through
you and wouldn't leave you alone in the house. To think I blamed my mummie!"

Now she saw the picture. It was her own mother, her own old mother, shuffling about the kitchen
in Hume Park Square in the dirty light of the unwarmed morning; poking forward into the grate
with hands on which housework had acted like a skin disease; pulling her flannel dressing-gown
about a body which poverty and neglect had made as ugly as the time, the place, the task. She
was too tired to see it vividly, but she understood the message. That was what happened to
women who allowed themselves to be disregarded; who allowed any other than themselves to dwell
in their men's attention.

"Richard! Richard!" She beat on his shoulder to make him listen. "Hark what your brother's
saying of us!"

He stirred. He sat up.

"He says we're bad."

He turned round and looked down on Roger. At the sight of his face, though it was still, Ellen
wished she had not roused him.

