From Lake Ontario down to the sea the Canadian frontier was never seriously threatened; and
the only action of any consequence was fought to the south of Montreal in the early spring.
On March 30 the Americans made a last inglorious attempt in this direction. Wilkinson started
with four thousand men to follow the line of Lake Champlain and the Richelieu river, the same
that was tried by Dearborn in 1812 and by Hampton in 1813. At La Colle, only four miles across
the frontier, he attacked Major Handcock's post of two hundred men. The result was like a second
Chateauguay. Handcock drew in three hundred reinforcements and two gunboats from Isle-aux-Noix.
Wilkinson's advanced guard lost its way overnight. In the morning he lacked the resolution
to press on, even with his overwhelming numbers; and so, after a part of his army had executed
some disjointed manoeuvres, he withdrew the whole and gave up in despair.

From this point of the Canadian frontier to the very end of the five-thousand-mile loop, that
is, from Montreal to Mexico, the theatre of operations was directly based upon the sea, where
the British Navy was by this time undisputedly supreme. A very few small American men-of-war
were still at large, together with a much greater number of privateers. But they had no power
whatever even to mitigate the irresistible blockade of the whole coast-line of the United States.
American sea-borne commerce simply died away; for no mercantile marine could have any independent
life when its trade had to be carried on by a constantly decreasing tonnage; when, too, it
could go to sea at all only by furtive evasion, and when it had to take cargo at risks so great
that they could not be covered either by insurance or by any attainable profits. The Atlantic
being barred by this Great Blockade, and the Pacific being inaccessible, the only practical
way left open to American trade was through the British lines by land or sea. He paused and scanned
their faces.

"But," he continued suddenly, "it cannot now, nor ever can afford
to lose what those three million feet represent,--the friends it has
made. I can pay you back the money you have spent and the time you
have put in--" This was, of course, in direct defiance of the American government,
and to the direct detriment of the United States as a nation. It was equally to the direct
benefit of the British colonies in general and of Nova Scotia in particular. American harbours
had never been so dull. Quebec and Halifax had never been so prosperous. American money was
drained away from the warlike South and West and either concentrated in the Northern States--which
were opposed to the war--or paid over into British hands.

Nor was this all. The British Navy harried the coast in every convenient quarter and made effective
the work of two most important joint attacks, one on Maine, the other on Washington itself.
The attack on Maine covered two months, altogether, from July 11 to September 11. It began
with the taking of Moose Island by Sir Thomas Hardy, Nelson's old flag-captain at Trafalgar,
and ended with the surrender, at Machias, of 'about 100 miles of sea-coast,' together with
'that intermediate tract of country which separates the province of New Brunswick from Lower
Canada.' On September 21 Sir John Sherbrooke proclaimed at Halifax the formal annexation of
'all the eastern side of the Penobscot river and all the country lying between the same river
and the boundary of New Brunswick.'

The attack on Maine was meant, in one sense at least, to create a partial counterpoise to the
American preponderance on Lake Erie. The attack on Washington was made in retaliation for the
burning of the old and new capitals of Upper Canada, Newark and York.

The naval defence of Washington had been committed to Commodore Barney, a most expert and gallant
veteran of the Revolution, who handled his wholly inadequate little force with consummate skill
and daring, both afloat and ashore. He was not, strictly speaking, a naval officer, but a privateersman
who had made the unique record of taking eleven prizes in ten consecutive days with his famous
Baltimore schooner Rossie. The military defence was committed to General Winder, one of the
two generals captured by Harvey's '704 firelocks' at Stoney Creek the year before. Winder was
a good soldier and did his best in the seven weeks at his disposal. But the American government,
which had now enjoyed continuous party power for no less than thirteen years, gave him no more
than four hundred regulars, backed by Barney's four hundred excellent seamen and the usual
array of militia, with whom to defend the capital in the third campaign of a war they had themselves
declared. There were 93,500 militiamen within the threatened area. But only fifteen thousand
were got under arms; and only five thousand were brought into action.

In the middle of August the British fleet under Admirals Cochrane and Cockburn sailed into
Chesapeake Bay with a detachment of four thousand troops commanded by General Ross. Barney
had no choice but to retire before this overwhelming force. As the British advanced up the
narrowing waters all chance of escape disappeared; so Barney burnt his boats and little vessels
and marched his seamen in to join Winder's army. On August 24 Winder's whole six thousand drew
up in an exceedingly strong position at Bladensburg, just north of Washington; and the President
rode out with his Cabinet to see a battle which is best described by its derisive title of
the Bladensburg Races. Ross's four thousand came on and were received by an accurate checking
fire from the regular artillery and from Barney's seamen gunners. But a total loss of 8 killed
and 11 wounded was more than the 5,000 American militia could stand. All the rest ran for dear
life. The deserted handful of regular soldiers and sailors was then overpowered; while Barney
was severely wounded and taken prisoner. He and they, however, had saved their honour and won
the respect and admiration of both friend and foe. Ross and Cockburn at once congratulated
him on the stand he had made against them; and he, with equal magnanimity, reported officially
that the British had treated him 'just like a brother.'

That night the little British army of four thousand men burnt governmental Washington, the
capital of a country with eight millions of people. Not a man, not a woman, not a child, was
in any way molested; nor was one finger laid on any private property. The four thousand then
marched back to the fleet, through an area inhabited by 93,500 militiamen on paper, without
having so much as a single musket fired at them.

Now, if ever, was Prevost's golden opportunity to end the war with a victory that would turn
the scale decisively in favour of the British cause. With the one exception of Lake Erie, the
British had the upper hand over the whole five thousand miles of front. A successful British
counter-invasion, across the Montreal frontier, would offset the American hold on Lake Erie,
ensure the control of Lake Champlain, and thus bring all the scattered parts of the campaign
into their proper relation to a central, crowning triumph.

On the other hand, defeat would mean disaster. But the bare possibility of defeat seemed quite
absurd when Prevost set out from his field headquarters opposite Montreal, between La Prairie
and Chambly, with eleven thousand seasoned veterans, mostly 'Peninsulars,' to attack Plattsburg,
which was no more than twenty-five miles across the frontier, very weakly fortified, and garrisoned
only by the fifteen hundred regulars whom Izard had 'culled out' when he started for Niagara.

The naval odds were not so favourable. But, as they could be decisively affected by military
action, they naturally depended on Prevost, who, with his overwhelming army, could turn them
whichever way he chose. It was true that Commodore Macdonough's American flotilla had more
trained seamen than Captain Downie's corresponding British force, and that his crews and vessels
possessed the further advantage of having worked together for some time. Downie, a brave and
skilful young officer, had arrived to take command of his flotilla at the upper end of Lake
Champlain only on September 2, that is, exactly a week before Prevost urged him to attack,
and nine days before the battle actually did take place. He had a fair proportion of trained
seamen; but they consisted of scratch drafts from different men-of-war, chosen in haste and
hurried to the front. Most of the men and officers were complete strangers to one another;
and they made such short-handed crews that some soldiers had to be wheeled out of the line
of march and put on board at the very last minute. There would have been grave difficulties
with such a flotilla under any circumstances. But Prevost had increased them tenfold by giving
no orders and making no preparations while trying his hand at another abortive armistice--one,
moreover, which he had no authority even to propose.

Yet, in spite of all this, Prevost still had the means of making Downie superior to Macdonough.
Macdonough's vessels were mostly armed with carronades, Downie's with long guns. Carronades
fired masses of small projectiles with great effect at very short ranges. Long guns, on the
other hand, fired each a single large projectile up to the farthest ranges known. In fact,
it was almost as if the Americans had been armed with shot-guns and the British armed with
rifles. Therefore the Americans had an overwhelming advantage at close quarters, while the
British had a corresponding advantage at long range. Now, Macdonough had anchored in an ideal
position for close action inside Plattsburg Bay. He required only a few men to look after his
ground tackle; [Footnote: Anchors and cables.] and his springs [Footnote: Ropes to hold a vessel
in position when hauling or swinging in a harbour. Here, ropes from the stern to the anchors
on the landward side.] were out on the landward side for 'winding ship,' that is, for turning
his vessels completely round, so as to bring their fresh broadsides into action. This turmoil
was so different from the dead quiet of desertion he had expected, that he was unable to gather
his faculties. All about him were familiar faces upturned to his own. He distinguished the broad,
square shoulders of Scotty Parsons, Jack Hyland, Kerlie, Bryan Moloney; Ellis grinned at him
from the press; Billy Camp, the fat and shiny drive cook; Mason,
the foreman of the mill; over beyond howled Solly, the tug captain,
Rollway Charley, Shorty, the chore-boy; everywhere were features that
he knew.

But Prevost had it fully in his power to prevent Macdonough from fighting in such an ideal
position at all. Macdonough's American flotilla was well within range of Macomb's long-range
American land batteries; while Prevost's overwhelming British army was easily able to take
these land batteries, turn their guns on Macdonough's helpless vessels--whose short-range carronades
could not possibly reply--and so either destroy the American flotilla at anchor in the bay
or force it out into the open lake, where it would meet Downie's long-range guns at the greatest
disadvantage. Prevost, after allowing for all other duties, had at least seven thousand veterans
for an assault on Macomb's second-rate regulars and ordinary militia, both of whom together
amounted at most to thirty-five hundred, including local militiamen who had come in to reinforce
the 'culls' whom Izard had left behind. The Americans, though working with very creditable
zeal, determined to do their best, quite expected to be beaten out of their little forts and
entrenchments, which were just across the fordable Saranac in front of Prevost's army. They
had tried to delay the British advance. But, in the words of Macomb's own official report,
'so undaunted was the enemy that he never deployed in his whole march, always pressing on in
column'; that is, the British veterans simply brushed the Americans aside without deigning
to change from their column of march into a line of battle. Prevost's duty was therefore perfectly
plain. With all the odds in his favour ashore, and with the power of changing the odds in his
favour afloat, he ought to have captured Macomb's position in the early morning and turned
both his own and Macomb's artillery on Macdonough, who would then have been forced to leave
his moorings for the open lake, where Downie would have had eight hours of daylight to fight
him at long range.

What Prevost actually did was something disgracefully different. Having first wasted time by
his attempted armistice, and so hindered preparations at the base, between La Prairie and Chambly,
he next proceeded to cross the frontier too soon. He reported home that Downie could not be
ready before September 15. But on August 31 he crossed the line himself, only twenty-five miles
from his objective, thus prematurely showing the enemy his hand. Then he began to goad the
unhappy Downie to his doom. Downie's flagship, the Confiance, named after a French prize which
Yeo had taken, was launched only on August 25, and hauled out into the stream only on September
7. Her scratch crew could not go to battle quarters till the 8th; and the shipwrights were
working madly at her up to the very moment that the first shot was fired in her fatal action
on the 11th. Yet Prevost tried to force her into action on the 9th, adding, 'I need not dwell
with you on the evils resulting to both services from delay,' and warning Downie that he was
being watched: 'Captain Watson is directed to remain at Little Chazy until you are preparing
to get under way.'

Thus watched and goaded by the governor-general and commander-in-chief, whose own service was
the Army, Downie, a comparative junior in the Navy, put forth his utmost efforts, against his
better judgment, to sail that very midnight. A baffling head-wind, however, kept him from working
out. He immediately reported to Prevost, giving quite satisfactory reasons. Downie, a junior
sailor, was perhaps suspected of 'shyness' by a very senior soldier. Prevost's poison worked
quickly. 'I will convince him that the Navy won't be backward,' said Downie to his second,
Pring, who gave this evidence, under oath, at the subsequent court-martial. Pring, whose evidence
was corroborated by that of both the first lieutenant and the master of the Confiance, then
urged the extreme risk of engaging Macdonough inside the bay. But Downie allayed their anxiety
by telling them that Prevost had promised to storm Macomb's indefensible works simultaneously.
This was not nearly so good as if Prevost had promised to defeat Macomb first and then drive
Macdonough out to sea. But it was better, far better, than what actually was done.

