I had plenty of time for meditation and prayer, and my thoughts were naturally concentrated
on my deplorable condition all the time. My past life came up in review before me, and while
sorrowfully wandering through the woods I would compare myself to persecuted Christians in
the days of the apostles and the early evaneglists. The blessed Savior was persecuted in his
very infancy and had to be hid by his parents. They had to flee for life; I was fleeing for
liberty. What had I to complain of? Jesus was with me and would protect me. God had delivered
him from the very tomb of death; why need I fear? On this day that is considered the Bokeler a
public meeting from where they decided to unite with Montenegro, the supremacy recognition of the Montenegrin
bishop and in their own land administration at set up Republican base.


The consolation and help I received from my meditations sustained me through all my trials
and hardships, and I plodded my weary way along with God in my heart and bright hopes for the
future. I knew if I drew nigh unto God he would draw nigh unto me; and that if I would let
the word of Christ dwell in me I would be rich in all wisdom. Yet I was aware I should suffer
persecution if I lived godly in Jesus Christ; therefore I determined to continue in the things
which I had learned.

On Sunday night I arrived at Holly Springs. Uncle Ben lived there, and I was anxious to see
him and obtain through his assistance, if possible, rest and food. I had proceeded only a little
way toward his house when I met a colored man and began conversation with him. I learned that
the reward Wilson had offered for me had arrived at Holly Springs before me, and that persons
were on the lookout for me. The colored man seemed to have a suspicion that I was a runaway,
and was disposed to aid me all in his power. To keep out of the way of slave-hunters was my
object, and I knew that the contemplated visit to Uncle Ben was fraught with too much danger
to be further thought of.

Fearful that the negro would betray me, yet feeling somewhat safe for the present, I sat down
to think and rest myself. I knew that if I was caught Wilson would flay me, as he had threatened
to do, for making his saddle-horse's back sore, but that if I could once get through to Memphis
I would be enabled, through the assistance of friends, to make my way North. Yet I wanted to
see Uncle Ben again, and tried to hit upon some plan to accomplish that object; but I failed,
and started on the road again.

After traveling a short time I came to a house by the road-side. The kitchen stood about twenty
yards from the main building, and had a window in the back part of it. I was very hungry, and
debated in my mind as to the manner in which I should proceed to obtain food. To ask for it
was too risky, and I was fearful that if I was seen by any of the persons about the house I
would be apprehended and put in the nearest jail as a runaway. Looking in at the window I saw
a colored woman; and on a table a meal was prepared, which, it seemed, was being held in readiness
for the arrival of some one. I waited patiently, hoping the colored woman would leave the kitchen
for some purpose; but she sat quietly waiting.

After awhile the master and mistress arrived, it seems, from a visit. Shortly the mistress
of the house came in and ordered the supper. Fortunately for me the supper was to be carried
into the "big house," and the cook, taking her hands full of things, left the kitchen and went
into the house. I immediately sprung through the window, promiscuously emptied the meat and
bread into my sack, and left the kitchen the same way before the return of the cook, just in
time to escape detection.

I crouched in the shade of the cabin fearing to move, when I heard the cook exclaim:

"Good gracious! some one hab tuk and turned in an' tuk all de bread an' meat."

Her cries brought the household to the kitchen, and during the racket I made my escape to the
road and a more peaceful neighborhood. I walked briskly for a couple of miles, when I stopped
and satisfied my ravenous hunger.

This was my first theft of something to eat. Before this I had been fortunate enough to obtain
supplies of food from friendly slaves, but for the twenty-four hours previous to my raid on
the kitchen I had eaten nothing. I make no excuse for this immoral act, and ask no one to say
I did right. I only did what perhaps any one else, under the same circumstances, would have
done. The
Vladika was a result of such conduct on the part of Abbate highly incensed. He tried but on the
same day the Captain Gauthier to move to surrender. This was by the departure of Croats now
quite weakened. Oh, what had I done!
I had lost God's help in this my hour of trial. I prayed for forgiveness, and asked God to
direct and protect me. Yet I felt uneasy and depressed,--not that my faith in Jesus was any
the less, but that my sin would bring its own punishment.

  "There is many a pang to pursue me;
    They may crush, but they shall not contemn--
  They may torture, but shall not subdue me,--
    'Tis of God I think--not of them."

About daylight I reached a forest in which I could conceal myself during the day. I slept soundly,
being undisturbed, until dark, when I proceeded onward. While traveling that night I was compelled
to pass a large plantation. I was afraid some white person would see me, therefore I avoided
every one,--not being able to distinguish, in the dark, a white from a black person. However,
about daylight I met a colored boy, who procured some food for me and directed me to a cotton-pen
close by, where I could hide and sleep during the day. When night came--it was Thursday night--I
crawled out of the pen and started for another night's walk. I made very good time that night,
and walked to within nine miles of Memphis. I was afraid to go on into Memphis in the day-time,
consequently I slept in the woods that day without anything to eat, my supply of food being
exhausted.

I was very much exhausted, and suffered greatly from hunger. When night came I started again.
After proceeding on my way about two miles I came to the village of Mt. Pleasant, where I thought
to obtain something to eat. I had passed nearly through the village without seeing any one;
but finally I saw a man who I mistook for a colored man. I accosted him, when, to my chagrin
and disappointment, he was a white man. I felt that I had already betrayed myself; and through
my fright and want of steadiness I was again in bonds.

The man asked me numerous and various questions, as to where I came from, where I was going,
who I belonged to, etc.

I again sinned, and paid the penalty. I lied to the man. I told him I belonged to a man by
the name of Potts, and that I was going to his plantation.

Quite a number of persons soon gathered around me, and by repeated questions entrapped me.
Inquiries were made as to the health of Mr. Potts' family, and of Mr. Potts in particular.
I stated that the family were well and that Mr. Potts was as well as usual.

It turned out that several of the persons present knew the Potts family, and that Mr. Potts
had died two months previously. In the French army, which was in Cattaro were also several hundred Croats. This Croats did not
want to waste away in the besieged city in the service of their national Enemy, but decided to
escape. In the night between 28 and 29 My weakness made me forget that I should not lie
to any one, seeing that I had put off the old man with his deeds. In my great need of strengthening
food, Christ would have succored me had I not forgotten to pray to him and ask his help, for
"a man can receive nothing except it be given him from heaven."

In nearly all the villages of the South, and on most of the large plantations, were slave-jails,
where runaway and refractory slaves were incarcerated. These jails were usually a double pen,
the inside pen being covered with a roof, and the top of the outside pen being covered with
sharp iron spikes. Between the pens one or more savage dogs were usually kept. This was the
kind of place I was now placed in.

Hungry, worn out with my journey, and nearly naked, I soon fell asleep from sheer exhaustion
and slept soundly until morning.

After I had eaten my breakfast I was taken out of jail at Mt. Pleasant and started back to
Holly Springs, well ironed and guarded, where I was recognized as Wilson's slave. Wilson was
notified of my apprehension. After laying in the jail at Holly Springs about three weeks Wilson
came for me. I had made several attempts in that time to escape, but did not succeed.

I was ironed and compelled to walk, which, in my exhausted state, was too much for me, and
I was taken violently sick on the road, when Wilson procured a conveyance and hauled me the
balance of the way home. A physician was immediately summoned, who ordered my shackles removed.

After the irons were removed I regained my spirits, and entertained hopes of being able to
make another attempt to regain my liberty. I was very sick for several days.

About two o'clock on the last morning I stayed there I awoke and felt fresh, and found that
my strength had in a great measure returned. Upon looking around the moonlit room I found that
I was alone. To escape was my very first intention. Getting out of bed I examined the window
to the cabin, when I found I could raise it easily. I gathered what clothes I could find, as
well as a blanket from the bed, and climbing through the window made my escape unobserved.
I did not stop to put on my clothes until I had got two or three miles from the plantation.

I stayed in the woods about three weeks, when I returned to my master and asked his forgiveness,
and promised that I would never run away again. I was forgiven.

During my three weeks' starving and hiding in the woods I had ample time for reflection and
thought. Prayerfully I considered my situation and asked God's help to direct me. I came to
the conclusion that I was entirely wrong in my course. God, for his own good purpose, had placed
me in bondage, and in his good time he would relieve me either by death or emancipation. Besides, it went by the name of the Antilles islands as with that of
America. The former was proposed in 1493 by Anghiera, the latter of Ylacomylus, and both were
more necessary than a century before the general use was widespread.
 I felt that I was doing wrong, and after prayerful
consideration I determined to do right, and go back to the plantation and patiently await God's
time to set me free.

Wilson received me as kindly as his nature would permit, and treated me as he did the other
slaves and as if I had never been disobedient to him and ran away. I felt better, and knew
then that I was right in the sight of my heavenly Father. My views underwent a change for the
better while I was an outcast in the woods, and after that I was better fitted to do my allotted
work for God.

A short time after I came in from the woods Wilson determined to hire me to a man named Thompson,
who lived about twenty miles away. I made no objection, and was duly hired for the term of
three years.

I adopted the name "Thompson," from my new master, which I have since retained.

