I cannot tell the story of the seven year's war.  The articles of confederation were sent to
the States in 1778, but the last of the thirteen States, Maryland, did not adopt them until
March, 1781. Congress under he confederacy dealt with the States and did not have the confidence
or the love of the people.  It required nine States to pass any measure of importance.  During
the war the confederacy was a pitiable failure.  It issued bills which no one would take, its
certificates of indebtedness and promises to pay were so worthless that it gave rise to the
proverb, "Not worth a continental."  Robert Morris, the financier, pleaded hopelessly for help.
Alexander Hamilton denounced the confederation as "neither fit for war nor peace."  Even Washington,
always hopeful, wrote in 1781: "Our troops are fast approaching nakedness; our hospitals are
without medicine; our sick are without meat; our public works are at a standstill; in a word,
we are at the end of our tether, and now or never deliverance must come."  At last victory
came--thanks to the generous assistance of France, to the heroism of leaders like Lafayette,
Baron Steuben, and hosts of others, who gave us their fortunes and hazarded their lives for
America, the war was ended by the surrender of Lord Cornwallis.  Victor Hugo said, "Napoleon
was not defeated at Waterloo by the allied forces.  It was God who conquered him."  Who that
remembers Trenton, Valley Forge, Saratoga and Yorktown, will not say God fought for our Washington?
In 1777 a Quaker had occasion to pass through the woods near the headquarters of the army;
hearing a voice, he approached the spot, and saw Washington in prayer.  Returning home, he
said to his wife: "All's well! All's well! Washington will prevail.  I have thought that no
man can be a soldier and a Christian.  George Washington has convinced me of my mistake." Peace
was declared in 1783.  I have a water-color of the building used as the Department of State,
in which the treaty of peace was signed--it was a building 12 feet by 30.

In May,1787, delegates from all the States, except Rhode Island, met in the state house in
Philadelphia, with George Washington as president, to draft a constitution for these United
States.  All the delegates were convinced of the utter failure of the articles of confederation,
all were convinced of the need of a stronger government.  Two parties honestly differed and
were determined to fight it out to the bitter end. At one time it looked as if the convention
must disband without effecting its object.  Franklin arose and said: "Mr. President, the small
progress we have made after five weeks is a melancholy proof of the imperfection of human understanding--we
have gone back to ancient history for models of government--we have viewed modern states--we
find none of their constitutions suitable to our circumstances--we are groping in the dark
to find political truth, and are scarcely able to distinguish it when presented to us.  When
the Constitution was adopted, Franklin rose, and pointing to the speaker's chair, on which
was carved a sun half-hid by the horizon, said: "Gentlemen, I have long watched that sun and
wondered whether it was a rising or a setting sun--God has heard our prayers, it is a rising
sun." This convention adopted the famous ordinance of 1787, which guaranteed that slavery should
never enter the north-west territory, and this, under God, saved the nation in the hour of
trial.  The Constitution was ratified by eleven of the States in 1788, and the first Wednesday
in January, 1789, electors were chosen in all the ratifying States, except New York, where
a conflict between the senate and assembly prevented a choice.  In Rhode Island and North Carolina
no election was held.  The person receiving the highest number of votes was to be president,
the man receiving the next highest number was to be vice-president.

Washington received the whole number of votes, 69; John Adams received 34.  They were elected
the first president and vice-president of the United States.

