Church Cooperation in Community Life

  By
  PAUL L. VOGT

  THE ABINGDON PRESS
  NEW YORK   CINCINNATI

  Copyright, 1921, by
  PAUL L. VOGT

  Printed in the
  United States of America

  TO

  MY FATHER AND MOTHER

  WHOSE PUBLIC-SPIRITED AND LIFELONG LOYALTY TO
  RELIGIOUS WORK IN A COUNTRY COMMUNITY
  HAS BEEN A CONSTANT INSPIRATION
  TO CHRISTIAN SERVICE

CONTENTS

  CHAPTER                                                      PAGE

        PREFACE                                                   7

     I. SOME PRELIMINARY DEFINITIONS                              9

    II. THE BASIS FOR COMMUNITY SERVICE                          26

   III. THE ECONOMIC CHALLENGE TO THE CHURCH                     44

    IV. THE SOCIAL CHALLENGE TO THE CHURCH                       69

     V. BUILDING FOR COMMUNITY SERVICE                           84

    VI. THE CHURCH AND RURAL PUBLIC THOUGHT                      94

   VII. ADJUSTING THE LOCAL CHURCH TO THE COMMUNITY             104

  VIII. INTERDENOMINATIONAL READJUSTMENT                        124

    IX. THE CHURCH AND OTHER RURAL AGENCIES                     142

     X. MISSIONARY PROGRAMS AND RURAL COMMUNITY SERVICE         152

    XI. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION                                  169

PREFACE

Many books have been written during the past few years on the rural church. Some of these have
given excellent concrete illustrations of methods that are proving successful in solving local
problems. Others have discussed the general rural church situation. The rural life movement,
however, has been so rapid that it is believed that a brief restatement of the place of the
church in the rural life movement is desirable at the present time.

It has been the task and privilege of the writer for the past four years to be almost constantly
in the field traveling from the Atlantic to the Pacific and from Canadian border to the limits
of Florida and getting so far as possible first-hand impressions of rural church and community
conditions. It is the purpose of the present essay to discuss some of the general problems
in rural life presenting themselves to the religious forces of America, and to note some conclusions
as to the next steps to be taken if these forces are to render the service in rural advance
that it is believed is theirs to render. Suggestions as to local programs will be made only
as evidence that when the church undertakes in an adequate manner the solution of problems
whose solution is demanded of it, it receives both the moral and the financial support of the
people served. The chapters on phases of the local program are intended only to help in preparing
the way for the larger service contemplated.

As with individuals, so it is with institutions. It is difficult to discuss the place of different
organizations in the rural life movement without arousing the antagonism of leaders in the
respective organizations. It is hoped that the point of view held will be accepted as one of
sympathy for the efforts of all organizations concerned and that the purpose of the discussion
is to point the way toward a larger cooperation resulting from a better understanding of the
work that may be expected of each.

     PAUL L. VOGT.

CHAPTER I

SOME PRELIMINARY DEFINITIONS

When one begins to discuss a subject it helps very much if his readers know what he has in
mind in the terms used. In the title selected for this text there are at least three words
that need definition. Probably no reader will agree fully with any of the definitions given,
but an attempt to define should at least help the reader to understand better in what sense
the terms are used by the writer.

The term "community" has come into such common use that it might be assumed that definition
is unnecessary. And yet when learned bodies get together to discuss community problems a large
part of the time is usually taken up in attempting to define what the different speakers are
talking about.

When the writer lived in the open country several years ago he went to Mifflin Center school
and attended Wesley Chapel church. The schoolhouse and the church were located at the same
crossroads, and these two institutions drew for their constituency from an area of about four
square miles for the school and a somewhat larger area for the church. Brownstown school, to
the south, Hendrickson's to the east, and Whetstone to the west made up other school communities.
Pleasant Grove church, Salem, and Brownstown, with a different territory covered by each, made
up church areas that did not coincide with the school areas bounding Mifflin Center school
territory. In like manner, when trading was to be done, Upper Sandusky and Kirby, five and
six miles away, were the centers to which everybody went, generally on Saturday afternoon,
when friends from other sections of the county might be found on the streets. The boundaries
of the trade center were thus much larger than those of either the school or the church. In
politics, the center of interest of the particular township with which the writer was concerned
was the old schoolhouse turned into a township house at Mifflin Center, the location of the
church and school. The local political interests of the other communities mentioned were at
the appointed places in the respective townships. The seat of justice was for some time in
the parlor of the writer's father's residence, or in the front yard, to which court was occasionally
adjourned when weather conditions permitted. In a larger way county courts were held at the
county seat, as were other of the larger political activities.

One could go on indefinitely illustrating the boundaries of interests of various kinds. Some
of them centered in the State House; others in the national Capitol; and many a wordy political
battle was fought in the little country section over the question as to whether the protective
tariff or the Democratic party was responsible for the hard times the farmers and others were
suffering. There were even world interests involved, as during the Spanish-American War or
the Venezuelan difficulty during Cleveland's administration.

This concrete illustration both raises the question, Which of these is the "community?" and
also points the way to the answer. None of the groupings mentioned can be considered "the community."
Yet each is "a community." A "community" is a psychical and not a physical thing. It can only
approximately be bounded by physical lines. In the last analysis the true "community" is nothing
more nor less than that group of two or more individuals who are bound together by a single
interest. Thus two people living within sight of one another may be members of the same religious
community and at the same time be absolutely separated from one another in their political
affiliations. Also one person can at the same time belong to many "communities."

But this definition, if adhered to strictly, would lead to confusion of thought perhaps more
serious than a less accurate use of the term. Careful investigation of the relation of the
different psychic communities to one another reveals the fact that geographically the areas
of individual community interest overlap one another; and that in the better organized regions
the centers of interests coincide and it is only the boundaries of the several interests that
are not coterminous. The Mifflin Center illustration given above is good in that it had the
religious, educational and political interests centered at one physical spot. The social and
recreational life of a large part of this local area also was centered here. In the other local
groups mentioned there was a division of interest much more marked. A more practical definition,
then, of a "community" would be "That aggregation of population which is bound together by
a predominating proportion of its local interests."

If this definition is accepted, then an inspection of almost any local aggregation, in the
open country at least, will lead to the conclusion that there are few groups of people who
have any large number of local interests in common. Perhaps the most powerful force to be considered
in determining what is an open country community is that of the social life. People in a given
section habitually seek those with whom they are best acquainted when they get together for
social affairs of interest outside the family circle; and it is only occasionally that the
mass will go out of these habitual associations in seeking social relaxation. This social life
may be sought at one time in the school, at another in the church, again at a picnic, or in
the home of some one in the "neighborhood." But the dominating factor is acquaintanceship rather
than religion or education or business.

Villages are more easily defined as to the number of interests holding the group together.

One principal objective in the modern local community organization movement seems to be to
bring together at some central point the focal points of as many local interests as possible,
thus strengthening the community bonds and increasing the community consciousness. As this
end is achieved the necessity for the strict definition given above disappears and the "community"
becomes that aggregation of people the majority of whose local interests have a common center.
This is the sense in which the term will be used in this discussion.

The term "rural" likewise conveys a different thought to different people. Indeed, so likely
has the term been to mislead that in a recent national survey of religious conditions, the
term was abandoned and "town and country" substituted. The simpler plan is to arrive at a definition
of the word "rural" which will include what the latter term connotes. To confuse "rural" with
"agricultural" is to ignore both the past and the present in movements of population and in
organization of interests. To an increasing degree the interests of the open country are centering
in the village, or even larger centers. So that in discussing the problems of the agricultural
population it is often necessary to make the center of discussion the organization of the village
with an agricultural environment. The better plan is to definitely discuss the problems of
the open country under the term "agricultural" and retain the other term for all interests
of groups of population in smaller communities, whether in the open country or in the villages.
In general, the division of the United States Census will be observed and the term "rural"
regularly applied to all groups of under two thousand five hundred population.

At a recent meeting of country ministers an attempt was made to define what is the problem
of the rural church. The definition as framed is herewith presented: "The rural task of the
church is the nurture and development of all phases of human welfare in those communities where
the general life and thinking of the people are related to matters which pertain to material
natural resources."

This definition is inadequate from the administrative point of view in that it would exclude
the small manufacturing community, the educational center, the summer and winter resort communities,
and similar specialized groups where population is small. The problems of these small communities
not directly related to material natural resources have many characteristics in common with
those included in the above definition. Size of community has much to do with the type of problem
presented; and the one who understands the problems of the agricultural village is probably
better able to deal with the problems of the villages of the type mentioned than is the one
trained for service in a metropolitan center.

The term "church" is here used in the sense of including all religious forces in rural life.
The Sunday School Association, the Christian Associations, Church Federations, and other groups
allied to the church are included in the general term.

THE MANIFOLD FUNCTIONS OF THE CHURCH

The church is the only agency in existence that is concerned with man in all his relationships.
It is concerned with keeping alive in human consciousness the existence of a Divine Being and
of man's relationship to that Being. It is the only agency that proceeds on the theory of the
immortality of the human soul and that has a program of preparing the soul for a life after
death. In common with other agencies the church is concerned with the individual life of man
on this earth and endeavors to lead human beings to that course of life which will result in
the maximum of personal spiritual welfare. And in common with other agencies it is concerned
with man in his relations to others and to his material environment because these relationships
have a vital effect on his spiritual life.

A full analysis of the functions of the church would include a discussion of those features
of church work which have to do with man's relation to God and to an immortal existence. But
in a discussion of the church in relation to the community it is not necessary to consider
man's relation to God nor to a future life except in so far as beliefs in such relationships
influence his personal welfare on this earth or his relationships to his fellow man. Thus this
discussion falls in the field of sociology rather than in the field of theology or psychology.
A casual observation of the forces at work in human relationships, especially in the smaller
communities, leads quickly to the conclusion that beliefs both with reference to God and to
a future life have a vital effect on social conduct. But it is the effect instead of the truth
of beliefs that is the subject matter to be considered.

Having thus defined the field of our discussion both as to subject matter and as to the phase
of the interests of the church to be considered, it is next in order to note the size of the task.

According to the census of 1920, 50,866,899 people in the United States lived in rural territory,
that is, in communities of less than 2,500 population. This was 48.1 per cent of the total.
For the first time in the history of the country the records showed a larger proportion of
the total population living in urban centers than in villages or in the open country. The population
in incorporated villages of less than 2,500 population was 9,864,196, or 9.3 per cent of the
total, while that in unincorporated or open country communities was 41,002,703 or 38.8 per
cent, as compared with 8.8 per cent and 44.8 per cent respectively in 1910.

The total rural population increase was but 1,518,986, or 3.1 per cent. Incorporated village
increase was 1,745,371, or 21.5 per cent, while the unincorporated community population actually
decreased 227,355, or .6 per cent.

These figures indicate two conclusions of importance to our discussion. The first is that the
villages of less than 2,500 inhabitants are sharing with the large centers in the general increase
in population. Their increase proportionately is not so marked as is that of the extremely
large centers, but it is sufficiently marked to indicate that they offer opportunities that
attract more than does the open country. This village growth must be reckoned with in determining
policies of location of church buildings and the type of local church program for community
service.

The second conclusion is that the open country is still at a disadvantage so far as its possibilities
of supporting a large population are concerned. Actual depopulation of the open country, the
enlargement of the size of farms, the abandonment of acreage once under cultivation, which
preliminary figures issued by the Census Bureau indicate, show that not yet is the demand for
agricultural products such as to make a much larger open country population possible. This
fact also points the direction for readjustment of rural community life.

The data from the religious census of the United States, taken in 1916, while not classified
as rural and urban, give hopeful figures as to the progress of religious institutions in this
country. One of the first and earliest suspected cases of dualism, which long puzzled the older
mycologists, was observed amongst the Uredines, and many years ago it was held that there must
be some mysterious association between the "red rust" (Trichobasis ruligo vera) of wheat and grasses
and the "corn mildew" (Puccinia graminis) which succeeded it. The simple spored rust first makes
its appearance, and later the bilocular "mildew." It is by no means uncommon to find the two forms
in the same pustule. Some have held, without good reason, that the simple cells became afterwards divided
and converted into Puccinia, but this is not the case; the uredo-spores
are always simple, and remain so except in Uredo linearis, where every
intermediate stage has been observed.

Both are also perfect in their kind, and capable of germination.

What the precise relations between the two forms may be has as yet never been revealed to observers,
but that the two forms belong to one species is not now doubted. Very many species of Puccinia
have already been found associated with a corresponding Trichobasis, and of Phragmidium with a relative
Lecythea, but it may be open to grave doubt whether some of the very many species associated
by authors are not so classed upon suspicion rather than observation. We are ready to admit
that the evidence is strong in favour of the dimorphism of a large
number of species--it may be in all, but this awaits proof, or substantial
presumption on good grounds.

Up to the present we know that there are species of Trichobasis which have never been traced
to association with a Puccinia, and doubtless there will be species of Puccinia for which
no corresponding Uredo or Trichobasis can be found.
 Church membership, of course, is not the only criterion of the influence
of the church; nor would all denominations admit that all the people should belong to church,
since some would not accept children not yet having reached the age of accountability. But
in any case Christian America is not Christian even in church membership. This does not take
into account matters of social and economic relationships which the spirit of Christianity
has not yet penetrated and by which church members as well as nonmembers are bound.

More than 50,000,000 rural folk rising to a consciousness of their inherent solidarity and
community of interest, and more than 20,000,000 of these not affiliated with any religious
organization, present a challenge for trained leadership unequaled in the history of the world.
Urban interests have grown powerful. Urban life has rapidly advanced for at least the more
favored groups until it has far outstripped conditions in rural communities that go to make
up the best in modern civilization and culture. Germs have been found in the "Old Oaken Bucket"
in the country, while the scourge of typhoid has been banished from the city, and the "Church
in the Dell" has crumbled in decay, while the metropolitan pulpit has taken the best leadership
for its own. The country has been unable to compete with the urban centers for educational,
religious, or social leadership because wealth has accumulated in the cities. Rural population
has declined because the prizes in wealth accumulation were in the cities and because it was
easier to secure those things there that people have learned to value as most worth while,
in good housing, medical attendance, education, and recreation. While city poets have sung
the praises of country life, many people who have lived in the country and endured the long
hours and little pay from husbandry have, like the Arab, folded their tents and slipped away;
and when once they have tasted the advantages of urban life, have not returned.

No civilization can be wholesome or permanent so long as any one great group is permanently
handicapped in its struggle for economic or social welfare. So long as any group is evidently
at a disadvantage the shift of population from the less-favored to the better-favored groups
will continue; that is, unless castes are formed which compel people to remain permanently
in one group or the other. And this does not happen in modern democratic society. And so long
as there is a continuous shift of population in one direction or another we have evidence that
conditions are such as to induce the shift.

It is the existence of conditions such as these that makes the challenge for a trained loyal
service on the part of those selected to attend to matters concerned with rural public welfare.

It is the purpose of the following pages to outline briefly some of the conditions to which
the church must give attention if it is to meet the demand now made upon it by modern rural
life. It is not intended to be a treatise on practical theology in the sense ordinarily accepted
in courses on that subject. Very little attention will be given to matters of organization
or administration of the local church. It is believed that if only ministers of the gospel
can once attain an adequate grasp of the purposes of religious service, the matter of method
of accomplishing results may be left largely to the pastors themselves. On the other hand,
emphasis upon method, which seems to be demanded by many ministers instead of knowledge of
ends to be attained, is more than likely to lead to overorganization, or organization not adapted
to objectives. One of the essentials in all leadership is that of having definite objectives
toward which to work, and it is the purpose of this text to call the attention to objectives
and to organization, both local and general, adapted to the attainment of objectives rather
than the methods of attaining them.

CHAPTER II

THE BASIS FOR COMMUNITY SERVICE

