Alas! both traditions--the tradition that Alfred founded the University of Oxford, and the
tradition that he founded University College--are devoid of historical foundation. Universities
did not exist in Alfred's days. They were developed centuries later out of the monastery schools.
When Queen Elizabeth was on a visit to Cambridge, a scholar delivered before her an oration,
in which he exalted the antiquity of his own university at the expense of that of the University
of Oxford. The University of Oxford was roused to arms. In that uncritical age any antiquarian
weapon which the fury of academical patriotism could supply was eagerly grasped, and the reputation
of the great antiquary Camden is somewhat compromised with regard to an interpolation in Asser's
Life of Alfred, which formed the chief documentary support of the Oxford case. The historic
existence of both the English universities dawns in the reign of the scholar king, and the
restorer of order and prosperity after the ravages of the conquest and the tyranny of Rufus--Henry
I. In that reign the Abbot of Croyland, to gain money for the rebuilding of his abbey, set
up a school where, we are told, Priscian's grammar, Aristotle's logic with the commentaries
of Porphyry and Averroes, Cicero and Quintilian as masters of rhetoric, were taught after the
manner of the school of Orleans. In the following reign a foreign professor, Vacarius, roused
the jealousy of the English monarchy and baronage by teaching Roman law in the schools of Oxford.
The thirteenth century, that marvellous and romantic age of mediaeval religion and character,
mediaeval art, mediaeval philosophy, was also the palmy age of the universities. Then Oxford
gloried in Groseteste, at once paragon and patron of learning, church reformer and champion
of the national church against Roman aggression; in his learned and pious friend, Adam de Marisco;
and in Roger Bacon, the pioneer and proto-martyr of physical science. Then, with Paris, she
was the great seat of that school philosophy, wonderful in its subtlety as well as in its aridity,
which, albeit it bore no fruit itself, trained the mind of Europe for more fruitful studies,
and was the original product of mediaeval Christendom, though its forms of thought were taken
from the deified Stagyrite, and it was clothed in the Latin language, though in a form of that
language so much altered and debased from the classical as to become, in fact, a literary vernacular
of the Middle Ages. Then her schools, her church porches, her very street corners, every spot
where a professor could gather an audience, were thronged with the aspiring youth who had flocked,
many of them begging their way out of the dark prison-house of feudalism, to what was then,
in the absence of printing, the sole centre of intellectual light. Then Oxford, which in later
times became from the clerical character of the headships and fellowships the great organ of
reaction, was the great organ of progress, produced the political songs which embodied, with
wonderful force, the principles of free government, and sent her students to fight under the
banner of the university in the army of Simon de Montfort.

It was in the thirteenth century that University College was really founded. The founder was
William of Durham, an English ecclesiastic who had studied in the University of Paris. The
universities were, like the church, common to all the natives of Latin Christendom, that ecclesiastical
and literary federation of the European States, which, afterwards broken up by the Reformation,
is now in course of reconstruction through uniting influences of a new kind. Martin saw the bow-legged
lieutenant standing on the poop, staring at the group on the beach. He saw more.

The tide had swung the vessel around during the past few moments. She now lay broadside on
to the beach. From a cabin port, he saw a bit of fluttering white. A lump rose in his throat.
It was Ruth, he knew, waving him good-by. Dear Ruth! Yes, it was farewell! Farewell to life,
perhaps, and to love, to this wonderful love that made him almost happy in his misery. The thought
of his sweetheart cooped up in that little room with the stricken blind man, with only her resourceful
wit and high courage to combat the leaguering terrors, steeled his resolve. He would play his
part, he vowed to himself, no matter what the price he payed. God grant that his shipmates
be enabled to play their part!

"Ah--we wait, Mr. Blake!" came Ichi's voice, and he was suddenly conscious that Moto's hand was
pressing his shoulder.

Ichi was already inside, lantern held high.

As Martin stepped for the opening, he cast a swift, sidelong glance down the beach, toward the
big-mouthed cave. He saw nothing--which was what he expected.

"I must have been mistaken," he thought. "It must have been a trick of imagination."

He brushed past the man who had the watch-tackle coiled over a shoulder, and fell in behind Ichi.
The last sound he heard from the outer world was the clear, vibrant sound of the ship's bell.
Five bells!

CHAPTER XIX

THE EDGE OF THE ABYSS

During the voyage Martin had listened to many discussions between Little Billy and Captain Dabney
concerning the formation of Fire Mountain, and their descriptions of the strange features
of the island had made him impatient to see with his own eyes the
grotesque sculptures, and with his own feet explore the mysterious
caverns.

In some long past age, argued the captain, the volcano had erupted during the Arctic winter,
and the flowing lava had been quickly chilled by the intense cold, and in the hardening formed
the odd sculpting and the numberless caves. But, urged the captain, this lava cloak could not
be very thick, and while the caves existed from base to summit and all the way around the
mountain, it was unlikely that any of them penetrated into the heart of the mountain.

Little Billy disagreed. He cited John Winters's log in disproof; and he and Martin made plans
to thoroughly explore the Island. The prospect charmed Martin. He felt he could hardly wait to reach
Fire Mountain beach, and enter the gloomy depths through the portal
of the Elephant Head on his errand of discovery.

And here at last he was on the very beach, stepping through the very opening! How different was
reality from his bright dreams? Instead of friendly company, he was surrounded by alien, hostile figures;
instead of Ruth's little hand snuggling confidingly in his, his arms were bound behind him;
instead of inspecting his path with carefree, curious gaze, he looked about him with eyes of
desperation.

He had little interest in discovery as he stepped through the Elephant
Head. The details of the physical appearance of the passageway were
sharply impressed upon his mind, but they were subconscious impressions.
His active mind was at the moment wholly concerned with his arms.
They ached cruelly. Would they fail him? When he jerked them free,
would he be able to use them? Or would they drop numb and useless
by his sides? No, he decided after cautious experiment, they were
not numbed. He could wriggle his fingers easily.

Ichi walked first,
then Martin, the grim Moto next, and the four sailors trailed behind,
the last man carrying the second lantern. The gallery they traversed
was a deep fissure in the black rock, of uneven height and width.
The walls narrowed until they could hardly squeeze through, and then
widened until the lanterns' rays failed to reveal them; at times Martin
had to bend his head to pass beneath the low roof; again the roof
was lost in the gloom.

After a few steps, the sand underfoot gave
place abruptly to a floor of hard, smooth lava rock. The gallery twisted,
and the thin shaft of daylight from the entrance was lost. The way
sloped gently upward. The lanterns waged but a feeble battle against
the darkness; Martin felt he was being crushed by that heavy, intense
gloom. Their steps echoed upon the glasslike, slippery rock underfoot.

Soon
Martin was sensible of a sharp rise in temperature. There was a strong
draft in the passageway, and a hot, smelly air blew against his face,
and ruffled his hair. He was the victorious champion of Christianity against
Paganism. This is the real significance of the struggle and of his character. The Northmen,
or, as we loosely term them, the Danes, are called by the Saxon chroniclers the Pagans. As
to race, the Northman, like the Saxon, was a Teuton, and the institutions, and the political
and social tendencies of both, were radically the same.

It has been said that Christianity enervated the English and gave them over into the hands
of the fresh and robust sons of nature. Asceticism and the abuse of monachism enervated the
English. Asceticism taught the spiritual selfishness which flies from the world and abandons
it to ruin instead of serving God by serving humanity. Kings and chieftains, under the hypocritical
pretence of exchanging a worldly for an angelic life, buried themselves in the indolence, not
seldom in the sensuality, of the cloister, when they ought to have been leading their people
against the Dane. But Christianity formed the bond which held the English together, and the
strength of their resistance. It inspired their patriot martyrs, it raised up to them a deliverer
at their utmost need. The causes of Danish success are manifest; superior prowess and valour,
sustained by more constant practice in war, of which the Saxon had probably had comparatively
little since the final subjection of the Celt and the union of the Saxon kingdoms under Egbert;
the imperfect character of that union, each kingdom retaining its own council and its own interests;
and above all the command of the sea, which made the invaders ubiquitous, while the march of
the defenders was delayed, and their junction prevented, by the woods and morasses of the uncleared
island, in which the only roads worthy of the name were those left by the Romans.

It would be wrong to call the Northmen mere corsairs, or even to class them with piratical
states such as Cilicia of old, or Barbary in more recent times. Their invasions were rather
to be regarded as an after-act of the great migration of the Germanic tribes, one of the last
waves of the flood which overwhelmed the Roman Empire, and deposited the germs of modern Christendom.
They were, and but for the defensive energy of the Christianized Teuton would have been, to
the Saxon what the Saxon had been to the Celt, whose sole monuments in England now are the
names of hills and rivers, the usual epitaph of exterminated races. Like the Saxons the Northmen
came by sea, untouched by those Roman influences, political and religious, by which most of
the barbarians had been more or less transmuted before their actual irruption into the Empire.
If they treated all the rest of mankind as their prey, this was the international law of heathendom,
modified only by a politic humanity in the case of the Imperial Roman, who preferred enduring
dominion to blood and booty. With Christianity came the idea, even now imperfectly realized,
of the brotherhood of man. The Northmen were a memorable race, and English character, especially
its maritime element, received in them a momentous addition. In their northern abodes they
had undergone, no doubt, the most rigorous process of national selection. The sea-roving life,
to which they were driven by the poverty of their soil, as the Scandinavian of our day is driven
to emigration, intensified in them the vigour, the enterprise, and the independence of the
Teuton. As has been said before, they were the first ocean sailors; for the Phoenicians, though
adventurous had crept along the shore; and the Greeks and Romans had done the same. The Northman,
stouter of heart than they, put forth into mid Atlantic. American antiquarians are anxious
to believe in a Norse discovery of America. Norse colonies were planted in Greenland beyond
what is now the limit of human habitation; and when a power grew up in his native seats which
could not be brooked by the Northman's love of freedom, he founded amidst the unearthly scenery
of Iceland a community which brought the image of a republic of the Homeric type far down into
historic times. His race, widely dispersed in its course of adventure, and everywhere asserting
its ascendancy, sat on the thrones of Normandy, Apulia, Sicily, England, Ireland, and even
Russia, and gave heroic chiefs to the crusaders. The pirates were not without heart towards
each other, nor without a rudimentary civilization, which included on the one hand a strong
regard for freehold property in land, and on the other a passionate love of heroic days. Their
mythology was the universal story of the progress of the sun and the changes of the year, but
in a northern version, wild with storms and icebergs, gloomy with the darkness of Scandinavian
winters. Their religion was a war religion, the lord of their hearts a war god; their only
heaven was that of the brave, their only hell that of the coward; and the joys of Paradise
were a renewal of the fierce combat and the fierce carouse of earth. Some of them wound themselves
up on the eve of battle to a frenzy like that of a Malay running amuck. But this was, at all
events, a religion of action, not of ceremonial or spell; and it quelled the fear of death.
In some legends of the Norse mythology there is a humorous element which shows freedom of spirit;
while in others, such as the legend of the death of Balder, there is a pathos not uncongenial
to Christianity. The Northmen were not priest-ridden. Their gods were not monstrous and overwhelming
forces like the hundred-handed idols of the Hindu, but human forms, their own high qualities
idealized, like the gods of the Greek, though with Scandinavian force in place of Hellenic grace.

Converted to Christianity, the Northman transferred his enthusiasm, his martial prowess and
his spirit of adventure from the service of Odin to that of Christ, and became a devotee and
a crusader. But in his unconverted state he was an exterminating enemy of Christianity; and
Christianity was the civilization as well as the religion of England.

Scarcely had the Saxon kingdom been united by Egbert, when the barks of the Northmen appeared,
filling the English Charlemagne, no doubt, with the same foreboding sorrow with which they
had filled his Frankish prototype and master. In the course of the half century which followed,
the swarms of rovers constantly increased, and grew more pertinacious and daring in their attacks.
Leaving their ships they took horses, extended their incursions inland, and formed in the interior
of the country strongholds, into which they brought the plunder of the district. At last they
in effect conquered the North and Midland, and set up a satrap king, as the agent of their
extortion. They seem, like the Franks of Clovis, to have quartered themselves as "guests" upon
the unhappy people of the land. The monasteries and churches were the special objects of their
attacks, both as the seats of the hated religion, and as the centres of wealth; and their sword
never spared a monk. Croyland, Peterborough, Huntingdon and Ely, were turned to blood- stained
ashes. Edmund, the Christian chief of East Anglia, found a martyrdom, of which one of the holiest
and most magnificent of English abbeys was afterwards the monument. The brave Algar, another
East Anglian chieftain, having taken the holy sacrament with all his followers on the eve of
battle, perished with them in a desperate struggle, overcome by the vulpine cunning of the
marauders. Among the leaders of the Northmen were the terrible brothers Ingrar and Ubba, fired,
if the Norse legend may be trusted, by revenge as well as by the love of plunder and horror;
for they were the sons of that Ragnar Lodbrok who had perished in the serpent tower of the
Saxon Ella. When Alfred appeared upon the scene, Wessex itself, the heritage of the house of
Cerdic and the supreme kingdom, was in peril from the Pagans, who had firmly entrenched themselves
at Reading, in the angle between the Thames and Kennet, and English Christianity was threatened
with destruction.

A younger but a favourite child, Alfred was sent in his infancy by his father to Rome to receive
the Pope's blessing. He was thus affiliated, as it were, to that Roman element, ecclesiastical
and political, which, combined with the Christian and Teutonic elements, has made up English
civilization. But he remained through life a true Teuton. He went a second time, in company
with his father, to Rome, still a child, yet old enough, especially if he was precocious, to
receive some impressions from the city of historic grandeur, ancient art, ecclesiastical order,
centralized power. There is a pretty legend, denoting the docility of the boy and his love
of learning, or at least of the national lays; but he was also a hunter and a warrior. From
his youth he had a thorn in his flesh, in the shape of a mysterious disease, perhaps epilepsy,
to which monkish chroniclers have given an ascetic and miraculous turn; and this enhances our
sense of the hero's moral energy in the case of Alfred, as in that of William III.

As "Crown Prince," to use the phrase of a German writer, Alfred took part with his elder brother,
King Ethelbert, in the mortal struggle against the Pagans, then raging around Reading and along
the rich valley through which the 'Great Western Railway' now runs, and where a Saxon victory
is commemorated by the White Horse, which forms the subject of a little work by Thomas Hughes,
a true representative, if any there be, of the liegemen and soldiers of King Alfred. When Ethelbert
was showing that in him at all events Christianity was not free from the ascetic taint, by
continuing to hear mass in his tent when the moment had come for decisive action, Alfred charged
up-hill "like a wild boar" against the heathen, and began a battle which, his brother at last
coming up, ended in a great victory. The death of Ethelbert, in the midst of the crisis, placed
the perilous crown on Alfred's head. Ethelbert left infant sons, but the monarchy was elective,
though one of the line of Cerdic was always chosen; and those were the days of the real king,
the ruler judge, and captain of the people, not of what Napoleon called the cochon a l'engrais
a cinq millions par an. In pitched battles, eight of which were fought in rapid succession,
the English held their own; but they were worn out, and at length could no longer be brought
into the field. Whether a faint monkish tradition of the estrangement of the people by unpopular
courses on the part of the young king has any substance of truth we cannot say.

Utter gloom now settled down upon the Christian king and people. Had Alfred yielded to his
inclinations, he would probably have followed the example of his brother-in-law, Buhred of
Mercia, and sought a congenial retreat amidst the churches and libraries of Rome; asceticism
would have afforded him a pretext for so doing; but he remained at the post of duty. Athelney,
a little island in the marshes of Somersetshire--then marshes, now drained and a fruitful plain--to
which he retired with the few followers left him, has been aptly compared to the mountains
of Asturias, which formed the last asylum of Christianity in Spain. A jewel with the legend
in Anglo-Saxon, "Alfred caused me to be made," was found near the spot, and is now in the University
Museum at Oxford. A similar island in the marshes of Cambridgeshire formed the last rallying
point of English patriotism against the Norman Conquest. Of course, after the deliverance,
a halo of legends gathered around Athelney. The legends of the king disguised as a peasant
in the cottage of the herdsman, and of the king disguised as a harper in the camp of the Dane,
are familiar to childhood. There is also a legend of the miraculous appearance of the great
Saxon Saint Cuthbert. The king in his extreme need had gone to fish in a neighbouring stream,
but had caught nothing, and was trying to comfort himself by reading the Psalms, when a poor
man came to the door and begged for a piece of bread. The king gave him half his last loaf
and the little wine left in the pitcher. The beggar vanished; the loaf was unbroken, the pitcher
brimful of wine; and fishermen came in bringing a rich haul of fish from the river. In the
night St. Cuthbert appeared to the king in a dream and promised him victory. We see at least
what notion the generations nearest to him had of the character of Alfred.

At last the heart of the oppressed people turned to its king, and the time arrived for a war
of liberation. But on the morrow of victory Alfred compromised with the Northmen. He despaired,
it seems, of their final expulsion, and thought it better, if possible, to make them Englishmen
and Christians, and, to convert them into a barrier against their foreign and heathen brethren.
We see in this politic moderation at once a trait of national character and a proof that the
exploits of Alfred are not mythical. By the treaty of Wedmore, the northeastern part of England
became the portion of the Dane, where he was to dwell in peace with the Saxon people, and in
allegiance to their king, but under his own laws--an arrangement which had nothing strange
in it when law was only the custom of the tribe. As a part of the compact, Guthorm led over
his Northmen from the allegiance of Odin to that of Christ, and was himself baptized by the
Christian name of Athelstan. When religions were national, or rather tribal, conversions were
tribal too. The Northmen of East Anglia had not so far put off their heathen propensities or
their savage perfidy as to remain perfectly true to their covenant: but, on the whole, Alfred's
policy of compromise and assimilation was successful. A new section of heathen Teutonism was
incorporated into Christendom, and England absorbed a large Norse population whose dwelling-place
is still marked by the names of places, and perhaps in some measure by the features and character
of the people. In the fishermen of Whitby, for example, a town with a Danish name, there is
a peculiarity which is probably Scandinavian.

The transaction resembled the cession of Normandy to Rolf and his followers by the Carlovingian
King of France. But the cession of Normandy marked the dissolution of the Carlovingian monarchy:
from the cession of East Anglia to Guthorm dates a regeneration of the monarchy of Cerdic.

Alfred had rescued the country. But the country which he had rescued was a wreck. The Church,
the great organ of civilization as well as of spiritual life, was ruined. The monasteries were
in ashes. The monks of St. Cuthbert were wandering from place to place, with the relics of
the great northern Saint. The worship of Woden seemed on the point of returning. The clergy
had exchanged the missal and censer for the battle-axe, and had become secularized and brutalized
by the conflict. The learning of the Order was dead. The Latin language, the tongue of the
Church, of literature, of education, was almost extinct. Alfred himself says that he could
not recollect a priest, south of the Thames, who understood the Latin service or could translate
a document from the Latin when he became king. Political institutions were in an equal state
of disorganization. Spiritual, intellectual, civil life--everything was to be restored; and
Alfred undertook to restore everything. No man in these days stands alone, or towers in unapproachable
superiority above his fellows. Nor can any man now play all the parts. A division of labour
has taken place in all spheres. The time when the missionaries at once converted and civilized
the forefathers of European Christendom, when Charlemagne or Alfred was the master spirit in
everything, has passed away, and with it the day of hero-worship, of rational hero- worship,
has departed, at least for the European nations. The more backward races may still need, and
have reason to venerate, a Peter the Great.

Alfred had to do everything almost with his own hands. He was himself the inventor of the candle-clock
which measured his time, so unspeakably precious, and of the lantern of transparent horn which
protected the candle-clock against the wind in the tent, or the lodging scarcely more impervious
to the weather than a tent, which in those times sheltered the head of wandering royalty. Far
and wide he sought for men, like a bee in quest of honey, to condense a somewhat prolix trope
of his biographer. An embassy of bishops, priests and religious laymen, with great gifts, was
sent to the Archbishop of Rheims, within whose diocese the famous Grimbald resided, to persuade
him to allow Grimbald to come to England, and with difficulty the ambassadors prevailed, Alfred
promising to treat Grimbald with distinguished honour during the rest of his life. It is touching
to see what a price the king set upon a good and able man. "I was called," says Asser, "from
the western extremity of Wales. I was led to Sussex, and first saw the king in the royal mansion
of Dene. He received me with kindness, and amongst other conversation, earnestly besought me
to devote myself to his service, and to become his companion. He begged me to give up my preferments
beyond the Severn, promising to bestow on me still richer preferments in their place." Asser
said that he was unwilling to quit, merely for worldly honour, the country in which he had
been brought up and ordained. "At least," replied the king, "give me half your time. Pass six
months of the year with me and the rest in Wales." Asser still hesitated. The king repeated
his solicitations, and Asser promised to return within half a year; the time was fixed for
his visit, and on the fourth day of their interview he left the king and went home.

In order to restore civilization, it was necessary above all things to reform the Church. "I
have often thought," says Alfred, "what wise men there were once among the English people,
both clergy and laymen, and what blessed times those were when the people were governed by
kings who obeyed God and His gospels, and how they maintained peace, virtue and good order
at home, and even extended them beyond their own country; how they prospered in battle as well
as in wisdom, and how zealous the clergy were in teaching and learning, and in all their sacred
duties; and how people came hither from foreign countries to seek for instruction, whereas
now, when we desire it, we can only obtain it from abroad." It is clear that the king, unlike
the literary devotees of Scandinavian paganism, looked upon Christianity as the root of the
greatness, and even of the military force, of the nation.

In order to restore the Church again, it was necessary above all things to refound the monasteries.
Afterwards--society having become settled, religion being established, and the Church herself
having acquired fatal wealth--these brotherhoods sank into torpor and corruption; but while
the Church was still a missionary in a spiritual and material wilderness, waging a death struggle
with heathenism and barbarism, they were the indispensable engines of the holy war. The re-foundation
of monasteries, therefore, was one of Alfred's first cares; and he did not fail, in token of
his pious gratitude, to build at Athelney a house of God which was far holier than the memorial
abbey afterwards built by the Norman Conqueror at Battle. The revival of monasticism among
the English, however, was probably no easy task, for their domestic and somewhat material nature
never was well suited to monastic life. The monastery schools, the germs, as has been already
said, of our modern universities and colleges, were the King's main organs in restoring education;
but he had also a school in his palace for the children of the nobility and the royal household.
It was not only clerical education that he desired to promote. His wish was "that all the free-born
youth of his people, who possessed the means, might persevere in learning so long as they had
no other work to occupy them, until they could perfectly read the English scriptures; while
such as desired to devote themselves to the service of the Church might be taught Latin." No
doubt the wish was most imperfectly fulfilled, but still it was a noble wish. We are told the
King himself was often present at the instruction of the children in the palace school. A pleasant
calm after the storms of battle with the Dane!

Oxford (Ousen-ford, the ford of the Ouse) was already a royal city; and it may be conjectured
that, amidst the general restoration of learning under Alfred, a school of some sort would
be opened there. This is the only particle of historical foundation for the academic legend
which gave rise to the recent celebration. Oxford was desolated by the Norman Conquest, and
anything that remained of the educational institution of Alfred was in all probability swept away.

Another measure, indispensable to the civilizer as well as to the church reformer in those
days, was to restore the intercourse with Rome, and through her with continental Christendom,
which had been interrupted by the troubles. The Pope, upon Alfred's accession, had sent him
gifts and a piece of the Holy Cross. Alfred sent embassies to the Pope, and made a voluntary
annual offering, to obtain favourable treatment for his subjects at Rome. But, adopted child
of Rome, and naturally attached to her as the centre of ecclesiastical order and its civilizing
influences though he was, and much as he was surrounded by ecclesiastical friends and ministers,
we trace in him no ultramontanism, no servile submission to priests. The English Church, so
far as we can see, remains national, and the English King remains its head.

Not only with Latin but with Eastern Christendom, Alfred, if we may trust the contemporary
Saxon chronicles, opened communication. As Charlemagne, in the spirit partly perhaps of piety,
partly of ambition, had sent an embassy with proofs of his grandeur to the Caliph of Bagdad;
as Louis XIV., in the spirit of mere ambition, delighted to receive an embassy from Siam; so
Alfred, in a spirit of piety unmixed, sent ambassadors to the traditional Church of St. Thomas
in India: and the ambassadors returned, we are told, with perfumes and precious stones as the
memorials of their journey, which were long preserved in the churches. "This was the first
intercourse," remarks Pauli, "that took place between England and Hindostan."

All nations are inclined to ascribe their primitive institutions to some national founder,
a Lycurgus, a Theseus, a Romulus. It is not necessary now to prove that Alfred did not found
trial by jury, or the frank- pledge, or that he was not the first who divided the kingdom into
shires, hundreds, or tithings. The part of trial by jury which has been politically of so much
importance, its popular character, as opposed to arbitrary trial by a royal or imperial officer--that
of which the preservation, amidst the general prevalence of judicial imperialism, has been
the glory of England--was simply Teutonic; so was the frank-pledge, the rude machinery for
preserving law and order by mutual responsibility in the days before police; so were the hundreds
and the tithings, rudimentary institutions marking the transition from the clan to the local
community or canton. The shires probably marked some stage in the consolidation of the Saxon
settlements; at all events they were ancient divisions which Alfred can at most only have reconstituted
in a revised form after the anarchy.

He seems, however, to have introduced a real and momentous innovation by appointing special
judges to administer a more regular justice than that which was administered in the local courts
of the earls and bishops, or even in the national assembly. In this respect he was the imitator,
probably the unconscious imitator, of Charlemagne, and the precursor of Henry II., the institutor
of our Justices in Eyre. The powers and functions of the legislature, the executive and the
judiciary, lie at first enfolded in the same germ, and are alike exercised by the king, or,
as in the case of the ancient republics, by the national assembly. It is a great step when
the special office of the judiciary is separated from the rest. It is a great step also when
uniformity of justice is introduced. Probably, however, these judges, like the itinerant justices
of Henry II., were administrative as well as judicial officers; or, in the terms of our modern
polity, they were delegates of the Home Office as well as of the Central Courts of Law.

In his laws, Alfred, with the sobriety and caution on which the statesmen of his race have
prided themselves, renounces the character of an innovator, fearing, as he says, that his innovations
might not be accepted by those who would come after him. His code, if so inartificial a document
can be dignified with the name, is mainly a compilation from the laws of his Saxon predecessors.
We trace, however, an advance from the barbarous system of weregeld, or composition for murder
and other crimes as private wrongs, towards a State system of criminal justice. In totally
forbidding composition for blood, and asserting that indefeasible sanctity of human life which
is the essential basis of civilization, the code of Moses stands contrasted with other primaeval
codes. Alfred, in fact, incorporated an unusually large amount of the Mosaic and Christian
elements, which blend with Germanic customs and the relics of Roman law, in different proportions,
to make up the various codes of the early Middle Ages, called the Laws of the Barbarians. His
code opens with the Ten Commandments, followed by extracts from Exodus, containing the Mosaic
law respecting the relations between masters and servants, murder and other crimes, and the
observance of holy days, and the Apostolic Epistle from Acts xv 23-29. Then is added Matthew
vii. 12, "Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them." "By this one
Commandment," says Alfred, "a man shall know whether he does right, and he will then require
no other law-book." This is not the form of a modern Act of Parliament, but legislation in
those days was as much preaching as enactment; it often resembled in character the Royal Proclamation
against Vice and Immorality.

Alfred's laws unquestionably show a tendency to enforce loyalty to the king, and to enhance
the guilt of treason, which, in the case of an attempt on the king's life, is punished with
death and confiscation, instead of the old composition by payment of the royal weregeld. Hence
he has been accused of imperializing and anti-Teutonic tendencies; he had even the misfortune
to be fixed upon as a prototype by Oxford advocates of the absolutism of Charles I. There is
no ground for the charge, so far at least as Alfred's legislation or any known measure of his
government is concerned. The kingly power was the great source of order and justice amidst
that anarchy, the sole rallying point and bond of union for the imperilled nation; to maintain
it, and protect from violence the life of its holder, was the duty of a patriot law-giver:
and as the authority of a Saxon king depended in great measure on his personal character and
position, no doubt the personal authority of Alfred was exceptionally great. But he continued
to govern by the advice of the national council; and the fundamental principles of the Teutonic
polity remained unimpaired by him, and were transmitted intact to his successors. His writings
breathe a sense of the responsibilities of rulers and a hatred of tyranny. He did not even
attempt to carry further the incorporation of the subordinate kingdoms with Wessex; but ruled
Mercia as a separate state by the hand of his brother-in-law, and left it to its own national
council or witan. Considering his circumstances, and the chaos from which his government had
emerged, it is wonderful that he did not centralize more. He was, we repeat, a true Teuton,
and entirely worthy of his place in the Germanic Walhalla.

The most striking proof of his multifarious activity of mind, and of the unlimited extent of
the task which his circumstances imposed upon him, as well as of his thoroughly English character,
is his undertaking to give his people a literature in their own tongue. To do this he had first
to educate himself--to educate himself at an advanced age, after a life of fierce distraction,
and with the reorganization of his shattered kingdom on his hands. In his boyhood he had got
by heart Saxon lays, vigorous and inspiring, but barbarous; he had learned to read, but it
is thought that he had not learned to write. "As we were one day sitting in the royal chamber,"
says Asser, "and were conversing as was our wont, it chanced that I read him a passage out
of a certain book. After he had listened with fixed attention, and expressed great delight,
he showed me the little book which he always carried about with him, and in which the daily
lessons, psalms and prayers, were written, and begged me to transcribe that passage into his
book." Asser assented, but found that the book was already full, and proposed to the king to
begin another book, which was soon in its turn filled with extracts. A portion of the process
of Alfred's education is recorded by Asser. "I was honourably received at the royal mansion,
and at that time stayed eight months in the king's court. I translated and read to him whatever
books he wished which were within our reach; for it was his custom, day and night, amidst all
his afflictions of mind and body, to read books himself or have them read to him by others."
To original composition Alfred did not aspire; he was content with giving his people a body
of translations of what he deemed the best authors; here again showing his royal good sense.
In the selection of his authors, he showed liberality and freedom from Roman, ecclesiastical,
imperialist, or other bias. On the one hand he chooses for the benefit of the clergy whom he
desired to reform, the "Pastoral Care" of the good Pope, Gregory the Great, the author of the
mission which had converted England to Christianity; but on the other hand he chooses the "Consolations
of Philosophy," the chief work of Boethius, the last of the Romans, and the victim of the cruel
jealousy of Theodoric. Of Boethius Hallam says "Last of the classic writers, in style not impure,
though displaying too lavishly that poetic exuberance which had distinguished the two or three
preceding centuries; in elevation of sentiment equal to any of the philosophers; and mingling
a Christian sanctity with their lessons, he speaks from his prison in the swan-like tones of
dying eloquence. The philosophy which consoled him in bonds was soon required in the sufferings
of a cruel death. Quenched in his blood, the lamp he had trimmed with a skilful hand gave no
more light; the language of Tully and Virgil soon ceased to be spoken; and many ages were to
pass away before learned diligence restored its purity, and the union of genius with imitation
taught a few modern writers to 'surpass in eloquence' the Latinity of Boethius." Bede's Ecclesiastical
History of the English, the highest product of that memorable burst of Saxon intellect which
followed the conversion, and a work, not untainted by miracle and legend, yet most remarkable
for its historical qualities as well as for its mild and liberal Christianity, is balanced
in the king's series of translations by the work of Orosius, who wrote of general and secular
history, though with a religious object. In the translation of Orosius, Alfred has inserted
a sketch of the geography of Germany, and the reports of explorations made by two mariners
under his auspices among the natives dwelling on the coasts of the Baltic and the North Sea--further
proof of the variety of his interests and the reach of his mind.

In his prefaces, and in his amplifications and interpolations of the philosophy of Boethius,
Alfred comes before us an independent author, and shows us something of his own mind on theology,
on philosophy, on government, and generally as to the estate of man. To estimate these passages
rightly, we must put ourselves back into the anarchical and illiterate England of the ninth
century, and imagine a writer, who, if we could see him, would appear barbarous and grotesque,
as would all his equipments and surroundings, and one who had spent his days in a desperate
struggle with wolfish Danes, seated at his literary work in his rude Saxon mansion, with his
candle-clock protected by the horn lantern against the wind. The utterances of Alfred will
then appear altogether worthy of his character and his deeds. He always emphasizes and expands
passages which speak either of the responsibilities of rulers or of the nothingness of earthly
power; and the reflections are pervaded by a pensiveness which reminds us of Marcus Aurelius.
The political world had not much advanced when, six centuries after Alfred, it arrived at Machiavelli.

There is an especial sadness in the tone of some words respecting the estate of kings, their
intrinsic weakness, disguised only by their royal trains, the mutual dread that exists between
them and those by whom they are surrounded, the drawn sword that always hangs over their heads,
"as to me it ever did." We seem to catch a glimpse of some trials, and perhaps errors, not
recorded by Asser or the chroniclers.

In his private life Alfred appears to have been an example of conjugal fidelity and manly purity,
while we see no traces of the asceticism which was revered by the superstition of the age of
Edward the Confessor. His words on the value and the claims of a wife, if not up to the standard
of modern sentiment, are at least instinct with genuine affection.

The struggle with the Northmen was not over. Their swarms came again, in the latter part of
Alfred's reign, from Germany, whence they had been repulsed, and from France, which they had
exhausted by their ravages. But the king's generalship foiled them and compelled them to depart.
Seeing where their strength lay, he built a regular fleet to encounter them on their own element,
and he may be called the founder of the Royal Navy.

His victory was decisive. The English monarchy rose from the ground in renewed strength, and
entered on a fresh lease of greatness. A line of able kings followed Alfred. His son and successor,
Edward, inherited his vigour. His favourite grandson, Athelstan, smote the Dane and the Scot
together at Brunanburgh, and awoke by his glorious victory the last echoes of Saxon song. Under
Edgar the greatness of the monarchy reached its highest pitch, and it embraced the whole island
under its imperial ascendancy. At last its hour came; but when Canute founded a Danish dynasty
he and his Danes were Christians.

"This I can now truly say, that so long as I have lived I have striven to live worthily, and
after my death to leave my memory to my descendants in good works." If the king who wrote those
words did not found a university or a polity, he restored and perpetuated the foundations of
English institutions, and he left what is almost as valuable as any institution--a great and
inspiring example of public duty.

THE LAST REPUBLICANS OF ROME

"Has humanity such forces at its command wherewith to combat vice and baseness, that each school
of virtue can afford to repel the aid of the rest, and to maintain that it alone is entitled
to the praise of courage, of goodness, and of resignation?" Such is the rebuke administered
by M. Renan to the Christians who refuse to recognise the martyrs of Stoicism under the Roman
Empire. My eye fell upon the words when I had just laid down Professor Mommsen's harsh judgment
of the last defenders of the Republic, and they seemed to me applicable to this case also.

It is needless to say that there has been a curious change of opinion as to the merits of these
men who, a century ago, were political saints of the Liberal party, but whom in the present
day Liberal writers are emulously striving, with Dante, to thrust down into the nethermost
hell. Dante puts Brutus and Cassius in hell not because he knows the real history of their
acts, or because he is qualified to judge of the moral and political conditions under which
they acted, but simply because he is a Ghibelin, and they slew the head of the Holy Roman Empire;
and the present change of opinion arises, in the main, not from the discovery of any new fact,
or from the better sifting of those already known, but from the prevalence of new sentiments--Imperialism
of different shades, Bonapartist or Positivist, and perhaps also hero-worship, which of course
fixes upon Caesar. Positivism and Hero-worship are somewhat incongruous allies, for Hero-worship
is evidently the least scientific, while Positivism aims at being the most scientific, of all
the theories of history.

We are judging the opponents of Caesar, it seems to me, under the dominion of exaggerated notions
of the beneficence of the Empire which Caesar founded, of its value as a political model, of
its connection with the life of modern civilization, and of the respect, not to say devotion,
due to the memory of its founder. Let us try to cast off for an hour the influence of these
modern sentiments, and put the whole group of ancient figures back into its place in ancient
history.

The Empire was a necessity at the time when it came--granted. But a necessity of what sort?
Was it a necessity created by an upward effort, by an elevation of humanity, or by degradation
and decline? In the former case you may pass the same sentence upon those who opposed its coming
which is passed upon those who crucified Christ, or who, like Philip II., opposed the Reformation
in the spirit of bigoted reaction. But in the latter case they must be charged, not with moral
blindness or depravity, but only with the lack of that clearness of sight which leads men and
parties at the right moment, or even in anticipation of the right moment, to despair; and such
perspicacity, to say the least, is a highly scientific quality, requiring perhaps, to make
it respectable and safe, a more exact knowledge of historical sequences than we even now possess.
Even now we determine these historical necessities by our knowledge of the result. It was a
necessity, given all the conditions-- the treachery of Ephialtes included--that the Persians
should force the pass of Thermopylae. But the Three Hundred could not know all the conditions.
Even if they had, would they have done right in giving way? They fell, but their spirits fought
again at Salamis.

To me it appears that the Empire was a necessity of the second kind; that it was an inevitable
concession to incurable evil, not a new development of good. The Roman morality, the morality
which had produced and sustained the Republic, was now in a state of final and irremediable
decay. That morality was narrow and imperfect, or rather it was rudimentary, a feeble and transient
prototype of the sounder and more enduring morality which was soon to be born into the world.
It was the morality of devotion to a single community, and in fact consisted mainly of the
performance of duty to that community in war. But it was real and energetic after its measure
and its own time. It produced a type of character, which, if reproduced now, would be out of
date and even odious, but which stands in history dignified and imposing even to the last.
Nor was it without elements of permanent value. It contributed largely to the patriotism of
the seventeenth century, a patriotism which has now perhaps become obsolete in its turn, and
is superseded in our aspirations by an ideal with less of right and self-assertion, with more
of duty and of social affection, yet did good service against the Stuarts. The Roman morality,
together with dignity of character, produced as usual simplicity of life. It produced a reverence
for the majesty of law, the voice of the community. It produced relations between the sexes,
and domestic relations generally, far indeed below the ideal, yet decidedly above those which
commonly existed in the pagan world. It produced a high degree of self-control and of abstinence
from vices which prevailed elsewhere. It produced fruits of intellect, some original, especially
in the political sphere, others merely borrowed from Greece, yet evincing on the part of the
borrower a power of appreciating the superior excellence of another, and that a conquered nation,
the value of which, as breaking through the iron boundary of national self-love, has perhaps
not received sufficient notice. What was of most consequence to the world at large and to history,
it produced, though probably not so much in the way of obedience to recognised principle as
of noble instinct, a signal mitigation of Conquest, which was then the universal habit, but
from being extermination and destruction, at best slavery or forcible transplantation, became
under the Romans a supremacy, imposed indeed by force, and at the cost of much suffering, yet,
in a certain sense civilizing, and not exercised wholly without regard for the good of the
subject races. Thus that political unity of the nations round the Mediterranean was brought
about, which was the necessary precursor and protector of a union of a better kind. A measure
of the same praise is due to Alexander, who was a conqueror of the higher order for a similar
reason--namely, that though a Macedonian prince, he was imbued with the ideas and the morality
of the Greek republics. But Alexander was a single man, and he could not accomplish what was
accomplished in a succession of generations by the corporate energies and virtues of the Roman
Senate.

The conditions under which this morality had maintained itself were now gone. It depended on
the circumstances of a small community, long engaged in a struggle for existence with powerful
and aggressive neighbours, the Latin, the Etruscan, the Samnite, and the Gaul; entering in
turn, when its own safety had been secured, on a career of conquest, still in a certain sense
defensive, since every neighbour was in those days an enemy; and continuing to task to the
utmost the citizen's devotion to the State, the virtues of command and obedience necessary
to victory, and the frugality necessary to supply the means of great national efforts; while
luxury was kept at bay, though the means of indulging it had begun to flow in, by the check
of national danger and the counter-attraction of military glory. But all this was at an end
when Carthage and Macedon were overthrown. National danger and the necessity for national effort
being removed, self-devotion failed, egotism broke loose, and began to revel in the pillage
and oppression of a conquered world. The Roman character was corrupted, as the Spartan character
was corrupted when Sparta, from being a camp in the midst of hostile Helots, became a dominant
power and sent out governors to subject states; though the corruption in the case of Sparta
was far more rapid, because Spartan excellence was more exclusively military, more formal and
more obsolete. The mass of the Romans ceased to perform military duty, and there being no great
public duty except military duty to be performed, there remained no school of public virtue.
Such public virtue as there was lingered, though in a degraded form round the eagles of the
standing armies, to which the duties of the citizen-soldier were now consigned; and the soldiery
thus acquired not only the power but the right of electing the emperors, the best of whom,
in fact, after Augustus, were generally soldiers. The ruling nation became a city rabble, the
vices of which were but little tempered by the fitful intervention of the enfranchised communities
of Italy. Of this rabble, political adventurers bought the consulships, which led to the government
of provinces, and wrung out of the unhappy provincials the purchase money and a fortune for
themselves besides. These fortunes begot colossal luxury and a general reign of vice. Violence
mingling with corruption in the elections was breeding a complete anarchy in Rome. Roman religion,
to which, if we believe Polybius, we must ascribe a real influence in the maintenance of morality,
was at the same time undermined by the sceptical philosophy of Greece, and by contact with
conflicting religions, the spectacle of which had its effect in producing the scepticism of
Montaigne.

The empire itself was on the point of dissolution. In empires founded by single conquerors,
such as those of the East, when corruption has made the reigning family its prey, the satraps
make themselves independent. The empire of Alexander was divided among his generals. The empire
of the conquering republic of Rome, the republic itself having succumbed to vices analagous
to the corruption of a reigning family, was about to be broken up by the great military chiefs.
Pompey had already, in fact, carved out for himself a separate kingdom in Spain, which with
its legions he had got permanently into his own hands. Thus the unity of the civilized portion
of humanity, so indispensable to the future of the race, would have been lost. Nor was there
any remedy but one. Representation of the provinces was out of the question. Supposing it possible
that a single assembly could have been formed out of all these different races and tongues,
the representation of the conquered would have been the abdication of the conqueror, and abdication
was a step for which the lazzaroni of the so-called democratic party were as little prepared
as the haughtiest aristocrat in Rome. A world of egotism, without faith or morality, could
be held together only by force, which presented itself in the person of the ablest, most daring,
and most unscrupulous adventurer of the time. If faith should again fail, and the world again
be reduced to a mass of egotism, the same sort of government will again, be needed. In fact,
we are at this moment rather in danger of something of the kind, and these revivals of Caesarism
are not wholly out of season. But in any other case to propose to society such a model would
be treason to humanity.

The abandonment of military duty by the Roman people had, among other things, made slavery
more immoral than ever, because there was no longer any semblance of a division of labour:
the master could no longer be said to defend the slave in war while the slave supported him
by labour at home. Becoming more immoral, slavery became more cruel. The six thousand crosses
erected on the road from Capua to Rome after the Servile War were the terrible proof.

As to the existence of an oligarchy in the bosom of the dominant republic, this would in itself
have been no great evil to the subject world, to which it mattered little whether its tyrants
were a hundred or a hundred thousand; just as to the unenfranchised in modern communities it
matters little whether the enfranchised class be large or small. In fact, the broader the basis
of a tyranny, the more fearless and unscrupulous, generally speaking, the tyranny is.

We need not overstate the case. If we do we shall tarnish the laurels of Caesar, who would
have shown no genius in killing the republic had the republic been already dead. There was
still respect for the law and the constitution. Pompey's hesitation when supreme power was
within his grasp, Caesar's own pause at the Rubicon, are proofs of it. The civil wars of Marius
and Sulla had fearfully impaired, in the eyes of Romans, but they had not utterly destroyed,
the majesty of Rome. There were still great characters--characters which you may dislike, but
of which you can never rationally speak with contempt--and there must have been some general
element of worth in which these characters were formed. If the recent administration of the
Senate had not been glorious, still, from a Roman point of view, it had not been disastrous:
the revolt of the slaves and the insurrection in Spain had been quelled; Mithridates had been
conquered; the pirates, though for a time their domination accused the feebleness of the government,
had at length been put down. The only great military calamity of recent date was the defeat
of Crassus, whose unprovoked and insane invasion of Parthia was the error, not of the Senate,
but of the Triumvirate. Legions were forthcoming for the conquest of Gaul, and a large reserve
of treasure was found in the sacred treasure-house when it was broken open by Caesar. Bad governors
of provinces, Verres, Fonteius, Gabinius, were impeached and punished. Lucullus, autocrat and
voluptuary as he was, governed his province well. So did Cicero, if we may take his own word
for it. We may, at all events, take his own word for this, that he was anxious to be thought
to have ruled with purity and justice, which proves that purity and justice were not quite
out of fashion. The old Roman spirit still struggled against luxury, and we find Cicero suffering
from indigestion, caused by a supper of vegetables at the house of a wealthy friend, whose
excellent cook had developed all the resources of gastronomic art in struggling with the restrictions
imposed by a sumptuary law. There was intellectual life, and all the civilized tastes and half-moral
qualities which the existence of intellectual life implies. In spite of the sanguinary anarchy
which often broke out in the Roman streets, Cicero, the most cultivated and the least combative
of men, when in exile or in his province, sighs for the capital as a Frenchman sighs for Paris.
In short, if we consider the case fairly, we shall admit, I believe, that, besides the force
of memory and of old allegiance, there was enough of worth and of apparent hope left, not only
to excuse republican illusions, but probably to make it a duty to try the issue with fate.
I say probably, and, after all, how can we presume to speak with certainty of a situation so
distant from us in time, and so imperfectly recorded?

The great need of the world was public virtue--the spirit of self- sacrifice for the common
good. This the empire could not possibly call into being. The public virtue of the ancient
world resided in the nationalities which the conquering republic had broken up, and of which
the empire only sealed the doom. The empire could never call forth even the lowest form of
public virtue, loyalty to the hereditary right of a royal family, because the empire never
presented itself as a right, but merely as a personal power. The idea of legitimacy, I apprehend
never connected itself with these dynasts who were, in fact, a series of usurpers, veiling
their usurpation under republican forms. When the spirit which leads man to sacrifice himself
to the good of the community appeared again it appeared in associations and notably in one
great association formed not by the empire but independently of it in antagonism to its immorality,
and in spite of its persecutions. Accidentally the empire assisted the extension of the great
Christian association by completing the overthrow of the national religions, but the main part
of this work had been done by the republic and it was the merit neither of the republic nor
of the empire.

It is said with confidence that the empire vastly improved the government of the provinces,
and that on this account it was a great blessing to the world. I do not believe that any nation
had then attained, I do not believe that any nation has now attained, and I doubt whether any
nation ever will attain, such a point of morality as to be able to govern other nations for
the benefit of the governed. I will say nothing about our Christian policy in India, but let
those who rate French morality so highly, consider what French tutelage is to the people of
Algeria. But supposing the task undertaken, the question which is the best organ of imperial
government--an assembly or an autocrat--is a curious one. I am disposed to think that, taking
the average of assemblies and the average of autocrats, there is more hope in the assembly,
because in the assembly opinion must have some force. The autocrat is in a certain sense, raised
above the dominant nation and its interests, but, after all, he is one of that nation, he lives
in it, and subsists by its support. Even in the time of Augustus, if we may trust Dion Cassius
Licinius the Governor of Gaul, was guilty of corruptions and peculations curiously resembling
those of Verres, from whom he seems to have borrowed the device of tampering with the calendar
for the purpose of fiscal fraud, and when the provinces complained, the Emperor hushed up the
matter, partly to avoid scandal, partly because Licinius was cunning enough to pretend that
his peculations had been intended to cut the sinews of revolt, and that his spoils were reserved
for the imperial exchequer. The rebellions of Vindex and Civilis seem to prove that even Caesar's
favourite province was not happy. Spain was misgoverned by the deputies both of Julius and
Augustus. In Britain, the history of the revolt of the Iceni shews that neither the extortions
of Roman usurers, nor the brutalities of Roman officers, had ended with the republic. The blood
tax of the conscription appears also to have been cruelly exacted. The tribute of largesses
and shows which the empire, though supposed to be lifted high above all partialities, paid
to the Roman populace, was drawn almost entirely from the provinces. Emperors who coined money
with the tongue of the informer and the sword of the executioner, were not likely to abstain
from selling governorships; and, in fact, Seneca intimates that under bad emperors governorships
were sold. Of course, the tyranny was felt most at Rome, where it was present; but when Caligula
or Caracalla made a tour in the provinces, it was like the march of the pestilence. The absence
of a regular bureaucracy, practically controlling, as the Russian bureaucracy does, the personal
will of the Emperor, must have made government better under Trajan, but much worse under Nero.
The aggregation of land in the hands of a few great land-holders evidently continued, and under
this system the garden of Italy became a desert. The decisive fact, however, is that the provinces
decayed, and that when the barbarians arrived, all power of resistance was gone. That the empire
was consciously levelling and cosmopolitan, surely cannot be maintained. Actium was a Roman
victory over the gods of the nations. Augustus, who must have known something about the system,
avowedly aimed at restoring the number, the purity, the privileged exclusiveness of the dominant
race. His legislation was an attempt to regenerate old Rome; and the political odes of the
court poet are full of that purpose. That the empire degraded all that had once been noble
in Rome is true; but the degradation of what had once been noble in Rome was not the regeneration
of humanity. The vast slave population was no more elevated by the ascendency of the freedmen
of the imperial household than the female sex was elevated by the ascendancy of Messalina.

That intellect declined under the emperors, and that the great writers of its earlier period,
Tacitus included, were really legacies of the Republic, cannot be denied; and surely it is
a pregnant fact. The empire is credited with Roman law. But the Roman law was ripe for codification
in the time of the first Caesar. The leading principles of the civil law seem by that time
to have been in existence. Unquestionably the great step had been taken of separating law as
a science from consecrated custom, and of calling into existence regular law courts and what
was tantamount to a legal profession. The mere evolution of the system from its principles
required no transcendant effort; and the idea of codification must have been something less
than divine, or it could not have been compassed by the intellect of Justinian. The criminal
law of the empire, with its arbitrary courts, its secret procedure, its elastic law of treason,
and its practice of torture, was the scourge of Europe till it was encountered and overthrown
by the jury system, a characteristic offspring of the Teutonic mind.

Tolerant the empire was, at least if you did not object to having the statue of Caligula set
up in your Holy of Holies, and this toleration fostered the growth of a new religion. But it
is needless to say that, in this respect, the politicians of the empire only inherited the
negative virtue of those of the republic.

As to private morality, we may surely trust the common authorities-- Juvenal, Suetonius, Petronius
Arbiter--supported as they are by the evidence of the museums. There was one family, at least,
whose colossal vices and crimes afforded a picture in the deepest sense tragic, considering
their tremendous effect on the lot and destinies of humanity.

It is a glorious dream, this of an autocrat, the elect of humanity, raised above all factions
and petty interests, armed with absolute power to govern well, agreeing exactly with all our
ideas, giving effect to all our schemes of beneficence, and dealing summarily with our opponents;
but it does not come through the "horngate" of history, at least not of the history of the
Roman empire.

The one great service which the empire performed to humanity was this: it held together, as
nothing else could have held together, the nations of the civilized world, and thus rendered
possible a higher unity of mankind.

I ventured to note, as one of the sources of illusion, a somewhat exaggerated estimate of the
amount and value of the Roman element transfused by the empire into modern civilization. The
theory of continuity, suggested by the discoveries of physical science, is prevailing also
in history. A historical theory is to me scientific, not because it is suggested by physical
science, but because it fits the historical facts. It may be true that there are no cataclysms
in history, but still there are great epochs. In fact, there are great epochs, even in the
natural history of the world; there were periods at which organization and life began to exist.
There may have been a time at which a still further effort was made, and spiritual life also
was brought into being. Things which do not come suddenly or abruptly, may nevertheless be
new. A great sensation has been created by an article in the Quarterly, on "The Talmud," which
purports to shew that the teachings of Christianity were, in fact, only those of Pharisaism.
The organ of orthodoxy, in publishing that article, was rather like our great mother Eve in
Milton, who "knew not eating death." But after all, Pharisaism crucified Christianity, and
probably it was not for plagiarism. Supposing we adopt the infiltration theory of the Barbarian
conquests, and discard that of a sudden deluge of invasion, it remains certain, unless all
contemporary writers were much mistaken, that some very momentous change did, after all, occur.
Catholicism and Feudalism were the life of the Middle Ages. Catholicism, though it had grown
up under the Empire, and at last subjugated it, was not of it. As to Feudalism, it is possible,
no doubt, to find lands held on condition of military service under the Roman empire as well
as under the Ottoman empire, and in other military states. But is it possible to find anything
like the social hierarchy of Feudalism, its code of mutual rights and duties, or the political
and social characters which it formed?

In France and Spain, much of the Roman province survived, but in England, not the least influential
of the group of modern nations, it was, as we have every reason to believe, completely erased
by the Saxon invaders, who came fresh from the seats of their barbarism, hating cities and
city life, and ignorant of the majesty of Rome. If a Roman element afterwards found its way
into England with the Norman conquest, it was rather ecclesiastical than imperial, and those
who brought it were Scandinavians to the core. Alfred had been at Rome in his boyhood, it is
true, and may have brought away some ideas of central dominion; but his laws open with a long
quotation, not from the Pandects, but from the New Testament--his character is altogether that
of a Christian, not of a Roman ruler, and if he had any political model before him, it was,
probably, at least as much the Hebrew monarchy as the military despotism of the Caesars. Many
of the Roman cities remained, and with them their municipal governments, and hence it is assumed
that municipal government altogether is Roman. But there was a municipal government in the
Saxon capital, and evidently there must be wherever large cities exist with any degree of independence.
The Roman law was, at all events so far lost in the early part of the Middle Ages when Christendom
was in process of formation that the study of it afterwards seemed new. Roman literature influenced
that of mediaeval Christendom down to about the end of the twelfth century. Our writers of
the time of Henry II. compose in half classical Latin and affect classical elegancies of style.
But then comes a philosophy which in spite of its worship of Aristotle is essentially an original
creation of the mediaeval and Catholic mind couched in a language Latin indeed but almost as
remote from classical Latin as German itself: the tongue in truth of a new intellectual world.
Open Aquinas and ask yourself how much is left of the language or the mind of Rome. The eye
of the antiquary sees the Basilica in the Cathedral, but what essential resemblance does the
Roman place of judicature and business bear to that marvellous and fantastic poetry of religion
writing its hymns in stone? In the same manner the Roman castra are traceable in the form as
well as the designation of the mediaeval castella. But what resemblance did the feudal militia
bear to the legionaries? And what became of the Roman art of war till it was revived by Gustavus
Adolphus? The outward mould of Christendom the Roman empire was and that it was so gives it
great dignity and interest, but it was no more. The life came from the German forest the life
of life from the peasantry of Galilee the least Romanized perhaps of the populations beneath
the sway of Rome.

The founder of the Roman empire was a very great man. With such genius and such fortune it
is not surprising that he should be made an idol. In intellectual stature he was at least an
inch higher than his fellows which is in itself enough to confound all our notions of right
and wrong. He had the advantage of being a statesman before he was a soldier whereas Napoleon
was a soldier before he was a statesman. His ambition coincided with the necessity of the world
which required to be held together by force, and therefore his empire endured for four hundred,
or if we include its eastern offset, for fourteen hundred years, while that of Napoleon crumbled
to pieces in four. But unscrupulous ambition was the root of his character. It was necessary
in fact to enable him to trample down the respect for legality which still hampered other men.
To connect him with any principle seems to me impossible. He came forward, it is true, as the
leader of what is styled the democratic party, and in that sense the empire which he founded
may be called democratic. But to the gamblers who brought their fortunes to that vast hazard
table, the democratic and aristocratic parties were merely rouge and noir. The social and political
equity, the reign of which we desire to see was, in truth, unknown to the men of Caesar's time.
It is impossible to believe that there was an essential difference of principle between one
member of the triumvirate and another. The great adventurer had begun by getting deeply into
debt, and had thus in fact bound himself to overthrow the republic. He fomented anarchy to
prepare the way for his dictatorship. He shrank from no accomplice however tainted, not even
from Catiline; from no act however profligate or even inhuman. Abusing his authority as a magistrate,
for party purposes, he tries to put to a cruel and ignominious death Rabirius, an aged and
helpless man, for an act done in party warfare thirty years before. The case of Vettius is
less clear, but Dr. Mommsen, at all events, seems to have little doubt that Caesar was privy
to the subornation of this perjurer, and when his perjuries had broken down, to his assassination.
Dr. Mommsen owns that there was a dark period in the life of the great man; in that darkness
it could scarcely be expected that the Republicans should see light.

The noblest feature in Caesar's character was his clemency. But we are reminded that it was
ancient, not modern clemency, when we find numbered among the signal instances of it his having
cut the throats of the pirates before he hanged them, and his having put to death without torture
(simplici morte punivit) a slave suspected of conspiring against his life. Some have gone so
far as to speak of him as the incarnation of humanity. But where in the whole history of Roman
conquest will you find a more ruthless conqueror? A million of Gauls, we are told, perished
by the sword. Multitudes were sold into slavery. The extermination of the Eburones went to
the verge even of ancient license. The gallant Vercingetorix, who had fallen into Caesar's
hands under circumstances which would have touched any but a depraved heart, was kept by him
a captive for six years, and butchered in cold blood on the day of the triumph. The sentiment
of humanity was at that time undeveloped. Be it so, but then we must not call Caesar the incarnation
of humanity.

Vast plans are ascribed to Caesar at the time of his death, and it seems to be thought that
a world of hopes for humanity perished when he fell. But if he had lived and acted for another
century what could he have done with those moral and political materials but found what he
did found--a military and sensualist empire? A multitude of projects are attributed to him
by writers who we must remember are late and who make him ride a fairy charger with feet like
the hands of a man. Some of these projects are really great, such as the codification of the
law and measures for the encouragement of intellect and science; others are questionable, such
as the restoration of commercial cities from which commerce had retired; others, great works
to be accomplished by an unlimited command of men and money, are the common dreams of every
Nebuchadnezzar. What we know if we know anything of his intentions is that he was about to
set out on a campaign against the Parthians in whose plains this prototype of Napoleon might
perhaps have found a torrid Moscow. No great advance of humanity can take place without a great
moral effort excited by higher moral desires. The masters of the legions can only set in action
by their fiat material forces. Even these they often misdirect; but if the empire could have
given every man Nero's golden house the inhabitants might still have been as unhappy as Nero.

It is not doubtful that Caesar was a type of the sensuality of his age. His worshippers even
feel it necessary to gird at characters deficient in sensual passion with a friskiness which
is a little amusing when you connect it with the spectacles and the blameless life of a learned
professor. Beneath the rock-snout was a narrow slit about six feet high by half as wide. It was,
Martin knew, the entrance the whaleman had written of.

But Martin had little time to inspect the beach. Ichi commanded dispatch. Martin noticed with surprise
that as soon as Ichi touched foot on the sand, his accustomed phlegm was replaced by visible nervousness.

Ichi
ordered, and the four sailors ran the boat up on the beach. Then, Moto leading the way, carrying
the two lanterns, they all trooped toward the cave entrance.

Martin used his eyes as he walked. There were, he saw, many cave openings
on a level with the beach.

One in particular was a gaping cavern. Ichi, by his side, and talkative, indicated this place.

"Where
we lived," he informed. "Very nasty place--damp, and of coldness. But our torches were poor,
and driftwood of much scarceness, so we dare not investigate greatly the interior for better place.
Our wood was all gone, and we feared muchly we must break up the boat, when Fate with so great a
kindness sent the honorable Dabney to rescue us."

"A queer rescue, you murderous little wretch!" thought Martin. But aloud, he said, "What did you
live on?"

They had fallen behind the others.

Martin considered swiftly whether or not to fall upon his companion now. He was certain he could
get the gun, and commence shooting, before the others assailed him. But he decided promptly that
it would not do. They would witness the affair from the ship.

"Oh--we eat the gulls," replied Ichi. "And the shell-fish, and a seal that was dead--ah, he
was long dead and of great nastiness! But mostly it was the shell-fish. See the many shells
on the sand?"

Martin looked. He gulped a swift, deep breath to keep from crying out, and stopped dead in his
tracks. He stared into the yawning mouth of the cave Ichi was speaking about, his heart thumping
furiously. Good Heaven! Had he seen a ghost? Was it a crazy trick of his overwrought mind? Or
had he actually beheld, for a fraction of a second, a white face
framed in the dense gloom of the cave's interior?

But that face!

"Ah--but do not pause, my dear Mr. Blake," said Ichi with a hint of sarcasm. "It is of great
interest, I know, but the view that awaits you as we seek the ambergris inside, is of much more
interestness. Come! See, our dear Moto has the lanterns lighted!"

Martin with difficulty maintained a disinterested expression. He recovered his stride, and they
joined the others beneath the overhanging elephant rock. Moto and Ichi held for a moment a chattering
interchange of their native speech.

Martin peered into this other opening, his agitated mind half-expecting
to see the startling vision again, flashing white in the interior
blackness. But beyond a few feet of sand floor and black lava walls,
he saw nothing. The opening in the elephant head led into a narrow
gallery, a hallway into the mountain.

A blast of hot, sulfur-tainted
air swirled out of the opening. It made his eyes smart. Coincidentally,
his ears were assailed by strange sound. It came out of the black
hole, and it was like the wailing of souls in torment. It was a dolorous
whistling that increased to a shrill screeching, then died away sobbingly.

Martin
listened to that weird grief all a-prickle with shivery sensations.
It was unnerving.

Nor were his companions indifferent to the sound.
The four sailors huddled quickly together and gazed fearfully into
the dark opening.

Moto chopped off short the word he was saying,
and Martin saw his body stiffen and his eyes dilate. Even Ichi betrayed
agitation, and Martin saw a violent but quickly mastered emotion flit
across his yellow features.

The eery wail died quite away, and Martin's
scalp stopped crawling. Of the two court
poets of Caesar's successor, one makes Cato preside over the spirits of the good in the Elysian
fields, while the other speaks with respect, at all events, of the soul which remained unconquered
in a conquered world--"Et cuneta terrarum subacta praeter atrocem animum Catonis." Paterculus,
an officer of Tiberius and a thorough Caesarian, calls Cato a man of ideal virtue ("homo virtuti
simillimus") who did right not for appearance sake, but because it was not in his nature to
do wrong. When the victor is thus overawed by the shade of the vanquished, the vanquished can
hardly have been a "fool." Contemporaries may be mistaken as to the merits of a character,
but they cannot well be mistaken as to the space which it occupied in their own eyes. Sallust,
the partizan of Marius and Caesar, who had so much reason to hate the senatorial party, speaks
of Caesar and Cato as the two mighty opposites of his time, and in an elaborate parallel ascribes
to Caesar the qualities which secure the success of the adventurer; to Cato those which make
up the character of the patriot. It is a mistake to regard Cato the younger as merely an unseasonable
repetition of Cato the elder. His inspiration came not from a Roman, but from a Greek school,
which, with all its errors and absurdities, and in spite of the hypocrisy of many of its professors,
really aimed highest in the formation of character; and the practical teachings and aspirations
of which, embodied in the Reflections of Marcus Aurelius, it is impossible to study without
profound respect for the force of moral conception and the depth of moral insight which they
sometimes display. Cato went to Greece to sit at the feet of a Greek teacher in a spirit very
different from the national pride of his ancestor. It is this which makes his character interesting:
it was an attempt at all events to grasp and hold fast a high rule of life in an age when the
whole moral world was sinking in a vortex of scoundrelism, and faith in morality, public or
private, had been lost. Of course the character is formal, and in some respects even grotesque.
But you may trace formalism, if you look closely enough, in every life led by a rule; in everything
in fact between the purest spiritual impulse on one side and abandoned sensuality on the other.

Attempts to revive old Roman simplicity of dress and habits in the age of Lucullus, were no
doubt futile enough: yet this is only the symbolical garb of the Hebrew prophet. The scene
is in ancient Rome, not in the smoking-room of the House of Commons. The character as painted
by Plutarch, who seems to have drawn from the writings of contemporaries, is hard of course,
but not cynical. Cato was devoted to his brother Caepio, and when Caepio died, forgot all his
Stoicism in the passionate indulgence of his grief, and all his frugality in lavishing gold
and perfumes on the funeral. Caesar in "Anti-Cato" accused him of sifting the ashes for the
gold, which, says Plutarch, is like charging Hercules with cowardice. Where the sensual appetites
are repressed, whatever may be the theory of life, the affections are pretty sure to be strong,
unless they are nipped by some such process as is undergone by a monk. Cato's resignation of
his fruitful wife to a childless friend, revolting as it is to our sense, betokens not so much
brutality in him as coarseness of the conjugal relations at Rome. Evidently the man had the
power of touching the hearts of others. His soldiers, though he has given them no largesses,
and indulged them in no license, when he leaves them, strew their garments under his feet.
His friends at Utica linger at the peril of their lives to give him a sumptuous funeral. He
affected conviviality like Socrates. He seems to have been able to enjoy a joke too at his
own expense. He can laugh when Cicero ridicules his Stoicism in a speech; and when in a province
he meets the inhabitants of a town turning out, and thinks at first that it is in his own honour,
but soon finds that it is in honour of a much greater man, the confidential servant of Pompey,
at first his dignity is outraged, but his anger soon gives place to amusement. That his public
character was perfectly pure, no one seems to have doubted; and there is a kindliness in his
dealings with the dependants of Rome which shews that had he been an emperor he would have
been such an emperor as Trajan--a man whom he probably resembled, both in the goodness of his
intentions and in the limited powers of his mind. Impracticable, of course, in a certain sense
he was; but his part was that of a reformer, and to compromise with the corruption against
which he was contending would have been to lose the only means of influence, which, having
no military force and no party, he possessed--the unquestioned integrity of his character.
He is said by Dr. Mommsen to have been incapable of even conceiving a policy. By policy I suppose
is meant one of those brilliant schemes of ambition with which some literary men are fond of
identifying themselves, fancying, it seems, that thereby they themselves after their measure
play the Caesar. The policy which Cato conceived was simply that of purifying and preserving
the Republic. So far, at all events, he had an insight into the situation, that he knew the
real malady of the State to be want of public spirit, which he did his best to supply. And
the fact is, that he did more than once succeed in a remarkable way in stemming the tide of
corruption. Though every instinct bade him struggle to the last, he had sense enough to see
the state of the case, and to advise that, to avert anarchy, supreme power should be put into
the hands of Pompey, whose political superstition, if not his loyalty, there was good reason
to trust. When at last civil war broke out, Cato went into it like Falkland, crying "peace;"
he set his face steadily against the excesses and cruelties of his party; and when he saw the
field of Dyrrhaeium covered with his slain enemies, he covered his face and wept. He wept a
Roman over Romans, but humanity will not refuse the tribute of his tears. After Pharsalus he
cherished no illusion, as Dr Mommsen himself admits, and though he determined himself to fall
fighting, he urged no one else to resistance: he felt that the duty of an ordinary citizen
was done. His terrible march over the African desert shewed high powers of command, as we shall
see by comparing it with the desert march of Napoleon. Dr. Mommsen ridicules his pedantry in
refusing, on grounds of loyalty, to take the commandership-in-chief over the head of a superior
in rank. Cato was fighting for legality, and the spirit of legality was the soul of his cause.
But besides this, he was himself without experience of war; and by declining the nominal command
he retained the real control. He remained master to the last of the burning vessel. Our morality
will not approve of his voluntary death; but then our morality would give him a sufficient
motive for living, even if he was to be bound to the car of the conqueror. Looking to Roman
opinion, he probably did what honour dictated; and those who prefer honour to life are not
so numerous that we can afford to speak of them with scorn. "The fool," says Dr Mommsen, when
the drama of the republic closes with Cato's death--"The fool spoke the Epilogue" Whether Cato
was a fool or not, it was not he that spoke the Epilogue. The Epilogue was spoken by Marcus
Aurelius, whose principles, political as well as philosophical, were identical with those for
which Cato gave his life. All that time the Stoic and Republican party lived, sustained by
the memory of its martyrs, and above them all by that of Cato. At first it struggled against
the Empire; at last it accepted it, and when the world was weary of Caesars, assumed the government
and gave humanity the respite of the Antonines. The doctrine of continuity is valid for all
parties alike, and the current of public virtue was not cut off by Pharsalus. Its near edge was
but a couple of feet inside the cavern entrance. It was from this half revealed gaping slit
that the wind came rushing; it was from somewhere in that hole, down, down, an immeasurable distance, that
the eerie wailing came.

The lanterns revealed white vapors swirling upward out of the hole. Everything was wet, water
dripped from overhead, the black walls glistened with moisture, underfoot was wet and slippery
as a waxed floor. Martin's clothes were wet through.

The four sailors huddled fearfully together, peering into the chasm.
Ichi's orders finally aroused them to action. The man with the tackle
slipped it from his shoulder, and, with the aid of another, overhauled
it. Cicero was no philosopher,
in the highest sense of the term; yet it is not certain that he did not do some service to
humanity by promulgating, in eloquent language, a pretty high and liberal morality, which both
modified monkish ethics, and, when monkish ethics fell, and brought down Christian ethics in
their fall, did something to supply the void. The Orations, even the great Philippic, I must
confess I could never enjoy. But all orations, read long after their delivery, are like spent
missiles, wingless and cold: they retain the deformities of passion, without the fire. A speech
embodying great principles may live with the principles which it embodies; otherwise happy
are the orators whose speeches are lost. The Letters it is not so easy to give up, especially
when we consider of how many graceful and pleasant compositions of the same kind, of how many
self-revelations, which have brought the hearts of men nearer to each other, those letters
have been the model. That, however, which pleases most in Cicero is that he is, for his age,
a thoroughly and pre- eminently civilized man. He hates gladiatorial shows; he despises even
the tasteless pageantry of the Roman theatre; he heartily loves books; he is saving up all
his earnings to buy a coveted library for his old age; he has a real enthusiasm for great writers;
he breaks through national pride, and feels sincerely grateful to the Greeks as the authors;
of civilization, rogues though he knew them to be in his time; he mourns, albeit with an apology,
over the death of a slave; his slaves evidently are attached to him, and are faithful to him
at the last; he writes to his favourite freedman with all the warmth of equal friendship. In
his writings--in the "De Legibus," for instance--you will find principles of humanity far more
comprehensive than those by which the policy of the empire was moulded. His tastes were pure
and refined, and though he multiplied his villas, and decorated them with cost and elegance,
it is certain that he was perfectly free alike from the prodigal ostentation and from the debauchery
of the time indeed his vast intellectual industry implies a temperate life. For the game- preserving
tendencies of the great oligarchs, he had a hearty dislike and contempt; in spite of the ill-looking,
though obscure, episode of his divorce from his wife Terentia, he was evidently a man of strong
family affections, the natural adjuncts of moral purity; he is inconsolable for the death of
his daughter, spends days in melancholy wandering in the woods, and finds consolation only
in erecting a temple to the beloved shade. His faults of character, both in private and public,
are glaring, and the only thing to be said in excuse of his vanity is that it is so frank,
and says plainly, "Puff me," not "Puff me not." As a political adventurer of the higher class,
pushing his way under an aristocratic government by his talents and his training, received
in course of time into the ranks of the aristocracy, yet never one of them, he will bear comparison
with Burke. He resembles Burke, too, in his religious constitutionalism and reverence for the
wisdom of political ancestors and perhaps his hope of creating a party at once conservative
and reforming, by a combination of the moneyed interest with the aristocracy, was not much
more chimerical than Burke's hope of creating a party at once conservative and reforming out
of the materials of Whiggism. Each of the two men affected a balanced, and in the literal sense,
a trimming policy, as opposed to one of abstract principle, Burke, perhaps, from temperament,
Cicero from necessity. Impeachments at Rome in Cicero's time were no doubt the regular stepping-stones
of rising politicians; nevertheless, the accuser of Verres may fairly be credited with some,
at least, of the genuine sentiment which impelled the accuser of Warren Hastings. We must couple
with the Verrines the admirable letter of the orator to his brother Quintus on the government
of a province, and his own provincial administration, which, as was said before, appears to
have been excellent. Cicero rose, not as an adherent of the aristocracy, but as their opponent,
and the assailant, a bold assailant, of the tyranny of Sulla. He was brought to the front in
politics, as Sallust avers, by his merit, in spite of his birth and social position, when the
mortal peril of the Catilinarian conspiracy was gathering round the state, and necessity called
for the man, and not the game-preserver. His conduct in that hour of supreme peril is ridiculously
overpraised by himself. Not only so, but he begs a friend in plain terms to write a history
of it and to exaggerate. Now, it is denounced as brutal tyranny and judicial murder. But those
who hold this language have new lights on the subject of Catiline. I confess that on me these
new lights have not dawned; I still believe Catiline to have been a terrible anarchist, coming
forth from the abyss of debauchery, ruin, and despair, which lay beneath: the great fortunes
of Rome. The land of Caesar Borgia has produced such men in more than one period of history.
The alleged illegality of the execution was made the stalking- horse of a party move, and scrupulous
legality found a champion and an avenger in Clodius. On his return from exile, Cicero was received
with the greatest enthusiasm by the whole population of Italy, a fact which Dr. Mommsen is
inclined to explain away, but which we should, perhaps, accept as the key to some other facts
in Cicero's history. The Italians were probably the most respectable of the political elements,
and it seems they not only looked up to their fellow-provincial with pride, but saw in him
a statesman who was saving their homesteads from a reign of terror. That Cicero had the general
support of the Italians was quite enough to make his adherence an object of serious consideration
to Caesar, though Dr. Mommsen persists in interpolating into the relations of the two men the
contempt which he feels, and which he fancies Caesar must have felt, for an advocate. Surely,
however, it is a mistake to think that oratory was not even in those days a real power at Rome.
Can a greater platitude be conceived than railing at a statesman of antiquity for having been
a rhetorician? Was not Pericles a rhetorician? Was not Caesar himself a rhetorician? Did he
not learn rhetoric from the same master as Cicero? Some day we may be ruled by political science;
but rhetoric was, at all events, an improvement on mere force. The situation at Rome had now
become essentially military; and Cicero having no military force at his command could not really
control the situation.

His attempts to control it exposed him to all the miscarriages and all the indignities which
such an attempt is sure to entail. He was a vessel of earthenware, or rather of very fragile
porcelain, swimming among vessels of brass. Self-respect would perhaps have prescribed retirement
from public life; but, to say nothing of his egotism, he had done too much to retire. Egotistical
he was in the highest degree, and that failing made all his humiliations doubly ignominious;
but still, I think, if you judge him candidly, you wilt see that he really loved his country,
and that his greatest object of desire was, as he himself says, to live in the grateful memory
of after-times; not the highest of all aims, but higher than that of the political adventurer.
When the civil war came, his perplexity was painful, and he betrayed it with his usual want
of reticence. In that, as in other respects, his character is the direct opposite of that of
the "gloomy sporting man," whose ways Louis Napoleon, it is said, avowed that he had studied
during his exile in England, and followed with profit as a conspirator in France. Cicero and
Cato knew too well that Pompey had "licked the sword of Sulla;" but they knew also, by long
experience of his political character, that he shrank from doing the last violence to the constitution.
On the other hand, all men expected that Caesar, who had formerly given himself out as the
political heir of Marius, who had restored the trophies of Marius, and had undertaken the conquest
of Gaul, evidently as a continuation of the victories of Marius, descending upon Italy with
an army partly consisting of barbarians and trained in the most ferocious warfare, would renew
the Marian reign of terror. This fear put all Italy at first on Pompey's side. Caesar had not
yet revealed his nobler and more glorious self. Even Curio told Cicero, in an interview, the
object of which was to draw Cicero to the Caesarian side, that Caesar's clemency was merely
policy, not in his nature. The best security against the bloody excesses of a victorious party
at that moment, undoubtedly, was the presence of Marcus Cato in the camp of Pompey. After Pharsalus,
Cicero submitted like many men of sterner mould. This departure of the advocate from the Pompeian
camp is surrounded by Dr. Mommsen with circumstances of ridicule, for which, on reference to
what I suppose to be the authorities, I can find no historical foundation. The fiercer Pompeians
very nearly killed him for refusing to stay and command them; his life was in fact only saved
by the intrepid moderation of Cato; and this is surely not a proof that they deemed his presence
worthless. Once more, orators were not ridiculous in the eyes of antiquity. Cicero accepted,
and, in a certain sense, served under the dictatorate of Caesar; though he afterwards rejoiced
when it was overthrown, and the constitution, the idol of his political worship, was restored;
just as we may suppose a French constitutionalist, not of stern mould, yet not dishonest, accepting
and serving under the empire, yet rejoicing at the restoration of constitutional government.
In the interval, between the death of Caesar and Philippi, he was really the soul and the main
support of the Restoration. I have said what I think of the Philippics; but there can be no
doubt that they told, or that Brutus and Cassius thought them, worth at least a legion.

Cicero met death with a physical courage, which there is no reason to believe that he wanted
in life. His cowardice was political; his fears were for his position and reputation. If Cato
survived in the tradition of public virtue, so did Cicero in the tradition of culture, which
saved the empire of the Caesars from being an empire of Moguls. The culture of a republic saved
Caesar himself from being a mere Timur, and set him after his victory to reforming calendars
and endowing science, instead of making pyramids of heads. Is it absurd to suppose that the
great soldier, who was also a great man of letters, had more respect for intellect without
military force than his literary admirers, and that he really wished to adorn his monarchy
by allying to it the leading man of intellect of the time?

Our accounts of Marcus Brutus are not very clear. Appian confounds Marcus with Decimus; and
it appears not unlikely that "Et tu Brute," if it was said at all, was said to Decimus, who
was a special favourite of Caesar, and was named in his will. Marcus seems to have been a man
of worth after his fashion; a patriot of the narrow Roman type, reproduced in later days by
Fletcher of Saltoun, whose ideal republic was an oligarchy, and who did not shrink from proposing
to settle the proletariat difficulty by making the common people slaves. This is quite compatible
with the fact revealed to us in the letters of Cicero, that Brutus was implicated, through
his agents, in the infamous practice of lending money to provincials at exorbitant interest,
and abusing the power of the Imperial Governments to exact the debt. One can imagine a West
Indian slave-owner, dealing with negroes through his agent according to the established custom,
and yet being a good citizen in England.

Cicero, though he suffered from the imperious temper of Brutus, speaks of him as one of those,
the sight of whom banished his fears and anxieties for the republic. That the most famous and
most terrible act of this man's life was an act of republican fanaticism, not of selfish ambition,
is proved by his refusing, with magnanimous imprudence, to make all sure, as the more worldly
spirits about him suggested, by cutting off Antony and the outer leading partisans of Caesar,
and by his permitting public honours to be done to the corpse of the man whom he had immolated
to civil duty. One almost shrinks from speaking of the death of Caesar; so much modern nonsense
on both sides has been talked about this, the most tragic, the most piteous, and at the same
time the most inevitable event of ancient story. Peculiar phases of society have their peculiar
sentiments, with reference to which events must be explained. The greased cartridges were the
real account of the Indian mutiny. Caesar was slain because he had shown that he was going
to assume the title of king. Cicero speaks the literal truth, when he says: that the real murderer
was Antony, and the fatal day the day of the Lupercalia, when Antony offered and Caesar faintly
put aside the crown. A dictator they would have borne, a king they would not bear, neither
then nor for ages afterwards; because the title of king to their minds spoke not of a St. Louis,
or an Edward I., or even a Louis XIV., but of the unutterable degradation of the Oriental slave.
To use a homely image, if you put your leg in the way of a cannon ball which seems spent, but
is still rolling, you will suffer by the experiment. This is exactly what Caesar, in the giddiness
of victory and supremacy, did, and the consequence was as certain as it was deplorable. The
republican sentiment seemed to him to have entirely lost its force, so that he might spurn
it with impunity; whereas, it had in it still enough of the momentum gathered through centuries
of republican training and glory to destroy him, to restore the republic for a brief period,
and to make victory doubtful at Phillipi. He began by celebrating a triumph over his fellow-citizens,
against the generous tradition of Rome: in that triumph he displayed pictures of the tragic
deaths of Cato and other Roman chiefs, which disgusted even the populace; he sported with the
curule offices, the immemorial objects of republican reverence, so wantonly that he might almost
as well have given a consulship to his horse; he flooded the Senate with soldiers and barbarians;
he forced a Roman knight to appear upon the stage: at last, craving, as natures destitute of
a high controlling principle do crave, for the form as well as the substance of power, he put
out his hand to grasp a crown. The feeling on that subject was not only of terrible strength,
but was actually embodied in a law by which the state solemnly armed the hand of the private
citizen against any man who should attempt to make himself a king. How completely Caesar's
insight failed him is proved by the general acquiescence or apathy with which his fall was
received, the subdued tone in which even his warm friend Marius speaks of it, and the readiness
with which his own soldiers and officers served under the restored republic. We have nothing
to do here with any problem of modern ethics respecting military usurpation and tyrannicide,
two things which must always stand together in the court of morality. Tyrannicide, like suicide,
was the rule of the ancient world, and would have been acknowledged by Caesar himself, before
he grasped supreme power, as an established duty. And certainly morality would stretch its
bounds to include anything really necessary to protect the Greek and Italian republics, with
the treasures which they bore in them for humanity, from the barbarous lust of power which
was always lying in wait to devour them. I have said that the spirits of Cato and Cicero lived
and worked after their deaths. So I suspect did that of Brutus. The Caesars had no God, no
fear of public opinion at home, no general sentiment of civilized nations to control their
tyranny. They had only the shadow of a hand armed with a dagger. One shrewd observer of the
times at least, if I mistake not, had profited by the lesson of Caesar's folly and fate. To
the constitutional demeanour and personal moderation of Augustus the world owes an epoch of
grandeur of a certain kind, and an example of true dignity in the use of power. And Augustus,
I suspect, had studied his part at the foot of Pompey's statue.

Plutarch parallels Cato with Phocion, Demosthenes with Cicero, Brutus with Dion--the Dion whose
history inspired the poem of Wordsworth. Greek republicanism, too, had its fatal hour; but
we do not pour scorn and contumely on those who strove to prolong the life of Athens beyond
the term assigned by fate. The case of Athens, a single independent state, was no doubt different
from that of Rome with so many subject nations under her sway. Still in each case there was
the commonwealth, standing in glorious contrast to the barbarous despotisms of other nations,
the highest social and political state which humanity had known or for ages afterwards was
to know. And this light of civilization was, so far as the last republicans could see, not
only to be eclipsed for a time or put out, as now in a single nation, while it burns on in
others, but to be swallowed up in hopeless night.

Mr. Charles Norton in the notes to his recent translation of the "Vita Nuova" of Dante quotes
a decree made by the commonwealth of Florence for the building of the cathedral.

"Whereas it is the highest interest of a people of illustrious origin so to proceed in their
affairs that men may perceive from their external works that their doings are at once wise
and magnanimous, it is therefore ordered that Arnulf, architect of our commune, prepare the
model or design for the rebuilding of Santa Reparata with such supreme and lavish magnificence,
that neither the industry nor the capacity of man shall be able to devise anything more grand
or more beautiful, inasmuch as the most judicious in this city have pronounced the opinion,
in public and private conferences, that no work of the commune should be undertaken unless
the design be such as to make it correspond with a heart which is of the greatest nature because
composed of the spirit of many citizens united together in one single will." [Footnote: In
his later and very valuable work on Church Building in the Middle Ages, Mr. Norton casts doubt
on the authenticity of the decree. It is genuine at all events, as an expression of Florentine
sentiment, if not as an extract from the archives.]

Let Imperialism, legitimist or democratic, match that! Florence, too, had her political vices,
many and grave, she tyrannized over Pisa and other dependants, there was faction in her councils,
anarchy, bloody anarchy, in her streets, for her, too, the hour of doom arrived, and the conspiracy
of the Pazzi was as much an anachronism as that of the republicans who slew Caesar. But Florence
had that heart composed of the united spirits of many citizens out of which came all that the
world admires and loves in the works of the Florentine. She produced, though she exiled Dante.
That which followed was more tranquil, more orderly perhaps, materially speaking, not less
happy, but it had no heart at all.

AUSTEN-LEIGH'S MEMOIR OF JANE AUSTEN

[Footnote: "A Memoir of Jane Austen. By her nephew, J. E. Austen-Leigh, Vicar of Bray, Berks." It
was here, on this ledge, that the blocks and tackle were to be used.

The man who carried the second lantern, took the head block in his free hand, and stepped onto the
ledge. He sidled along, hugging the wall, dragging the rope behind him.

A few feet inside he crept past the first opening in the wall. A score of feet beyond, man and lantern
melted into the wall, and Martin knew the second opening was reached. In a moment, man and
lantern reappeared, and the fellow sang out.

The sailor in the entrance, who held the foot block, fastened its hook in a little raised hump
of rock; then, grasping the hauling line, pulled the tackle taut. The result was a serviceable
lifeline, waist high, across the dangerous passage.

The sailor took a turn about his body with the bight of the rope, and leaned back, holding a
steady strain upon the tackle. Martin could see now why they had fetched a tackle, and not
just a length of rope--there were no boldly jutting rocks about which a rope might be looped and
knotted, but the hooks of the blocks fitted into the small inequalities the edges of the walls presented.
So long as a strain was kept upon the hauling line, the hooks would bite, and the lifeline would be
quite safe.

Martin followed this work with a watchful eye. He was on the lookout for a chance to execute his plan,
waiting for a careless moment on the part of those about him, which would give him an opportunity
to free his hands, and strike his blow.

For this was the time and the place! Here, by the edge of the abyss, must come his opportunity,
his only opportunity. Somehow he must get possession of Ichi's revolver, the only firearm in
the crowd. If he obtained that, he might be able to hold this gang at bay, and prevent them returning
to the ship until after the bosun's surprise party. Or, failing that, he could surely finish
some of them before their sharp knives finished him. He could dispose of Ichi.

And this was the only plan he had. To fight, and to sacrifice himself, if need be. He had dismissed
the thought of escape, of making a dash and losing himself in the black caves. He could do that, he
knew. But his escape would not help his shipmates; it would not save Ruth.

He knew that if he did not run for it, his death was almost certain. If he fought, when he fought, he
would be killed. If he did not make his chance to fight, Ichi would murder him as soon as the ambergris
was discovered--he was sure this program was agreed upon by Carew
and Ichi. And if the ambergris were not discovered he would be given
over to Moto for torture. Martin was afraid of Moto, and a little
bit afraid of death--but his fear for himself was quite overshadowed
by his other great fear, his fear for Ruth. His fate was nothing.
But her fate! It was because of Ruth he disdained an attempt at flight;
it was for Ruth he would strike his blow, and take death if it came.

Hence
Martin stood meekly by while the sailors rigged the line, and watched
for his chance. Moto's eyes remained fixed upon him unwaveringly;
Ichi was surrounded by his men. The moment was not yet.

Martin could
not help according the little yellow men a certain admiration. She had been fifty years
in her grave when her nephew, the Rev J. E. Austen-Leigh, the youngest of the mourners who
attended her funeral, undertook to make a volume of his own recollections, those of one or
two other surviving relatives, and a few letters. Of 230 pages, in large print, and with a
margin the vastness of which requires to be relieved by a rod rubric, not above a third is
really biography, the rest is genealogy, description of places, manners, and customs, critical
disquisition, testimonies of admirers. Still, thanks to the real capacity of the biographer,
and to the strong impression left by a character of remarkable beauty on his mind, we catch
a pretty perfect though faint outline of the figure which was just hovering on the verge of
memory, and in a few years more would, like the figure of Shakespeare, have been swallowed
up in night.

Jane Austen was the flower of a stock, full, apparently, through all its branches, of shrewd
sense and caustic humour, which in her were combined with the creative imagination. She was
born in 1775, at Steventon, in Hampshire, a country parish, of which her father was the rector.
A village of cottages at the foot of a gentle slope, an old church with its coeval yew, an
old manor-house, an old parsonage all surrounded by tall elms, green meadows, hedgerows full
of primroses and wild hyacinths--such was the scene in which Jane Austen grew. It is the picture
which rises in the mind of every Englishman when he thinks of his country. Around dwelt the
gentry, more numerous and, if coarser and duller, more home-loving and less like pachas than
they are now, when the smaller squires and yeomen have been swallowed up in the growing lordships
of a few grandees who spend more than half their time in London or in other seats of politics
or pleasure. Not far off was a country town, a "Meriton," the central gossiping place of the
neighbourhood, and the abode of the semi-genteel. If a gentleman like Mr. Woodhouse lives equivocally
close to the town, his "place" is distinguished by a separate name. There was no resident squire
at Steventon, the old manor-house being let to a tenant, so that Jane's father was at once
parson and squire. "That house (Edmund Bertram's parsonage) may receive such an air as to make
its owner be set down as the great landowner of the parish by every creature travelling the
road, especially as there is no real squire's house to dispute the point, a circumstance, between
ourselves, to enhance the value of such a situation in point of privilege and advantage beyond
all calculation." Her father having from old age resigned Steventon when Jane was six and twenty,
she afterwards lived for a time with her family at Bath, a great watering-place, and the scene
of the first part of "Northanger Abbey;" at Lyme, a pretty little sea-bathing place on the
coast of Dorset, on the "Cobb" of which takes place the catastrophe of "Persuasion;" and at
Southampton, now a great port, then a special seat of gentility. Finally, she found a second
home with her widowed mother and her sister at Chawton, another village in Hampshire.

"In person," says Jane's biographer, "she was very attractive. Her figure was rather tall and
slender, her step light and firm, and her whole appearance expressive of health and animation.
In complexion, she was a clear brunette, with a rich colour; she had full round cheeks, with
mouth and nose small and well formed; bright hazel eyes (it is a touch of the woman, then,
when Emma is described as having the true hazel eye), and brown hair forming natural curls
close round her face." The sweetness and playfulness of "Dear Aunt Jane" are fresh after so
many years in the memories of her nephew and nieces, who also strongly attest the sound sense
and sterling excellence of character which lay beneath. She was a special favourite with children,
for whom she delighted to exercise her talent in improvising fairy-tales. Unknown to fame,
uncaressed save by family affection, and, therefore, unspoilt, while writing was her delight,
she kept it in complete subordination to the duties of life, which she performed with exemplary
conscientiousness in the house of mourning as well as in the house of feasting. Even her needlework
was superfine. We doubt not that, if the truth was known, she was a good cook.

She calls herself "the most unlearned and uninformed female who ever dared to be an authoress;"
but this is a nominal tribute to the jealousy of female erudition which then prevailed, and
at which she sometimes glances, though herself very far from desiring a masculine education
for women. In fact, she was well versed in English literature, read French with ease, and knew
something of Italian--German was not thought of in those days. She had a sweet voice, and sang
to her own accompaniment simple old songs which still linger in her nephew's ear. Her favourite
authors were Johnson, whose strong sense was congenial to her, while she happily did not allow
him to infect her pure and easy style, Cowper, Richardson and Crabbe. She said that, if she
married at all, she should like to be Mrs. Crabbe. And besides Crabbe's general influence,
which is obvious, we often see his special touch in her writings:

"Emma's spirits were mounted up quite to happiness. Everything wore a different air. James
and his horses seemed not half so sluggish as before. When she looked at the hedges, she thought
the elder at least must soon be coming out; and, when she turned round to Harriet, she saw
something like a look of spring--a tender smile even there."

Jane was supremely happy in her family relations, especially in the love of her elder sister,
Cassandra, from whom she was inseparable. Of her four brothers, two were officers in the Royal
Navy. How she watched their career, how she welcomed them home from the perils not only of
the sea but of war (for it was the time of the great war with France), she has told us in painting
the reception of William Price by his sister Fanny, in "Mansfield Park." It is there that she
compares conjugal and fraternal love, giving the preference in one respect to the latter, because
with brothers and sisters "all the evil and good of the earliest years can be gone over again,
and every former united pain and pleasure retraced with the fondest recollection: an advantage
this, a strengthener of love, in which even the conjugal tie is beneath the fraternal." It
was, perhaps, because she was so happy in the love of her brothers and sisters, as well as
because she was wedded to literature, that she was content, in spite of her good looks, to
assume the symbolic cap of perpetual maidenhood at an unusually early age.

Thus she grew in a spot as sunny, as sheltered, and as holy as do the violets which her biographer
tells us abound beneath the south wall of Steventon church. It was impossible that she should
have the experiences of Miss Bronte or Madame Sand, and without some experience the most vivid
imagination cannot act, or can act only in the production of mere chimeras. To forestall Miss
Braddon in the art of criminal phantasmagoria might have been within Jane's power by the aid
of strong green tea, but would obviously have been repugnant to her nature. We must not ask
her, then, for the emotions and excitements which she could not possibly afford. The character
of Emma is called commonplace. It is commonplace in the sense in which the same term might
be applied to any normal beauty of nature--to a well-grown tree or to a perfectly developed
flower. She is, as Mr. Weston says, "the picture of grown-up health." "There is health not
merely in her bloom, but in her air, her gait, her glance." She has been brought up like Jane
Austen herself, in a pure English household, among loving relations and good old servants.
Her feet have been in the path of domestic and neighbourly duty, quiet as the path which leads
to the village church. It has been impossible for strong temptations or fierce passions to
come near her. Yet men accustomed to the most exciting struggles, to the most powerful emotions
of parliamentary life, have found an interest, equal to the greatest ever created by a sensation
novel, in the little scrapes and adventures into which her weakness betrays her, and in the
process by which her heart is gradually drawn away from objects apparently more attractive
to the robust nature in union with which she is destined to find strength as well as happiness.

With more justice may Jane Austen be reproached with having been too much influenced by the
prejudices of the somewhat narrow and somewhat vulgarly aristocratic, or rather plutocratic,
society in which she lived. Her irony and her complete dramatic impersonality render it difficult
to see how far this goes; but certainly it goes further than we could wish. Decidedly she believes
in gentility, and in its intimate connection with affluence and good family; in its incompatibility
with any but certain very refined and privileged kinds of labour; in the impossibility of finding
a gentleman in a trader, much more in a yeoman or mechanic. "The yeomanry are precisely the
order of people with whom I feel I can have nothing to do; a degree or two lower, and a creditable
appearance, might interest me; I might hope to be useful to their families in some way or other;
but a farmer can need none of my help, and is, therefore, in one sense, as much above my notice
as in every other he is below it." This is said by Emma--by Emma when she is trying to deter
her friend from marrying a yeoman, it is true, but still by Emma. The picture of the coarseness
of poverty in the household of Fanny's parents in "Mansfield Park" is truth, but it is hard
truth, and needs some counterpoise. Both in the case of Fanny Price and in that of Frank Churchill,
the entire separation of a child from its own home for the sake of the worldly advantages furnished
by an adoptive home of a superior class, is presented too much as a part of the order of nature.
The charge of acquiescence in the low standard of clerical duty prevalent in the Establishment
of that day is well founded, though perhaps not of much importance. Of more importance is the
charge which might be made, with equal justice, of acquiescence in somewhat low and coarse
ideas of the relations between the sexes, and of the destinies and proper aspirations of young
women. "Mr. Collins, to be sure, was neither sensible nor agreeable; his society was irksome,
and his attachment to her must be imaginary; but still he would be her husband. Without thinking
highly either of men or matrimony, marriage had always been her object; it was the only honourable
provision for well-educated young women of small fortune; and, however uncertain of giving
happiness, must be their pleasantest preservative from want. This preservative she had now
attained; and at the age of twenty-seven, without having ever been handsome, she felt all the
good-luck of it." This reflection is ascribed to Charlotte Lucas, an inferior character, but
still thought worthy to be the heroine's bosom friend.

Jane's first essays in composition were burlesques on the fashionable manners of the day; whence
grew "Northanger Abbey," with its anti- heroine, Catharine Morley, "roving and wild, hating
constraint and cleanliness, and loving nothing so much as rolling down the green slope at the
back of the house," and with its exquisite travestie of the "Mysteries of Udolpho." But she
soon felt her higher power. Marvellous to say, she began "Pride and Prejudice" in 1796, before
she was twenty- one years old, and completed it in the following year. "Sense and Sensibility"
and "Northanger Abbey" immediately followed; it appears, with regard to the latter, that she
had already visited Bath, though it was not till afterwards that she resided there. But she
published nothing--not only so, but it seems that she entirely suspended composition--till
1809, when her family settled at Chawton. Here she revised for the press what she had written,
and wrote "Mansfield Park," "Emma" and "Persuasion." "Persuasion," whatever her nephew and
biographer may say, and however Dr. Whewell may have fired up at the suggestion, betrays an
enfeeblement of her faculties, and tells of approaching death. But we still see in it the genuine
creative power multiplying new characters; whereas novelists who are not creative, when they
have exhausted their original fund of observations, are forced to subsist by exaggeration of
their old characters, by aggravated extravagances of plot, by multiplied adulteries and increased
carnage.

"Pride and Prejudice," when first offered to Cadell, was declined by return of post. The fate
of "Northanger Abbey" was still more ignominious: it was sold for ten pounds to a Bath publisher,
who, after keeping it many years in his drawer, was very glad to return it and get back his
ten pounds. No burst of applause greeted the works of Jane Austen like that which greeted the
far inferior works of Miss Burney. Crevit occulto velut arbor oevo fama. A few years ago, the
verger of Winchester cathedral asked a visitor who desired to be shown her tomb, "what there
was so particular about that lady that so many people wanted to see where she was buried?"
Nevertheless, she lived to feel that "her own dear children" were appreciated, if not by the
vergers, yet in the right quarters, and to enjoy a quiet pleasure in the consciousness of her
success. One tribute she received which was overwhelming. It was intimated to her by authority
that His Royal Highness, the Prince Regent, had read her novels with pleasure, and that she
was at liberty to dedicate the next to him. More than this, the Royal Librarian, Mr. Clarke,
of his own motion apparently, did her the honour to suggest that, changing her style for a
higher, she should write "a historical romance in illustration of the august house of Cobourg,"
and dedicate it to Prince Leopold. She answered in effect that, if her life depended on it,
she could not be serious for a whole chapter. Let it be said, however, for the Prince Regent,
that underneath his royalty and his sybaritism, there was, at first, something of a better
and higher nature, which at last was entirely stifled by them. His love for Mrs. Fitzherbert
was not merely sensual, and Heliogabalus would not have been amused by the novels of Miss Austen.

Jane was never the authoress but when she was writing her novels; and in the few letters with
which this memoir is enriched there is nothing of point or literary effort, and very little
of special interest. We find, however, some pleasant and characteristic touches.

"Charles has received L30 for his share of the privateer, and expects L10 more; but of what
avail is it to take prizes if he lays out the produce in presents to his sisters? He has been
buying gold chains and topaz crosses for us. He must be well scolded."

"We (herself and Miss A.) afterwards walked together for an hour on the Cobb; she is very conversable
in a common way; I do not perceive wit or genius, but she has sense and some degree of taste,
and her manners are very engaging. She seems to like people rather too easily."

Of her own works, or rather of the characters of her own creation, her Elizabeths and Emmas,
Jane speaks literally as a parent. They are her "dear children." "I must confess that I think
her (Elizabeth) as delightful a creature as ever appeared in print, and how I shall be able
to tolerate those who do not like her at least I do not know." This is said in pure playfulness;
there is nothing in the letters like real egotism or impatience of censure.

At the age of forty-two, in the prime of intellectual life, with "Emma" just out and "Northanger
Abbey" coming, and in the midst of domestic affection and happiness, life must have been sweet
to Jane Austen. She resigned it, nevertheless, with touching tranquillity and meekness. In
1816, it appears, she felt her inward malady, and began to go round her old haunts in a manner
which seemed to indicate that she was bidding them farewell. In the next year, she was brought
for medical advice to a house in the Close of Winchester, and there, surrounded to the last
by affection and to the last ardently returning it, she died. Her last words were her answer
to the question whether there was anything she wanted--"Nothing but death." Those who expect
religious language in season and out of season have inferred from the absence of it in Jane
Austen's novels that she was indifferent to religion. The testimony of her nephew is positive
to the contrary; and he is a man whose word may be believed.

Those who died in the Close were buried in the cathedral. It is therefore by mere accident
that Jane Austen rests among princes and princely prelates in that glorious and historic fane.
But she deserves at least her slab of black marble in the pavement there. She possessed a real
and rare gift, and she rendered a good account of it. If the censer which she held among the
priests of art was not of the costliest, the incense was of the purest. If she cannot be ranked
with the very greatest masters of fiction, she has delighted many, and none can draw from her
any but innocent delight.

PATTISON'S MILTON

[Footnote: "English Men of Letters. Edited by John Morley Milton. By Mark Pattison B.D., Rector
of Lincoln College, Oxford." London, Macmillan, New York: Harper & Bros., 1879]

John Bright once asked a friend who was the greatest of Englishmen and the friend hesitating
answered his own question by saying, "Milton, because he above all others, combined the greatness
of the writer with the greatness of the citizen." Professor Masson in his Life and Times of
Milton, has embodied the conception of the character indicated by this remark, but he has run
into the extreme of incorporating a complete narrative of the Revolution with the biography
of Milton, so that the historical portion of the work overlays instead of illuminating the
biographical, and the chapters devoted specially to the life seem to the reader interpolations,
and not always welcome interpolations, in an intensely interesting history of the times. But
now comes a biographer in whose eyes the life of Milton the citizen is a mere episode, and
not only a mere episode but a lamentable and humiliating episode, in the life of Milton the
poet. Milton's life, says Mr. Pattison "is a drama in three acts. The first discovers him in
the calm and peaceful retirement of Horton, of which 'L'Allegro,' 'Il Penseroso,' and 'Lycidas'
are the expression. In the second act he is breathing the foul and heated atmosphere of party
passion and religious hate, generating the lurid fires which glare in the battailous canticles
of his prose pamphlets. The three great poems--'Paradise Lost,' 'Paradise Regained,' and 'Samson
Agonistes'--are the utterance of his final period of solitary and Promethean grandeur, when,
blind, destitute, friendless, he testified of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come,
alone before a fallen world." As to the struggle to which Milton, with Cromwell, Vane Pym,
Hampden, Selden, and Chillingworth, gave his life, it is in the eyes of his present biographer,
an ignoble "fray," a "biblical brawl," and its fruits in the way of theological discussion
are nothing but "garbage." To write his Defence of the English People Milton deliberately sacrificed
his eyesight, his doctor having warned him that he would lose his one remaining eye if he persisted
in using it for book work. I considered with myself that many had purchased less good with
worse ill, as they who gave their lives to reap only glory, and I thereupon concluded to employ
the little remaining eyesight I was to enjoy in doing this, the greatest service to the common
weal it was in my power to render." Mr. Pattison has quoted this passage, and no doubt he silently
appreciates the heroism which breathes through it; but the "supreme duty" of which it speaks
appears to him only a "prostitution of faculties" and a "poor delusion." Milton, he thinks,
ought to have kept entirely aloof from the brawl and remained quiet either in the intellectual
circles of Italy or in the delicious seclusion of his library at Horton, leaving liberty, truth,
and righteousness to drown or to be saved from drowning by other hands than his. In "plunging
into the fray" the poet miserably derogated from his superior position as a literary man, and
the result was a dead loss to him and to the world. We are sure that we do not state Mr. Pattison's
view more strongly than it is stated in his own pages.

The views of all of us, including Professor Masson, on such a question are sure to be more
or less idiosyncratic, and those of the present biographer have not escaped the general liability.
They seem, at least, aptly to represent a mood prevalent just now among eminent men of the
literary class in England, particularly at the universities. These men have been tossed on
the waves of Ritualism, tossed on the waves of the reaction from Ritualism; some of them have
been personally battered in both controversies; they have attained no certainty, but rather
arrived at the conclusion that no certainty is attainable; they are weary and disgusted; such
of them as have been enthusiasts in politics have been stripped of their illusions in that
line also, and have fallen back on the conviction that everything must be left to evolve itself,
and that there is nothing to be done. They have withdrawn into the sanctuary of critical learning
and serene art, abjuring all theology and politics, and, above all, abjuring controversy of
all kinds as utterly vulgar and degrading, though, as might be expected, they are sometimes
controversial and even rather tart in an indirect way, and without being conscious of it themselves.
Mr. Pattison's air when he comes into contact with the politics or theology of Milton's days
is like that of a very seasick passenger at the sight of a pork chop. Nor does he fail to reflect
the Necessarianism of the circle. "That in selecting a scriptural subject," he says, "Milton
was not, in fact, exercising any choice, but was determined by his circumstances, is only what
must be said of all choosing." Criticism fastidiously erudite, a study of art religiously and
almost mystically profound, are fruits of this intellectual seclusion of chosen spirits from
the coarse and ruffling world for which that world has reason to be grateful. It is not likely
Milton would have chosen a writer of this school as his biographer, but few men would choose
their own biographers well.

Milton has at all events found in Mr. Pattison a biographer whose narrative is throughout extremely
pleasant, interesting and piquant, the piquancy being enhanced for those who have the key to
certain sly hits, such as that at "the peculiar form of credulity which makes perverts (to
Roman Catholicism) think that everyone is about to follow their example," which carries us
back to the time when the head of Tractarianism having gone over to Rome, was waiting anxiously,
but in vain, for the tail to join it. The facts had already been collected by the diligence
of Professor Masson, but Mr. Pattison uses them in a style which places beyond a doubt his
own familiarity with the subject. Through the moral judgments there runs, as we think, and
as we should have expected, a somewhat lofty conception of the privileges of intellect and
of the value of literary objects compared with others, but with this qualification the reflections
will probably be deemed sensible and sound. The unfortunate relations between Milton and his
first wife are treated as we think all readers will say, at once with delicacy and justice. "Have
no afraid. The sound of much strangeness is from the cave of the wind," said Ichi. "It is from
the deep place. Now will come the shake, perhaps."

The shake came on the tail of Ichi's words.

A heavy, ominous rumbling came out of the black depths. Martin recalled hearing the same sound
the day before, when he was on the topgallant-yard. And suddenly the hard, packed sand began to
crawl beneath his feet, things swayed dizzily before his eyes, and a sharp nausea attacked the
pit of his stomach.

It was but a baby temblor, and it lasted but an instant.

Martin was not much disturbed--a lifetime in San Francisco had made quakes a commonplace experience--but
he had the sudden thought that there were safer journeys in the world than the one he was
about to take into the heart of a half-extinct volcano. Not that the probable danger of the trip
impressed him sharply--he was too much occupied with his plight, and desperate plan--but it
was evident the Japs did not relish the undertaking.

The four sailors and Moto were plainly terrified, and, as the trembling and rumbling ceased,
they exclaimed with awe and fear. Ichi held himself in hand, but his mouth sagged.

"Always comes the strange noise, and then the shake," he said to Martin. There was the hint of a
quiver in his voice. "Out of the deep place, they come--like the struggles of Evil Ones!"

He broke off to speak sharply to his men, bracing them with words.

"They are of much ignorance," he continued to Martin. "They have much fear. They know a silly
story their mothers have told them, about the Evil Ones calling from
the deep pit; it is a--what you say?--a folk story of the Japanese.
These men are of ignorance. But we gentlemen know it is of absurdness,
and most untrue. It is a story of great unscientificness."

Ichi rolled
the last word off his tongue with difficult triumph. "Unscientificness,"
was evidently the club his Western education gave him, with which
to combat the inbred superstition of centuries. But Martin saw it
was a straw club.

But if Ichi were frightened, he mastered his fear.

"It
will, perhaps, be some time till the next shake," he told Martin.
"We must haste. You shall follow me, please? And recall, as we walk,
that Moto is but a pace behind you, and in fine readiness."

He chattered
peremptory words to his followers. One of the sailors picked up a
lantern, Moto stepped behind Martin, and Ichi lifted the other lantern
and stepped toward the cave mouth. It is said
that Lord Thurlow and another lawyer were crossing Hounslow Heath in a post-chaise when a tremendous
thunder-storm came on; that the other lawyer said that it reminded him of the battle in "Paradise
Lost" between the devil and the angels, and that Thurlow roared, with a blasphemous oath, "Yes,
and I wish the devil had won." Persons desirous of sustaining the religious reputation of the
legal profession add that his companion jumped out of the chaise in the rain and ran away over
the heath. For our part, we have never found nearly so much difficulty in any of the incongruities
connected with the relations between spirit and matter, or in any confusion of the Copernican
with the Ptolemaic system, as in the constant wrenching of our moral sympathies, which the
poet demands for the Powers of Good, but which his own delineation of Satan, as a hero waging
a Promethean war against Omnipotence, compels us to give to the Powers of Evil. Perhaps a word
or two might have been said about the relations of "Paradise Lost" to other "epics." It manifestly
belongs not to the same class of poems as the "Iliad" and the "Odyssey," or even the "AEneid."
Dobson's Latin translation of it is about the greatest feat ever performed in modern Latin
verse, and it shows by a crucial experiment how little Milton really has in common with Virgil.
"Paradise Lost" seems to us far more akin to the Greek tragedy than to the Homeric poems or
the "AEneid." In the form of a Greek drama it was first conceived. Its verse is the counterpart
of the Greek iambic, not of the Greek or Latin hexameter. Had the laborious Dobson turned it
into Greek iambics instead of turning it into Latin hexameters, we suspect the real affinity
would have appeared.

Looking upon the life of Milton the politician merely as a sad and ignominious interlude in
the life of Milton the poet, Mr. Pattison cannot be expected to entertain the idea that the
poem is in any sense the work of the politician. Yet we cannot help thinking that the tension
and elevation which Milton's nature had undergone in the mighty struggle, together with the
heroic dedication of his faculties to the most serious objects, must have had not a little
to do both with the final choice of his subject and with the tone of his poem. "The great Puritan
epic" could hardly have been written by any one but a militant Puritan. Had Milton abjured
the service of his cause, as his biographer would have had him do, he might have given us an
Arthurian romance or some other poem of amusement. We even think it not impossible that he
might have never produced a great poem at all, but have let life slip away in elaborate preparation
without being able to fix upon a theme or brace himself to the effort of composition. If Milton's
participation in a political battle fought to save at once the political and spiritual life
of England was degrading, Dante's participation in the faction fight between the Guelphs and
Ghibellines must have been still more so; yet if Dante had been a mere man of leisure would
he have written the "Divina Commedia"? Who are these sublime artists in poetry that are pinnacled
so high above the "frays" and "brawls" of vulgar humanity? The best of them, we suppose (writers
for the stage being out of the question) is Goethe. Shelley, Wordsworth, and Byron were all
distinctly poets of the Revolution, or of the Counter-Revolution, and if you could remove from
them the political element, you would rob them of half their force and interest. The great
growths of poetry have coincided with the great bursts of national life, and the great bursts
of national life have hitherto been generally periods of controversy and struggle.

Art itself, in its highest forms, has been the expression of faith. We have now people who
profess to cultivate art as art for its own sake; but they have hardly produced anything which
the world accepts as great, though they have supplied some subjects for Punch. "He that loseth
his life shall preserve it." Milton was ready to lose his literary life by sacrificing the
remains of his eyesight to a cause which, upon the whole, humanity has accepted as its own;
and it was preserved to him in a work which will never die. Mr. Pattison points to a short
poem written by Milton when his pen was chiefly employed in serving the Commonwealth as indication
that Milton "did not inwardly forfeit the peace which passeth all understanding." Why should
a man forfeit that peace when he is doing with his whole soul that which he conscientiously
believes to be his highest duty?

Over Milton's pamphlets Mr. Pattison can of course only wring his hands. He is at liberty to
wring his hands as much as he pleases over the personalities which sullied the controversy
with Salmasius; but these are a small part of the matter, particularly when they are viewed
in connection with the habits of a time which was at once much rougher in phrase, though perhaps
not more malicious, than ours, and given to servile imitation of Greek and Latin oratory. To
point his moral more keenly, Mr. Pattison denies that Milton was ever effective as a political
writer. Yet the Council of State, who can have looked to nothing but effectiveness, and were
pretty good judges of it, specially invited Milton to answer "Eikon Basilike" and to plead
the cause of the Regicide Republic against Salmasius in the court of European opinion. Mr.
Pattison himself (p. 135) allows that on the Continent Milton was renowned as the answerer
of Salmasius and the vindicator of liberty; and he proceeds to quote the statement of Milton's
nephew that learned foreigners could not leave London without seeing his uncle. But the biographer
has evidently laid down beforehand in his own mind general laws which are fatal to all pamphlets
as pamphlets, without consideration of their particular merits. "There are," he says, "examples
of thought having been influenced by books. But such books have been scientific, not rhetorical."
If it were not rude to contradict, we should have said that the influence exercised in politics
by scientific treatises had been as nothing in the aggregate compared with that exercised by
pamphlets, speeches, and, in later times, by the newspaper press. What does Mr. Pattison say
to Burke's "Reflections on the French Revolution," to Paine's "Common Sense," to the tracts
written by Halifax and Defoe at the time of the Revolution? Neither thought nor action is his
epigrammatic condemnation of Milton's political writings, but an appeal which stirs men to
action is surely both. Again of "Eikonoklastes" we are told that "it is like all answers, worthless
as a book." Bentley's "Phalaris" is an answer, Demosthenes' "De Corona" is an answer. As a
rule no doubt the form is a bad one, but an answer may embody principles and knowledge as well
as show literary skill, reasoning power, and courteous self-control, which after all are not
worthless though they are worth far less than some other things. These discussions so odious
and contemptible in Mr. Pattison's eyes, what are they but the processes of thought through
which a nation or humanity works its way to political truth? Even books scientific in form
such as Hobbes's "Leviathan" or Harrington's "Oceana" are but registered results of a long
discussion. "Eikon Basilike" was doing infinite mischief to the cause of the Commonwealth,
and how could it have been met except by a critical reply? "Eikonoklastes" was thought, though
it was not exact science, and so far as it told it was action, though it was not a pike or
a musket.

This portion of Mr. Pattison's work is thickly sown with aphorisms to which no one who does
not share his special mood can without qualification assent. No good man can with impunity
addict himself to party, and the best men will suffer most because their conviction of the
goodness of their cause is deeper. But when one with the sensibility of a poet throws himself
into the excitements of a struggle he is certain to lose his balance. The endowment of feeling
and imagination which qualifies him to be the ideal interpreter of life unfits him for participation
in that real life through the manoeuvres and compromises of which reason is the only guide
and where imagination is as much misplaced as it would be in a game of chess. In this there
is an element of truth but there is also something to which we are inclined to demur. If by
party is meant mere faction, plainly no man can addict himself to it with impunity. But when
the English nation was struggling in the grasp of a court and a prelacy which sought to reduce
it to the level of Spain, no Englishman as it seems to us could with impunity perch himself
aloft in a palace of art while peasants were shedding their blood to make him free. Especially
do we question the soundness of the sentiment expressed in the last clause. Why is real life
to be abandoned by every man of feeling and imagination and given over to the men of manoeuvre
and compromise? Is not this the sentiment of the monkish ascetic coming back to us in another
form and enjoining us to make ourselves eunuchs for the Kingdom of Art's sake? Cromwell, Vane,
Hampden, and Pym were not men of manoeuvre and compromise, they had plenty of feeling and imagination,
though in them these qualities gave birth not to poetry, but to high political or religious
aspirations and grand social ideals. The theory of Milton's biographer is that an active interest
in public affairs is fatal to excellence in literature or in art; and this theory seems to
be confuted as signally as possible by the facts of Milton's life.

It is curious to see how completely at variance Milton's own sentiment is with that of his
biographer and how little he foresaw what Mr. Pattison would say about him. In the Defensio
Secunda he defends himself against the charge not of over activity but of inaction. "I can
easily repel," he says, "any imputation of want of courage or of want of zeal. For though I
did not share the toils or perils of the war I was engaged in a service not less hazardous
to myself and more beneficial to my fellow citizens; nor in the adverse turns of our affairs,
did I ever betray any symptoms of pusillanimity and dejection; or show myself more afraid than
became me of malice or of death: For since from my youth I was devoted to the pursuits of literature,
and my mind has always been stronger than my body, I did not court the labours of a camp, in
which any common person would have been of more service than myself, but resorted to that employment
in which my exertions were likely to be of most avail. Thus, with the better part of my frame
I contributed as much as possible to the good of my country, and to the success of the glorious
cause in which we were engaged; and I thought that if God willed the success of such glorious
achievements, it was equally agreeable to his will that there should be others by whom those
achievements should be recorded with dignity and elegance; and that the truth, which had been
defended by arms, should also be defended by reason; which is the best and only legitimate
means of defending it. Hence, while I applaud those who were victorious in the field, I will
not complain of the province which was assigned me; but rather congratulate myself upon it,
and thank the author of all good for having placed me in a station, which may be an object
of envy to others rather than of regret to myself." Here is a culprit who entirely mistakes
the nature of his offence and instead of apologizing for what he has done apologizes for not
having done more. Nor so far as we are aware is there in Milton's writings the slightest trace
of sorrow for the misemployment of his best years or consciousness of the ruin which it had
wrought in his genius as a poet.

In the same spirit Mr. Pattison continually represents the end of Milton's public life as "the
irretrievable discomfiture of all his hopes, aims, and aspirations," his labour as "being swept
away without a trace of it being left," and the latter part of his life as utter "wretchedness."
The failure of selfish schemes often makes men wretched. The failure of unselfish aspirations
may make a man sad, but can never make him wretched, and Milton was not wretched when he was
writing "Paradise Lost." He would not have been wretched even if the discomfiture of his hopes
for the Commonwealth had been as final and as irretrievable as his biographer supposes. But
Milton knew that though disastrous it was not final or irretrievable. He had implicit confidence
in the indestructibility of moral force, and he "bated no jot of heart or hope." He could see
the limits of the reaction and he knew that, though great and calamitous in proportion to the
errors of the Republican party, it had not changed in a day the character and fundamental tendencies
of the nation. Such then was the man--stubborn, strong-willed, brusque, honest, irritable, ill-tempered,
but by no means a bad man at heart--with whom Matthew Flinders had to do. We may now follow what
occurred.

CHAPTER 22. THE CAPTIVITY. He found himself the defender
of regicide, not free from peril, indeed, yet protected by public opinion, while, in general,
narrow bounds were set to the bloodthirsty vengeance of the Cavaliers. He lived to witness
the actual turn of the tide. Six years before his death the Triple Alliance was formed, and
in the year of his death the Cabal Ministry fell. At worst, his case would have been that of
a soldier killed in an unfortunate crisis of a battle which in the end was won, but he fell,
if not with the shout of victory in his ears, with the inspiring signs of a general advance
around him. If we take remoter ages into our view, the triumph of Milton is still more manifest.
The cause to which he gave his life and his genius is forever exalted and dignified by his
name. The notion that the Cavaliers were the men of culture and that the Puritans were the
uncultivated has been a hundred times confuted, though it reappears in the discourses of Mr.
Matthew Arnold, and, what is much more astonishing, in this work of Mr. Pattison. But in a
party of action great defect of culture would be amply redeemed by the possession of a Milton.

COLERIDGE'S LIFE OF KEBLE.

[Footnote: A Memoir of the Rev. J. Keble, M.A., late Vicar of Hursley, by the Right Hon. Sir
J.T. Coleridge, D.C.L., Oxford and London: James Parker & Co., 1869.]

SIR JOHN COLERIDGE, the writer of this "Life of Keble," was for many years one of the Judges
of the Court of Queen's Bench, is now a Privy Councillor, and may be regarded almost as the
lay head of the High Church party in England. Sharing Keble's opinions, and entering into all
his feelings, he is at the same time himself always a man of the world and a man of sense.
Add to these qualifications his intimate and lifelong friendship with the subject of his work,
and we have reason to expect a biography at once appreciative and judicial. Such a biography,
in fact, we have; one full of sympathy, yet free from exaggeration, and a good lesson to biographers
in general. The intimacy of the friendship between the writer and his subject might have interfered
with his impartiality and repelled our confidence if the case had been more complex and had
made greater demands on the inflexibility of the judge. But in the case of a character and
a life so perfectly simple, pure, and transparent as the character and the life of Keble, there
was but one thing to be said.

The author of "The Christian Year" was the son of a country clergyman of the Church of England,
and was educated at home by his father, so that he missed, or, as he would probably have said
himself, escaped, the knowledge of minds differently trained from his own which a boy cannot
help picking up at an English public school. At a very early age he became a scholar of Corpus
Christi, a very small and secluded college of the High Church and High Tory University of Oxford.
As the scholarships led to fellowships--the holders of which were required to be in holy orders--and
to church preferment, almost all the scholars were destined for the clerical profession. Of
Keble's student friendships one only seems to have been formed outside the walls of his own
college, and this was with Miller, a student of Worcester College, who afterwards became a
High Church clergyman. Among the students destined for the Anglican priesthood in the Junior
Common Room of Corpus Christi College, there was indeed one whose presence strikes us like
the apparition of Turnus in the camp of AEneas--Thomas Arnold. Here again we find Flinders accurately
and fully informed: Decaen did not underrate his "dangerous" potentialities.

Decaen, in fact, saw clearly that the game was up. His threat to retire in six months did not mean
that he would not have given the British a fight before he lowered
the tricolour. He was not the man to surrender quite tamely; but he
knew that he could no longer hold out for more than a measurable period,
the length of which would depend upon the enemy's initiative. The friendship between
Arnold and Keble, however, was merely personal, Arnold evidently never exercised the slightest
influence over Keble's mind, and even in this 'great rebellion'--the only rebellion, great
or small, of his life--Keble was induced to take part, as he has expressly recorded, at the
instigation of Coleridge, a middle term between Arnold and himself. The college teachers were
all clergymen and the university curriculum in their days was regulated and limited by clerical
ascendancy, and consisted of the Aristotelian and Butlerian philosophy, classics, and pure
mathematics, without modern history or physical science. The remarkable precocity of Keble's
intellect enabled him to graduate with the highest honours both in classics and mathematics
at an age almost miraculously early even when allowance is made for the comparative youthfulness
of students in general in those days. But then, he thought, this blow would not help his shipmates;
indeed, it would harm them, for the rest would immediately scurry back to the ship. No, he must
try to get the revolver into his hand.

Ichi reached the lantern, and stepped into the cleft in the wall. Martin followed, and found
himself again on a level floor, and in the entrance to another cave.

This
entrance was not large. There was standing room there for but four
of them, the sailor who had strung the line, and who was guarding
the head block, Ichi, Moto, and himself. Thus, up to twenty-three, Keble's life had been that of a sort of acolyte, and though
not ascetic (for his nature appears to have been always genial and mirthful), entirely clerical
in its environments and its aspirations. At twenty-three he took orders, and put round his
neck, with the white tie of Anglican priesthood, the Thirty-nine Articles, the whole contents
of the Anglican Prayer Book and all the contradictions between those two standards of belief.
For some time he held a tutorship in his college then he went down to a country living in the
neighbourhood of a cathedral city, where he spent the rest of his days. His character was so
sweet and gentle that he could not fail to be naturally disposed to toleration. He even goes
the length of saying that some profane libellers whom his friend Coleridge was going to prosecute,
were not half so dangerous enemies to religion as some wicked worldly-minded Christians. But
it is no wonder, and implies no derogation from his charity, that he should have regarded the
progress of opinions different from his own as a mediaeval monk would have regarded the progress
of an army of Saracens or a horde of Avars. His poetic sympathies could not hinder him from
disliking the rebel and Puritan Milton.

Thus it was impossible that he should be in a very broad sense a poet of humanity. This was not Ichi's
first visit to the cave of winds, and he came prepared.

The opening in which they stood was near the left hand wall of the
windy cave. A ledge, no more than six feet wide at the widest, ran
between the wall and the edge of the pit. When his friend is thinking of the profession of the law, he conjures
him to forego the brilliant visions which tempted him in that direction for "visions far more
brilliant and more certain too, more brilliant in their results, inasmuch as the salvation
of one soul is worth more than the framing the Magna Charta of a thousand worlds, more certain
to take place since temptations are fewer and opportunities everywhere to be found. These words
remind us of a passage in one of Massillon's sermons, preached on the delivery of colours to
a regiment, in which the bishop after dwelling on the hardships and sufferings which soldiers
are called upon to endure, intimates that a small part of those hardships and sufferings, undergone
in performance of a monastic vow, would merit the kingdom of heaven. If souls are to be saved
by real moral influences, Sir John Coleridge has probably saved a good many more souls as a
religious judge and man of the world than he would have saved as the rector of a country parish,
and if character is formed by moral effort, he has probably formed a much higher character
by facing temptation than he would have done by flying from it. Keble himself, in his Morning
Hymn, has a passage in a different strain, but the sentiment which really prevailed with him
was probably that embodied in his advice to his friend.

Whatever of grace, worth, or beneficence there could be in the half cloistered life of an Oxford
fellow of those days or in the rural and sacerdotal life of a High Church rector, there was
in the life of Keble at Oriel, and afterwards at Hursley. The best spirit of such a life together
with the image of a character rivalling in spiritual beauty, after its kind that of Ken or
Leighton, is found in Keble's poetry, and for this we may be, as hundreds of thousands have
been, thankful.

The biographer declines to enter into a critical examination of the "Christian Year," but he
confidently predicts its indefinite reign, founding his prediction on the causes of its original
success. He justly describes it, in effect as rather a poetical manual of devotion than a book
of poetry for continuous reading It is in truth, so completely out of the category of ordinary
poetry that to estimate its poetic merits would be a very difficult task. Sir John Coleridge
indicates this, when he cites as an appropriate tribute to the excellence of the book the practice
of the clergyman who used, every Sunday afternoon instead of a sermon to read and interpret
to his congregation the poem of the Christian Year for the day. This connection with the Prayer
Book and with the Anglican Calendar, while it has given the book an immense circulation necessarily
limits its range and interest. Yet those who care least for being brought into unison with
the Prayer Book fully admit that the "Christian Year" gives proof of real poetic power. Keble
himself, as his biographer attests, had a very humble opinion of his own work, seldom read
it hated to hear it praised consented with great difficulty to its glorification by sumptuous
editions. It was his saintly humility suggests the biographer which made him feel that the
book which flowed from his own heart would inevitably be taken for a faithful likeness of himself,
that he would thus be exhibiting himself in favourable colours and be in danger of incurring
the woe pronounced on those who win the good opinion of the world. If this account be true
it is another proof of the mediaeval and half monastic mould in which Keble's religious character
was cast.

The comparative failure of the "Lyra Innocentium" is probably to be attributed not only to
its inferiority in intrinsic merit but to the fact that whereas the "Christian Year" has as
little of a party character as any work of devotion written by an Anglican and High Church
clergyman could have, the "Lyra Innocentium" was the work of a leading party man. And now he was
also conscious of the low moaning, a vast, spine-prickling moaning like the protest of a giant
in pain, that came out of the darkness ahead.

They wound this way and that. Martin had lost count of the steps, but he thought they must have
gone sixty or seventy yards into the mountain. They passed an opening,
but it was on the left hand.

The whaleman's directions were in Martin's
mind: "4 starboard--windy cave." That must mean the fourth opening
on the right hand. The cave of winds. Keble was the associate
of Hurrell Froude, Newman Pusey and the other great Tractarians. A sermon which he preached
before the University of Oxford was regarded by Newman as the beginning of the movement. He
contributed to the Tracts for the Times, though as a controversialist he was never powerful,
sweetness not strength being the characteristic of his mind. He gradually embraced, as it seems
to us, all the principles which sent his fellow Tractarians over to Rome. The posthumous alteration
made in the Christian Year by his direction shows that he held a doctrine respecting the Eucharist
not practically distinguishable from the Roman doctrine of Transubstantiation. A poem intended
to appear in the "Lyra Apostolica" but suppressed at the time in deference to the wishes of
cautious friends and now published by his biographer proves that he was, as a Protestant putting
it plainly would say, an advanced Mariolater. He was a thoroughgoing sacerdotalist and believer
in the authority of the Church in matters of opinion. He mourned over the abandonment of auricular
confession. He regarded the cessation of prayers for the souls of dead founders and benefactors
as a lamentable concession to Protestant prejudice. Like his associates he repudiated the very
name of Protestant. He deemed the state of the Church of England with regard to orthodoxy most
deplorable--two prelates having distinctly denied an article of the Apostles Creed and matters
going on altogether so that it was very difficult for a Catholic Christian to remain in that
communion. Why then did he not with Newman and the rest accept the logical conclusions of his
premises and go to the place to which his principles belonged? His was not a character to be
influenced by any worldly motives or even by that sense of ecclesiastical position which perhaps
has sometimes had its influence in making Romanizing leaders of the Anglican clergy unwilling
to merge their party and their leadership in the Church of Rome. There was nothing in his nature
which would have recoiled from any self abnegation or submission. The real answer is we believe
that Keble was a married man. We can hardly imagine him making love. His marriage was no doubt
one not of passion but of affection, as small a departure from the sacerdotal ideal as it was
possible for a marriage to be. Still, he was married and tenderly attached to his good wife.
Thus it was probably not any subtle distinction between Real Presence and Transubstantiation,
not misgivings as to the exact degree of worship to be paid to the Virgin, not doubts as to
the limits of the personal infallibility of the Pope or objections to practical abuses in the
Church of Rome--which kept Keble and has kept many a Romanizing clergyman of the Anglican Church
from becoming a Roman Catholic. Nor is the reason when analysed one of which Anglican philosophy
need be ashamed for to the pretentions of sacerdotal asceticism the best answer is domestic love.

Keble stopped his ears with wax against the siren appeal of his seceding chief John Henry Newman
and refused at first to read the Essay on Development. When at last he was drawn into the controversy
he constructed for his own satisfaction and that of other waverers who looked up to him for
support and guidance an argument founded on the Butlerian principle of probability as the guide
of life. But Butler, with all deference to his great name be it said, imports into questions
of conscience and into the spiritual domain a principle really applicable only to worldly concerns.
A man will invest his money or take any other step in relation to his worldly affairs as he
thinks the chances are in his favour, but he cannot be satisfied with a mere preponderance
of chances that he possesses vital truth and that he will escape everlasting condemnation.
The analogy drawn by Keble between the late recognition of the Prayer Book instead of the too
Protestant Articles as the real canon of the Anglican faith and the lateness of the Christian
Revelation in the world's history was an application of the analogical method of reasoning
which showed to what strange uses that method might be put.

It is singular but consistent with our theory as to the real nature of the tie which prevented
Keble from joining the secession that he should have determined if compelled to leave the Church
of England (a contingency which from the growth of heresy in that Church he distinctly contemplated)
to go not into the communion of the Church of Rome but out of all communion whatever. He would
have gone we suppose into some limbo like the phantom Church of the Nonjurors. It is difficult
to see how such a course can have logically commended itself to the mind of any member of the
theological school which held that the individual reason afforded no sort of standing ground
and that the one thing indispensable to salvation was visible communion with the true Church.

Sir John Coleridge deals with the question as to the posthumous alteration in "The Christian
Year" the discovery of which caused so much scandal among its Protestant admirers and brought
to a stand, it was said, the subscription for a memorial college in honour of its author. It
is made clearly to appear that the alteration was in accordance with Keble's expressed desire,
and the suspicion which was cast upon his executors and those who were about him in his last
moments is proved to be entirely unfounded. But, on the other hand, we cannot think that the
biographer (or rather Keble, who speaks for himself in this matter) will be successful in convincing
many people that the alteration was merely verbal. The mental interpolation of "only" after
"not" in the words "not in the Hands," is surely a tour de force, and it must be remembered
that the passage occurs in the lines on the "Gunpowder Treason," and is evidently pointed against
the Roman Catholic doctrine of the Eucharist. The Roman Catholics do not deny that the Eucharist
is received "in the heart," but the Protestants deny that it is is received "in the hands"
at all, and the vast majority of Keble's readers could not fail to construe the passage as
an assertion of the Protestant doctrine. Sir John Coleridge does not confront the real difficulty,
because he does not give the two versions side by side, or exhibit the passage in its context.
A more natural account of the matter is suggested by a letter of Keble, written when he was
contemplating the publication of the "Lyra Innocentium," and included in the present memoir.
In that letter he says:

"No doubt, there would be the difference in tone which you take notice of between this and
the former book, for when I wrote that, I did not understand (to mention no more points) either
the doctrine of Repentance or that of the Holy Eucharist, as held, e. g., by Bishop Ken, nor
that of Justification, and such points as these must surely make a great difference. But may
it please God to preserve me from writing so unreally and deceitfully as I did then, and if
I could tell you the whole of my shameful history, you would join with all your heart in this
prayer."

The biographer, while he proves his integrity by giving us the letter, of course protests against
our taking seriously the self accusations of a saint. We certainly shall not take seriously
any charge of deceitfulness against Keble, whether made by himself or by any other human being,
but he was liable, to a certain extent, like all other human beings, to self-deception. His
opinions, like those of his associates, on theological questions in general and on the question
of the Eucharist in particular, had been moving rapidly in a Romanizing direction during the
interval between the publication of "The Christian Year" and that of the "Lyra Innocentium."
In the passage just quoted, we see that he was conscious of this, but it was not unnatural
that he should sometimes forget it, and that he should then put upon the words in "The Christian
Year" a construction in conformity with his opinions as they were in their most advanced stage. Moreover,
all the information we have collected upon the regions in question is deposited in the chest which
has to be forwarded, sealed, to the Government, and without access to this the notes that
I should desire to furnish to you cannot be completed. Nevertheless, in order to contribute
as far as possible to your enlightenment on the subject, I take the
liberty of furnishing you with some particulars of the new establishment.

In asking you to excuse, on account of the circumstances, faults both of style and of presentation,
I venture to assure you, General, that you can rely upon my jealous exactitude in fulfilling
as far as was in my power the intention of the Government of my country.

Mr. Gladstone chooses, the apt epithet when he calls the lectures "refined." Refinement rather
than vigour or depth was always the attribute of Keble's productions. His view of poetry, however,
as the vent for overcharged feelings or an imagination oppressed by its own fulness--as a vis
medica, to use his own expression--if it does not cover the whole ground, well deserves attention
among other theories.

To the discredit, perhaps, rather of the dogmatic spirit than of either of the persons concerned,
religious differences were allowed to interfere with he personal friendship formed in youth
between Keble and Arnold. With this single and slight exception, Keble's character in every
relation--as friend, son, husband, tutor, pastor--seems to have been all that the admirers
of "The Christian Year" can expect or desire. The current of his life, but for the element
of theological controversy and perplexity which slightly disturbed his later days, would have
been limpid and tranquil as that of any rivulet in the quiet scene where the years of his Christian
ministry were passed. He and his wife, the partner of all his thoughts and labours, and the
mirror and partaker of the beauty of his character, died almost on the same day; she dying
last, and rejoicing that her husband was spared the pain of being the survivor.

  "Within these walls [of the Church] each fluttering guest
  Is gently lured to one safe nest--
  Without 'tis moaning and unrest."

The writer of those lines perfectly as well as beautifully realized his ideal.