The Great Controversy*

                         Between Christ and Satan

          The Conflict of the Ages in the Christian Dispensation

                            By Ellen G. White

                  Review & Herald Publishing Association

                             Washington, D.C.

             Copyright 1888, 1907, 1911, by Mrs. E. G. White

CONTENTS

Preface Introduction. 1. The Destruction Of Jerusalem. 2. Persecution In The First Centuries.
3. The Apostasy. 4. The Waldenses. 5. John Wycliffe. 6. Huss and Jerome. 7. Luther’s Separation
From Rome. 8. Luther Before The Diet. 9. The Swiss Reformer. 10. Progress Of Reform In Germany.
11. Protest Of The Princes. 12. The French Reformation. 13. The Netherlands And Scandinavia.
14. Later English Reformers. 15. The Bible And The French Revolution. 16. The Pilgrim Fathers.
17. Heralds Of The Morning. 18. An American Reformer. 19. Light Through Darkness. 20. A Great
Religious Awakening. 21. A Warning Rejected. 22. Prophecies Fulfilled. 23. What Is The Sanctuary?
24. In The Holy Of Holies. 25. God’s Law Immutable. 26. A Work Of Reform. 27. Modern Revivals.
28. The Investigative Judgment. 29. The Origin Of Evil. 30. Enmity Between Man And Satan. 31.
Agency Of Evil Spirits. 32. Snares Of Satan. 33. The First Great Deception. 34. Spiritualism.
35. Aims Of The Papacy. 36. The Impending Conflict. 37. The Scriptures A Safeguard. 38. The
Final Warning. 39. “The Time Of Trouble.” 40. God’s People Delivered. 41. Desolation Of The
Earth. 42. The Controversy Ended. Appendix. Index of Scripture References. General Index. Footnotes

PREFACE

This book, reader, is not published to tell us that there is sin and woe and misery in this
world. We know it all too well.

This book is not published to tell us that there is an irreconcilable controversy between darkness
and light, sin and righteousness, wrong and right, death and life. In our heart of hearts we
know it, and know that we are participators, actors, in the conflict.

But to every one of us comes at times a longing to know more of the great controversy. How
did the controversy begin? or was it always here? What elements enter into its awfully complex
aspect? How am I related to it? What is my responsibility? I find myself in this world by no
choice of my own. Does that mean to me evil or good?

What are the great principles involved? How long will the controversy continue? What will be
its ending? Will this earth sink, as some scientists tell us, into the depths of a sunless,
frozen, eternal night? or is there a better future before it, radiant with the light of life,
warm with the eternal love of God?

The question comes closer still: How may the controversy in my own heart, the strife between
inflowing selfishness and outgoing love, be settled in the victory of good, and settled forever?
What does the Bible say? What has God to teach us upon this question, eternally important to
every soul?

Questions like these meet us from every side. They rise insistent up from the depths of our
own heart. They demand definite answer.

Surely the God who created in us the longing for the better, the desire for the truth, will
not withhold from us the answer to all needed knowledge; for “the Lord Jehovah will do nothing,
except He reveal His secret unto His servants the prophets.”

It is the aim of this book, reader, to help the troubled soul to a right solution of all these
problems. It is written by one who has tasted and found that God is good, and who has learned
in communion with God and the study of His word that the secret of the Lord is with them that
fear Him, and that He will show them His covenant.

That we may better understand the principles of the all-important controversy, in which the
life of a universe is involved, the author has set it before us in great, concrete object-lessons
of the last twenty centuries.

The book opens with the sad closing scenes of Jerusalem’s history, the city of God’s chosen,
after her rejection of the Man of Calvary, who came to save. Thence onward along the great
highway of the nations, it points us to the persecutions of God’s children in the first centuries;
the great apostasy which followed in His church; the world-awakening of the Reformation, in
which some of the great principles of the controversy are clearly manifest; the awful lesson
of the rejection of right principles by France; the revival and exaltation of the Scriptures,
and their beneficent, life-saving influence; the religious awakening of the last days; the
unsealing of the radiant fountain of God’s word, with its wonderful revelations of light and
knowledge to meet the baleful upspringing of every delusion of darkness.

The present impending conflict, with the vital principles involved, in which no one can be
neutral, are simply, lucidly, strongly set forth.

Last of all, we are told of the eternal and glorious victory of good over evil, right over
wrong, light over darkness, joy over sorrow, hope over despair, glory over shame, life over
death, and everlasting, long-suffering love over vindictive hate.

Former editions of this book have brought many souls to the True Shepherd; it is the prayer
of the publishers that this edition may be even more fruitful of eternal good.

THE PUBLISHERS.

INTRODUCTION.

Before the entrance of sin, Adam enjoyed open communion with his Maker; but since man separated
himself from God by transgression, the human race has been cut off from this high privilege.
By the plan of redemption, however, a way has been opened whereby the inhabitants of the earth
may still have connection with heaven. God has communicated with men by His Spirit, and divine
light has been imparted to the world by revelations to His chosen servants.

During the first twenty-five hundred years of human history, there was no written revelation.
Those who had been taught of God, communicated their knowledge to others, and it was handed
down from father to son, through successive generations. The preparation of the written word
began in the time of Moses. Inspired revelations were then embodied in an inspired book. This
work continued during the long period of sixteen hundred years,—from Moses, the historian of
creation and the law, to John, the recorder of the most sublime truths of the gospel.

The Bible points to God as its author; yet it was written by human hands; and in the varied
style of its different books it presents the characteristics of the several writers. The truths
revealed are all “given by inspiration of God” (2 Tim. 3:16); yet they are expressed in the
words of men. The Infinite One by His Holy Spirit has shed light into the minds and hearts
of His servants. He has given dreams and visions, symbols and figures; and those to whom the
truth was thus revealed, have themselves embodied the thought in human language.

The ten commandments were spoken by God Himself, and were written by His own hand. They are
of divine, and not of human composition. But the Bible, with its God-given truths expressed
in the language of men, presents a union of the divine and the human. Such a union existed
in the nature of Christ, who was the Son of God and the Son of man. Thus it is true of the
Bible, as it was of Christ, that “the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us.” John 1:14.

Written in different ages, by men who differed widely in rank and occupation, and in mental
and spiritual endowments, the books of the Bible present a wide contrast in style, as well
as a diversity in the nature of the subjects unfolded. Different forms of expression are employed
by different writers; often the same truth is more strikingly presented by one than by another.
And as several writers present a subject under varied aspects and relations, there may appear,
to the superficial, careless, or prejudiced reader, to be discrepancy or contradiction, where
the thoughtful, reverent student, with clearer insight, discerns the underlying harmony.

As presented through different individuals, the truth is brought out in its varied aspects.
One writer is more strongly impressed with one phase of the subject; he grasps those points
that harmonize with his experience or with his power of perception and appreciation; another
seizes upon a different phase; and each, under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, presents what
is most forcibly impressed upon his own mind—a different aspect of the truth in each, but a
perfect harmony through all. And the truths thus revealed unite to form a perfect whole, adapted
to meet the wants of men in all the circumstances and experiences of life.

God has been pleased to communicate His truth to the world by human agencies, and He Himself,
by His Holy Spirit, qualified men and enabled them to do this work. He guided the mind in the
selection of what to speak and what to write. The treasure was intrusted to earthen vessels,
yet it is, none the less, from Heaven. The testimony is conveyed through the imperfect expression
of human language, yet it is the testimony of God; and the obedient, believing child of God
beholds in it the glory of a divine power, full of grace and truth.

In His word, God has committed to men the knowledge necessary for salvation. The Holy Scriptures
are to be accepted as an authoritative, infallible revelation of His will. They are the standard
of character, the revealer of doctrines, and the test of experience. 3:16, 17, Revised Version.

Yet the fact that God has revealed His will to men through His word, has not rendered needless
the continued presence and guiding of the Holy Spirit. On the contrary, the Spirit was promised
by our Saviour, to open the Word to His servants, to illuminate and apply its teachings. And
since it was the Spirit of God that inspired the Bible, it is impossible that the teaching
of the Spirit should ever be contrary to that of the Word.

The Spirit was not given—nor can it ever be bestowed—to supersede the Bible; for the Scriptures
explicitly state that the word of God is the standard by which all teaching and experience
must be tested.

Great reproach has been cast upon the work of the Holy Spirit by the errors of a class that,
claiming its enlightenment, profess to have no further need of guidance from the word of God.
They are governed by impressions which they regard as the voice of God in the soul. But the
spirit that controls them is not the Spirit of God. This following of impressions, to the neglect
of the Scriptures, can lead only to confusion, to deception and ruin. It serves only to further
the designs of the evil one. Since the ministry of the Holy Spirit is of vital importance to
the church of Christ, it is one of the devices of Satan, through the errors of extremists and
fanatics, to cast contempt upon the work of the Spirit, and cause the people of God to neglect
this source of strength which our Lord Himself has provided.

In harmony with the word of God, His Spirit was to continue its work throughout the period
of the gospel dispensation. During the ages while the Scriptures of both the Old and the New
Testament were being given, the Holy Spirit did not cease to communicate light to individual
minds, apart from the revelations to be embodied in the Sacred Canon. The Bible itself relates
how, through the Holy Spirit, men received warning, reproof, counsel, and instruction, in matters
in no way relating to the giving of the Scriptures. And mention is made of prophets in different
ages, of whose utterances nothing is recorded. In like manner, after the close of the canon
of Scripture, the Holy Spirit was still to continue its work, to enlighten, warn, and comfort
the children of God. Scripture plainly teaches that these promises, so far from being limited
to apostolic days, extend to the church of Christ in all ages. The Saviour assures His followers,
“I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world.” Matt. 28:20. 1:17-19. The ministry of
the divine Spirit in enlightening the understanding and opening to the mind the deep things
of God’s holy word, was the blessing which Paul thus besought for the Ephesian church.

In immediate connection with the scenes of the great day of God, the Lord by the prophet Joel
has promised a special manifestation of His Spirit. Joel 2:28. This prophecy received a partial
fulfilment in the outpouring of the Spirit on the day of Pentecost; but it will reach its full
accomplishment in the manifestation of divine grace which will attend the closing work of the
gospel. 

The commodious kennels were soon taken possession of by the tired dogs. Indian servants had
abundance of fish ready for them, and a watchful oversight was kept upon them that the stronger
ones should not rob the weaker or younger ones, a trick, we are sorry to say, of which some dogs
are guilty.

After the hearty supper and prayers were over in the dining room, and the younger children had retired
to rest, Mr and Mrs Ross and the boys went out into the capacious kitchen to hear old Kinesasis
give his version of the goose hunt. To please the old man, Mr Ross filled a beautiful calumet
and presented it to him as a gift in addition to his wages, for his thoughtful care of the dogs while
under his charge at the island. For some minutes he smoked his new pipe in silence. Indians
are the least demonstrative people in the world, and Kinesasis was one of them. He was never
known to say "Thank you" in his life, and yet none could be more grateful or pleased than he to
have his faithful services thus recognised. Mr Ross thoroughly understood him, and the grateful
look in his expressive eyes as he received the pipe from Mr Ross's
hand was all that was expected or that would be received.

Without one word of reference to the pipe, Kinesasis began about the wild geese. Here is his story,
which was a sort of monologue. He said:

"I have been much thinking about it, and I feel that it is my fault that the young geese could
not go south with the old ones when the call came in the voice of the North Wind that it was time to
go. I well remember that last spring, when in the big boat I carried the dogs out to the island, we
saw some geese flying around that island where we caught the young ones to-day. We could not
get a shot at the old geese then, they were so wary, but we pulled ashore, and there among the
rushes we found some nests full of eggs. Of course, we took the eggs and ate them. No doubt
those old geese when they returned, after we had gone, were very angry at our taking the eggs,
but they were not discouraged, and so they went to work and filled up their nests with another setting
of eggs and hatched them out. But they had lost a full month of time, and there was not enough
warm weather left for these broods of young geese to grow strong to rise up in the air when
the call came to fly away to the South Land."

For a few minutes he puffed away vigorously at his calumet, and then continuing his story said:
"Wild geese are strange things. I have hid myself from them and watched them years ago, when they were
more plentiful and hatched their young at many places around our lakes and rivers here. Then
we had only bows and arrows, and so did not kill as many as we do
now.

Their greatest enemies were the foxes, but no fox would dare attack a goose on her nest or
a brood of young ones if the old gander were around. One blow of his powerful wing would kill
any fox. I have found dead foxes that have thus been killed."
Then, looking up, the old Indian said, in a voice that showed he
was deeply impressed by what he was uttering: "There was always some
strange mystery about their call to go south and their leaving. To-day
they would be acting as though they would be intending to stay with
us all the time. In pursuance of this
purpose, I have endeavored to select and group together events in the history of the church
in such a manner as to trace the unfolding of the great testing truths that at different periods
have been given to the world, that have excited the wrath of Satan, and the enmity of a world-loving
church, and that have been maintained by the witness of those who “loved not their lives unto
the death.”

In these records we may see a foreshadowing of the conflict before us. Regarding them in the
light of God’s word, and by the illumination of His Spirit, we may see unveiled the devices
of the wicked one, and the dangers which they must shun who would be found “without fault”
before the Lord at His coming.

The great events which have marked the progress of reform in past ages, are matters of history,
well known and universally acknowledged by the Protestant world; they are facts which none
can gainsay. This history I have presented briefly, in accordance with the scope of the book,
and the brevity which must necessarily be observed, the facts having been condensed into as
little space as seemed consistent with a proper understanding of their application. In some
cases where a historian has so grouped together events as to afford, in brief, a comprehensive
view of the subject, or has summarized details in a convenient manner, his words have been
quoted; but in some instances no specific credit has been given, since the quotations are not
given for the purpose of citing that writer as authority, but because his statement affords
a ready and forcible presentation of the subject. In narrating the experience and views of
those carrying forward the work of reform in our own time, similar use has been made of their
published works.

It is not so much the object of this book to present new truths concerning the struggles of
former times, as to bring out facts and principles which have a bearing on coming events. Yet
viewed as a part of the controversy between the forces of light and darkness, all these records
of the past are seen to have a new significance; and through them a light is cast upon the
future, illumining the pathway of those who, like the reformers of past ages, will be called,
even at the peril of all earthly good, to witness “for the word of God, and for the testimony
of Jesus Christ.”

To unfold the scenes of the great controversy between truth and error; to reveal the wiles
of Satan, and the means by which he may be successfully resisted; to present a satisfactory
solution of the great problem of evil, shedding such a light upon the origin and the final
disposition of sin as to make fully manifest the justice and benevolence of God in all His
dealings with His creatures; and to show the holy, unchanging nature of His law, is the object
of this book. That through its influence souls may be delivered from the power of darkness,
and become “partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light,” to the praise of Him who
loved us, and gave Himself for us, is the earnest prayer of the writer.

E. G. W.

                   Jerusalem From The Mount Of Olives.

1. THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM. Fair and peaceful was the scene spread out before Him. It
was the season of the Passover, and from all lands the children of Jacob had gathered there
to celebrate the great national festival. In the midst of gardens and vineyards, and green
slopes studded with pilgrims’ tents, rose the terraced hills, the stately palaces, and massive
bulwarks of Israel’s capital. The daughter of Zion seemed in her pride to say, “I sit a queen,
and shall see no sorrow;” as lovely then, and deeming herself as secure in Heaven’s favor,
as when, ages before, the royal minstrel sung, “Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole
earth, is Mount Zion, ... the city of the great King.”(2) In full view were the magnificent
buildings of the temple. The rays of the setting sun lighted up the snowy whiteness of its
marble walls, and gleamed from golden gate and tower and pinnacle. “The perfection of beauty”
it stood, the pride of the Jewish nation. What child of Israel could gaze upon the scene without
a thrill of joy and admiration! But far other thoughts occupied the mind of Jesus. “When He
was come near, He beheld the city, and wept over it.”(3) Amid the universal rejoicing of the
triumphal entry, while palm branches waved, while glad hosannas awoke the echoes of the hills,
and thousands of voices declared Him king, the world’s Redeemer was overwhelmed with a sudden
and mysterious sorrow. He, the Son of God, the Promised One of Israel, whose power had conquered
death, and called its captives from the grave, was in tears, not of ordinary grief, but of
intense, irrepressible agony.

His tears were not for Himself, though He well knew whither His feet were tending. Before Him
lay Gethsemane, the scene of His approaching agony. The sheep gate also was in sight, through
which for centuries the victims for sacrifice had been led, and which was to open for Him when
He should be “brought as a lamb to the slaughter.”(4) Not far distant was Calvary, the place
of crucifixion. Upon the path which Christ was soon to tread must fall the horror of great
darkness as He should make His soul an offering for sin. Yet it was not the contemplation of
these scenes that cast the shadow upon Him in this hour of gladness. No foreboding of His own
superhuman anguish clouded that unselfish spirit. He wept for the doomed thousands of Jerusalem—because
of the blindness and impenitence of those whom He came to bless and to save.

The history of more than a thousand years of God’s special favor and guardian care, manifested
to the chosen people, was open to the eye of Jesus. There was Mount Moriah, where the son of
promise, an unresisting victim, had been bound to the altar,—emblem of the offering of the
Son of God.(5) There, the covenant of blessing, the glorious Messianic promise, had been confirmed
to the father of the faithful. There, the flames of the sacrifice ascending to heaven from
the threshing-floor of Ornan had turned aside the sword of the destroying angel(6)—fitting
symbol of the Saviour’s sacrifice and mediation for guilty men. Jerusalem had been honored
of God above all the earth. The Lord had “chosen Zion,” He had “desired it for His habitation.”(7)
There, for ages, holy prophets had uttered their messages of warning. There, priests had waved
their censers, and the cloud of incense, with the prayers of the worshipers, had ascended before
God. There, daily the blood of slain lambs had been offered, pointing forward to the Lamb of
God. There, Jehovah had revealed His presence in the cloud of glory above the mercy-seat. There,
rested the base of that mystic ladder connecting earth with heaven,(8)—that ladder upon which
angels of God descended and ascended, and which opened to the world the way into the holiest
of all. Had Israel as a nation preserved her allegiance to Heaven, Jerusalem would have stood
forever, the elect of God.(9) But the history of that favored people was a record of backsliding
and rebellion. They had resisted Heaven’s grace, abused their privileges, and slighted their
opportunities. With more than a father’s pitying love for the son of his care, God had “sent
to them by His messengers, rising up betimes, and sending; because He had compassion on His
people, and on His dwelling-place.”(12) When remonstrance, entreaty, and rebuke had failed,
He sent to them the best gift of heaven; nay, He poured out all heaven in that one Gift.

The Son of God Himself was sent to plead with the impenitent city. It was Christ that had brought
Israel as a goodly vine out of Egypt.(13) His own hand had cast out the heathen before it.
He had planted it “in a very fruitful hill.”(14) His guardian care had hedged it about. His
servants had been sent to nurture it. “What could have been done more to My vineyard,” He exclaims,
“that I have not done in it?”(15) Though when He “looked that it should bring forth grapes,
it brought forth wild grapes,”(16) yet with a still yearning hope of fruitfulness He came in
person to His vineyard, if haply it might be saved from destruction. He digged about His vine;
He pruned and cherished it. He was unwearied in His efforts to save this vine of His own planting.

For three years the Lord of light and glory had gone in and out among His people. He “went
about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil,”(17) binding up the broken-hearted,
setting at liberty them that were bound, restoring sight to the blind, causing the lame to
walk and the deaf to hear, cleansing the lepers, raising the dead, and preaching the gospel
to the poor. To all classes alike was addressed the gracious call, “Come unto Me, all ye that
labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.”(18)

Though rewarded with evil for good, and hatred for His love,(19) He had steadfastly pursued
His mission of mercy. Never were those repelled that sought His grace. A homeless wanderer,
reproach and penury His daily lot, He lived to minister to the needs and lighten the woes of
men, to plead with them to accept the gift of life. The waves of mercy, beaten back by those
stubborn hearts, returned in a stronger tide of pitying, inexpressible love. But Israel had
turned from her best Friend and only Helper. The pleadings of His love had been despised, His
counsels spurned, His warnings ridiculed.

The hour of hope and pardon was fast passing; the cup of God’s long-deferred wrath was almost
full. The cloud that had been gathering through ages of apostasy and rebellion, now black with
woe, was about to burst upon a guilty people; and He who alone could save them from their impending
fate had been slighted, abused, rejected, and was soon to be crucified. When Christ should
hang upon the cross of Calvary, Israel’s day as a nation favored and blessed of God would be
ended. The loss of even one soul is a calamity infinitely outweighing the gains and treasures
of a world; but as Christ looked upon Jerusalem, the doom of a whole city, a whole nation,
was before Him,—that city, that nation, which had once been the chosen of God, His peculiar
treasure.

Prophets had wept over the apostasy of Israel, and the terrible desolations by which their
sins were visited. He beheld the destroying angel with sword uplifted against the city which
had so long been Jehovah’s dwelling-place. From the ridge of Olivet, the very spot afterward
occupied by Titus and his army, He looked across the valley upon the sacred courts and porticoes,
and with tear-dimmed eyes He saw, in awful perspective, the walls surrounded by alien hosts.
He heard the tread of armies marshaling for war. He heard the voice of mothers and children
crying for bread in the besieged city. He saw her holy and beautiful house, her palaces and
towers, given to the flames, and where once they stood, only a heap of smouldering ruins.

Looking down the ages, He saw the covenant people scattered in every land, “like wrecks on
a desert shore.” In the temporal retribution about to fall upon her children, He saw but the
first draught from that cup of wrath which at the final judgment she must drain to its dregs.
I have stayed the angel of justice, I have called thee to repentance, but in vain. It is not
merely servants, delegates, and prophets, whom thou hast refused and rejected, but the Holy
One of Israel, thy Redeemer. If thou art destroyed, thou alone art responsible. ‘Ye will not
come to Me, that ye might have life.’ ”(22)

Christ saw in Jerusalem a symbol of the world hardened in unbelief and rebellion, and hastening
on to meet the retributive judgments of God. The woes of a fallen race, pressing upon His soul,
forced from His lips that exceeding bitter cry. He saw the record of sin traced in human misery,
tears, and blood; His heart was moved with infinite pity for the afflicted and suffering ones
of earth; He yearned to relieve them all. But even His hand might not turn back the tide of
human woe; few would seek their only Source of help. He was willing to pour out His soul unto
death, to bring salvation within their reach; but few would come to Him that they might have life.

The Majesty of heaven in tears! the Son of the infinite God troubled in spirit, bowed down
with anguish! The scene filled all heaven with wonder. That scene reveals to us the exceeding
sinfulness of sin; it shows how hard a task it is, even for infinite power, to save the guilty
from the consequences of transgressing the law of God. Jesus, looking down to the last generation,
saw the world involved in a deception similar to that which caused the destruction of Jerusalem.
The great sin of the Jews was their rejection of Christ; the great sin of the Christian world
would be their rejection of the law of God, the foundation of His government in heaven and
earth. The precepts of Jehovah would be despised and set at naught. Millions in bondage to
sin, slaves of Satan, doomed to suffer the second death, would refuse to listen to the words
of truth in their day of visitation. Terrible blindness! strange infatuation!

Two days before the Passover, when Christ had for the last time departed from the temple, after
denouncing the hypocrisy of the Jewish rulers, He again went out with His disciples to the
Mount of Olives, and seated Himself with them upon the grassy slope overlooking the city. Once
more He gazed upon its walls, its towers, and its palaces. Once more He beheld the temple in
its dazzling splendor, a diadem of beauty crowning the sacred mount. Vast stores of treasure
for this purpose had been collected by King David, and the plans for its construction were
made by divine inspiration.(25) Solomon, the wisest of Israel’s monarchs, had completed the
work. This temple was the most magnificent building which the world ever saw. There were then
among them aged men who had seen the glory of Solomon’s temple, and who wept at the foundation
of the new building, that it must be so inferior to the former. The feeling that prevailed
is forcibly described by the prophet: “Who is left among you that saw this house in her first
glory? and how do ye see it now? is it not in your eyes in comparison of it as nothing?”(27)
Then was given the promise that the glory of this latter house should be greater than that
of the former.

But the second temple had not equaled the first in magnificence; nor was it hallowed by those
visible tokens of the divine presence which pertained to the first temple. There was no manifestation
of supernatural power to mark its dedication. No cloud of glory was seen to fill the newly
erected sanctuary. No fire from heaven descended to consume the sacrifice upon its altar. The
shekinah no longer abode between the cherubim in the most holy place; the ark, the mercy-seat,
and the tables of the testimony were not to be found therein. No voice sounded from heaven
to make known to the inquiring priest the will of Jehovah.

For centuries the Jews had vainly endeavored to show wherein the promise of God given by Haggai,
had been fulfilled; yet pride and unbelief blinded their minds to the true meaning of the prophet’s
words. The second temple was not honored with the cloud of Jehovah’s glory, but with the living
presence of One in whom dwelt the fulness of the Godhead bodily—who was God Himself manifest
in the flesh. The “Desire of all nations” had indeed come to His temple when the Man of Nazareth
taught and healed in the sacred courts. In the presence of Christ, and in this only, did the
second temple exceed the first in glory. But Israel had put from her the proffered Gift of
heaven. With the humble Teacher who had that day passed out from its golden gate, the glory
had forever departed from the temple. Already were the Saviour’s words fulfilled, “Your house
is left unto you desolate.”(28)

The disciples had been filled with awe and wonder at Christ’s prediction of the overthrow of
the temple, and they desired to understand more fully the meaning of His words. Wealth, labor,
and architectural skill had for more than forty years been freely expended to enhance its splendors.
Herod the Great had lavished upon it both Roman wealth and Jewish treasure, and even the emperor
of the world had enriched it with his gifts. Massive blocks of white marble, of almost fabulous
size, forwarded from Rome for this purpose, formed a part of its structure; and to these the
disciples had called the attention of their Master, saying, “See what manner of stones and
what buildings are here!”(29)

To these words, Jesus made the solemn and startling reply, “Verily I say unto you, There shall
not be left here one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down.”(30)

With the overthrow of Jerusalem the disciples associated the events of Christ’s personal coming
in temporal glory to take the throne of universal empire, to punish the impenitent Jews, and
to break from off the nation the Roman yoke. The Lord had told them that He would come the
second time. Hence at the mention of judgments upon Jerusalem, their minds reverted to that
coming; and as they were gathered about the Saviour upon the Mount of Olives, they asked, “When
shall these things be? and what shall be the sign of Thy coming, and of the end of the world?”(31)

The future was mercifully veiled from the disciples. Had they at that time fully comprehended
the two awful facts,—the Redeemer’s sufferings and death, and the destruction of their city
and temple,—they would have been overwhelmed with horror. Christ presented before them an outline
of the prominent events to take place before the close of time. His words were not then fully
understood; but their meaning was to be unfolded as His people should need the instruction
therein given. The prophecy which He uttered was twofold in its meaning: while foreshadowing
the destruction of Jerusalem, it prefigured also the terrors of the last great day.

Jesus declared to the listening disciples the judgments that were to fall upon apostate Israel,
and especially the retributive vengeance that would come upon them for their rejection and
crucifixion of the Messiah. Unmistakable signs would precede the awful climax. The dreaded
hour would come suddenly and swiftly. When the warning sign should be seen, those who would
escape must make no delay. Throughout the land of Judea, as well as in Jerusalem itself, the
signal for flight must be immediately obeyed. He who chanced to be upon the housetop must not
go down into his house, even to save his most valued treasures. Those who were working in the
fields or vineyards must not take time to return for the outer garment laid aside while they
should be toiling in the heat of the day. They must not hesitate a moment, lest they be involved
in the general destruction.

In the reign of Herod, Jerusalem had not only been greatly beautified, but by the erection
of towers, walls, and fortresses, adding to the natural strength of its situation, it had been
rendered apparently impregnable. He who would at this time have foretold publicly its destruction,
would, like Noah in his day, have been called a crazed alarmist. But Christ had said, “Heaven
and earth shall pass away, but My words shall not pass away.”(33) Because of her sins, wrath
had been denounced against Jerusalem, and her stubborn unbelief rendered her doom certain.
The heads thereof judge for reward, and the priests thereof teach for hire, and the prophets
thereof divine for money: yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among
us? none evil can come upon us.”(34)

These words faithfully described the corrupt and self-righteous inhabitants of Jerusalem. While
claiming to observe rigidly the precepts of God’s law, they were transgressing all its principles.
They hated Christ because His purity and holiness revealed their iniquity; and they accused
Him of being the cause of all the troubles which had come upon them in consequence of their
sins. Though they knew Him to be sinless, they had declared that His death was necessary to
their safety as a nation. “If we let Him thus alone,” said the Jewish leaders, “all men will
believe on Him: and the Romans shall come and take away both our place and nation.”(35) If
Christ were sacrificed, they might once more become a strong, united people. Thus they reasoned,
and they concurred in the decision of their high priest, that it would be better for one man
to die than for the whole nation to perish.

Thus the Jewish leaders had “built up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity.” And yet,
while they slew their Saviour because He reproved their sins, such was their self-righteousness
that they regarded themselves as God’s favored people, and expected the Lord to deliver them
from their enemies. Wonderful was the long-suffering of God toward the rejecters of His gospel
and the murderers of His Son. The parable of the unfruitful tree represented God’s dealings
with the Jewish nation. The command had gone forth, “Cut it down; why cumbereth it the ground?”(37)
but divine mercy had spared it yet a little longer. There were still many among the Jews who
were ignorant of the character and the work of Christ. And the children had not enjoyed the
opportunities or received the light which their parents had spurned. Through the preaching
of the apostles and their associates, God would cause light to shine upon them; they would
be permitted to see how prophecy had been fulfilled, not only in the birth and life of Christ,
but in His death and resurrection. The children were not condemned for the sins of the parents;
but when, with a knowledge of all the light given to their parents, the children rejected the
additional light granted to themselves, they became partakers of the parents’ sins, and filled
up the measure of their iniquity.

The long-suffering of God toward Jerusalem only confirmed the Jews in their stubborn impenitence.
In their hatred and cruelty toward the disciples of Jesus, they rejected the last offer of
mercy. Then God withdrew His protection from them, and removed His restraining power from Satan
and his angels, and the nation was left to the control of the leader she had chosen. Her children
had spurned the grace of Christ, which would have enabled them to subdue their evil impulses,
and now these became the conquerors. Satan aroused the fiercest and most debased passions of
the soul. Men did not reason; they were beyond reason,—controlled by impulse and blind rage.
They became satanic in their cruelty. In the family and in the nation, among the highest and
the lowest classes alike, there was suspicion, envy, hatred, strife, rebellion, murder. There
was no safety anywhere. Friends and kindred betrayed one another. Parents slew their children
and children their parents. The rulers of the people had no power to rule themselves. Uncontrolled
passions made them tyrants. The Jews had accepted false testimony to condemn the innocent Son
of God. Now false accusations made their own lives uncertain. By their actions they had long
been saying, “Cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us.”(38) Now their desire was
granted. The fear of God no longer disturbed them. Satan was at the head of the nation, and
the highest civil and religious authorities were under his sway.

The leaders of the opposing factions at times united to plunder and torture their wretched
victims, and again they fell upon each other’s forces, and slaughtered without mercy. Even
the sanctity of the temple could not restrain their horrible ferocity. The worshipers were
stricken down before the altar, and the sanctuary was polluted with the bodies of the slain.
Yet in their blind and blasphemous presumption the instigators of this hellish work publicly
declared that they had no fear that Jerusalem would be destroyed, for it was God’s own city.
To establish their power more firmly, they bribed false prophets to proclaim, even while Roman
legions were besieging the temple, that the people were to wait for deliverance from God. To
the last, multitudes held fast to the belief that the Most High would interpose for the defeat
of their adversaries. But Israel had spurned the divine protection, and now she had no defense.
Unhappy Jerusalem! rent by internal dissensions, the blood of her children slain by one another’s
hands crimsoning her streets, while alien armies beat down her fortifications and slew her
men of war!

All the predictions given by Christ concerning the destruction of Jerusalem were fulfilled
to the letter. The Jews experienced the truth of His words of warning, “With what measure ye
mete, it shall be measured to you again.”(39)

Signs and wonders appeared, foreboding disaster and doom. In the midst of the night an unnatural
light shone over the temple and the altar. Upon the clouds at sunset were pictured chariots
and men of war gathering for battle. The priests ministering by night in the sanctuary were
terrified by mysterious sounds; the earth trembled, and a multitude of voices were heard crying,
“Let us depart hence.” The great eastern gate, which was so heavy that it could hardly be shut
by a score of men, and which was secured by immense bars of iron fastened deep in the pavement
of solid stone, opened at midnight, without visible agency.(40)

For seven years a man continued to go up and down the streets of Jerusalem, declaring the woes
that were to come upon the city. By day and by night he chanted the wild dirge, “A voice from
the east! a voice from the west! a voice from the four winds! a voice against Jerusalem and
against the temple! a voice against the bridegrooms and the brides! a voice against the whole
people!” This strange being was imprisoned and scourged, but no complaint escaped his lips.
To insult and abuse he answered only, “Woe, woe to Jerusalem!” “woe, woe to the inhabitants
thereof!” His warning cry ceased not until he was slain in the siege he had foretold.

Not one Christian perished in the destruction of Jerusalem. Christ had given His disciples
warning, and all who believed His words watched for the promised sign. “When ye shall see Jerusalem
compassed with armies,” said Jesus, “then know that the desolation thereof is nigh. Then let
them which are in Judea flee to the mountains; and let them which are in the midst of it depart
out.”(41) After the Romans under Cestius had surrounded the city, they unexpectedly abandoned
the siege when everything seemed favorable for an immediate attack. The besieged, despairing
of successful resistance, were on the point of surrender, when the Roman general withdrew his
forces without the least apparent reason. But God’s merciful providence was directing events
for the good of His own people. The promised sign had been given to the waiting Christians,
and now an opportunity was afforded for all who would, to obey the Saviour’s warning. Events
were so overruled that neither Jews nor Romans should hinder the flight of the Christians.
Upon the retreat of Cestius, the Jews, sallying from Jerusalem, pursued after his retiring
army; and while both forces were thus fully engaged, the Christians had an opportunity to leave
the city. At this time the country also had been cleared of enemies who might have endeavored
to intercept them. At the time of the siege, the Jews were assembled at Jerusalem to keep the
Feast of Tabernacles, and thus the Christians throughout the land were able to make their escape
unmolested. Without delay they fled to a place of safety,—the city of Pella, in the land of
Perea, beyond Jordan.

The Jewish forces, pursuing after Cestius and his army, fell upon their rear with such fierceness
as to threaten them with total destruction. It was with great difficulty that the Romans succeeded
in making their retreat. The Jews escaped almost without loss, and with their spoils returned
in triumph to Jerusalem. Yet this apparent success brought them only evil. It inspired them
with that spirit of stubborn resistance to the Romans which speedily brought unutterable woe
upon the doomed city.

Terrible were the calamities that fell upon Jerusalem when the siege was resumed by Titus.
The city was invested at the time of the Passover, when millions of Jews were assembled within
its walls. Their stores of provision, which if carefully preserved would have supplied the
inhabitants for years, had previously been destroyed through the jealousy and revenge of the
contending factions, and now all the horrors of starvation were experienced. A measure of wheat
was sold for a talent. So fierce were the pangs of hunger that men would gnaw the leather of
their belts and sandals and the covering of their shields. Great numbers of the people would
steal out at night to gather wild plants growing outside the city walls, though many were seized
and put to death with cruel torture, and often those who returned in safety were robbed of
what they had gleaned at so great peril. The most inhuman tortures were inflicted by those
in power, to force from the want-stricken people the last scanty supplies which they might
have concealed. And these cruelties were not infrequently practised by men who were themselves
well fed, and who were merely desirous of laying up a store of provision for the future.

Thousands perished from famine and pestilence. Natural affection seemed to have been destroyed.
Husbands robbed their wives, and wives their husbands. Children would be seen snatching the
food from the mouths of their aged parents. Those prisoners who resisted when taken, were scourged,
tortured, and crucified before the wall of the city. Hundreds were daily put to death in this
manner, and the dreadful work continued until, along the valley of Jehoshaphat and at Calvary,
crosses were erected in so great numbers that there was scarcely room to move among them. So
terribly was visited that awful imprecation uttered before the judgment-seat of Pilate: “His
blood be on us, and on our children.”(45)

Titus would willingly have put an end to the fearful scene, and thus have spared Jerusalem
the full measure of her doom. He was filled with horror as he saw the bodies of the dead lying
in heaps in the valleys. Like one entranced, he looked from the crest of Olivet upon the magnificent
temple, and gave command that not one stone of it be touched. Before attempting to gain possession
of this stronghold, he made an earnest appeal to the Jewish leaders not to force him to defile
the sacred place with blood. If they would come forth and fight in any other place, no Roman
should violate the sanctity of the temple. Josephus himself, in a most eloquent appeal, entreated
them to surrender, to save themselves, their city, and their place of worship. But his words
were answered with bitter curses. Darts were hurled at him, their last human mediator, as he
stood pleading with them. The Jews had rejected the entreaties of the Son of God, and now expostulation
and entreaty only made them more determined to resist to the last. In vain were the efforts
of Titus to save the temple; One greater than he had declared that not one stone was to be
left upon another.

The blind obstinacy of the Jewish leaders, and the detestable crimes perpetrated within the
besieged city, excited the horror and indignation of the Romans, and Titus at last decided
to take the temple by storm. He determined, however, that if possible it should be saved from
destruction. But his commands were disregarded. After he had retired to his tent at night,
the Jews, sallying from the temple, attacked the soldiers without. In the struggle, a firebrand
was flung by a soldier through an opening in the porch, and immediately the cedar-lined chambers
about the holy house were in a blaze. Titus rushed to the place, followed by his generals and
legionaries, and commanded the soldiers to quench the flames. His words were unheeded. In their
fury the soldiers hurled blazing brands into the chambers adjoining the temple, and then with
their swords they slaughtered in great numbers those who had found shelter there. Blood flowed
down the temple steps like water. Thousands upon thousands of Jews perished. Above the sound
of battle, voices were heard shouting, “Ichabod!”—the glory is departed.

“Titus found it impossible to check the rage of the soldiery; he entered with his officers,
and surveyed the interior of the sacred edifice. The splendor filled them with wonder; and
as the flames had not yet penetrated to the holy place, he made a last effort to save it, and
springing forth, again exhorted the soldiers to stay the progress of the conflagration. The
centurion Liberalis endeavored to force obedience with his staff of office; but even respect
for the emperor gave way to the furious animosity against the Jews, to the fierce excitement
of battle, and to the insatiable hope of plunder. The soldiers saw everything around them radiant
with gold, which shone dazzlingly in the wild light of the flames; they supposed that incalculable
treasures were laid up in the sanctuary. A soldier, unperceived, thrust a lighted torch between
the hinges of the door: the whole building was in flames in an instant. The blinding smoke
and fire forced the officers to retreat, and the noble edifice was left to its fate.

“It was an appalling spectacle to the Roman—what was it to the Jew? The whole summit of the
hill which commanded the city, blazed like a volcano. One after another the buildings fell
in, with a tremendous crash, and were swallowed up in the fiery abyss. The roofs of cedar were
like sheets of flame; the gilded pinnacles shone like spikes of red light; the gate towers
sent up tall columns of flame and smoke. The neighboring hills were lighted up; and dark groups
of people were seen watching in horrible anxiety the progress of the destruction: the walls
and heights of the upper city were crowded with faces, some pale with the agony of despair,
others scowling unavailing vengeance. The shouts of the Roman soldiery as they ran to and fro,
and the howlings of the insurgents who were perishing in the flames, mingled with the roaring
of the conflagration and the thundering sound of falling timbers. The echoes of the mountains
replied or brought back the shrieks of the people on the heights; all along the walls resounded
screams and wailings; men who were expiring with famine rallied their remaining strength to
utter a cry of anguish and desolation.

“The slaughter within was even more dreadful than the spectacle from without. Men and women,
old and young, insurgents and priests, those who fought and those who entreated mercy, were
hewn down in indiscriminate carnage. The number of the slain exceeded that of the slayers.
The legionaries had to clamber over heaps of dead to carry on the work of extermination.”(46)

After the destruction of the temple, the whole city soon fell into the hands of the Romans.
The leaders of the Jews forsook their impregnable towers, and Titus found them solitary. He
gazed upon them with amazement, and declared that God had given them into his hands; for no
engines, however powerful, could have prevailed against those stupendous battlements. Both
the city and the temple were razed to their foundations, and the ground upon which the holy
house had stood was “plowed like a field.”(47) In the siege and the slaughter that followed,
more than a million of the people perished; the survivors were carried away as captives, sold
as slaves, dragged to Rome to grace the conqueror’s triumph, thrown to wild beasts in the amphitheaters,
or scattered as homeless wanderers throughout the earth.

The Jews had forged their own fetters; they had filled for themselves the cup of vengeance.
In the utter destruction that befell them as a nation, and in all the woes that followed them
in their dispersion, they were but reaping the harvest which their own hands had sown. Says
the prophet, “O Israel, thou hast destroyed thyself;” “for thou hast fallen by thine iniquity.”(48)
Their sufferings are often represented as a punishment visited upon them by the direct decree
of God. It is thus that the great deceiver seeks to conceal his own work. By stubborn rejection
of divine love and mercy, the Jews had caused the protection of God to be withdrawn from them,
and Satan was permitted to rule them according to his will. The horrible cruelties enacted
in the destruction of Jerusalem are a demonstration of Satan’s vindictive power over those
who yield to his control.

We cannot know how much we owe to Christ for the peace and protection which we enjoy. It is
the restraining power of God that prevents mankind from passing fully under the control of
Satan. The disobedient and unthankful have great reason for gratitude for God’s mercy and long-suffering
in holding in check the cruel, malignant power of the evil one. But when men pass the limits
of divine forbearance, that restraint is removed. God does not stand toward the sinner as an
executioner of the sentence against transgression; but He leaves the rejecters of His mercy
to themselves, to reap that which they have sown. Every ray of light rejected, every warning
despised or unheeded, every passion indulged, every transgression of the law of God, is a seed
sown, which yields its unfailing harvest. The Spirit of God, persistently resisted, is at last
withdrawn from the sinner, and then there is left no power to control the evil passions of
the soul, and no protection from the malice and enmity of Satan. The destruction of Jerusalem
is a fearful and solemn warning to all who are trifling with the offers of divine grace, and
resisting the pleadings of divine mercy. Never was there given a more decisive testimony to
God’s hatred of sin, and to the certain punishment that will fall upon the guilty.

The Saviour’s prophecy concerning the visitation of judgments upon Jerusalem is to have another
fulfilment, of which that terrible desolation was but a faint shadow. In the fate of the chosen
city we may behold the doom of a world that has rejected God’s mercy and trampled upon His
law. Dark are the records of human misery that earth has witnessed during its long centuries
of crime. The heart sickens and the mind grows faint in contemplation. Terrible have been the
results of rejecting the authority of Heaven. But a scene yet darker is presented in the revelations
of the future. The records of the past,—the long procession of tumults, conflicts, and revolutions,
the “battle of the warrior, with confused noise, and garments rolled in blood,”(49)—what are
these, in contrast with the terrors of that day when the restraining Spirit of God shall be
wholly withdrawn from the wicked, no longer to hold in check the outburst of human passion
and satanic wrath! The world will then behold, as never before, the results of Satan’s rule.
By a life of sin, they have placed themselves so out of harmony with God, their natures have
become so debased with evil, that the manifestation of His glory is to them a consuming fire.

Let men beware lest they neglect the lesson conveyed to them in the words of Christ. As He
warned His disciples of Jerusalem’s destruction, giving them a sign of the approaching ruin,
that they might make their escape; so He has warned the world of the day of final destruction,
and has given them tokens of its approach, that all who will may flee from the wrath to come.
Jesus declares, “There shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars; and upon
the earth distress of nations.”(52) Those who behold these harbingers of His coming are to
“know that it is near, even at the doors.”(53) “Watch ye therefore,”(54) are His words of admonition.
They that heed the warning shall not be left in darkness, that that day should overtake them
unawares. But to them that will not watch, “the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the
night.”(55)

The world is no more ready to credit the message for this time than were the Jews to receive
the Saviour’s warning concerning Jerusalem. Come when it may, the day of God will come unawares
to the ungodly. When life is going on in its unvarying round; when men are absorbed in pleasure,
in business, in traffic, in money-making; when religious leaders are magnifying the world’s
progress and enlightenment, and the people are lulled in a false security,—then, as the midnight
thief steals within the unguarded dwelling, so shall sudden destruction come upon the careless
and ungodly, “and they shall not escape.”(56)

2. PERSECUTION IN THE FIRST CENTURIES.

When Jesus revealed to His disciples the fate of Jerusalem and the scenes of the second advent,
He foretold also the experience of His people from the time when He should be taken from them,
to His return in power and glory for their deliverance. From Olivet the Saviour beheld the
storms about to fall upon the apostolic church; and penetrating deeper into the future, His
eye discerned the fierce, wasting tempests that were to beat upon His followers in the coming
ages of darkness and persecution. In a few brief utterances of awful significance, He foretold
the portion which the rulers of this world would mete out to the church of God.(57) The followers
of Christ must tread the same path of humiliation, reproach, and suffering which their Master
trod. The enmity that burst forth against the world’s Redeemer, would be manifested against
all who should believe on His name.

The history of the early church testified to the fulfilment of the Saviour’s words. The powers
of earth and hell arrayed themselves against Christ in the person of His followers. Paganism
foresaw that should the gospel triumph, her temples and altars would be swept away; therefore
she summoned her forces to destroy Christianity. The fires of persecution were kindled. Christians
were stripped of their possessions, and driven from their homes. They “endured a great fight
of afflictions.”(58) They “had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover of bonds
and imprisonment.”(59) Great numbers sealed their testimony with their blood. Noble and slave,
rich and poor, learned and ignorant, were alike slain without mercy.

These persecutions, beginning under Nero about the time of the martyrdom of Paul, continued
with greater or less fury for centuries. Christians were falsely accused of the most dreadful
crimes, and declared to be the cause of great calamities—famine, pestilence, and earthquake.
As they became the objects of popular hatred and suspicion, informers stood ready, for the
sake of gain, to betray the innocent. They were condemned as rebels against the empire, as
foes of religion, and pests to society. Great numbers were thrown to wild beasts or burned
alive in the amphitheaters. Some were crucified; others were covered with the skins of wild
animals, and thrust into the arena to be torn by dogs. Their punishment was often made the
chief entertainment at public fêtes. Vast multitudes assembled to enjoy the sight, and greeted
their dying agonies with laughter and applause.

Wherever they sought refuge, the followers of Christ were hunted like beasts of prey. They
were forced to seek concealment in desolate and solitary places. “Destitute, afflicted, tormented;
(of whom the world was not worthy:) they wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens
and caves of the earth.”(60) The catacombs afforded shelter for thousands. Beneath the hills
outside the city of Rome, long galleries had been tunneled through earth and rock; the dark
and intricate network of passages extended for miles beyond the city walls. In these underground
retreats, the followers of Christ buried their dead; and here also, when suspected and proscribed,
they found a home. When the Lifegiver shall awaken those who have fought the good fight, many
a martyr for Christ’s sake will come forth from those gloomy caverns.

Under the fiercest persecution, these witnesses for Jesus kept their faith unsullied. Though
deprived of every comfort, shut away from the light of the sun, making their home in the dark
but friendly bosom of the earth, they uttered no complaint. With words of faith, patience,
and hope, they encouraged one another to endure privation and distress. The loss of every earthly
blessing could not force them to renounce their belief in Christ. Trials and persecution were
but steps bringing them nearer their rest and their reward.

Like God’s servants of old, many were “tortured, not accepting deliverance; that they might
obtain a better resurrection.”(61) These called to mind the words of their Master, that when
persecuted for Christ’s sake, they were to be exceeding glad, for great would be their reward
in heaven; for so the prophets had been persecuted before them. They rejoiced that they were
accounted worthy to suffer for the truth, and songs of triumph ascended from the midst of crackling
flames. Looking upward by faith, they saw Christ and angels leaning over the battlements of
heaven, gazing upon them with the deepest interest, and regarding their steadfastness with
approval, A voice came down to them from the throne of God, “Be thou faithful unto death, and
I will give thee a crown of life.”(62)

In vain were Satan’s efforts to destroy the church of Christ by violence. The great controversy
in which the disciples of Jesus yielded up their lives, did not cease when these faithful standard-bearers
fell at their post. By defeat they conquered. God’s workmen were slain, but His work went steadily
forward. The gospel continued to spread, and the number of its adherents to increase. It penetrated
into regions that were inaccessible, even to the eagles of Rome. Said a Christian, expostulating
with the heathen rulers who were urging forward the persecution: You may “kill us, torture
us, condemn us.... Your injustice is the proof that we are innocent.... Nor does your cruelty
... avail you.” It was but a stronger invitation to bring others to their persuasion. “The
oftener we are mown down by you, the more in number we grow; the blood of Christians is seed.”(63)

Thousands were imprisoned and slain; but others sprung up to fill their places. And those who
were martyred for their faith were secured to Christ, and accounted of Him as conquerors. They
had fought the good fight, and they were to receive the crown of glory when Christ should come.
The sufferings which they endured brought Christians nearer to one another and to their Redeemer.
Their living example and dying testimony were a constant witness for the truth; and where least
expected, the subjects of Satan were leaving his service, and enlisting under the banner of Christ.

Satan therefore laid his plans to war more successfully against the government of God, by planting
his banner in the Christian church. If the followers of Christ could be deceived, and led to
displease God, then their strength, fortitude, and firmness would fail, and they would fall
an easy prey.

The great adversary now endeavored to gain by artifice what he had failed to secure by force.
Persecution ceased, and in its stead were substituted the dangerous allurements of temporal
prosperity and worldly honor. Idolaters were led to receive a part of the Christian faith,
while they rejected other essential truths. They professed to accept Jesus as the Son of God,
and to believe in His death and resurrection; but they had no conviction of sin, and felt no
need of repentance or of a change of heart. With some concessions on their part, they proposed
that Christians should make concessions, that all might unite on the platform of belief in Christ.

Now the church was in fearful peril. Prison, torture, fire, and sword were blessings in comparison
with this. Some of the Christians stood firm, declaring that they could make no compromise.
Others were in favor of yielding or modifying some features of their faith, and uniting with
those who had accepted a part of Christianity, urging that this might be the means of their
full conversion. That was a time of deep anguish to the faithful followers of Christ. Under
a cloak of pretended Christianity, Satan was insinuating himself into the church, to corrupt
their faith, and turn their minds from the word of truth.

Most of the Christians at last consented to lower their standard, and a union was formed between
Christianity and paganism. Although the worshipers of idols professed to be converted, and
united with the church, they still clung to their idolatry, only changing the objects of their
worship to images of Jesus, and even of Mary and the saints. The foul leaven of idolatry, thus
brought into the church, continued its baleful work. Unsound doctrines, superstitious rites,
and idolatrous ceremonies were incorporated into her faith and worship. As the followers of
Christ united with idolaters, the Christian religion became corrupted, and the church lost
her purity and power. There were some, however, who were not misled by these delusions. They
still maintained their fidelity to the Author of truth, and worshiped God alone.

There have ever been two classes among those who profess to be followers of Christ. While one
class study the Saviour’s life, and earnestly seek to correct their defects and conform to
the Pattern, the other class shun the plain, practical truths which expose their errors. Even
in her best estate, the church was not composed wholly of the true, pure, and sincere. Our
Saviour taught that those who wilfully indulge in sin are not to be received into the church;
yet He connected with Himself men who were faulty in character, and granted them the benefits
of His teachings and example, that they might have an opportunity to see their errors and correct
them. Among the twelve apostles was a traitor.

Judas was accepted, not because of his defects of character, but notwithstanding them. He was
connected with the disciples, that, through the instruction and example of Christ, he might
learn what constitutes Christian character, and thus be led to see his errors, to repent, and
by the aid of divine grace, to purify his soul “in obeying the truth.” But Judas did not walk
in the light so graciously permitted to shine upon him. By indulgence in sin, he invited the
temptations of Satan. His evil traits of character became predominant. He yielded his mind
to the control of the powers of darkness, he became angry when his faults were reproved, and
thus he was led to commit the fearful crime of betraying his Master. So do all who cherish
evil under a profession of godliness hate those who disturb their peace by condemning their
course of sin. When a favorable opportunity is presented, they will, like Judas, betray those
who for their good have sought to reprove them.

The apostles encountered those in the church who professed godliness while they were secretly
cherishing iniquity. Ananias and Sapphira acted the part of deceivers, pretending to make an
entire sacrifice for God, when they were covetously withholding a portion for themselves. The
Spirit of truth revealed to the apostles the real character of these pretenders, and the judgments
of God rid the church of this foul blot upon its purity. This signal evidence of the discerning
Spirit of Christ in the church was a terror to hypocrites and evil-doers. They could not long
remain in connection with those who were, in habit and disposition, constant representatives
of Christ; and as trials and persecution came upon His followers, those only who were willing
to forsake all for the truth’s sake desired to become His disciples. Thus, as long as persecution
continued, the church remained comparatively pure. But as it ceased, converts were added who
were less sincere and devoted, and the way was opened for Satan to obtain a foothold.

But there is no union between the Prince of light and the prince of darkness, and there can
be no union between their followers. When Christians consented to unite with those who were
but half converted from paganism, they entered upon a path which led farther and farther from
the truth. Satan exulted that he had succeeded in deceiving so large a number of the followers
of Christ. He then brought his power to bear more fully upon these, and inspired them to persecute
those who remained true to God. None understood so well how to oppose the true Christian faith
as did those who had once been its defenders; and these apostate Christians, uniting with their
half-pagan companions, directed their warfare against the most essential features of the doctrines
of Christ.

It required a desperate struggle for those who would be faithful to stand firm against the
deceptions and abominations which were disguised in sacerdotal garments and introduced into
the church. The Bible was not accepted as the standard of faith. The doctrine of religious
freedom was termed heresy, and its upholders were hated and proscribed.

After a long and severe conflict, the faithful few decided to dissolve all union with the apostate
church if she still refused to free herself from falsehood and idolatry. They saw that separation
was an absolute necessity if they would obey the word of God. They dared not tolerate errors
fatal to their own souls, and set an example which would imperil the faith of their children
and children’s children. To secure peace and unity they were ready to make any concession consistent
with fidelity to God; but they felt that even peace would be too dearly purchased at the sacrifice
of principle. If unity could be secured only by the compromise of truth and righteousness,
then let there be difference, and even war.

Well would it be for the church and the world if the principles that actuated those steadfast
souls were revived in the hearts of God’s professed people. There is an alarming indifference
in regard to the doctrines which are the pillars of the Christian faith. The opinion is gaining
ground, that, after all, these are not of vital importance. This degeneracy is strengthening
the hands of the agents of Satan, so that false theories and fatal delusions which the faithful
in ages past imperiled their lives to resist and expose, are now regarded with favor by thousands
who claim to be followers of Christ.

The early Christians were indeed a peculiar people. Their blameless deportment and unswerving
faith were a continual reproof that disturbed the sinner’s peace. Though few in numbers, without
wealth, position, or honorary titles, they were a terror to evil-doers wherever their character
and doctrines were known. Therefore they were hated by the wicked, even as Abel was hated by
the ungodly Cain. For the same reason that Cain slew Abel, did those who sought to throw off
the restraint of the Holy Spirit, put to death God’s people. It was for the same reason that
the Jews rejected and crucified the Saviour,—because the purity and holiness of His character
was a constant rebuke to their selfishness and corruption. From the days of Christ until now,
His faithful disciples have excited the hatred and opposition of those who love and follow
the ways of sin.

How, then, can the gospel be called a message of peace? The gospel is a message of peace. Christianity
is a system, which, received and obeyed, would spread peace, harmony, and happiness throughout
the earth. The religion of Christ will unite in close brotherhood all who accept its teachings.
It was the mission of Jesus to reconcile men to God, and thus to one another. But the world
at large are under the control of Satan, Christ’s bitterest foe. The gospel presents to them
principles of life which are wholly at variance with their habits and desires, and they rise
in rebellion against it. They hate the purity which reveals and condemns their sins, and they
persecute and destroy those who would urge upon them its just and holy claims. It is in this
sense—because the exalted truths it brings, occasion hatred and strife—that the gospel is called
a sword.

The mysterious providence which permits the righteous to suffer persecution at the hand of
the wicked, has been a cause of great perplexity to many who are weak in faith. Some are even
ready to cast away their confidence in God, because He suffers the basest of men to prosper,
while the best and purest are afflicted and tormented by their cruel power. How, it is asked,
can One who is just and merciful, and who is also infinite in power, tolerate such injustice
and oppression? This is a question with which we have nothing to do. God has given us sufficient
evidence of His love, and we are not to doubt His goodness because we cannot understand the
workings of His providence. Said the Saviour to His disciples, foreseeing the doubts that would
press upon their souls in days of trial and darkness: “Remember the word that I said unto you,
The servant is not greater than his lord. If they have persecuted Me, they will also persecute
you.”(66) Jesus suffered for us more than any of His followers can be made to suffer through
the cruelty of wicked men. Those who are called to endure torture and martyrdom, are but following
in the steps of God’s dear Son.

“The Lord is not slack concerning His promise.”(67) He does not forget or neglect His children;
but He permits the wicked to reveal their true character, that none who desire to do His will
may be deceived concerning them. Again, the righteous are placed in the furnace of affliction,
that they themselves may be purified; that their example may convince others of the reality
of faith and godliness; and also that their consistent course may condemn the ungodly and unbelieving.

God permits the wicked to prosper, and to reveal their enmity against Him, that when they shall
have filled up the measure of their iniquity, all may see His justice and mercy in their utter
destruction. The day of His vengeance hastens, when all who have transgressed His law and oppressed
His people will meet the just recompense of their deeds; when every act of cruelty or injustice
toward God’s faithful ones will be punished as though done to Christ Himself.

There is another and more important question that should engage the attention of the churches
of to-day. The only reason is, that the church has conformed to the world’s standard, and therefore
awakens no opposition. The religion which is current in our day is not of the pure and holy
character that marked the Christian faith in the days of Christ and His apostles. It is only
because of the spirit of compromise with sin, because the great truths of the word of God are
so indifferently regarded, because there is so little vital godliness in the church, that Christianity
is apparently so popular with the world. Let there be a revival of the faith and power of the
early church, and the spirit of persecution will be revived, and the fires of persecution will
be rekindled.

                       St. Peter’s And The Vatican

3. THE APOSTASY.

The apostle Paul, in his second letter to the Thessalonians, foretold the great apostasy which
would result in the establishment of the papal power.

Little by little, at first in stealth and silence, and then more openly as it increased in
strength and gained control of the minds of men, the mystery of iniquity carried forward its
deceptive and blasphemous work. Almost imperceptibly the customs of heathenism found their
way into the Christian church. The spirit of compromise and conformity was restrained for a
time by the fierce persecutions which the church endured under paganism. But as persecution
ceased, and Christianity entered the courts and palaces of kings, she laid aside the humble
simplicity of Christ and His apostles for the pomp and pride of pagan priests and rulers; and
in place of the requirements of God, she substituted human theories and traditions. The nominal
conversion of Constantine, in the early part of the fourth century, caused great rejoicing;
and the world, cloaked with a form of righteousness, walked into the church. Now, the work
of corruption rapidly progressed. Paganism, while appearing to be vanquished, became the conqueror.
Her spirit controlled the church. Her doctrines, ceremonies, and superstitions were incorporated
into the faith and worship of the professed followers of Christ.

This compromise between paganism and Christianity resulted in the development of the “man of
sin” foretold in prophecy as opposing and exalting himself above God. That gigantic system
of false religion is a masterpiece of Satan’s power,—a monument of his efforts to seat himself
upon the throne to rule the earth according to his will.

Satan once endeavoured to form a compromise with Christ. He came to the Son of God in the wilderness
of temptation, and showing Him all the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them, offered
to give all into His hands if He would but acknowledge the supremacy of the prince of darkness.
Christ rebuked the presumptuous tempter, and forced him to depart. But Satan meets with greater
success in presenting the same temptations to man. To secure worldly gains and honors, the
church was led to seek the favor and support of the great men of earth; and having thus rejected
Christ, she was induced to yield allegiance to the representative of Satan,—the bishop of Rome.

It is one of the leading doctrines of Romanism that the pope is the visible head of the universal
church of Christ, invested with supreme authority over bishops and pastors in all parts of
the world. More than this, the pope has been given the very titles of Deity. He has been styled
“Lord God the Pope,”(71) and has been declared infallible. He demands the homage of all men.
The same claim urged by Satan in the wilderness of temptation, is still urged by him through
the Church of Rome, and vast numbers are ready to yield him homage. The doctrine of papal supremacy
is directly opposed to the teachings of the Scriptures. The pope can have no power over Christ’s
church except by usurpation.

Romanists have persisted in bringing against Protestants the charge of heresy, and wilful separation
from the true church. But these accusations apply rather to themselves. They are the ones who
laid down the banner of Christ, and departed from “the faith which was once delivered unto
the saints.”(73)

Satan well knew that the Holy Scriptures would enable men to discern his deceptions and withstand
his power. It was by the Word that even the Saviour of the world had resisted his attacks.
At every assault, Christ presented the shield of eternal truth, saying, “It is written.” To
every suggestion of the adversary, He opposed the wisdom and power of the Word. In order for
Satan to maintain his sway over men, and establish the authority of the papal usurper, he must
keep them in ignorance of the Scriptures. The Bible would exalt God, and place finite men in
their true position; therefore its sacred truths must be concealed and suppressed. This logic
was adopted by the Roman Church. For hundreds of years the circulation of the Bible was prohibited.
The people were forbidden to read it or to have it in their houses, and unprincipled priests
and prelates interpreted its teachings to sustain their pretensions. Thus the pope came to
be almost universally acknowledged as the vicegerent of God on earth, endowed with authority
over church and state.

The detector of error having been removed, Satan worked according to his will. Prophecy had
declared that the papacy was to “think to change times and laws.”(74) This work it was not
slow to attempt. To afford converts from heathenism a substitute for the worship of idols,
and thus to promote their nominal acceptance of Christianity, the adoration of images and relics
was gradually introduced into the Christian worship. The decree of a general council(75) finally
established this system of idolatry. To complete the sacrilegious work, Rome presumed to expunge
from the law of God the second commandment, forbidding image worship, and to divide the tenth
commandment, in order to preserve the number.

The spirit of concession to paganism opened the way for a still further disregard of Heaven’s
authority. Satan, working through unconsecrated leaders of the church, tampered with the fourth
commandment also, and essayed to set aside the ancient Sabbath, the day which God had blessed
and sanctified,(76) and in its stead to exalt the festival observed by the heathen as “the
venerable day of the sun.” This change was not at first attempted openly. In the first centuries
the true Sabbath had been kept by all Christians. They were jealous for the honor of God, and
believing that His law is immutable, they zealously guarded the sacredness of its precepts.
But with great subtlety, Satan worked through his agents to bring about his object. That the
attention of the people might be called to the Sunday, it was made a festival in honor of the
resurrection of Christ. Religious services were held upon it; yet it was regarded as a day
of recreation, the Sabbath being still sacredly observed.

To prepare the way for the work which he designed to accomplish, Satan had led the Jews, before
the advent of Christ, to load down the Sabbath with the most rigorous exactions, making its
observance a burden. Now, taking advantage of the false light in which he had thus caused it
to be regarded, he cast contempt upon it as a Jewish institution. While Christians generally
continued to observe the Sunday as a joyous festival, he led them, in order to show their hatred
of Judaism, to make the Sabbath a fast, a day of sadness and gloom.

In the early part of the fourth century, the emperor Constantine issued a decree making Sunday
a public festival throughout the Roman empire.(77) The day of the sun was reverenced by his
pagan subjects, and was honored by Christians; it was the emperor’s policy to unite the conflicting
interests of heathenism and Christianity. He was urged to do this by the bishops of the church,
who, inspired by ambition and thirst for power, perceived that if the same day was observed
by both Christians and heathen, it would promote the nominal acceptance of Christianity by
pagans, and thus advance the power and glory of the church. But while many God-fearing Christians
were gradually led to regard Sunday as possessing a degree of sacredness, they still held the
true Sabbath as the holy of the Lord, and observed it in obedience to the fourth commandment.

The arch-deceiver had not completed his work. He was resolved to gather the Christian world
under his banner, and to exercise his power through his vicegerent, the proud pontiff who claimed
to be the representative of Christ. Through half-converted pagans, ambitious prelates, and
world-loving churchmen, he accomplished his purpose. Vast councils were held from time to time,
in which the dignitaries of the church were convened from all the world. In nearly every council
the Sabbath which God had instituted was pressed down a little lower, while the Sunday was
correspondingly exalted. Thus the pagan festival came finally to be honored as a divine institution,
while the Bible Sabbath was pronounced a relic of Judaism, and its observers were declared
to be accursed.

The great apostate had succeeded in exalting himself “above all that is called God, or that
is worshiped.”(78) He had dared to change the only precept of the divine law that unmistakably
points all mankind to the true and living God. In the fourth commandment, God is revealed as
the Creator of the heavens and the earth, and is thereby distinguished from all false gods.
It was as a memorial of the work of creation that the seventh day was sanctified as a rest-day
for man. It was designed to keep the living God ever before the minds of men as the source
of being and the object of reverence and worship. Satan strives to turn men from their allegiance
to God, and from rendering obedience to His law; therefore he directs his efforts especially
against that commandment which points to God as the Creator.

Protestants now urge that the resurrection of Christ on Sunday made it the Christian Sabbath.
But Scripture evidence is lacking. No such honor was given to the day by Christ or His apostles.
The observance of Sunday as a Christian institution had its origin in that “mystery of lawlessness”(79)
which, even in Paul’s day, had begun its work. Where and when did the Lord adopt this child
of the papacy? What valid reason can be given for a change which the Scriptures do not sanction?

In the sixth century the papacy had become firmly established. Its seat of power was fixed
in the imperial city, and the bishop of Rome was declared to be the head over the entire church.
Paganism had given place to the papacy. The dragon had given to the beast “his power, and his
seat, and great authority.”(80) And now began the 1260 years of papal oppression foretold in
the prophecies of Daniel and the Revelation.(81) Christians were forced to choose either to
yield their integrity and accept the papal ceremonies and worship, or to wear away their lives
in dungeons or suffer death by the rack, the fagot, or the heads-man’s axe. Now were fulfilled
the words of Jesus: “Ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and brethren, and kins-folks, and
friends; and some of you shall they cause to be put to death. And ye shall be hated of all
men for My name’s sake.”(82) Persecution opened upon the faithful with greater fury than ever
before, and the world became a vast battle-field. For hundreds of years the church of Christ
found refuge in seclusion and obscurity. As her power increased, the darkness deepened. Faith
was transferred from Christ, the true foundation, to the pope of Rome. Instead of trusting
in the Son of God for forgiveness of sins and for eternal salvation, the people looked to the
pope, and to the priests and prelates to whom he delegated authority. They were taught that
the pope was their earthly mediator, and that none could approach God except through him; and
further, that he stood in the place of God to them, and was therefore to be implicitly obeyed.
A deviation from his requirements was sufficient cause for the severest punishment to be visited
upon the bodies and souls of the offenders. Thus the minds of the people were turned away from
God to fallible, erring, and cruel men, nay, more, to the prince of darkness himself, who exercised
his power through them. Sin was disguised in a garb of sanctity. When the Scriptures are suppressed,
and man comes to regard himself as supreme, we need look only for fraud, deception, and debasing
iniquity. With the elevation of human laws and traditions, was manifest the corruption that
ever results from setting aside the law of God.

Those were days of peril for the church of Christ. The faithful standard-bearers were few indeed.
Though the truth was not left without witnesses, yet at times it seemed that error and superstition
would wholly prevail, and true religion would be banished from the earth. The gospel was lost
sight of, but the forms of religion were multiplied, and the people were burdened with rigorous
exactions.

They were taught not only to look to the pope as their mediator, but to trust to works of their
own to atone for sin. Long pilgrimages, acts of penance, the worship of relics, the erection
of churches, shrines, and altars, the payment of large sums to the church,—these and many similar
acts were enjoined to appease the wrath of God or to secure His favor; as if God were like
men, to be angered at trifles, or pacified by gifts or acts of penance!

Notwithstanding that vice prevailed, even among the leaders of the Roman Church, her influence
seemed steadily to increase. About the close of the eighth century, papists put forth the claim
that in the first ages of the church the bishops of Rome had possessed the same spiritual power
which they now assumed. To establish this claim, some means must be employed to give it a show
of authority; and this was readily suggested by the father of lies. Ancient writings were forged
by monks. Decrees of councils before unheard of, were discovered, establishing the universal
supremacy of the pope from the earliest times. And a church that had rejected the truth, greedily
accepted these deceptions.(84)

The few faithful builders upon the true foundation(85) were perplexed and hindered, as the
rubbish of false doctrine obstructed the work. Others, undaunted by the opposition of their
enemies, fearlessly declared, “Be not ye afraid of them: remember the Lord, which is great
and terrible;”(87) and they proceeded with the work, every one with his sword girded by his
side.(88)

The same spirit of hatred and opposition to the truth has inspired the enemies of God in every
age, and the same vigilance and fidelity have been required in His servants. The words of Christ
to the first disciples are applicable to His followers to the close of time: “What I say unto
you I say unto all, Watch.”(89)

The darkness seemed to grow more dense. Image worship became more general. Candles were burned
before images, and prayers were offered to them. The most absurd and superstitious customs
prevailed. The minds of men were so completely controlled by superstition that reason itself
seemed to have lost its sway. While priests and bishops were themselves pleasure-loving, sensual,
and corrupt, it could only be expected that the people who looked to them for guidance would
be sunken in ignorance and vice. 

That the central position of Rome, in the long and narrow peninsula of Italy, was highly favourable
to her Italian dominion, and that the situation of Italy was favourable to her dominion over
the countries surrounding the Mediterranean, has been often pointed out. But we have yet to ask what
launched Rome in her career of conquest, and still more, what rendered that career so different
from those of ordinary conquerors? What caused the Empire of Rome to be so durable? What gives
it so high an organization? What made it so tolerable, and even in
some cases beneficent to her subjects?

What enabled it to perform services so important in preparing the way for a higher civilization?

About
the only answer that we get to these questions is race. The Romans, we are told, were by nature a
peculiarly warlike race. "They were the wolves of Italy," says Mr. Merivale, who may be taken
to represent fairly the state of opinion on this subject. We are presented in short with the old
fable of the Twins suckled by the She-wolf in a slightly rationalized form. It was more likely
to be true, if anything, in its original form, for in mythology nothing is so irrational as rationalization.
That unfortunate She-wolf with her Twins has now been long discarded by criticism as a historical
figure; but she still obtrudes herself as a symbolical legend into the first chapter of Roman
history, and continues to affect the historian's imagination and to give him a wrong bias at the
outset. Who knows whether the statue which we possess is a real counterpart of the original? Who
knows what the meaning of the original statue was? If the group was of great antiquity, we
may be pretty sure that it was not political or historic, but religious; for primaeval art is the
handmaid of religion; historic representation and political portraiture
belong generally to a later age.

We cannot tell with certainty even that the original statue was Roman: it may have been brought
to Rome among the spoils of some conquered city, in which case it would have no reference to Roman history
at all. We must banish it entirely from our minds, with all the associations and impressions
which cling to it, and we must do the same with regard to the whole
of that circle of legends woven out of misinterpreted monuments or
customs, with the embellishments of pure fancy, which grouped itself
round the apocryphal statues of the seven kings in the Capitol, aptly
compared by Arnold to the apocryphal portraits of the early kings
of Scotland in Holyrood and those of the mediaeval founders of Oxford
in the Bodleian.

We must clear our minds altogether of these fictions; they are not even ancient: they came into
existence at a time when the early history of Rome was viewed in the deceptive light of her
later achievements; when, under the influence of altered circumstances, Roman sentiment had probably
undergone a considerable change; and when, consequently, the national imagination no longer
pointed true to anything primaeval.

Race, when tribal peculiarities are once formed, is a most important feature in history; those
who deny this and who seek to resolve everything, even in advanced humanity, into the influence
of external circumstances or of some particular external circumstance, such as food, are not less
one-sided or less wide of the truth than those who employ race as
the universal solution.

Who can doubt that between the English and the French, between the Scotch and the Irish, there
are differences of character which have profoundly affected and still affect the course of history?
The case is still stronger if we take races more remote from each other, such as the English
and the Hindoo. But the further we inquire, the more reason there appears to be for believing
that peculiarities of race are themselves originally formed by the
influence of external circumstances on the primitive tribe; that,
however marked and ingrained they may be, they are not congenital
and perhaps not indelible.

Englishmen and Frenchmen are closely assimilated by education; and the weaknesses of character
supposed to be inherent in the Irish gradually disappear under the more benign influences of the
New World. Thus, by ascribing the achievements of the Romans to the special qualities of their
race, we should not be solving the problem, but only stating it again in other terms.

But besides this, the wolf theory halts in a still more evident manner. The foster-children of the
she-wolf, let them have never so much of their foster-mother's milk in them, do not do what the
Romans did, and they do precisely what the Romans did not. They kill, ravage, plunder-- perhaps
they conquer and even for a time retain their conquests--but they
do not found highly organized empires, they do not civilize, much
less do they give birth to law.

The brutal and desolating domination of the Turk, which after being long artificially upheld
by diplomacy, is at last falling into final ruin, is the type of an empire founded by the foster-children
of the she-wolf. Plunder, in the animal lust of which alone it originated, remains its law,
and its only notion of imperial administration is a coarse division, imposed by the extent of
its territory, into satrapies, which, as the central dynasty, enervated by sensuality, loses
its force, revolt, and break up the empire.

Even the Macedonian, pupil of Aristotle though he was, did not create an empire at all comparable
to that created by the Romans. He overran an immense extent of territory, and scattered over
a portion of it the seed of an inferior species of Hellenic civilization, but he did not organize
it politically, much less did he give it, and through it the world, a code of law. It at once fell
apart into a number of separate kingdoms, the despotic rulers of which were Sultans with a
tinge of Hellenism, and which went for nothing in the political development of mankind.

What if the very opposite theory to that of the she-wolf and her foster- children should be
true? What if the Romans should have owed their peculiar and unparalleled success to their having
been at first not more warlike, but less warlike than their neighbours? It may seem a paradox,
but we suspect in their imperial ascendency is seen one of the earliest and not least important
steps in that gradual triumph of intellect over force, even in war,
which has been an essential part of the progress of civilization.

The happy day may come when Science in the form of a benign old gentleman with a bald head and
spectacles on nose, holding some beneficent compound in his hand, will confront a standing army and
the standing army will cease to exist. That will be the final victory of intellect. But in the
meantime, our acknowledgments are due to the primitive inventors of military organization and
military discipline. They shivered Goliath's spear. A mass of comparatively unwarlike burghers,
unorganized and undisciplined, though they may be the hope of civilization from their mental
and industrial qualities, have as little of collective as they have of individual strength
in war; they only get in each other's way, and fall singly victims to the prowess of a gigantic
barbarian. He who first thought of combining their force by organization, so as to make their numbers
tell, and who taught them to obey officers, to form regularly for
action, and to execute united movements at the word of command, was,
perhaps, as great a benefactor of the species as he who grew the first
corn, or built the first canoe.

What is the special character of the Roman legends, so far as they relate to war? Their special
character is, that they are legends not of personal prowess but of discipline. Rome has no Achilles.
The great national heroes, Camillus, Cincinnatus, Papirius, Cursor, Fabius Maximus, Manlius
are not prodigies of personal strength and valour, but commanders and disciplinarians. The most striking
incidents are incidents of discipline. The most striking incident of all is the execution by
a commander of his own son for having gained a victory against orders. "Disciplinam militarem,"
Manlius is made to say, "qua stetit ad hanc diem Romana res."

Discipline was the great secret of Roman ascendency in war. It is the great secret of all ascendency
in war. Victories of the undisciplined over the disciplined, such as Killiecrankie and Preston Pans,
are rare exceptions which only prove the rule. The rule is that in anything like a parity
of personal prowess and of generalship discipline is victory. Thrice Rome encountered discipline
equal or superior to her own. Pyrrhus at first beat her, but there was no nation behind him, Hannibal
beat her, but his nation did not support him; she beat the army of Alexander, but the army of
Alexander when it encountered her, like that of Frederic at Jena, was an old machine, and
it was commanded by a man who was more like Tippoo Sahib than the conqueror of Darius.

But how came military discipline to be so specially cultivated by
the Romans?

We can see how it came to be specially cultivated by the Greeks: it was the necessity of civic
armies, fighting perhaps against warlike aristocracies; it was the necessity of Greeks in general
fighting against the invading hordes of the Persian. We can see how it came to be cultivated
among the mercenaries and professional soldiers of Pyrrhus and Hannibal.

But what was the motive power in the case of Rome? Dismissing the notion of occult qualities
of race, we look for a rational explanation in the circumstances of the plain which was the cradle
of the Roman Empire.

It is evident that in the period designated as that of the kings, when Rome commenced her career
of conquest, she was, for that time and country, a great and wealthy
city.

This is proved by the works of the kings, the Capitoline Temple, the excavation for the Circus
Maximus, the Servian Wall, and above all the Cloaca Maxima. Historians have indeed undertaken
to give us a very disparaging picture of the ancient Rome, which they confidently describe
as nothing more than a great village of shingle-roofed cottages thinly scattered over a large
area. We ask in vain what are the materials for this description. It is most probable that
the private buildings of Rome under the kings were roofed with nothing better than shingle, and it
is very likely that they were mean and dirty, as the private buildings of Athens appear to
have been, and as those of most of the great cities of the Middle Ages unquestionably were.
But the Cloaca Maxima is in itself conclusive evidence of a large
population, of wealth, and of a not inconsiderable degree of civilization.

Taking our stand upon this monument, and clearing our vision entirely of Romulus and his asylum,
we seem dimly to perceive the existence of a deep prehistoric background, richer than is commonly
supposed in the germs of civilization,--a remark which may in all likelihood be extended to the
background of history in general. Nothing surely can be more grotesque than the idea of a set of wolves,
like the Norse pirates before their conversion to Christianity, constructing in their den the Cloaca
Maxima.

That Rome was comparatively great and wealthy is certain. We can hardly doubt that she was a
seat of industry and commerce, and that the theory which represents her industry and commerce
as having been developed subsequently to her conquests is the reverse of the fact. Whence, but from
industry and commerce, could the population and the wealth have come? Peasant farmers do not
live in cities, and plunderers do not accumulate. Rome had around her what was then a rich and
peopled plain; she stood at a meeting-place of nationalities; she was on a navigable river, yet
out of the reach of pirates; the sea near her was full of commerce, Etruscan, Greek, and Carthaginian.
Her first colony was Ostia, evidently commercial and connected with salt-works, which may well
have supplied the staple of her trade. Her patricians were financiers and money-lenders. We are
aware that a different turn has been given to this part of the story, and that the indebtedness
has been represented as incurred not by loans of money, but by advances
of farm stock.

This, however, completely contradicts the whole tenor of the narrative, and especially what is
said about the measures for relieving the debtor by reducing the rate of interest and by deducting
from the principal debt the interest already paid. The narrative as it stands, moreover, is
supported by analogy. It has a parallel in the economical history of ancient Athens, and in
the "scaling of debts," to use the American equivalent for Seisachtheia, by the legislation of
Solon.

What prevents our supposing that usury, when it first made its appearance on the scene, before
people had learned to draw the distinction between crimes and defaults, presented itself in a
very coarse and cruel form? True, the currency was clumsy, and retained philological traces
of a system of barter; but without commerce there could have been no currency at all.

Even more decisive is the proof afforded by the early political history of Rome. In that wonderful
first decade of Livy there is no doubt enough of Livy himself to give him a high place among the
masters of fiction. It is the epic of a nation of politicians, and admirably adapted for the
purposes of education as the grand picture of Roman character and the richest treasury of Roman
sentiment. But we can hardly doubt that in the political portion there is a foundation of fact; it
is too circumstantial, too consistent in itself, and at the same
time too much borne out by analogy, to be altogether fiction.

The institutions which we find existing in historic times must have been evolved by some such
struggle between the orders of patricians and plebeians as that which Livy presents to us. And
these politics, with their parties and sections of parties, their shades of political character,
the sustained interest which they imply in political objects, their various devices and compromises,
are not the politics of a community of peasant farmers, living apart each on his own farm and
thinking of his own crops: they are the politics of the quick-witted and gregarious population
of an industrial and commercial city. They are politics of the same sort as those upon which the
Palazzo Vecchio looked down in Florence. That ancient Rome was a republic there can be no doubt.
Even the so-called monarchy appears clearly to have been elective; and republicanism may be
described broadly with reference to its origin, as the government of the city and of the artisan,
while monarchy and aristocracy are the governments of the country
and of farmers.

 Here, for a thousand years, witnesses for the truth maintained the ancient
faith.

God had provided for His people a sanctuary of awful grandeur, befitting the mighty truths
committed to their trust. To those faithful exiles the mountains were an emblem of the immutable
righteousness of Jehovah. They pointed their children to the heights towering above them in
unchanging majesty, and spoke to them of Him with whom there is no variableness nor shadow
of turning, whose word is as enduring as the everlasting hills. God had set fast the mountains,
and girded them with strength; no arm but that of Infinite Power could move them out of their
place. In like manner He had established His law, the foundation of His government in heaven
and upon earth. The arm of man might reach his fellow-men and destroy their lives; but that
arm could as readily uproot the mountains from their foundations, and hurl them into the sea,
as it could change one precept of the law of Jehovah, or blot out one of His promises to those
who do His will. In their fidelity to His law, God’s servants should be as firm as the unchanging
hills.

The mountains that girded their lowly valleys were a constant witness to God’s creative power,
and a never-failing assurance of His protecting care. Those pilgrims learned to love the silent
symbols of Jehovah’s presence. They indulged no repining because of the hardships of their
lot; they were never lonely amid the mountain solitudes. They thanked God that He had provided
for them an asylum from the wrath and cruelty of men. They rejoiced in their freedom to worship
before Him. Often when pursued by their enemies, the strength of the hills proved a sure defense.
From many a lofty cliff they chanted the praise of God, and the armies of Rome could not silence
their songs of thanksgiving.

Pure, simple, and fervent was the piety of these followers of Christ. The principles of truth
they valued above houses and lands, friends, kindred, even life itself. These principles they
earnestly sought to impress upon the hearts of the young. From earliest childhood the youth
were instructed in the Scriptures, and taught to regard sacredly the claims of the law of God.
Copies of the Bible were rare; therefore its precious words were committed to memory. Many
were able to repeat large portions of both the Old and the New Testament. Thoughts of God were
associated alike with the sublime scenery of nature and with the humble blessings of daily
life. Little children learned to look with gratitude to God as the giver of every favor and
every comfort.

Parents, tender and affectionate as they were, loved their children too wisely to accustom
them to self-indulgence. Before them was a life of trial and hardship, perhaps a martyr’s death.
They were educated from childhood to endure hardness, to submit to control, and yet to think
and act for themselves. Very early they were taught to bear responsibilities, to be guarded
in speech, and to understand the wisdom of silence. One indiscreet word let fall in the hearing
of their enemies, might imperil not only the life of the speaker, but the lives of hundreds
of his brethren; for as wolves hunting their prey did the enemies of truth pursue those who
dared to claim freedom of religious faith.

The Waldenses had sacrificed their worldly prosperity for the truth’s sake, and with persevering
patience they toiled for their bread. Every spot of tillable land among the mountains was carefully
improved; the valleys and the less fertile hillsides were made to yield their increase. Economy
and severe self-denial formed a part of the education which the children received as their
only legacy. They were taught that God designs life to be a discipline, and that their wants
could be supplied only by personal labor, by forethought, care, and faith. The process was
laborious and wearisome, but it was wholesome, just what man needs in his fallen state, the
school which God has provided for his training and development. While the youth were inured
to toil and hardship, the culture of the intellect was not neglected. They were taught that
all their powers belonged to God, and that all were to be improved and developed for His service.

The Vaudois churches, in their purity and simplicity, resembled the church of apostolic times.
Rejecting the supremacy of pope and prelate, they held the Bible as the only supreme, infallible
authority. Their pastors, unlike the lordly priests of Rome, followed the example of their
Master, who “came not to be ministered unto, but to minister.” They fed the flock of God, leading
them to the green pastures and living fountains of His holy word. Far from the monuments of
human pomp and pride, the people assembled, not in magnificent churches or grand cathedrals,
but beneath the shadow of the mountains, in the Alpine valleys, or, in time of danger, in some
rocky stronghold, to listen to the words of truth from the servants of Christ. The pastors
not only preached the gospel, but they visited the sick, catechized the children, admonished
the erring, and labored to settle disputes and promote harmony and brotherly love. In times
of peace they were sustained by the freewill offerings of the people; but, like Paul the tent-maker,
each learned some trade or profession by which, if necessary, to provide for his own support.

From their pastors the youth received instruction. While attention was given to branches of
general learning, the Bible was made the chief study. The Gospels of Matthew and John were
committed to memory, with many of the Epistles. They were employed also in copying the Scriptures.
Some manuscripts contained the whole Bible, others only brief selections, to which some simple
explanations of the text were added by those who were able to expound the Scriptures. Thus
were brought forth the treasures of truth so long concealed by those who sought to exalt themselves
above God.

By patient, untiring labor, sometimes in the deep, dark caverns of the earth, by the light
of torches, the sacred Scriptures were written out, verse by verse, chapter by chapter. Thus
the work went on, the revealed will of God shining out like pure gold; how much brighter, clearer,
and more powerful because of the trials undergone for its sake, only those could realize who
were engaged in the work. Angels from heaven surrounded these faithful workers.

Satan had urged on the papal priests and prelates to bury the Word of truth beneath the rubbish
of error, heresy, and superstition; but in a most wonderful manner it was preserved uncorrupted
through all the ages of darkness. It bore not the stamp of man, but the impress of God. Men
have been unwearied in their efforts to obscure the plain, simple meaning of the Scriptures,
and to make them contradict their own testimony; but like the ark upon the billowy deep, the
word of God outrides the storms that threaten it with destruction. As the mine has rich veins
of gold and silver hidden beneath the surface, so that all must dig who would discover its
precious stores, so the Holy Scriptures have treasures of truth that are revealed only to the
earnest, humble, prayerful seeker. God designed the Bible to be a lesson-book to all mankind,
in childhood, youth, and manhood, and to be studied through all time. He gave His word to men
as a revelation of Himself. Every new truth discerned is a fresh disclosure of the character
of its Author. The study of the Scriptures is the means divinely ordained to bring men into
closer connection with their Creator, and to give them a clearer knowledge of His will. It
is the medium of communication between God and man.

While the Waldenses regarded the fear of the Lord as the beginning of wisdom, they were not
blind to the importance of a contact with the world, a knowledge of men and of active life,
in expanding the mind and quickening the perceptions. From their schools in the mountains some
of the youth were sent to institutions of learning in the cities of France or Italy, where
was a more extended field for study, thought, and observation than in their native Alps. The
youth thus sent forth were exposed to temptation, they witnessed vice, they encountered Satan’s
wily agents, who urged upon them the most subtle heresies and the most dangerous deceptions.
But their education from childhood had been of a character to prepare them for all this.

In the schools whither they went, they were not to make confidants of any. Their garments were
so prepared as to conceal their greatest treasure,—the precious manuscripts of the Scriptures.
These, the fruit of months and years of toil, they carried with them, and whenever they could
do so without exciting suspicion, they cautiously placed some portion in the way of those whose
hearts seemed open to receive the truth. From their mother’s knee the Waldensian youth had
been trained with this purpose in view; they understood their work, and faithfully performed
it. Converts to the true faith were won in these institutions of learning, and frequently its
principles were found to be permeating the entire school; yet the papal leaders could not,
by the closest inquiry, trace the so-called corrupting heresy to its source.

The spirit of Christ is a missionary spirit. The very first impulse of the renewed heart is
to bring others also to the Saviour. Such was the spirit of the Vaudois Christians. They felt
that God required more of them than merely to preserve the truth in its purity in their own
churches; that a solemn responsibility rested upon them to let their light shine forth to those
who were in darkness; by the mighty power of God’s word they sought to break the bondage which
Rome had imposed. The Vaudois ministers were trained as missionaries, every one who expected
to enter the ministry being required first to gain an experience as an evangelist. Each was
to serve three years in some mission field before taking charge of a church at home. This service,
requiring at the outset self-denial and sacrifice, was a fitting introduction to the pastor’s
life in those times that tried men’s souls. The youth who received ordination to the sacred
office saw before them, not the prospect of earthly wealth and glory, but a life of toil and
danger, and possibly a martyr’s fate. The missionaries went out two and two, as Jesus sent
forth His disciples. With each young man was usually associated a man of age and experience,
the youth being under the guidance of his companion, who was held responsible for his training,
and whose instruction he was required to heed. These co-laborers were not always together,
but often met for prayer and counsel, thus strengthening each other in the faith.

To have made known the object of their mission would have insured its defeat; therefore they
carefully concealed their real character. Every minister possessed a knowledge of some trade
or profession, and the missionaries prosecuted their work under cover of a secular calling.
Usually they chose that of merchant or peddler. “They carried silks, jewelry, and other articles,
at that time not easily purchasable save at distant marts; and they were welcomed as merchants
where they would have been spurned as missionaries.”(101) All the while their hearts were uplifted
to God for wisdom to present a treasure more precious than gold or gems. They secretly carried
about with them copies of the Bible, in whole or in part; and whenever an opportunity was presented,
they called the attention of their customers to these manuscripts. Often an interest to read
God’s word was thus awakened, and some portion was gladly left with those who desired to receive
it.

The work of these missionaries began in the plains and valleys at the foot of their own mountains,
but it extended far beyond these limits. With naked feet and in garments coarse and travel-stained
as were those of their Master, they passed through great cities, and penetrated to distant
lands. Everywhere they scattered the precious seed. Churches sprung up in their path, and the
blood of martyrs witnessed for the truth. The day of God will reveal a rich harvest of souls
garnered by the labors of these faithful men. Veiled and silent, the word of God was making
its way through Christendom, and meeting a glad reception in the homes and hearts of men.

To the Waldenses the Scriptures were not merely a record of God’s dealings with men in the
past, and a revelation of the responsibilities and duties of the present, but an unfolding
of the perils and glories of the future. They believed that the end of all things was not far
distant; and as they studied the Bible with prayer and tears, they were the more deeply impressed
with its precious utterances, and with their duty to make known to others its saving truths.
They saw the plan of salvation clearly revealed in the sacred pages, and they found comfort,
hope, and peace in believing in Jesus. As the light illuminated their understanding and made
glad their hearts, they longed to shed its beams upon those who were in the darkness of papal
error.

They saw that under the guidance of pope and priests, multitudes were vainly endeavoring to
obtain pardon by afflicting their bodies for the sin of their souls. Taught to trust to their
good works to save them, they were ever looking to themselves, their minds dwelling upon their
sinful condition, seeing themselves exposed to the wrath of God, afflicting soul and body,
yet finding no relief. Thus conscientious souls were bound by the doctrines of Rome. Thousands
abandoned friends and kindred, and spent their lives in convent cells. By oft-repeated fasts
and cruel scourgings, by midnight vigils, by prostration for weary hours upon the cold, damp
stones of their dreary abode, by long pilgrimages, by humiliating penance and fearful torture,
thousands vainly sought to obtain peace of conscience. Oppressed with a sense of sin, and haunted
with the fear of God’s avenging wrath, many suffered on, until exhausted nature gave way, and
without one ray of light or hope, they sank into the tomb.

The Waldenses longed to break to these starving souls the bread of life, to open to them the
messages of peace in the promises of God, and to point them to Christ as their only hope of
salvation. The doctrine that good works can atone for the transgression of God’s law, they
held to be based upon falsehood. Reliance upon human merit intercepts the view of Christ’s
infinite love. Jesus died as a sacrifice for man because the fallen race can do nothing to
recommend themselves to God. The merits of a crucified and risen Saviour are the foundation
of the Christian’s faith. The dependence of the soul upon Christ is as real, and its connection
with Him must be as close, as that of a limb to the body, or of a branch to the vine.

The teachings of popes and priests had led men to look upon the character of God, and even
of Christ, as stern, gloomy, and forbidding. The Saviour was represented as so far devoid of
sympathy with man in his fallen state that the mediation of priests and saints must be invoked.
Those whose minds had been enlightened by the word of God longed to point these souls to Jesus
as their compassionate, loving Saviour, standing with outstretched arms, inviting all to come
to Him with their burden of sin, their care and weariness. They longed to clear away the obstructions
which Satan had piled up that men might not see the promises, and come directly to God, confessing
their sins, and obtaining pardon and peace.

Eagerly did the Vaudois missionary unfold to the inquiring mind the precious truths of the
gospel. Cautiously he produced the carefully written portions of the Holy Scriptures. It was
his greatest joy to give hope to the conscientious, sin-stricken soul, who could see only a
God of vengeance, waiting to execute justice. With quivering lip and tearful eye did he, often
on bended knees, open to his brethren the precious promises that reveal the sinner’s only hope.
Thus the light of truth penetrated many a darkened mind, rolling back the cloud of gloom, until
the Sun of Righteousness shone into the heart with healing in His beams. It was often the case
that some portion of Scripture was read again and again, the hearer desiring it to be repeated,
as if he would assure himself that he had heard aright. They saw how vain is the mediation
of men or angels in behalf of the sinner. As the true light dawned upon their minds, they exclaimed
with rejoicing, “Christ is my priest; His blood is my sacrifice; His altar is my confessional.”
They cast themselves wholly upon the merits of Jesus, repeating the words, “Without faith it
is impossible to please Him.”(104) “There is none other name under heaven given among men,
whereby we must be saved.”(105)

The assurance of a Saviour’s love seemed too much for some of these poor tempest-tossed souls
to realize. So great was the relief which it brought, such a flood of light was shed upon them,
that they seemed transported to heaven. Their hands were laid confidingly in the hand of Christ;
their feet were planted upon the Rock of Ages. All fear of death was banished. They could now
covet the prison and the fagot if they might thereby honor the name of their Redeemer.

In secret places the word of God was thus brought forth and read, sometimes to a single soul,
sometimes to a little company who were longing for light and truth. Often the entire night
was spent in this manner. So great would be the wonder and admiration of the listeners that
the messenger of mercy was not infrequently compelled to cease his reading until the understanding
could grasp the tidings of salvation. Often would words like these be uttered: “Will God indeed
accept my offering? Will He smile upon me? Will He pardon me?” The answer was read, “Come unto
Me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.”(106)

Faith grasped the promise, and the glad response was heard: “No more long pilgrimages to make;
no more painful journeys to holy shrines. I may come to Jesus just as I am, sinful and unholy,
and He will not spurn the penitential prayer. ‘Thy sins be forgiven thee.’ Mine, even mine,
may be forgiven!”

A tide of sacred joy would fill the heart, and the name of Jesus would be magnified by praise
and thanksgiving. Those happy souls returned to their homes to diffuse light, to repeat to
others, as well as they could, their new experience; that they had found the true and living
Way. There was a strange and solemn power in the words of Scripture that spoke directly to
the hearts of those who were longing for the truth. It was the voice of God, and it carried
conviction to those who heard.

The messenger of truth went on his way; but his appearance of humility, his sincerity, his
earnestness and deep fervor, were subjects of frequent remark. In many instances his hearers
had not asked him whence he came or whither he went. They had been so overwhelmed, at first
with surprise, and afterward with gratitude and joy, that they had not thought to question
him. When they had urged him to accompany them to their homes, he had replied that he must
visit the lost sheep of the flock. Could he have been an angel from heaven? they queried.

In many cases the messenger of truth was seen no more. He had made his way to other lands,
or he was wearing out his life in some unknown dungeon, or perhaps his bones were whitening
on the spot where he had witnessed for the truth. But the words he had left behind could not
be destroyed. They were doing their work in the hearts of men; the blessed results will be
fully known only in the judgment.

The Waldensian missionaries were invading the kingdom of Satan, and the powers of darkness
aroused to greater vigilance. Every effort to advance the truth was watched by the prince of
evil, and he excited the fears of his agents. The papal leaders saw a portent of danger to
their cause from the labors of these humble itinerants. If the light of truth were allowed
to shine unobstructed, it would sweep away the heavy clouds of error that enveloped the people;
it would direct the minds of men to God alone, and would eventually destroy the supremacy of Rome.

The very existence of this people, holding the faith of the ancient church, was a constant
testimony to Rome’s apostasy, and therefore excited the most bitter hatred and persecution.
Their refusal to surrender the Scriptures was also an offense that Rome could not tolerate.
She determined to blot them from the earth. Now began the most terrible crusades against God’s
people in their mountain homes. Inquisitors were put upon their track, and the scene of innocent
Abel falling before the murderous Cain was often repeated.

Again and again were their fertile lands laid waste, their dwellings and chapels swept away,
so that where once were flourishing fields and the homes of an innocent, industrious people,
there remained only a desert. As the ravenous beast is rendered more furious by the taste of
blood, so the rage of the papists was kindled to greater intensity by the sufferings of their
victims. Many of these witnesses for a pure faith were pursued across the mountains, and hunted
down in the valleys where they were hidden, shut in by mighty forests and pinnacles of rock.

No charge could be brought against the moral character of this proscribed class. Even their
enemies declared them to be a peaceable, quiet, pious people. Their grand offense was that
they would not worship God according to the will of the pope. For this crime, every humiliation,
insult, and torture that men or devils could invent was heaped upon them.

When Rome at one time determined to exterminate the hated sect, a bull was issued by the pope,
condemning them as heretics, and delivering them to slaughter.(107) They were not accused as
idlers, or dishonest, or disorderly; but it was declared that they had an appearance of piety
and sanctity that seduced “the sheep of the true fold.” Therefore the pope ordered “that malicious
and abominable sect of malignants,” if they “refuse to abjure, to be crushed like venomous
snakes.”(108) Did this haughty potentate expect to meet those words again? Did he know that
they were registered in the books of heaven, to confront him at the judgment? “Inasmuch as
ye have done it unto one of the least of these My brethren,” said Jesus, “ye have done it unto
Me.”(109)

This bull called upon all members of the church to join the crusade against the heretics. As
an incentive to engage in this cruel work, it “absolved from all ecclesiastical pains and penalties,
general and particular; it released all who joined the crusade from any oaths they might have
taken; it legitimatized their title to any property they might have illegally acquired; and
promised remission of all their sins to such as should kill any heretic. It annulled all contracts
made in favor of Vaudois, ordered their domestics to abandon them, forbade all persons to give
them any aid whatever, and empowered all persons to take possession of their property.” This
document clearly reveals the master-spirit behind the scenes. It is the roar of the dragon,
and not the voice of Christ, that is heard therein.

The papal leaders would not conform their characters to the great standard of God’s law, but
erected a standard to suit themselves, and determined to compel all to conform to this because
Rome willed it. The most horrible tragedies were enacted. Corrupt and blasphemous priests and
popes were doing the work which Satan appointed them. Mercy had no place in their natures.
The same spirit that crucified Christ and slew the apostles, the same that moved the bloodthirsty
Nero against the faithful in his day, was at work to rid the earth of those who were beloved
of God.

The persecutions visited for many centuries upon this God-fearing people were endured by them
with a patience and constancy that honored their Redeemer. Notwithstanding the crusades against
them, and the inhuman butchery to which they were subjected, they continued to send out their
missionaries to scatter the precious truth. They were hunted to the death; yet their blood
watered the seed sown, and it failed not of yielding fruit. Thus the Waldenses witnessed for
God, centuries before the birth of Luther. Scattered over many lands, they planted the seeds
of the Reformation that began in the time of Wycliffe, grew broad and deep in the days of Luther,
and is to be carried forward to the close of time by those who also are willing to suffer all
things for “the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus Christ.”(110)

5. JOHN WYCLIFFE.

Before the Reformation, there were at times but very few copies of the Bible in existence;
but God had not suffered His word to be wholly destroyed. Its truths were not to be forever
hidden. He could as easily unchain the words of life as He could open prison doors and unbolt
iron gates to set His servants free. In the different countries of Europe men were moved by
the Spirit of God to search for the truth as for hid treasures. Providentially guided to the
Holy Scriptures, they studied the sacred pages with intense interest. They were willing to
accept the light, at any cost to themselves. Though they did not see all things clearly, they
were enabled to perceive many long-buried truths. As Heaven-sent messengers they went forth,
rending asunder the chains of error and superstition, and calling upon those who had been so
long enslaved, to arise and assert their liberty.

Except among the Waldenses, the word of God had for ages been locked up in languages known
only to the learned; but the time had come for the Scriptures to be translated, and given to
the people of different lands in their native tongue. The world had passed its midnight. The
hours of darkness were wearing away, and in many lands appeared tokens of the coming dawn.

In the fourteenth century arose in England the “morning star of the Reformation.” John Wycliffe
was the herald of reform, not for England alone, but for all Christendom. The great protest
against Rome which it was permitted him to utter, was never to be silenced. That protest opened
the struggle which was to result in the emancipation of individuals, of churches, and of nations.

Wycliffe received a liberal education, and with him the fear of the Lord was the beginning
of wisdom. He was noted at college for his fervent piety as well as for his remarkable talents
and sound scholarship. In his thirst for knowledge he sought to become acquainted with every
branch of learning. He was educated in the scholastic philosophy, in the canons of the church,
and in the civil law, especially that of his own country. In his after-labors the value of
this early training was apparent. A thorough acquaintance with the speculative philosophy of
his time enabled him to expose its errors; and by his study of national and ecclesiastical
law he was prepared to engage in the great struggle for civil and religious liberty. While
he could wield the weapons drawn from the word of God, he had acquired the intellectual discipline
of the schools, and he understood the tactics of the schoolmen. The power of his genius and
the extent and thoroughness of his knowledge commanded the respect of both friends and foes.
His adherents saw with satisfaction that their champion stood foremost among the leading minds
of the nation; and his enemies were prevented from casting contempt upon the cause of reform
by exposing the ignorance or weakness of its supporter.

While Wycliffe was still at college, he entered upon the study of the Scriptures. In those
early times, when the Bible existed only in the ancient languages, scholars were enabled to
find their way to the fountain of truth, which was closed to the uneducated classes. Thus already
the way had been prepared for Wycliffe’s future work as a Reformer.

Men of learning had studied the word of God, and had found the great truth of His free grace
there revealed. In their teachings they had spread a knowledge of this truth, and had led others
to turn to the Living Oracles.

When Wycliffe’s attention was directed to the Scriptures, he entered upon their investigation
with the same thoroughness which had enabled him to master the learning of the schools. Heretofore
he had felt a great want, which neither his scholastic studies nor the teaching of the church
could satisfy. In the word of God he found that which he had before sought in vain. Here he
saw the plan of salvation revealed, and Christ set forth as the only advocate for man. He gave
himself to the service of Christ, and determined to proclaim the truths he had discovered.

Like after-reformers, Wycliffe did not, at the opening of his work, foresee whither it would
lead him. He did not set himself deliberately in opposition to Rome. But devotion to truth
could not but bring him in conflict with falsehood. The more clearly he discerned the errors
of the papacy, the more earnestly he presented the teaching of the Bible. He saw that Rome
had forsaken the word of God for human tradition; he fearlessly accused the priesthood of having
banished the Scriptures, and demanded that the Bible be restored to the people, and that its
authority be again established in the church. He was an able and earnest teacher, and an eloquent
preacher, and his daily life was a demonstration of the truths he preached. His knowledge of
the Scriptures, the force of his reasoning, the purity of his life, and his unbending courage
and integrity, won for him general esteem and confidence. Many of the people had become dissatisfied
with their former faith, as they saw the iniquity that prevailed in the Roman Church, and they
hailed with unconcealed joy the truths brought to view by Wycliffe; but the papal leaders were
filled with rage when they perceived that this Reformer was gaining an influence greater than
their own.

Wycliffe was a keen detector of error, and he struck fearlessly against many of the abuses
sanctioned by the authority of Rome. While acting as chaplain for the king, he took a bold
stand against the payment of tribute claimed by the pope from the English monarch, and showed
that the papal assumption of authority over secular rulers was contrary to both reason and
revelation. The demands of the pope had excited great indignation, and Wycliffe’s teachings
exerted an influence upon the leading minds of the nation. The king and the nobles united in
denying the pontiff’s claim to temporal authority, and in refusing the payment of the tribute.
Thus an effectual blow was struck against the papal supremacy in England.

Another evil against which the Reformer waged long and resolute battle, was the institution
of the orders of mendicant friars. These friars swarmed in England, casting a blight upon the
greatness and prosperity of the nation. Industry, education, morals, all felt the withering
influence. The monks’ life of idleness and beggary was not only a heavy drain upon the resources
of the people, but it brought useful labor into contempt. The youth were demoralized and corrupted.
By the influence of the friars many were induced to enter a cloister and devote themselves
to a monastic life, and this not only without the consent of their parents, but even without
their knowledge, and contrary to their commands. One of the early Fathers of the Roman Church,
urging the claims of monasticism above the obligations of filial love and duty, had declared:
“Though thy father should lie before thy door, weeping and lamenting, and thy mother should
show the body that bore thee and the breasts that nursed thee, see that thou trample them under
foot, and go onward straightway to Christ.” By this “monstrous inhumanity,” as Luther afterward
styled it, “savoring more of the wolf and the tyrant than of the Christian and the man,” were
the hearts of children steeled against their parents.(111) Thus did the papal leaders, like
the Pharisees of old, make the commandment of God of none effect by their tradition. Thus homes
were made desolate, and parents were deprived of the society of their sons and daughters.

Even the students in the universities were deceived by the false representations of the monks,
and induced to join their orders. Many afterward repented this step, seeing that they had blighted
their own lives, and had brought sorrow upon their parents; but once fast in the snare, it
was impossible for them to obtain their freedom. Many parents, fearing the influence of the
monks, refused to send their sons to the universities. There was a marked falling off in the
number of students in attendance at the great centers of learning. The schools languished,
and ignorance prevailed.

The pope had bestowed on these monks the power to hear confessions and to grant pardon. This
became a source of great evil. Bent on enhancing their gains, the friars were so ready to grant
absolution that criminals of all descriptions resorted to them, and as a result, the worst
vices rapidly increased. The sick and the poor were left to suffer, while the gifts that should
have relieved their wants went to the monks, who with threats demanded the alms of the people,
denouncing the impiety of those who should withhold gifts from their orders. Notwithstanding
their profession of poverty, the wealth of the friars was constantly increasing, and their
magnificent edifices and luxurious tables made more apparent the growing poverty of the nation.
And while spending their time in luxury and pleasure, they sent out in their stead ignorant
men, who could only recount marvelous tales, legends, and jests to amuse the people, and make
them still more completely the dupes of the monks. Yet the friars continued to maintain their
hold on the superstitious multitudes, and led them to believe that all religious duty was comprised
in acknowledging the supremacy of the pope, adoring the saints, and making gifts to the monks,
and that this was sufficient to secure them a place in heaven.

Men of learning and piety had labored in vain to bring about a reform in these monastic orders;
but Wycliffe, with clearer insight, struck at the root of the evil, declaring that the system
itself was false, and that it should be abolished. Discussion and inquiry were awakening. As
the monks traversed the country, vending the pope’s pardons, many were led to doubt the possibility
of purchasing forgiveness with money, and they questioned whether they should not seek pardon
from God rather than from the pontiff of Rome.(112) Not a few were alarmed at the rapacity
of the friars, whose greed seemed never to be satisfied. “The monks and priests of Rome,” said
they, “are eating us away like a cancer. God must deliver us, or the people will perish.”(113)
To cover their avarice, these begging monks claimed that they were following the Saviour’s
example, declaring that Jesus and His disciples had been supported by the charities of the
people. This claim resulted in injury to their cause, for it led many to the Bible to learn
the truth for themselves,—a result which of all others was least desired by Rome. The minds
of men were directed to the Source of truth, which it was her object to conceal.

Wycliffe began to write and publish tracts against the friars, not, however, seeking so much
to enter into dispute with them as to call the minds of the people to the teachings of the
Bible and its Author. He declared that the power of pardon or of excommunication is possessed
by the pope in no greater degree than by common priests, and that no man can be truly excommunicated
unless he has first brought upon himself the condemnation of God. In no more effectual way
could he have undertaken the overthrow of that mammoth fabric of spiritual and temporal dominion
which the pope had erected, and in which the souls and bodies of millions were held captive.

Again Wycliffe was called to defend the rights of the English crown against the encroachments
of Rome; and being appointed a royal ambassador, he spent two years in the Netherlands, in
conference with the commissioners of the pope. Here he was brought into communication with
ecclesiastics from France, Italy, and Spain, and he had an opportunity to look behind the scenes,
and gain a knowledge of many things which would have remained hidden from him in England. He
learned much that was to give point to his after-labors. In these representatives from the
papal court he read the true character and aims of the hierarchy. He returned to England to
repeat his former teachings more openly and with greater zeal, declaring that covetousness,
pride, and deception were the gods of Rome.

In one of his tracts he said, speaking of the pope and his collectors: “They draw out of our
land poor men’s livelihood, and many thousand marks, by the year, of the king’s money, for
sacraments and spiritual things, that is cursed heresy of simony, and maketh all Christendom
assent and maintain this heresy. And certes though our realm had a huge hill of gold, and never
other man took thereof but only this proud worldly priest’s collector, by process of time this
hill must be spended; for he taketh ever money out of our land, and sendeth naught again but
God’s curse for his simony.”(114)

Soon after his return to England, Wycliffe received from the king the appointment to the rectory
of Lutterworth. This was an assurance that the monarch at least had not been displeased by
his plain speaking. Wycliffe’s influence was felt in shaping the action of the court, as well
as in moulding the belief of the nation.

The papal thunders were soon hurled against him. Three bulls were dispatched to England,—to
the university, to the king, and to the prelates,—all commanding immediate and decisive measures
to silence the teacher of heresy.(115) Before the arrival of the bulls, however, the bishops,
in their zeal, had summoned Wycliffe before them for trial. But two of the most powerful princes
in the kingdom accompanied him to the tribunal; and the people, surrounding the building and
rushing in, so intimidated the judges that the proceedings were for the time suspended, and
he was allowed to go his way in peace. A little later, Edward III., whom in his old age the
prelates were seeking to influence against the Reformer, died, and Wycliffe’s former protector
became regent of the kingdom.

But the arrival of the papal bulls laid upon all England a peremptory command for the arrest
and imprisonment of the heretic. These measures pointed directly to the stake. It appeared
certain that Wycliffe must soon fall a prey to the vengeance of Rome. But He who declared to
one of old, “Fear not: I am thy shield,”(116) again stretched out His hand to protect His servant.
Death came, not to the Reformer, but to the pontiff who had decreed his destruction. Gregory
XI. died, and the ecclesiastics who had assembled for Wycliffe’s trial, dispersed.

God’s providence still further overruled events to give opportunity for the growth of the Reformation.
The death of Gregory was followed by the election of two rival popes. Two conflicting powers,
each professedly infallible, now claimed obedience.(117) Each called upon the faithful to assist
him in making war upon the other, enforcing his demands by terrible anathemas against his adversaries,
and promises of rewards in heaven to his supporters. This occurrence greatly weakened the power
of the papacy. The rival factions had all they could do to attack each other, and Wycliffe
for a time had rest. Anathemas and recriminations were flying from pope to pope, and torrents
of blood were poured out to support their conflicting claims. Crimes and scandals flooded the
church. Meanwhile the Reformer, in the quiet retirement of his parish of Lutterworth, was laboring
diligently to point men from the contending popes to Jesus, the Prince of Peace.

The schism, with all the strife and corruption which it caused, prepared the way for the Reformation,
by enabling the people to see what the papacy really was. In a tract which he published, “On
the Schism of the Popes,” Wycliffe called upon the people to consider whether these two priests
were not speaking the truth in condemning each other as the antichrist. “God,” said he, “would
no longer suffer the fiend to reign in only one such priest, but ... made division among two,
so that men, in Christ’s name, may the more easily overcome them both.”(118)

Wycliffe, like his Master, preached the gospel to the poor. Not content with spreading the
light in their humble homes in his own parish of Lutterworth, he determined that it should
be carried to every part of England. To accomplish this he organized a body of preachers, simple,
devout men, who loved the truth and desired nothing so much as to extend it. These men went
everywhere, teaching in the market-places, in the streets of the great cities, and in the country
lanes. They sought out the aged, the sick, and the poor, and opened to them the glad tidings
of the grace of God.

As a professor of theology at Oxford, Wycliffe preached the word of God in the halls of the
university. So faithfully did he present the truth to the students under his instruction, that
he received the title of “The Gospel Doctor.” But the greatest work of his life was to be the
translation of the Scriptures into the English language. In a work, “On the Truth and Meaning
of Scripture,” he expressed his intention to translate the Bible, so that every man in England
might read, in the language in which he was born, the wonderful works of God.

But suddenly his labors were stopped. Though not yet sixty years of age, unceasing toil, study,
and the assaults of his enemies, had told upon his strength, and made him prematurely old.
He was attacked by a dangerous illness. The tidings brought great joy to the friars. Now they
thought he would bitterly repent the evil he had done the church, and they hurried to his chamber
to listen to his confession. Representatives from the four religious orders, with four civil
officers, gathered about the supposed dying man. “You have death on your lips,” they said;
“be touched by your faults, and retract in our presence all that you have said to our injury.”
The Reformer listened in silence; then he bade his attendant raise him in his bed, and gazing
steadily upon them as they stood waiting for his recantation, he said, in the firm, strong
voice which had so often caused them to tremble, “I shall not die, but live, and again declare
the evil deeds of the friars.”(119) Astonished and abashed, the monks hurried from the room.

Wycliffe’s words were fulfilled. He lived to place in the hands of his countrymen the most
powerful of all weapons against Rome,—to give them the Bible, the Heaven-appointed agent to
liberate, enlighten, and evangelize the people. There were many and great obstacles to surmount
in the accomplishment of this work. Wycliffe was weighed down with infirmities; he knew that
only a few years for labor remained for him; he saw the opposition which he must meet; but,
encouraged by the promises of God’s word, he went forward nothing daunted. In the full vigor
of his intellectual powers, rich in experience, he had been preserved and prepared by God’s
special providence for this, the greatest of his labors. While all Christendom was filled with
tumult, the Reformer in his rectory at Lutterworth, unheeding the storm that raged without,
applied himself to his chosen task.

At last the work was completed,—the first English translation of the Bible ever made. The word
of God was opened to England. The Reformer feared not now the prison or the stake. He had placed
in the hands of the English people a light which should never be extinguished. In giving the
Bible to his countrymen, he had done more to break the fetters of ignorance and vice, more
to liberate and elevate his country, than was ever achieved by the most brilliant victories
on fields of battle.

The art of printing being still unknown, it was only by slow and wearisome labor that copies
of the Bible could be multiplied. So great was the interest to obtain the book, that many willingly
engaged in the work of transcribing it, but it was with difficulty that the copyists could
supply the demand. Some of the more wealthy purchasers desired the whole Bible. Others bought
only a portion. In many cases, several families united to purchase a copy. Thus Wycliffe’s
Bible soon found its way to the homes of the people.

The appeal to men’s reason aroused them from their passive submission to papal dogmas. Wycliffe
now taught the distinctive doctrines of Protestantism,—salvation through faith in Christ, and
the sole infallibility of the Scriptures. The preachers whom he had sent out circulated the
Bible, together with the Reformer’s writings, and with such success that the new faith was
accepted by nearly one half of the people of England.

The appearance of the Scriptures brought dismay to the authorities of the church. They had
now to meet an agency more powerful than Wycliffe,—an agency against which their weapons would
avail little. There was at this time no law in England prohibiting the Bible, for it had never
before been published in the language of the people. Such laws were afterward enacted and rigorously
enforced. Meanwhile, notwithstanding the efforts of the priests, there was for a season opportunity
for the circulation of the word of God.

Again the papal leaders plotted to silence the Reformer’s voice. Before three tribunals he
was successively summoned for trial, but without avail. First a synod of bishops declared his
writings heretical, and winning the young king, Richard II., to their side, they obtained a
royal decree consigning to prison all who should hold the condemned doctrines.

Wycliffe appealed from the synod to Parliament; he fearlessly arraigned the hierarchy before
the national council, and demanded a reform of the enormous abuses sanctioned by the church.
With convincing power he portrayed the usurpations and corruptions of the papal see. His enemies
were brought to confusion. The friends and supporters of Wycliffe had been forced to yield,
and it had been confidently expected that the Reformer himself, in his old age, alone and friendless,
would bow to the combined authority of the crown and the mitre. But instead of this the papists
saw themselves defeated. Parliament, roused by the stirring appeals of Wycliffe, repealed the
persecuting edict, and the Reformer was again at liberty.

A third time he was brought to trial, and now before the highest ecclesiastical tribunal in
the kingdom. Here no favor would be shown to heresy. Here at last Rome would triumph, and the
Reformer’s work would be stopped. So thought the papists. If they could but accomplish their
purpose, Wycliffe would be forced to abjure his doctrines, or would leave the court only for
the flames.

But Wycliffe did not retract; he would not dissemble. He fearlessly maintained his teachings,
and repelled the accusations of his persecutors. Losing sight of himself, of his position,
of the occasion, he summoned his hearers before the divine tribunal, and weighed their sophistries
and deceptions in the balances of eternal truth. The power of the Holy Spirit was felt in the
council-room. A spell from God was upon the hearers. They seemed to have no power to leave
the place. As arrows from the Lord’s quiver, the Reformer’s words pierced their hearts. The
charge of heresy, which they had brought against him, he with convincing power threw back upon
themselves. Why, he demanded, did they dare to spread their errors? For the sake of gain, to
make merchandise of the grace of God.

“With whom, think you,” he finally said, “are ye contending? with an old man on the brink of
the grave? No! with Truth,—Truth which is stronger than you, and will overcome you.”(120) So
saying, he withdrew from the assembly, and not one of his adversaries attempted to prevent him.

Wycliffe’s work was almost done; the banner of truth which he had so long borne was soon to
fall from his hand; but once more he was to bear witness for the gospel. The truth was to be
proclaimed from the very stronghold of the kingdom of error. Wycliffe was summoned for trial
before the papal tribunal at Rome, which had so often shed the blood of the saints. He was
not blind to the danger that threatened him, yet he would have obeyed the summons had not a
shock of palsy made it impossible for him to perform the journey. But though his voice was
not to be heard at Rome, he could speak by letter, and this he determined to do. From his rectory
the Reformer wrote to the pope a letter, which, while respectful in tone and Christian in spirit,
was a keen rebuke to the pomp and pride of the papal see.

“Verily I do rejoice,” he said, “to open and declare unto every man the faith which I do hold,
and especially unto the bishop of Rome: which, forasmuch as I do suppose to be sound and true,
he will most willingly confirm my said faith, or if it be erroneous, amend the same.

“First, I suppose that the gospel of Christ is the whole body of God’s law.... I do give and
hold the bishop of Rome, forasmuch as he is the vicar of Christ here on earth, to be most bound,
of all other men, unto that law of the gospel. For the greatness among Christ’s disciples did
not consist in worldly dignity or honors, but in the near and exact following of Christ in
His life and manners.... Christ, for the time of His pilgrimage here, was a most poor man,
abjecting and casting off all worldly rule and honor....

“No faithful man ought to follow either the pope himself or any of the holy men, but in such
points as he hath followed the Lord Jesus Christ; for Peter and the sons of Zebedee, by desiring
worldly honor, contrary to the following of Christ’s steps, did offend, and therefore in those
errors they are not to be followed....

“The pope ought to leave unto the secular power all temporal dominion and rule, and thereunto
effectually to move and exhort his whole clergy; for so did Christ, and especially by His apostles.
Wherefore, if I have erred in any of these points, I will most humbly submit myself unto correction,
even by death, if necessity so require; and if I could labor according to my will or desire
in mine own person, I would surely present myself before the bishop of Rome; but the Lord hath
otherwise visited me to the contrary, and hath taught me rather to obey God than men.”

In closing he said: “Let us pray unto our God, that He will so stir up our pope Urban VI.,
as he began, that he with his clergy may follow the Lord Jesus Christ in life and manners;
and that they may teach the people effectually, and that they, likewise, may faithfully follow
them in the same.”(121)

Thus Wycliffe presented to the pope and his cardinals the meekness and humility of Christ,
exhibiting not only to themselves but to all Christendom the contrast between them and the
Master whose representatives they professed to be.

Wycliffe fully expected that his life would be the price of his fidelity. The king, the pope,
and the bishops were united to accomplish his ruin, and it seemed certain that a few months
at most would bring him to the stake. But his courage was unshaken. “Why do you talk of seeking
the crown of martyrdom afar?” he said. “Preach the gospel of Christ to haughty prelates, and
martyrdom will not fail you. What! I should live and be silent?... Never! Let the blow fall,
I await its coming.”(122)

But God’s providence still shielded His servant. The man who for a whole lifetime had stood
boldly in defense of the truth, in daily peril of his life, was not to fall a victim to the
hatred of its foes. Wycliffe had never sought to shield himself, but the Lord had been his
protector; and now, when his enemies felt sure of their prey, God’s hand removed him beyond
their reach. In his church at Lutterworth, as he was about to dispense the communion, he fell,
stricken with palsy, and in a short time yielded up his life.

God had appointed to Wycliffe his work. He had put the word of truth in his mouth, and He set
a guard about him that this word might come to the people. His life was protected, and his
labors were prolonged, until a foundation was laid for the great work of the Reformation.

Wycliffe came from the obscurity of the Dark Ages. There were none who went before him from
whose work he could shape his system of reform. Raised up like John the Baptist to accomplish
a special mission, he was the herald of a new era. Yet in the system of truth which he presented
there was a unity and completeness which Reformers who followed him did not exceed, and which
some did not reach, even a hundred years later. So broad and deep was laid the foundation,
so firm and true was the framework, that it needed not to be reconstructed by those who came
after him.

The great movement that Wycliffe inaugurated, which was to liberate the conscience and the
intellect, and set free the nations so long bound to the triumphal car of Rome, had its spring
in the Bible. Here was the source of that stream of blessing, which, like the water of life,
has flowed down the ages since the fourteenth century. Wycliffe accepted the Holy Scriptures
with implicit faith as the inspired revelation of God’s will, a sufficient rule of faith and
practice. He had been educated to regard the Church of Rome as the divine, infallible authority,
and to accept with unquestioning reverence the established teachings and customs of a thousand
years; but he turned away from all these to listen to God’s holy word. This was the authority
which he urged the people to acknowledge. Instead of the church speaking through the pope,
he declared the only true authority to be the voice of God speaking through His word. And he
taught not only that the Bible is a perfect revelation of God’s will, but that the Holy Spirit
is its only interpreter, and that every man is, by the study of its teachings, to learn his
duty for himself. Thus he turned the minds of men from the pope and the Church of Rome to the
word of God.

Wycliffe was one of the greatest of the Reformers. In breadth of intellect, in clearness of
thought, in firmness to maintain the truth, and boldness to defend it, he was equaled by few
who came after him. Purity of life, unwearying diligence in study and in labor, incorruptible
integrity, and Christlike love and faithfulness in his ministry, characterized the first of
the Reformers. And this notwithstanding the intellectual darkness and moral corruption of the
age from which he emerged.

The character of Wycliffe is a testimony to the educating, transforming power of the Holy Scriptures.
It was the Bible that made him what he was. The effort to grasp the great truths of revelation
imparts freshness and vigor to all the faculties. It expands the mind, sharpens the perceptions,
and ripens the judgment. The study of the Bible will ennoble every thought, feeling, and aspiration
as no other study can. It gives stability of purpose, patience, courage, and fortitude; it
refines the character, and sanctifies the soul. An earnest, reverent study of the Scriptures,
bringing the mind of the student in direct contact with the infinite mind, would give to the
world men of stronger and more active intellect, as well as of nobler principle, than has ever
resulted from the ablest training that human philosophy affords. “The entrance of Thy words,”
says the psalmist, “giveth light; it giveth understanding.”(123)

The doctrines which had been taught by Wycliffe continued for a time to spread; his followers,
known as Wycliffites and Lollards, not only traversed England, but scattered to other lands,
carrying the knowledge of the gospel. Now that their leader was removed, the preachers labored
with even greater zeal than before, and multitudes flocked to listen to their teachings. Some
of the nobility, and even the wife of the king, were among the converts. In many places there
was a marked reform in the manners of the people, and the idolatrous symbols of Romanism were
removed from the churches. But soon the pitiless storm of persecution burst upon those who
had dared to accept the Bible as their guide. The English monarchs, eager to strengthen their
power by securing the support of Rome, did not hesitate to sacrifice the Reformers. For the
first time in the history of England, the stake was decreed against the disciples of the gospel.
Martyrdom succeeded martyrdom. The advocates of truth, proscribed and tortured, could only
pour their cries into the ear of the Lord of Sabaoth. Hunted as foes of the church and traitors
to the realm, they continued to preach in secret places, finding shelter as best they could
in the humble homes of the poor, and often hiding away even in dens and caves.

Notwithstanding the rage of persecution, a calm, devout, earnest, patient protest against the
prevailing corruption of religious faith continued for centuries to be uttered. The Christians
of that early time had only a partial knowledge of the truth, but they had learned to love
and obey God’s word, and they patiently suffered for its sake. Like the disciples in apostolic
days, many sacrificed their worldly possessions for the cause of Christ. Those who were permitted
to dwell in their homes, gladly sheltered their banished brethren; and when they too were driven
forth, they cheerfully accepted the lot of the outcast. Thousands, it is true, terrified by
the fury of their persecutors, purchased their freedom at the sacrifice of their faith, and
went out of their prisons, clothed in penitents’ robes, to publish their recantation. But the
number was not small—and among them were men of noble birth as well as the humble and lowly—who
bore fearless testimony to the truth in dungeon cells, in “Lollard towers,” and in the midst
of torture and flame, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to know “the fellowship of His
sufferings.”

The papists had failed to work their will with Wycliffe during his life, and their hatred could
not be satisfied while his body rested quietly in the grave. By the decree of the Council of
Constance, more than forty years after his death his bones were exhumed and publicly burned,
and the ashes were thrown into a neighboring brook.

It was through the writings of Wycliffe that John Huss, of Bohemia, was led to renounce many
of the errors of Romanism, and to enter upon the work of reform. Thus in these two countries,
so widely separated, the seed of truth was sown. From Bohemia the work extended to other lands.
The minds of men were directed to the long-forgotten word of God. A divine hand was preparing
the way for the Great Reformation.

6. HUSS AND JEROME.

The gospel had been planted in Bohemia as early as the ninth century. The Bible was translated,
and public worship was conducted, in the language of the people. But as the power of the pope
increased, so the word of God was obscured. Gregory VII., who had taken it upon him to humble
the pride of kings, was no less intent upon enslaving the people, and accordingly a bull was
issued forbidding public worship to be conducted in the Bohemian tongue. The pope declared
that “it was pleasing to the Omnipotent that His worship should be celebrated in an unknown
language, and that many evils and heresies had arisen from not observing this rule.”(125) Thus
Rome decreed that the light of God’s word should be extinguished, and the people should be
shut up in darkness. But Heaven had provided other agencies for the preservation of the church.
Many of the Waldenses and Albigenses, driven by persecution from their homes in France and
Italy, came to Bohemia. Though they dared not teach openly, they labored zealously in secret.
Thus the true faith was preserved from century to century.

Before the days of Huss, there were men in Bohemia who rose up to condemn openly the corruption
in the church and the profligacy of the people. Their labors excited widespread interest. The
fears of the hierarchy were roused, and persecution was opened against the disciples of the
gospel. Driven to worship in the forests and the mountains, they were hunted by soldiers, and
many were put to death. After a time it was decreed that all who departed from the Romish worship
should be burned. But while the Christians yielded up their lives, they looked forward to the
triumph of their cause. One of those who “taught that salvation was only to be found by faith
in the crucified Saviour,” declared when dying, “The rage of the enemies of the truth now prevails
against us, but it will not be forever; there shall arise one from among the common people,
without sword or authority, and against him they shall not be able to prevail.”(126) Luther’s
time was yet far distant; but already one was rising, whose testimony against Rome would stir
the nations.

John Huss was of humble birth, and was early left an orphan by the death of his father. His
pious mother, regarding education and the fear of God as the most valuable of possessions,
sought to secure this heritage for her son. Huss studied at the provincial school, and then
repaired to the university at Prague, receiving admission as a charity scholar. He was accompanied
on the journey to Prague by his mother; widowed and poor, she had no gift of worldly wealth
to bestow upon her son, but as they drew near to the great city, she kneeled down beside the
fatherless youth, and invoked for him the blessing of their Father in heaven. Little did that
mother realize how her prayer was to be answered.

At the university, Huss soon distinguished himself by his untiring application and rapid progress,
while his blameless life and gentle, winning deportment gained him universal esteem. He was
a sincere adherent of the Roman Church, and an earnest seeker for the spiritual blessings which
it professes to bestow. On the occasion of a jubilee, he went to confession, paid the last
few coins in his scanty store, and joined in the processions, that he might share in the absolution
promised. After completing his college course, he entered the priesthood, and rapidly attaining
to eminence, he soon became attached to the court of the king. He was also made professor and
afterward rector of the university where he had received his education. In a few years the
humble charity scholar had become the pride of his country, and his name was renowned throughout
Europe.

But it was in another field that Huss began the work of reform. Several years after taking
priest’s orders he was appointed preacher of the chapel of Bethlehem. The founder of this chapel
had advocated, as a matter of great importance, the preaching of the Scriptures in the language
of the people. Notwithstanding Rome’s opposition to this practice, it had not been wholly discontinued
in Bohemia. But there was great ignorance of the Bible, and the worst vices prevailed among
the people of all ranks. These evils Huss unsparingly denounced, appealing to the word of God
to enforce the principles of truth and purity which he inculcated.

A citizen of Prague, Jerome, who afterward became so closely associated with Huss, had, on
returning from England, brought with him the writings of Wycliffe. The queen of England, who
had been a convert to Wycliffe’s teachings, was a Bohemian princess, and through her influence
also the Reformer’s works were widely circulated in her native country. These works Huss read
with interest; he believed their author to be a sincere Christian, and was inclined to regard
with favor the reforms which he advocated. Already, though he knew it not, Huss had entered
upon a path which was to lead him far away from Rome.

About this time there arrived in Prague two strangers from England, men of learning, who had
received the light, and had come to spread it in this distant land. Beginning with an open
attack on the pope’s supremacy, they were soon silenced by the authorities; but being unwilling
to relinquish their purpose, they had recourse to other measures. Being artists as well as
preachers, they proceeded to exercise their skill. In a place open to the public they drew
two pictures. One represented the entrance of Christ into Jerusalem, “meek, and sitting upon
an ass,”(127) and followed by His disciples in travel-worn garments and with naked feet. The
other picture portrayed a pontifical procession,—the pope arrayed in his rich robes and triple
crown, mounted upon a horse magnificently adorned, preceded by trumpeters, and followed by
cardinals and prelates in dazzling array.

Here was a sermon which arrested the attention of all classes. Crowds came to gaze upon the
drawings. None could fail to read the moral, and many were deeply impressed by the contrast
between the meekness and humility of Christ the Master, and the pride and arrogance of the
pope, His professed servant. There was great commotion in Prague, and the strangers after a
time found it necessary, for their own safety, to depart. But the lesson they had taught was
not forgotten. The pictures made a deep impression on the mind of Huss, and led him to a closer
study of the Bible and of Wycliffe’s writings. Though he was not prepared, even yet, to accept
all the reforms advocated by Wycliffe, he saw more clearly the true character of the papacy,
and with greater zeal denounced the pride, the ambition, and the corruption of the hierarchy.

From Bohemia the light extended to Germany; for disturbances in the University of Prague caused
the withdrawal of hundreds of German students. Many of them had received from Huss their first
knowledge of the Bible, and on their return they spread the gospel in their fatherland.

Tidings of the work at Prague were carried to Rome, and Huss was soon summoned to appear before
the pope. To obey would be to expose himself to certain death. The king and queen of Bohemia,
the university, members of the nobility, and officers of the government, united in an appeal
to the pontiff that Huss be permitted to remain at Prague, and to answer at Rome by deputy.
Instead of granting this request, the pope proceeded to the trial and condemnation of Huss,
and then declared the city of Prague to be under interdict.

In that age this sentence, whenever pronounced, created wide-spread alarm. The ceremonies by
which it was accompanied were well adapted to strike terror to a people who looked upon the
pope as the representative of God Himself, holding the keys of heaven and hell, and possessing
power to invoke temporal as well as spiritual judgments. It was believed that the gates of
heaven were closed against the region smitten with interdict; that until it should please the
pope to remove the ban, the dead were shut out from the abodes of bliss. In token of this terrible
calamity, all the services of religion were suspended. The churches were closed. Marriages
were solemnized in the churchyard. The dead, denied burial in consecrated ground, were interred,
without the rites of sepulture, in the ditches or the fields. Thus by measures which appealed
to the imagination, Rome essayed to control the consciences of men.

The city of Prague was filled with tumult. A large class denounced Huss as the cause of all
their calamities, and demanded that he be given up to the vengeance of Rome. To quiet the storm,
the Reformer withdrew for a time to his native village. Writing to the friends whom he had
left at Prague, he said: “If I have withdrawn from the midst of you, it is to follow the precept
and example of Jesus Christ, in order not to give room to the ill-minded to draw on themselves
eternal condemnation, and in order not to be to the pious a cause of affliction and persecution,
I have retired also through an apprehension that impious priests might continue for a longer
time to prohibit the preaching of the word of God amongst you; but I have not quitted you to
deny the divine truth, for which, with God’s assistance, I am willing to die.”(128) Huss did
not cease his labors, but traveled through the surrounding country, preaching to eager crowds.
Thus the measures to which the pope resorted to suppress the gospel, were causing it to be
the more widely extended. “We can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth.”(129)

“The mind of Huss, at this stage of his career, would seem to have been the scene of a painful
conflict. Although the church was seeking to overwhelm him by her thunderbolts, he had not
renounced her authority. The Roman Church was still to him the spouse of Christ, and the pope
was the representative and vicar of God. What Huss was warring against was the abuse of authority,
not the principle itself. This brought on a terrible conflict between the convictions of his
understanding and the claims of his conscience. If the authority was just and infallible, as
he believed it to be, how came it that he felt compelled to disobey it? To obey, he saw, was
to sin; but why should obedience to an infallible church lead to such an issue? This was the
problem he could not solve; this was the doubt that tortured him hour by hour. The nearest
approximation to a solution which he was able to make, was that it had happened again, as once
before in the days of the Saviour, that the priests of the church had become wicked persons,
and were using their lawful authority for unlawful ends. This led him to adopt for his own
guidance, and to preach to others for theirs, the maxim that the precepts of Scripture, conveyed
through the understanding, are to rule the conscience; in other words, that God speaking in
the Bible, and not the church speaking through the priesthood, is the one infallible guide.”(130)

When after a time the excitement in Prague subsided, Huss returned to his chapel of Bethlehem,
to continue with greater zeal and courage the preaching of the word of God. His enemies were
active and powerful, but the queen and many of the nobles were his friends, and the people
in great numbers sided with him. Comparing his pure and elevating teachings and holy life with
the degrading dogmas which the Romanists preached, and the avarice and debauchery which they
practised, many regarded it an honor to be on his side.

Hitherto Huss had stood alone in his labors; but now Jerome, who while in England had accepted
the teachings of Wycliffe, joined in the work of reform. The two were hereafter united in their
lives, and in death they were not to be divided. Brilliancy of genius, eloquence and learning—gifts
that win popular favor—were possessed in a preeminent degree by Jerome; but in those qualities
which constitute real strength of character, Huss was the greater. His calm judgment served
as a restraint upon the impulsive spirit of Jerome, who, with true humility, perceived his
worth, and yielded to his counsels. Under their united labors the reform was more rapidly extended.

God permitted great light to shine upon the minds of these chosen men, revealing to them many
of the errors of Rome; but they did not receive all the light that was to be given to the world.
Through these, His servants, God was leading the people out of the darkness of Romanism; but
there were many and great obstacles for them to meet, and He led them on, step by step, as
they could bear it. They were not prepared to receive all the light at once. Like the full
glory of the noontide sun to those who have long dwelt in darkness, it would, if presented,
have caused them to turn away. Therefore He revealed it to the leaders little by little, as
it could be received by the people. From century to century, other faithful workers were to
follow, to lead the people on still farther in the path of reform.

The schism in the church still continued. Three popes were now contending for the supremacy,
and their strife filled Christendom with crime and tumult. Not content with hurling anathemas,
they resorted to temporal weapons. Each cast about him to purchase arms and to obtain soldiers.
Of course money must be had; and to procure this, the gifts, offices, and blessings of the
church were offered for sale.(131) The priests also, imitating their superiors, resorted to
simony and war to humble their rivals and strengthen their own power. With daily increasing
boldness, Huss thundered against the abominations which were tolerated in the name of religion;
and the people openly accused the Romish leaders as the cause of the miseries that overwhelmed
Christendom.

Again the city of Prague seemed on the verge of a bloody conflict. As in former ages, God’s
servant was accused as “he that troubleth Israel.”(132) The city was again placed under interdict,
and Huss withdrew to his native village. The testimony so faithfully borne from his loved chapel
of Bethlehem was ended. He was to speak from a wider stage, to all Christendom, before laying
down his life as a witness for the truth.

To cure the evils that were distracting Europe, a general council was summoned to meet at Constance.
The council was called at the desire of the emperor Sigismund, by one of the three rival popes,
John XXIII. The demand for a council had been far from welcome to Pope John, whose character
and policy could ill bear investigation, even by prelates as lax in morals as were the churchmen
of those times. He dared not, however, oppose the will of Sigismund.(133)

The chief objects to be accomplished by the council were to heal the schism in the church,
and to root out heresy. Hence the two anti-popes were summoned to appear before it, as well
as the leading propagator of the new opinions, John Huss. The former, having regard to their
own safety, did not attend in person, but were represented by their delegates. Pope John, while
ostensibly the convoker of the council, came to it with many misgivings, suspecting the emperor’s
secret purpose to depose him, and fearing to be brought to account for the vices which had
disgraced the tiara, as well as for the crimes which had secured it. Yet he made his entry
into the city of Constance with great pomp, attended by ecclesiastics of the highest rank,
and followed by a train of courtiers. All the clergy and dignitaries of the city, with an immense
crowd of citizens, went out to welcome him. Above his head was a golden canopy, borne by four
of the chief magistrates. The host was carried before him, and the rich dresses of the cardinals
and nobles made an imposing display.

Meanwhile another traveler was approaching Constance. Huss was conscious of the dangers which
threatened him. He parted from his friends as if he were never to meet them again, and went
on his journey feeling that it was leading him to the stake. Notwithstanding he had obtained
a safe-conduct from the king of Bohemia, and received one also from the emperor Sigismund while
on his journey, he made all his arrangements in view of the probability of his death.

In a letter addressed to his friends at Prague he said: “My brethren, ... I am departing with
a safe-conduct from the king, to meet my numerous and mortal enemies.... I confide altogether
in the all-powerful God, in my Saviour; I trust that He will listen to your ardent prayers,
that He will infuse His prudence and His wisdom into my mouth, in order that I may resist them;
and that He will accord me His Holy Spirit to fortify me in His truth, so that I may face with
courage, temptations, prison, and if necessary, a cruel death. Jesus Christ suffered for His
well-beloved; and therefore ought we to be astonished that He has left us His example, in order
that we may ourselves endure with patience all things for our own salvation? He is God, and
we are His creatures; He is the Lord, and we are His servants; He is Master of the world, and
we are contemptible mortals:—yet He suffered! Why, then, should we not suffer also, particularly
when suffering is for us a purification? Therefore, beloved, if my death ought to contribute
to His glory, pray that it may come quickly, and that He may enable me to support all my calamities
with constancy. But if it be better that I return amongst you, let us pray to God that I may
return without stain,—that is, that I may not suppress one tittle of the truth of the gospel,
in order to leave my brethren an excellent example to follow. Probably, therefore, you will
never more behold my face at Prague: but should the will of the all-powerful God deign to restore
me to you, let us then advance with a firmer heart in the knowledge and the love of His law.”(134)

In another letter, to a priest who had become a disciple of the gospel, Huss spoke with deep
humility of his own errors, accusing himself “of having felt pleasure in wearing rich apparel,
and of having wasted hours in frivolous occupations.” He then added these touching admonitions:
“May the glory of God and the salvation of souls occupy thy mind, and not the possession of
benefices and estates. Beware of adorning thy house more than thy soul; and above all, give
thy care to the spiritual edifice. Be pious and humble with the poor, and consume not thy substance
in feasting. Shouldst thou not amend thy life and refrain from superfluities, I fear that thou
wilt be severely chastened, as I am myself.... Thou knowest my doctrine, for thou hast received
my instructions from thy childhood; it is therefore useless for me to write to thee any further.
But I conjure thee, by the mercy of our Lord, not to imitate me in any of the vanities into
which thou hast seen me fall.” On the cover of the letter he added, “I conjure thee, my friend,
not to break this seal until thou shalt have acquired the certitude that I am dead.”(135)

On his journey, Huss everywhere beheld indications of the spread of his doctrines, and the
favor with which his cause was regarded. The people thronged to meet him, and in some towns
the magistrates attended him through their streets.

Upon arriving at Constance, Huss was granted full liberty. To the emperor’s safe-conduct was
added a personal assurance of protection by the pope. But in violation of these solemn and
repeated declarations, the Reformer was in a short time arrested, by order of the pope and
cardinals, and thrust into a loathsome dungeon. Later he was transferred to a strong castle
across the Rhine, and there kept a prisoner. The pope, profiting little by his perfidy, was
soon after committed to the same prison.(136) He had been proved before the council to be guilty
of the basest crimes, besides murder, simony, and adultery, “sins not fit to be named.” So
the council itself declared; and he was finally deprived of the tiara, and thrown into prison.
The anti-popes also were deposed, and a new pontiff was chosen.

Though the pope himself had been guilty of greater crimes than Huss had ever charged upon the
priests, and for which he had demanded a reformation, yet the same council which degraded the
pontiff proceeded to crush the Reformer. The imprisonment of Huss excited great indignation
in Bohemia. Powerful noblemen addressed to the council earnest protests against this outrage.
The emperor, who was loath to permit the violation of a safe-conduct, opposed the proceedings
against him. But the enemies of the Reformer were malignant and determined. They appealed to
the emperor’s prejudices, to his fears, to his zeal for the church. They brought forward arguments
of great length to prove that “faith ought not to be kept with heretics, nor persons suspected
of heresy, though they are furnished with safe-conducts from the emperor and kings.”(137) Thus
they prevailed.

Enfeebled by illness and imprisonment,—for the damp, foul air of his dungeon had brought on
a fever which nearly ended his life,—Huss was at last brought before the council. Loaded with
chains, he stood in the presence of the emperor, whose honor and good faith had been pledged
to protect him. During his long trial he firmly maintained the truth, and in the presence of
the assembled dignitaries of church and state, he uttered a solemn and faithful protest against
the corruptions of the hierarchy. When required to choose whether he would recant his doctrines
or suffer death, he accepted the martyr’s fate.

The grace of God sustained him. During the weeks of suffering that passed before his final
sentence, heaven’s peace filled his soul. “I write this letter,” he said to a friend, “in my
prison, and with my fettered hand, expecting my sentence of death to-morrow.... When, with
the assistance of Jesus Christ, we shall again meet in the delicious peace of the future life,
you will learn how merciful God has shown Himself toward me, how effectually He has supported
me in the midst of my temptations and trials.”(138)

In the gloom of his dungeon he foresaw the triumph of the true faith. Returning in his dreams
to the chapel at Prague where he had preached the gospel, he saw the pope and his bishops effacing
the pictures of Christ which he had painted on its walls. It was a vast and brilliant assembly,—the
emperor, the princes of the empire, the royal deputies, the cardinals, bishops, and priests,
and an immense crowd who had come as spectators of the events of the day. From all parts of
Christendom had been gathered the witnesses of this first great sacrifice in the long struggle
by which liberty of conscience was to be secured.

Being called upon for his final decision, Huss declared his refusal to abjure, and fixing his
penetrating glance upon the monarch whose plighted word had been so shamelessly violated, he
declared, “I determined, of my own free will, to appear before this council, under the public
protection and faith of the emperor here present.”(140) A deep flush crimsoned the face of
Sigismund as the eyes of all in the assembly turned upon him.

Sentence having been pronounced, the ceremony of degradation began. The bishops clothed their
prisoner in the sacerdotal habit, and as he took the priestly robe, he said, “Our Lord Jesus
Christ was covered with a white robe, by way of insult, when Herod had Him conducted before
Pilate.”(141) Being again exhorted to retract, he replied, turning toward the people: “With
what face, then, should I behold the heavens? How should I look on those multitudes of men
to whom I have preached the pure gospel? No; I esteem their salvation more than this poor body,
now appointed unto death.” The vestments were removed one by one, each bishop pronouncing a
curse as he performed his part of the ceremony. Finally “they put on his head a cap or pyramidal-shaped
mitre of paper, on which were painted frightful figures of demons, with the word ‘Arch-Heretic’
conspicuous in front. ‘Most joyfully,’ said Huss, ‘will I wear this crown of shame for Thy
sake, O Jesus, who for me didst wear a crown of thorns.’ ”

When he was thus arrayed, “the prelates said, ‘Now we devote thy soul to the devil.’ ‘And I,’
said John Huss, lifting up his eyes toward heaven, ‘do commit my spirit into Thy hands, O Lord
Jesus, for Thou hast redeemed me.’ ”(142)

He was now delivered up to the secular authorities, and led away to the place of execution.
An immense procession followed, hundreds of men at arms, priests and bishops in their costly
robes, and the inhabitants of Constance. When he had been fastened to the stake, and all was
ready for the fire to be lighted, the martyr was once more exhorted to save himself by renouncing
his errors. “What errors,” said Huss, “shall I renounce? I know myself guilty of none. I call
God to witness that all that I have written and preached has been with the view of rescuing
souls from sin and perdition; and, therefore, most joyfully will I confirm with my blood that
truth which I have written and preached.”(143) When the flames kindled about him, he began
to sing, “Jesus, Thou Son of David, have mercy on me,” and so continued till his voice was
silenced forever.

Even his enemies were struck with his heroic bearing. A zealous papist, describing the martyrdom
of Huss, and of Jerome, who died soon after, said: “Both bore themselves with constant mind
when their last hour approached. They prepared for the fire as if they were going to a marriage
feast. They uttered no cry of pain. When the flames rose, they began to sing hymns; and scarce
could the vehemency of the fire stop their singing.”(144)

When the body of Huss had been wholly consumed, his ashes, with the soil upon which they rested,
were gathered up and cast into the Rhine, and thus borne onward to the ocean. His persecutors
vainly imagined that they had rooted out the truths he preached. Little did they dream that
the ashes that day borne away to the sea were to be as seed scattered in all the countries
of the earth; that in lands yet unknown it would yield abundant fruit in witnesses for the
truth. The voice which had spoken in the council hall of Constance had wakened echoes that
would be heard through all coming ages. Huss was no more, but the truths for which he died
could never perish. His example of faith and constancy would encourage multitudes to stand
firm for the truth, in the face of torture and death. His execution had exhibited to the whole
world the perfidious cruelty of Rome. The enemies of truth, though they knew it not, had been
furthering the cause which they vainly sought to destroy.

Yet another stake was to be set up at Constance. The blood of another witness must testify
for the truth. Jerome, upon bidding farewell to Huss on his departure for the council, had
exhorted him to courage and firmness, declaring that if he should fall into any peril, he himself
would fly to his assistance. Upon hearing of the Reformer’s imprisonment, the faithful disciple
immediately prepared to fulfil his promise. Without a safe-conduct he set out, with a single
companion, for Constance. On arriving there he was convinced that he had only exposed himself
to peril, without the possibility of doing anything for the deliverance of Huss. He fled from
the city, but was arrested on the homeward journey, and brought back loaded with fetters, and
under the custody of a band of soldiers. At his first appearance before the council, his attempts
to reply to the accusations brought against him were met with shouts, “To the flames with him!
to the flames!”(145) He was thrown into a dungeon, chained in a position which caused him great
suffering, and fed on bread and water. After some months the cruelties of his imprisonment
brought upon Jerome an illness that threatened his life, and his enemies, fearing that he might
escape them, treated him with less severity, though he remained in prison for one year.

The death of Huss had not resulted as the papists had hoped. The violation of his safe-conduct
had roused a storm of indignation, and as the safer course, the council determined, instead
of burning Jerome, to force him, if possible, to retract. He was brought before the assembly,
and offered the alternative to recant, or to die at the stake. Death at the beginning of his
imprisonment would have been a mercy, in comparison with the terrible sufferings which he had
undergone; but now, weakened by illness, by the rigors of his prison-house, and the torture
of anxiety and suspense, separated from his friends, and disheartened by the death of Huss,
Jerome’s fortitude gave way, and he consented to submit to the council. He pledged himself
to adhere to the Catholic faith, and accepted the action of the council in condemning the doctrines
of Wycliffe and Huss, excepting, however, the “holy truths” which they had taught.(146)

By this expedient Jerome endeavored to silence the voice of conscience and escape his doom.
But in the solitude of his dungeon he saw more clearly what he had done. He thought of the
courage and fidelity of Huss, and in contrast pondered upon his own denial of the truth. He
thought of the divine Master whom he had pledged himself to serve, and who for his sake endured
the death of the cross. Before his retraction he had found comfort, amid all his sufferings,
in the assurance of God’s favor; but now remorse and doubt tortured his soul. He knew that
still other retractions must be made before he could be at peace with Rome. The path upon which
he was entering could end only in complete apostasy. His resolution was taken: to escape a
brief period of suffering he would not deny his Lord.

Soon he was again brought before the council. His submission had not satisfied his judges.
Their thirst for blood, whetted by the death of Huss, clamored for fresh victims. Only by an
unreserved surrender of the truth could Jerome preserve his life. But he had determined to
avow his faith, and follow his brother-martyr to the flames.

He renounced his former recantation, and as a dying man, solemnly required an opportunity to
make his defense. Fearing the effect of his words, the prelates insisted that he should merely
affirm or deny the truth of the charges brought against him. Jerome protested against such
cruelty and injustice. “You have held me shut up three hundred and forty days in a frightful
prison,” he said, “in the midst of filth, noisomeness, stench, and the utmost want of everything;
you then bring me out before you, and lending an ear to my mortal enemies, you refuse to hear
me.... If you be really wise men, and the lights of the world, take care not to sin against
justice. As to me, I am only a feeble mortal; my life is but of little importance; and when
I exhort you not to deliver an unjust sentence, I speak less for myself than for you.”(147)

His request was finally granted. In the presence of his judges, Jerome kneeled down and prayed
that the divine Spirit might control his thoughts and words, that he might speak nothing contrary
to the truth or unworthy of his Master. For a whole year he had been immured in a dungeon,
unable to read or even to see, in great physical suffering and mental anxiety. Yet his arguments
were presented with as much clearness and power as if he had had undisturbed opportunity for
study. He pointed his hearers to the long line of holy men who had been condemned by unjust
judges. In almost every generation have been those who, while seeking to elevate the people
of their time, have been reproached and cast out, but who in later times have been shown to
be deserving of honor. Christ Himself was condemned as a malefactor at an unrighteous tribunal.

At his retraction, Jerome had assented to the justice of the sentence condemning Huss; he now
declared his repentance, and bore witness to the innocence and holiness of the martyr. “I knew
him from his childhood,” he said. “He was a most excellent man, just and holy; he was condemned,
notwithstanding his innocence.... I also—I am ready to die: I will not recoil before the torments
that are prepared for me by my enemies and false witnesses, who will one day have to render
an account of their impostures before the great God, whom nothing can deceive.”(149)

In self-reproach for his own denial of the truth, Jerome continued: “Of all the sins that I
have committed since my youth, none weigh so heavily on my mind, and cause me such poignant
remorse, as that which I committed in this fatal place, when I approved of the iniquitous sentence
rendered against Wycliffe, and against the holy martyr, John Huss, my master and my friend.
Yes! I confess it from my heart, and declare with horror that I disgracefully quailed when,
through a dread of death, I condemned their doctrines. I therefore supplicate ... Almighty
God to deign to pardon me my sins, and this one in particular, the most heinous of all.” Pointing
to his judges, he said firmly: “You condemned Wycliffe and John Huss, not for having shaken
the doctrine of the church, but simply because they branded with reprobation the scandals proceeding
from the clergy,—their pomp, their pride, and all the vices of the prelates and priests. The
things which they have affirmed, and which are irrefutable, I also think and declare, like them.”

His words were interrupted. The prelates, trembling with rage, cried out, “What need is there
of further proof? We behold with our own eyes the most obstinate of heretics!”

Unmoved by the tempest, Jerome exclaimed: “What! do you suppose that I fear to die? You have
held me for a whole year in a frightful dungeon, more horrible than death itself. You have
treated me more cruelly than a Turk, Jew, or pagan, and my flesh has literally rotted off my
bones alive; and yet I make no complaint, for lamentation ill becomes a man of heart and spirit;
but I cannot but express my astonishment at such great barbarity toward a Christian.”(150)

Again the storm of rage burst out, and Jerome was hurried away to prison. Yet there were some
in the assembly upon whom his words had made a deep impression, and who desired to save his
life. He was visited by dignitaries of the church, and urged to submit himself to the council.
The most brilliant prospects were presented before him as the reward of renouncing his opposition
to Rome. But like his Master, when offered the glory of the world, Jerome remained steadfast.

“Prove to me from the Holy Writings that I am in error,” he said, “and I will abjure it.”

“The Holy Writings!” exclaimed one of his tempters, “is everything then to be judged by them?
Who can understand them till the church has interpreted them?”

“Are the traditions of men more worthy of faith than the gospel of our Saviour?” replied Jerome.
“Paul did not exhort those to whom he wrote to listen to the traditions of men, but said, ‘Search
the Scriptures.’ ”

“Heretic!” was the response, “I repent having pleaded so long with you. I see that you are
urged on by the devil.”(151)

Erelong sentence of condemnation was passed upon him. He was led out to the same spot upon
which Huss had yielded up his life. He went singing on his way, his countenance lighted up
with joy and peace. His gaze was fixed upon Christ, and to him death had lost its terrors.
When the executioner, about to kindle the pile, stepped behind him, the martyr exclaimed, “Come
forward boldly; apply the fire before my face. Had I been afraid, I should not be here.”

His last words, uttered as the flames rose about him, were a prayer. “Lord, Almighty Father,”
he cried, “have pity on me, and pardon me my sins; for Thou knowest that I have always loved
Thy truth.”(152) His voice ceased, but his lips continued to move in prayer. When the fire
had done its work, the ashes of the martyr, with the earth upon which they rested, were gathered
up, and like those of Huss, were thrown into the Rhine.

So perished God’s faithful light-bearers. But the light of the truths which they proclaimed,—the
light of their heroic example,—could not be extinguished. As well might men attempt to turn
back the sun in its course as to prevent the dawning of that day which was even then breaking
upon the world.

The execution of Huss had kindled a flame of indignation and horror in Bohemia. It was felt
by the whole nation that he had fallen a prey to the malice of the priests and the treachery
of the emperor. He was declared to have been a faithful teacher of the truth, and the council
that decreed his death was charged with the guilt of murder. His doctrines now attracted greater
attention than ever before. By the papal edicts the writings of Wycliffe had been condemned
to the flames. But those that had escaped destruction were now brought out from their hiding-places,
and studied in connection with the Bible, or such parts of it as the people could obtain, and
many were thus led to accept the reformed faith.

The murderers of Huss did not stand quietly by and witness the triumph of his cause. Political
subjects have been excluded both to keep a volume intended for friends free from anything of a
party character and because the writer looks forward to putting the
thoughts scattered over his political essays and reviews into a more
connected form.

The papers on 'The Early Years of the Conqueror of Quebec,' 'A Wirepuller of Kings,' 'A True
Captain of Industry' and 'Early Years of Abraham Lincoln' can hardly pretend to be more than accounts
of books to which they relate, but they interested some of their readers at the time and there
are probably not many copies of the books in Canada. All the papers have been revised, so that
they do not appear here exactly as they were in the periodicals from which they are reprinted.


The enemies of the Bohemians, knowing that the blind warrior was dead, deemed the opportunity
favorable for recovering all that they had lost. The pope now proclaimed a crusade against
the Hussites, and again an immense force was precipitated upon Bohemia, but only to suffer
terrible defeat. Another crusade was proclaimed. In all the papal countries of Europe, men,
money, and munitions of war were raised. Multitudes flocked to the papal standard, assured
that at last an end would be made of the Hussite heretics. Confident of victory, the vast force
entered Bohemia. The people rallied to repel them. The two armies approached each other, until
only a river lay between them. “The crusaders were in greatly superior force, but instead of
dashing across the stream, and closing in battle with the Hussites whom they had come so far
to meet, they stood gazing in silence at those warriors.”(153) Then suddenly a mysterious terror
fell upon the host. Without striking a blow, that mighty force broke and scattered, as if dispelled
by an unseen power. Great numbers were slaughtered by the Hussite army, which pursued the fugitives,
and an immense booty fell into the hands of the victors, so that the war, instead of impoverishing,
enriched the Bohemians.

A few years later, under a new pope, still another crusade was set on foot. As before, men
and means were drawn from all the papal countries of Europe. Great were the inducements held
out to those who should engage in this perilous enterprise. Full forgiveness of the most heinous
crimes was insured to every crusader. All who died in the war were promised a rich reward in
heaven, and those who survived were to reap honor and riches on the field of battle. Again
a vast army was collected, and crossing the frontier they entered Bohemia. The Hussite forces
fell back before them, thus drawing the invaders farther and farther into the country, and
leading them to count the victory already won. At last the army of Procopius made a stand,
and turning upon the foe, advanced to give them battle. The crusaders, now discovering their
mistake, lay in their encampment awaiting the onset. As the sound of the approaching force
was heard, even before the Hussites were in sight, a panic again fell upon the crusaders. Princes,
generals, and common soldiers, casting away their armor, fled in all directions. In vain the
papal legate, who was the leader of the invasion, endeavored to rally his terrified and disorganized
forces. Despite his utmost endeavors, he himself was swept along in the tide of fugitives.
The rout was complete, and again an immense booty fell into the hands of the victors.

Thus the second time a vast army, sent forth by the most powerful nations of Europe, a host
of brave, warlike men, trained and equipped for battle, fled without a blow, before the defenders
of a small and hitherto feeble nation. Here was a manifestation of divine power. The invaders
were smitten with a supernatural terror. He who overthrew the hosts of Pharaoh in the Red Sea,
who put to flight the armies of Midian before Gideon and his three hundred, who in one night
laid low the forces of the proud Assyrian, had again stretched out His hand to wither the power
of the oppressor. “There were they in great fear, where no fear was: for God hath scattered
the bones of him that encampeth against thee: thou hast put them to shame, because God hath
despised them.”(154)

The papal leaders, despairing of conquering by force, at last resorted to diplomacy. A compromise
was entered into, that while professing to grant to the Bohemians freedom of conscience, really
betrayed them into the power of Rome. The Bohemians had specified four points as the condition
of peace with Rome: The free preaching of the Bible; the right of the whole church to both
the bread and the wine in the communion, and the use of the mother tongue in divine worship;
the exclusion of the clergy from all secular offices and authority; and in cases of crime,
the jurisdiction of the civil courts over clergy and laity alike. The papal authorities at
last “agreed that the four articles of the Hussites should be accepted, but that the right
of explaining them, that is, of determining their precise import, should belong to the council—in
other words, to the pope and the emperor.”(155) On this basis a treaty was entered into, and
Rome gained by dissimulation and fraud what she had failed to gain by conflict; for, placing
her own interpretation upon the Hussite articles, as upon the Bible, she could pervert their
meaning to suit her own purposes.

A large class in Bohemia, seeing that it betrayed their liberties, could not consent to the
compact. Dissensions and divisions arose, leading to strife and bloodshed among themselves.
In this strife the noble Procopius fell, and the liberties of Bohemia perished.

Sigismund, the betrayer of Huss and Jerome, now became king of Bohemia, and regardless of his
oath to support the rights of the Bohemians, he proceeded to establish popery. But he had gained
little by his subservience to Rome. For twenty years his life had been filled with labors and
perils. His armies had been wasted and his treasuries drained by a long and fruitless struggle;
and now, after reigning one year, he died, leaving his kingdom on the brink of civil war, and
bequeathing to posterity a name branded with infamy.

Tumults, strife, and bloodshed were protracted. Again foreign armies invaded Bohemia, and internal
dissension continued to distract the nation. Those who remained faithful to the gospel were
subjected to a bloody persecution.

As their former brethren, entering into compact with Rome, imbibed her errors, those who adhered
to the ancient faith had formed themselves into a distinct church, taking the name of “United
Brethren.” This act drew upon them maledictions from all classes. Yet their firmness was unshaken.
Forced to find refuge in the woods and caves, they still assembled to read God’s word and unite
in His worship.

Through messengers secretly sent out into different countries, they learned that here and there
were “isolated confessors of the truth, a few in this city and a few in that, the object, like
themselves, of persecution; and that amid the mountains of the Alps was an ancient church,
resting on the foundations of Scripture, and protesting against the idolatrous corruptions
of Rome.”(156) This intelligence was received with great joy, and a correspondence was opened
with the Waldensian Christians.

Steadfast to the gospel, the Bohemians waited through the night of their persecution; in the
darkest hour still turning their eyes toward the horizon like men who watch for the morning.
“Their lot was cast in evil days, but ... they remembered the words first uttered by Huss,
and repeated by Jerome, that a century must revolve before the day should break. These were
to the Taborites [Hussites] what the words of Joseph were to the tribes in the house of bondage:
‘I die, and God will surely visit you, and bring you out.’ ”(157) “The closing period of the
fifteenth century witnessed the slow but sure increase of the churches of the Brethren. Although
far from being unmolested, they yet enjoyed comparative rest. At the commencement of the sixteenth
century, their churches numbered two hundred in Bohemia and Moravia.”(158) “So goodly was the
remnant which, escaping the destructive fury of fire and sword, was permitted to see the dawning
of that day which Huss had foretold.”

7. LUTHER’S SEPARATION FROM ROME.

Foremost among those who were called to lead the church from the darkness of popery into the
light of a purer faith, stood Martin Luther. Zealous, ardent, and devoted, knowing no fear
but the fear of God, and acknowledging no foundation for religious faith but the Holy Scriptures,
Luther was the man for his time; through him, God accomplished a great work for the reformation
of the church and the enlightenment of the world.

Like the first heralds of the gospel, Luther sprung from the ranks of poverty. His early years
were spent in the humble home of a German peasant. By daily toil as a miner, his father earned
the means for his education. He intended him for a lawyer; but God purposed to make him a builder
in the great temple that was rising so slowly through the centuries. Hardship, privation, and
severe discipline were the school in which Infinite Wisdom prepared Luther for the important
mission of his life.

Luther’s father was a man of strong and active mind and great force of character, honest, resolute,
and straight-forward. He was true to his convictions of duty, let the consequences be what
they might. His sterling good sense led him to regard the monastic system with distrust. He
was highly displeased when Luther, without his consent, entered a monastery; and it was two
years before the father was reconciled to his son, and even then his opinions remained the same.

Luther’s parents bestowed great care upon the education and training of their children. They
endeavored to instruct them in the knowledge of God and the practice of Christian virtues.
The father’s prayer often ascended in the hearing of his son, that the child might remember
the name of the Lord, and one day aid in the advancement of His truth. Every advantage for
moral or intellectual culture which their life of toil permitted them to enjoy, was eagerly
improved by these parents. Their efforts were earnest and persevering to prepare their children
for a life of piety and usefulness. With their firmness and strength of character they sometimes
exercised too great severity; but the Reformer himself, though conscious that in some respects
they had erred, found in their discipline more to approve than to condemn.

At school, where he was sent at an early age, Luther was treated with harshness and even violence.
So great was the poverty of his parents, that upon going from home to school in another town
he was for a time obliged to obtain his food by singing from door to door, and he often suffered
from hunger. The gloomy, superstitious ideas of religion then prevailing filled him with fear.
He would lie down at night with a sorrowful heart, looking forward with trembling to the dark
future, and in constant terror at the thought of God as a stern, unrelenting judge, a cruel
tyrant, rather than a kind heavenly Father.

Yet under so many and so great discouragements, Luther pressed resolutely forward toward the
high standard of moral and intellectual excellence which attracted his soul. He thirsted for
knowledge, and the earnest and practical character of his mind led him to desire the solid
and useful rather than the showy and superficial.

When, at the age of eighteen, he entered the University of Erfurt, his situation was more favorable
and his prospects were brighter than in his earlier years. His parents having by thrift and
industry acquired a competence, they were able to render him all needed assistance. And the
influence of judicious friends had somewhat lessened the gloomy effects of his former training.
He applied himself to the study of the best authors, diligently treasuring their most weighty
thoughts, and making the wisdom of the wise his own. Even under the harsh discipline of his
former instructors, he had early given promise of distinction; and with favorable influences
his mind rapidly developed. A retentive memory, a lively imagination, strong reasoning powers,
and untiring application, soon placed him in the foremost rank among his associates. Intellectual
discipline ripened his understanding, and aroused an activity of mind and a keenness of perception
that were preparing him for the conflicts of his life.

The fear of the Lord dwelt in the heart of Luther, enabling him to maintain his steadfastness
of purpose, and leading him to deep humility before God. He had an abiding sense of his dependence
upon divine aid, and he did not fail to begin each day with prayer, while his heart was continually
breathing a petition for guidance and support. “To pray well,” he often said, “is the better
half of study.”(159)

While one day examining the books in the library of the university, Luther discovered a Latin
Bible. Such a book he had never before seen. He was ignorant even of its existence. He had
heard portions of the Gospels and Epistles, which were read to the people at public worship,
and he supposed that these were the entire Bible. Now, for the first time, he looked upon the
whole of God’s word. With mingled awe and wonder he turned the sacred pages; with quickened
pulse and throbbing heart he read for himself the words of life, pausing now and then to exclaim,
“O that God would give me such a book for myself!”(160) Angels of heaven were by his side,
and rays of light from the throne of God revealed the treasures of truth to his understanding.
He had ever feared to offend God, but now the deep conviction of his condition as a sinner
took hold upon him as never before.

An earnest desire to be free from sin and to find peace with God, led him at last to enter
a cloister, and devote himself to a monastic life. Here he was required to perform the lowest
drudgery, and to beg from house to house. He was at an age when respect and appreciation are
most eagerly craved, and these menial offices were deeply mortifying to his natural feelings;
but he patiently endured this humiliation, believing that it was necessary because of his sins.

Every moment that could be spared from his daily duties he employed in study, robbing himself
of sleep, and grudging even the time spent at his scanty meals. Above everything else he delighted
in the study of God’s word. He had found a Bible chained to the convent wall, and to this he
often repaired. As his convictions of sin deepened, he sought by his own works to obtain pardon
and peace. He led a most rigorous life, endeavoring by fasting, vigils, and scourgings to subdue
the evils of his nature, from which the monastic life had brought no release. He shrank from
no sacrifice by which he might attain to that purity of heart which would enable him to stand
approved before God. “I was indeed a pious monk,” he afterward said, “and followed the rules
of my order more strictly than I can express. If ever monk could obtain heaven by his monkish
works, I should certainly have been entitled to it.... If it had continued much longer, I should
have carried my mortifications even to death.”(161) As the result of this painful discipline,
he lost strength, and suffered from fainting spasms, from the effects of which he never fully
recovered. But with all his efforts, his burdened soul found no relief. He was at last driven
to the verge of despair.

When it appeared to Luther that all was lost, God raised up a friend and helper for him. The
pious Staupitz opened the word of God to Luther’s mind, and bade him look away from himself,
cease the contemplation of infinite punishment for the violation of God’s law, and look to
Jesus, his sin-pardoning Saviour. “Instead of torturing yourself on account of your sins, throw
yourself into the Redeemer’s arms. Trust in Him, in the righteousness of His life, in the atonement
of His death.... Listen to the Son of God. He became man to give you the assurance of divine
favor,” “Love Him who first loved you.”(162) Thus spoke this messenger of mercy. His words
made a deep impression upon Luther’s mind. After many a struggle with long-cherished errors,
he was enabled to grasp the truth, and peace came to his troubled soul.

Luther was ordained a priest, and was called from the cloister to a professorship in the University
of Wittenberg. Here he applied himself to the study of the Scriptures in the original tongues.
He began to lecture upon the Bible; and the book of Psalms, the Gospels, and the Epistles were
opened to the understanding of crowds of delighted listeners. Staupitz, his friend and superior,
urged him to ascend the pulpit, and preach the word of God. Luther hesitated, feeling himself
unworthy to speak to the people in Christ’s stead. It was only after a long struggle that he
yielded to the solicitations of his friends. Already he was mighty in the Scriptures, and the
grace of God rested upon him. His eloquence captivated his hearers, the clearness and power
with which he presented the truth convinced their understanding, and his fervor touched their
hearts.

Luther was still a true son of the papal church, and had no thought that he would ever be anything
else. In the providence of God he was led to visit Rome. He pursued his journey on foot, lodging
at the monasteries on the way. At a convent in Italy he was filled with wonder at the wealth,
magnificence, and luxury that he witnessed. Endowed with a princely revenue, the monks dwelt
in splendid apartments, attired themselves in the richest and most costly robes, and feasted
at a sumptuous table. With painful misgivings Luther contrasted this scene with the self-denial
and hardship of his own life. His mind was becoming perplexed.

At last he beheld in the distance the seven-hilled city. With deep emotion he prostrated himself
upon the earth, exclaiming, “Holy Rome, I salute thee!”(163) He entered the city, visited the
churches, listened to the marvelous tales repeated by priests and monks, and performed all
the ceremonies required. Everywhere he looked upon scenes that filled him with astonishment
and horror. He saw that iniquity existed among all classes of the clergy. He heard indecent
jokes from prelates, and was filled with horror at their awful profanity, even during mass.
As he mingled with the monks and citizens, he met dissipation, debauchery. Turn where he would,
in the place of sanctity he found profanation. “No one can imagine,” he wrote, “what sins and
infamous actions are committed in Rome; they must be seen and heard to be believed. Thus they
are in the habit of saying, ‘If there is a hell, Rome is built over it: it is an abyss whence
issues every kind of sin.’ ”(164)

By a recent decretal, an indulgence had been promised by the pope to all who should ascend
upon their knees “Pilate’s staircase,” said to have been descended by our Saviour on leaving
the Roman judgment hall, and to have been miraculously conveyed from Jerusalem to Rome. Luther
was one day devoutly climbing these steps, when suddenly a voice like thunder seemed to say
to him, “The just shall live by faith.”(165) He sprung to his feet, and hastened from the place
in shame and horror. That text never lost its power upon his soul. From that time he saw more
clearly than ever before the fallacy of trusting to human works for salvation, and the necessity
of constant faith in the merits of Christ. His eyes had been opened, and were never again to
be closed, to the delusions of the papacy. When he turned his face from Rome, he had turned
away also in heart, and from that time the separation grew wider, until he severed all connection
with the papal church.

After his return from Rome, Luther received at the University of Wittenberg the degree of Doctor
of Divinity. Now he was at liberty to devote himself, as never before, to the Scriptures that
he loved. He had taken a solemn vow to study carefully and to preach with fidelity the word
of God, not the sayings and doctrines of the popes, all the days of his life. He was no longer
the mere monk or professor, but the authorized herald of the Bible. He had been called as a
shepherd to feed the flock of God, that were hungering and thirsting for the truth. He firmly
declared that Christians should receive no other doctrines than those which rest on the authority
of the Sacred Scriptures. These words struck at the very foundation of papal supremacy. They
contained the vital principle of the Reformation.

Luther saw the danger of exalting human theories above the word of God. He fearlessly attacked
the speculative infidelity of the schoolmen, and opposed the philosophy and theology which
had so long held a controlling influence upon the people. He denounced such studies as not
only worthless but pernicious, and sought to turn the minds of his hearers from the sophistries
of philosophers and theologians to the eternal truths set forth by prophets and apostles.

Precious was the message which he bore to the eager crowds that hung upon his words. Never
before had such teachings fallen upon their ears. The glad tidings of a Saviour’s love, the
assurance of pardon and peace through His atoning blood, rejoiced their hearts, and inspired
within them an immortal hope. At Wittenberg a light was kindled whose rays should extend to
the uttermost parts of the earth, and which was to increase in brightness to the close of time.

But light and darkness cannot harmonize. Between truth and error there is an irrepressible
conflict. To uphold and defend the one is to attack and overthrow the other. Our Saviour Himself
declared, “I came not to send peace, but a sword,”(166) Said Luther, a few years after the
opening of the Reformation: “God does not guide me, He pushes me forward, He carries me away.
I am not master of myself. I desire to live in repose; but I am thrown into the midst of tumults
and revolutions.”(167) He was now about to be urged into the contest.

The Roman Church had made merchandise of the grace of God. The tables of the money-changers(168)
were set up beside her altars, and the air resounded with the shouts of buyers and sellers.
Under the plea of raising funds for the erection of St. Peter’s church at Rome, indulgences
for sin were publicly offered for sale by the authority of the pope. By the price of crime
a temple was to be built up for God’s worship,—the corner-stone laid with the wages of iniquity!
But the very means adopted for Rome’s aggrandizement provoked the deadliest blow to her power
and greatness. It was this that aroused the most determined and successful of the enemies of
popery, and led to the battle which shook the papal throne, and jostled the triple crown upon
the pontiff’s head.

The official appointed to conduct the sale of indulgences in Germany—Tetzel by name—had been
convicted of the basest offenses against society and against the law of God; but having escaped
the punishment due to his crimes, he was employed to further the mercenary and unscrupulous
projects of the pope. With great effrontery he repeated the most glaring falsehoods, and related
marvelous tales to deceive an ignorant, credulous, and superstitious people. Had they possessed
the word of God, they would not have been thus deceived. It was to keep them under the control
of the papacy, in order to swell the power and wealth of her ambitious leaders, that the Bible
had been withheld from them.(169)

As Tetzel entered a town, a messenger went before him, announcing, “The grace of God and of
the holy father is at your gates.”(170) And the people welcomed the blasphemous pretender as
if he were God Himself come down from heaven to them. The infamous traffic was set up in the
church, and Tetzel, ascending the pulpit, extolled indulgences as the most precious gift of
God. Gold and silver flowed into his treasury. A salvation that could be bought with money
was more easily obtained than that which requires repentance, faith, and diligent effort to
resist and overcome sin.(174)

The doctrine of indulgences had been opposed by men of learning and piety in the Roman Church,
and there were many who had no faith in pretensions so contrary to both reason and revelation.
No prelate dared lift his voice against this iniquitous traffic; but the minds of men were
becoming disturbed and uneasy, and many eagerly inquired if God would not work through some
instrumentality for the purification of His church.

Luther, though still a papist of the straitest sort, was filled with horror at the blasphemous
assumptions of the indulgence mongers. Many of his own congregation had purchased certificates
of pardon, and they soon began to come to their pastor, confessing their various sins, and
expecting absolution, not because they were penitent and wished to reform, but on the ground
of the indulgence. Luther refused them absolution, and warned them that unless they should
repent and reform their lives, they must perish in their sins. In great perplexity they repaired
to Tetzel with the complaint that their confessor had refused his certificates; and some boldly
demanded that their money be returned to them. The friar was filled with rage. He uttered the
most terrible curses, caused fires to be lighted in the public squares, and declared that he
“had received an order from the pope to burn all heretics who presumed to oppose his most holy
indulgences.”(175)

Luther now entered boldly upon his work as a champion of the truth. His voice was heard from
the pulpit in earnest, solemn warning. He set before the people the offensive character of
sin, and taught them that it is impossible for man, by his own works, to lessen its guilt or
evade its punishment. Nothing but repentance toward God and faith in Christ can save the sinner.
The grace of Christ cannot be purchased; it is a free gift. He counseled the people not to
buy indulgences, but to look in faith to a crucified Redeemer. He related his own painful experience
in vainly seeking by humiliation and penance to secure salvation, and assured his hearers that
it was by looking away from himself and believing in Christ that he found peace and joy.

As Tetzel continued his traffic and his impious pretensions, Luther determined upon a more
effectual protest against these crying abuses. An occasion soon offered. The castle church
of Wittenberg possessed many relics, which on certain holy days were exhibited to the people,
and full remission of sins was granted to all who then visited the church and made confession.
Accordingly on these days the people in great numbers resorted thither. One of the most important
of these occasions, the festival of “All Saints,” was approaching. On the preceding day, Luther,
joining the crowds that were already making their way to the church, posted on its door a paper
containing ninety-five propositions against the doctrine of indulgences. He declared his willingness
to defend these theses next day at the university, against all who should see fit to attack them.

His propositions attracted universal attention. They were read and re-read, and repeated in
every direction. Great excitement was created in the university and in the whole city. By these
theses it was shown that the power to grant the pardon of sin, and to remit its penalty, had
never been committed to the pope or to any other man. The whole scheme was a farce,—an artifice
to extort money by playing upon the superstitions of the people,—a device of Satan to destroy
the souls of all who should trust to its lying pretensions. It was also clearly shown that
the gospel of Christ is the most valuable treasure of the church, and that the grace of God,
therein revealed, is freely bestowed upon all who seek it by repentance and faith.

Luther’s theses challenged discussion; but no one dared accept the challenge. The questions
which he proposed had in a few days spread through all Germany, and in a few weeks they had
sounded throughout Christendom. Many devoted Romanists, who had seen and lamented the terrible
iniquity prevailing in the church, but had not known how to arrest its progress, read the propositions
with great joy, recognizing in them the voice of God. They felt that the Lord had graciously
set His hand to arrest the rapidly swelling tide of corruption that was issuing from the see
of Rome. Princes and magistrates secretly rejoiced that a check was to be put upon the arrogant
power which denied the right of appeal from its decisions.

But the sin-loving and superstitious multitudes were terrified as the sophistries that had
soothed their fears were swept away. Crafty ecclesiastics, interrupted in their work of sanctioning
crime, and seeing their gains endangered, were enraged, and rallied to uphold their pretensions.
The Reformer had bitter accusers to meet. Some charged him with acting hastily and from impulse.
Others accused him of presumption, declaring that he was not directed of God, but was acting
from pride and forwardness. “Who does not know,” he responded, “that a man rarely puts forth
any new idea without having some appearance of pride, and without being accused of exciting
quarrels?... Why were Christ and all the martyrs put to death? Because they seemed to be proud
contemners of the wisdom of the time, and because they advanced novelties without having first
humbly taken counsel of the oracles of the ancient opinions.”

Again he declared: “Whatever I do will be done, not by the prudence of men, but by the counsel
of God. If the work be of God, who shall stop it? if it be not, who can forward it? Not my
will, nor theirs, nor ours; but Thy will, O holy Father, which art in heaven.”(176)

Though Luther had been moved by the Spirit of God to begin his work, he was not to carry it
forward without severe conflicts. The reproaches of his enemies, their misrepresentation of
his purposes, and their unjust and malicious reflections upon his character and motives, came
in upon him like an overwhelming flood; and they were not without effect. He had felt confident
that the leaders of the people, both in the church and in the schools, would gladly unite with
him in efforts for reform. Words of encouragement from those in high position had inspired
him with joy and hope. Already in anticipation he had seen a brighter day dawning for the church.
But encouragement had changed to reproach and condemnation. Many dignitaries, of both church
and state, were convicted of the truthfulness of his theses; but they soon saw that the acceptance
of these truths would involve great changes. To enlighten and reform the people would be virtually
to undermine the authority of Rome, to stop thousands of streams now flowing into her treasury,
and thus greatly to curtail the extravagance and luxury of the papal leaders. FINN'S CHIEF MEN

XII.
THE TALE OF VIVIONN THE GIANTESS

XIII. THE CHASE OF THE GILLA DACAR

XIV. THE BIRTH OF OISÍN

XV. OISÍN IN THE LAND OF YOUTH

THE HISTORY OF KING CORMAC

XVI. 1. THE BIRTH OF CORMAC

2. THE JUDGMENT OF CORMAC

3. THE MARRIAGE OF KING CORMAC

4. THE INSTRUCTIONS OF THE KING

5. CORMAC SETS UP THE FIRST MILL IN ERINN

6. A PLEASANT STORY OF CORMAC'S BREHON

7. THE JUDGMENT CONCERNING CORMAC'S SWORD

8. THE DISAPPEARANCE OF CORMAC

9. DESCRIPTION OF CORMAC

10. DEATH AND BURIAL OF CORMAC

NOTES ON THE SOURCES

PRONOUNCING INDEX

ILLUSTRATIONS

"FINN HEARD FAR OFF THE FIRST NOTES OF THE FAIRY HARP" (Frontispiece)

"THERE SAT THE THREE MAIDENS WITH THE QUEEN"

"THEY MADE AN ENCAMPMENT AND THE SWANS SANG TO THEM"

"BEAR US SWIFTLY, BOAT OF MANANAN, TO THE GARDEN OF THE HESPERIDES"

"THERE DWELT THE RED-HAIRED OCEAN-NYMPHS"

"THEY ALL TROOPED OUT, LORDS AND LADIES, TO VIEW THE WEE MAN"
"FERGUS GOES DOWN INTO THE LAKE"

"A MIGHTY SHOUT OF EXULTATION AROSE
FROM THE ULSTERMEN"

"THEY ROSE UP IN THE AIR"

"SHE HEARD HER OWN
NAME CALLED AGAIN AND AGAIN"

"AND THAT NIGHT THERE WAS FEASTING AND
JOY IN THE LONELY HUT"

"THEY RAN HIM BY HILL AND PLAIN"

"DERMOT
TOOK THE HORN AND WOULD HAVE FILLED IT"

"'FOLLOW ME NOW TO THE HILL
OF ALLEN'"

"THEY RODE UP TO A STATELY PALACE"

"THE WHITE STEED HAD
VANISHED FROM THEIR EYES LIKE A WREATH OF MIST"

Introduction

Many
years have passed by since, delivering the Inaugural Lecture of the
Irish Literary Society in London, I advocated as one of its chief
aims the recasting into modern form and in literary English of the
old Irish legends, preserving the atmosphere of the original tales
as much as possible, but clearing them from repetitions, redundant
expressions, idioms interesting in Irish but repellent in English,
and, above all, from absurdities, such as the sensational fancy of
the later editors and bards added to the simplicities of the original
tales.

Long before I spoke of this, it had been done by P.W. Joyce
in his OLD CELTIC ROMANCES, and by Standish O'Grady for the whole
story of Cuchulain, but in this case with so large an imitation of
the Homeric manner that the Celtic spirit of the story was in danger
of being lost. This was the fault I had to find with that inspiring
book,[3] but it was a fault which had its own attraction.

[3] I gave
this book--The History of Ireland (HEROIC PERIOD)--to Burne-Jones
in order to interest him in Irish myth and legend. "I'll try and read
it," he said. A week afterwards he came and said--"It is a new world
of thought and pleasure you have opened to me. I knew nothing of this,
and life is quite enlarged. But now, I want to see all the originals.
Where can I get them?"

I have only spoken of prose writing above.
But in poetry (and in Poetry well fitted to the tales), this work
had already been done nobly, and with a fine Celtic splendour of feeling
and expression, by Sir Samuel Ferguson.

Since then, a number of writers
have translated into literary English a host of the Irish tales, and
have done this with a just reverence for their originals. Being, in
nearly every case, Irish themselves, they have tried, with varying
success, to make their readers realize the wild scenery of Ireland,
her vital union with the sea and the great ocean to the West, those
changing dramatic skies, that mystic weather, the wizard woods and
streams which form the constant background of these stories; nor have
they failed to allure their listeners to breathe the spiritual air
of Ireland, to feel its pathetic, heroic, imaginative thrill.

They
have largely succeeded in their effort. The Irish bardic tales have
now become a part of English literature and belong not only to grown
up persons interested in early poetry, in mythology and folk-customs,
but to the children of Ireland and England. Our new imaginative stories
are now told in nurseries, listened to at evening when the children
assemble in the fire-light to hear tales from their parents, and eagerly
read by boys at school. The legate was therefore charged “to prosecute and constrain
without any delay.” If he should remain steadfast, and the legate should fail to gain possession
of his person, he was empowered “to proscribe him in every part of Germany; to banish, curse,
and excommunicate all those who are attached to him.”(180) And further, the pope directed his
legate, in order entirely to root out the pestilent heresy, to excommunicate all, of whatever
dignity in church or state, except the emperor, who should neglect to seize Luther and his
adherents, and deliver them up to the vengeance of Rome.

Here is displayed the true spirit of popery. Not a trace of Christian principle, or even of
common justice, is to be seen in the whole document. Luther was at a great distance from Rome;
he had had no opportunity to explain or defend his position; yet before his case had been investigated,
he was summarily pronounced a heretic, and in the same day, exhorted, accused, judged, and
condemned; and all this by the self-styled holy father, the only supreme, infallible authority
in church or state!

At this time, when Luther so much needed the sympathy and counsel of a true friend, God’s providence
sent Melanchthon to Wittenberg. Young in years, modest and diffident in his manners, Melanchthon’s
sound judgment, extensive knowledge, and winning eloquence, combined with the purity and uprightness
of his character, won universal admiration and esteem. The brilliancy of his talents was not
more marked than his gentleness of disposition. He soon became an earnest disciple of the gospel,
and Luther’s most trusted friend and valued supporter; his gentleness, caution, and exactness
serving as a complement to Luther’s courage and energy. Their union in the work added strength
to the Reformation, and was a source of great encouragement to Luther.

Augsburg had been fixed upon as the place of trial, and the Reformer set out on foot to perform
the journey thither. Serious fears were entertained in his behalf. Threats had been made openly
that he would be seized and murdered on the way, and his friends begged him not to venture.
They even entreated him to leave Wittenberg for a time, and find safety with those who would
gladly protect him. But he would not leave the position where God had placed him. He must continue
faithfully to maintain the truth, notwithstanding the storms that were beating upon him. His
language was: “I am like Jeremiah, a man of strife and contention; but the more their threats
increase, the more my joy is multiplied.... They have already destroyed my honor and my reputation.
One single thing remains; it is my wretched body: let them take it; they will thus shorten
my life by a few hours. But as for my soul, they cannot take that. He who desires to proclaim
the word of Christ to the world, must expect death at every moment.”(181)

The tidings of Luther’s arrival at Augsburg gave great satisfaction to the papal legate. The
troublesome heretic who was exciting the attention of the whole world seemed now in the power
of Rome, and the legate determined that he should not escape. The Reformer had failed to provide
himself with a safe-conduct. His friends urged him not to appear before the legate without
one, and they themselves undertook to procure it from the emperor. The legate intended to force
Luther, if possible, to retract, or, failing in this, to cause him to be conveyed to Rome,
to share the fate of Huss and Jerome. Therefore through his agents he endeavored to induce
Luther to appear without a safe-conduct, trusting himself to his mercy. This the Reformer firmly
declined to do. Not until he had received the document pledging him the emperor’s protection,
did he appear in the presence of the papal ambassador.

As a matter of policy, the Romanists had decided to attempt to win Luther by an appearance
of gentleness. The legate, in his interviews with him, professed great friendliness; but he
demanded that Luther submit implicitly to the authority of the church, and yield every point
without argument or question. He had not rightly estimated the character of the man with whom
he had to deal. Luther, in reply, expressed his regard for the church, his desire for the truth,
his readiness to answer all objections to what he had taught, and to submit his doctrines to
the decision of certain leading universities. But at the same time he protested against the
cardinal’s course in requiring him to retract without having proved him in error.

The only response was, “Retract, retract!” The Reformer showed that his position was sustained
by the Scriptures, and firmly declared that he could not renounce the truth. The legate, unable
to reply to Luther’s arguments, overwhelmed him with a storm of reproaches, gibes, and flattery,
interspersed with quotations from tradition and the sayings of the Fathers, granting the Reformer
no opportunity to speak. Seeing that the conference, thus continued, would be utterly futile,
Luther finally obtained a reluctant permission to present his answer in writing.

“In so doing,” said he, writing to a friend, “the oppressed find double gain; first, what is
written may be submitted to the judgment of others; and second, one has a better chance of
working on the fears, if not on the conscience, of an arrogant and babbling despot, who would
otherwise overpower by his imperious language.”(182)

At the next interview, Luther presented a clear, concise, and forcible exposition of his views,
fully supported by many quotations from Scripture. This paper, after reading aloud, he handed
to the cardinal, who, however, cast it contemptuously aside, declaring it to be a mass of idle
words and irrelevant quotations. Luther, fully roused, now met the haughty prelate on his own
ground,—the traditions and teachings of the church,—and utterly overthrew his assumptions.

When the prelate saw that Luther’s reasoning was unanswerable, he lost all self-control, and
in a rage cried out: “Retract! or I will send you to Rome, there to appear before the judges
commissioned to take cognizance of your cause. I will excommunicate you and all your partisans,
and all who shall at any time countenance you, and will cast them out of the church.” And he
finally declared, in a haughty and angry tone, “Retract, or return no more.”(183)

The Reformer promptly withdrew with his friends, thus declaring plainly that no retraction
was to be expected from him. This was not what the cardinal had purposed. He had flattered
himself that by violence he could awe Luther to submission. Now, left alone with his supporters,
he looked from one to another in utter chagrin at the unexpected failure of his schemes.

Luther’s efforts on this occasion were not without good results. The large assembly present
had opportunity to compare the two men, and to judge for themselves of the spirit manifested
by them, as well as of the strength and truthfulness of their positions. How marked the contrast!
The Reformer, simple, humble, firm, stood up in the strength of God, having truth on his side;
the pope’s representative, self-important, overbearing, haughty, and unreasonable, was without
a single argument from the Scriptures, yet vehemently crying, “Retract, or be sent to Rome
for punishment.”

Notwithstanding Luther had secured a safe-conduct, the Romanists were plotting to seize and
imprison him. His friends urged that as it was useless for him to prolong his stay, he should
return to Wittenberg without delay, and that the utmost caution should be observed in order
to conceal his intentions. He accordingly left Augsburg before daybreak, on horseback, accompanied
only by a guide furnished him by the magistrate. With many forebodings he secretly made his
way through the dark and silent streets of the city. Enemies, vigilant and cruel, were plotting
his destruction. Would he escape the snares prepared for him? Those were moments of anxiety
and earnest prayer. He reached a small gate in the wall of the city. It was opened for him,
and with his guide he passed through without hindrance. Once safely outside, the fugitives
hastened their flight, and before the legate learned of Luther’s departure, he was beyond the
reach of his persecutors. Satan and his emissaries were defeated. The man whom they had thought
in their power was gone, escaped as a bird from the snare of the fowler.

At the news of Luther’s escape, the legate was overwhelmed with surprise and anger. He had
expected to receive great honor for his wisdom and firmness in dealing with this disturber
of the church; but his hope was disappointed. He gave expression to his wrath in a letter to
Frederick, the elector of Saxony, bitterly denouncing Luther, and demanding that Frederick
send the Reformer to Rome or banish him from Saxony.

In defense, Luther urged that the legate or the pope show him his errors from the Scriptures,
and pledged himself in the most solemn manner to renounce his doctrines if they could be shown
to contradict the word of God. And he expressed his gratitude to God that he had been counted
worthy to suffer in so holy a cause.

The elector had, as yet, little knowledge of the reformed doctrines, but he was deeply impressed
by the candor, force, and clearness of Luther’s words; and until the Reformer should be proved
to be in error, Frederick resolved to stand as his protector. In reply to the legate’s demand
he wrote: “ ‘Since Doctor Martin has appeared before you at Augsburg, you should be satisfied.
We did not expect that you would endeavor to make him retract without having convinced him
of his errors. None of the learned men in our principality have informed me that Martin’s doctrine
is impious, antichristian, or heretical.’ The prince refused, moreover, to send Luther to Rome,
or to expel him from his states.”(184)

The elector saw that there was a general breaking down of the moral restraints of society.
A great work of reform was needed. The complicated and expensive arrangements to restrain and
punish crime would be unnecessary if men but acknowledged and obeyed the requirements of God
and the dictates of an enlightened conscience. He saw that Luther was laboring to secure this
object, and he secretly rejoiced that a better influence was making itself felt in the church.

He saw also that as a professor in the university Luther was eminently successful. Only a year
had passed since the Reformer posted his theses on the castle church, yet there was already
a great falling off in the number of pilgrims that visited the church at the festival of All
Saints. Rome had been deprived of worshipers and offerings, but their place was filled by another
class, who now came to Wittenberg, not pilgrims to adore her relics, but students to fill her
halls of learning. The writings of Luther had kindled everywhere a new interest in the Holy
Scriptures, and not only from all parts of Germany, but from other lands, students flocked
to the university. Young men, coming in sight of Wittenberg for the first time, “raised their
hands to heaven, and praised God for having caused the light of truth to shine forth from this
city, as from Zion in times of old, and whence it spread even to the most distant countries.”(185)

Luther was as yet but partially converted from the errors of Romanism. But as he compared the
Holy Oracles with the papal decrees and constitutions, he was filled with wonder. “I am reading,”
he wrote, “the decrees of the pontiffs, and ... I do not know whether the pope is antichrist
himself, or his apostle, so greatly is Christ misrepresented and crucified in them.”(186) Yet
at this time Luther was still a supporter of the Roman Church, and had no thought that he would
ever separate from her communion.

The Reformer’s writings and his doctrine were extending to every nation in Christendom. The
work spread to Switzerland and Holland. Copies of his writings found their way to France and
Spain. In England his teachings were received as the word of life. To Belgium and Italy also
the truth had extended. Thousands were awakening from their deathlike stupor to the joy and
hope of a life of faith.

Rome became more and more exasperated by the attacks of Luther, and it was declared by some
of his fanatical opponents, even by doctors in Catholic universities, that he who should kill
the rebellious monk would be without sin. One day a stranger, with a pistol hidden under his
cloak, approached the Reformer, and inquired why he went thus alone. “I am in God’s hands,”
answered Luther. “He is my strength and my shield. What can man do unto me?”(187) Upon hearing
these words, the stranger turned pale, and fled away, as from the presence of the angels of heaven.

Rome was bent upon the destruction of Luther; but God was his defense. His doctrines were heard
everywhere,—“in cottages and convents, ... in the castles of the nobles, in the universities,
and in the palaces of kings;” and noble men were rising on every hand to sustain his efforts.

It was about this time that Luther, reading the works of Huss, found that the great truth of
justification by faith, which he himself was seeking to uphold and teach, had been held by
the Bohemian Reformer. “We have all,” said Luther, “Paul, Augustine, and myself, been Hussites
without knowing it!” “God will surely visit it upon the world,” he continued, “that the truth
was preached to it a century ago, and burned!”(188)

In an appeal to the emperor and nobility of Germany in behalf of the Reformation of Christianity,
Luther wrote concerning the pope: “It is a horrible thing to behold the man who styles himself
Christ’s vicegerent, displaying a magnificence that no emperor can equal. Is this being like
the poor Jesus, or the humble Peter? He is, say they, the lord of the world! But Christ, whose
vicar he boasts of being, has said, ‘My kingdom is not of this world.’ Can the dominions of
a vicar extend beyond those of his superior?”(189)

He wrote thus of the universities: “I am much afraid that the universities will prove to be
the great gates of hell, unless they diligently labor in explaining the Holy Scriptures, and
engraving them in the hearts of youth. I advise no one to place his child where the Scriptures
do not reign paramount. Every institution in which men are not unceasingly occupied with the
word of God must become corrupt.”(190)

This appeal was rapidly circulated throughout Germany, and exerted a powerful influence upon
the people. The whole nation was stirred, and multitudes were roused to rally around the standard
of reform. Luther’s opponents, burning with a desire for revenge, urged the pope to take decisive
measures against him. It was decreed that his doctrines should be immediately condemned. Sixty
days were granted the Reformer and his adherents, after which, if they did not recant, they
were all to be excommunicated.

That was a terrible crisis for the Reformation. For centuries Rome’s sentence of excommunication
had struck terror to powerful monarchs; it had filled mighty empires with woe and desolation.
Those upon whom its condemnation fell, were universally regarded with dread and horror; they
were cut off from intercourse with their fellows, and treated as outlaws, to be hunted to extermination.
Luther was not blind to the tempest about to burst upon him; but he stood firm, trusting in
Christ to be his support and shield. With a martyr’s faith and courage he wrote: “What is about
to happen I know not, nor do I care to know.... Let the blow light where it may, I am without
fear. Not so much as a leaf falls, without the will of our Father. How much rather will He
care for us! It is a light thing to die for the Word, since the Word which was made flesh hath
Himself died. If we die with Him, we shall live with Him; and passing through that which He
has passed through before us, we shall be where He is and dwell with Him forever.”(191)

When the papal bull reached Luther, he said: “I despise and attack it, as impious, false....
It is Christ Himself who is condemned therein.... I rejoice in having to bear such ills for
the best of causes. Already I feel greater liberty in my heart; for at last I know that the
pope is antichrist, and that his throne is that of Satan himself.”(192)

Yet the mandate of Rome was not without effect. Prison, torture, and sword were weapons potent
to enforce obedience. The weak and superstitious trembled before the decree of the pope; and
while there was general sympathy for Luther, many felt that life was too dear to be risked
in the cause of reform. Everything seemed to indicate that the Reformer’s work was about to close.

But Luther was fearless still. Rome had hurled her anathemas against him, and the world looked
on, nothing doubting that he would perish or be forced to yield. But with terrible power he
flung back upon herself the sentence of condemnation, and publicly declared his determination
to abandon her forever. In the presence of a crowd of students, doctors, and citizens of all
ranks, Luther burned the pope’s bull, with the canon laws, the decretals, and certain writings
sustaining the papal power. “My enemies have been able, by burning my books,” he said, “to
injure the cause of truth in the minds of the common people, and destroy their souls; for this
reason I consumed their books in return. A serious struggle has just begun. Hitherto I have
been only playing with the pope. I began this work in God’s name; it will be ended without
me, and by His might.”(193)

To the reproaches of his enemies who taunted him with the weakness of his cause, Luther answered:
“Who knows if God has not chosen and called me, and if they ought not to fear that, by despising
me, they despise God Himself? Moses was alone at the departure from Egypt; Elijah was alone
in the reign of King Ahab; Isaiah alone in Jerusalem; Ezekiel alone in Babylon.... God never
selected as a prophet either the high priest or any other great personage; but ordinarily He
chose low and despised men, once even the shepherd Amos. In every age, the saints have had
to reprove the great, kings, princes, priests, and wise men, at the peril of their lives....
I do not say that I am a prophet; but I say that they ought to fear precisely because I am
alone and that they are many. I am sure of this, that the word of God is with me, and that
it is not with them.”(194)

Yet it was not without a terrible struggle with himself that Luther decided upon a final separation
from the church. It was about this time that he wrote: “I feel more and more every day how
difficult it is to lay aside the scruples which one has imbibed in childhood. O, how much pain
it has caused me, though I had the Scriptures on my side, to justify it to myself that I should
dare to make a stand alone against the pope, and hold him forth as antichrist! What have the
tribulations of my heart not been! How many times have I not asked myself with bitterness that
question which was so frequent on the lips of the papists: ‘Art thou alone wise? Can every
one else be mistaken? How will it be, if, after all, it is thyself who art wrong, and who art
involving in thy error so many souls, who will then be eternally damned?’ ’Twas so I fought
with myself and with Satan, till Christ, by His own infallible word, fortified my heart against
these doubts.”(195)

The pope had threatened Luther with excommunication if he did not recant, and the threat was
now fulfilled. A new bull appeared, declaring the Reformer’s final separation from the Roman
Church, denouncing him as accursed of Heaven, and including in the same condemnation all who
should receive his doctrines. The great contest had been fully entered upon.

Opposition is the lot of all whom God employs to present truths specially applicable to their
time. There was a present truth in the days of Luther,—a truth at that time of special importance;
there is a present truth for the church to-day. He who does all things according to the counsel
of His will, has been pleased to place men under various circumstances, and to enjoin upon
them duties peculiar to the times in which they live, and the conditions under which they are
placed. If they would prize the light given them, broader views of truth would be opened before
them. But truth is no more desired by the majority to-day than it was by the papists who opposed
Luther. There is the same disposition to accept the theories and traditions of men instead
of the word of God as in former ages. Those who present the truth for this time should not
expect to be received with greater favor than were earlier reformers. The great controversy
between truth and error, between Christ and Satan, is to increase in intensity to the close
of this world’s history. The forms of opposition to the truth may change, the enmity may be
less open because it is more subtle; but the same antagonism still exists, and will be manifested
to the end of time.

8. LUTHER BEFORE THE DIET.

A new emperor, Charles V., had ascended the throne of Germany, and the emissaries of Rome hastened
to present their congratulations, and induce the monarch to employ his power against the Reformation.
On the other hand, the elector of Saxony, to whom Charles was in great degree indebted for
his crown, entreated him to take no step against Luther until he should have granted him a
hearing. The emperor was thus placed in a position of great perplexity and embarrassment. The
papists would be satisfied with nothing short of an imperial edict sentencing Luther to death.
The elector had declared firmly that “neither his imperial majesty nor any other person had
shown that Luther’s writings had been refuted;” therefore he requested “that Doctor Luther
should be furnished with a safe-conduct, so that he might appear before a tribunal of learned,
pious, and impartial judges.”(198)

The attention of all parties was now directed to the assembly of the German states which convened
at Worms soon after the accession of Charles to the empire. There were important political
questions and interests to be considered by this national council; for the first time the princes
of Germany were to meet their youthful monarch in deliberative assembly. From all parts of
the fatherland had come the dignitaries of church and state. Secular lords, high-born, powerful,
and jealous of their hereditary rights; princely ecclesiastics, flushed with their conscious
superiority in rank and power; courtly knights and their armed retainers; and ambassadors from
foreign and distant lands,—all gathered at Worms. Yet in that vast assembly the subject that
excited the deepest interest, was the cause of the Saxon Reformer.

Charles had previously directed the elector to bring Luther with him to the Diet, assuring
him of protection, and promising a free discussion, with competent persons, of the questions
in dispute. Luther was anxious to appear before the emperor. His health was at this time much
impaired; yet he wrote to the elector: “If I cannot go to Worms in good health, I will be carried
there, sick as I am. For if the emperor calls me, I cannot doubt that it is the call of God
Himself. If they desire to use violence against me, and that is very probable (for it is not
for their instruction that they order me to appear), I place the matter in the Lord’s hands.
He still lives and reigns who preserved the three young men in the burning fiery furnace. If
He will not save me, my life is of little consequence. Let us only prevent the gospel from
being exposed to the scorn of the wicked, and let us shed our blood for it, for fear they should
triumph. It is not for me to decide whether my life or my death will contribute most to the
salvation of all.... You may expect everything from me ... except flight and recantation. Fly
I cannot, and still less retract.”(199)

As the news was circulated at Worms that Luther was to appear before the Diet, a general excitement
was created. Aleander, the papal legate to whom the case had been specially intrusted, was
alarmed and enraged. He saw that the result would be disastrous to the papal cause. To institute
inquiry into a case in which the pope had already pronounced sentence of condemnation, would
be to cast contempt upon the authority of the sovereign pontiff. Furthermore, he was apprehensive
that the eloquent and powerful arguments of this man might turn away many of the princes from
the cause of the pope. He therefore, in the most urgent manner, remonstrated with Charles against
Luther’s appearance at Worms. About this time the bull declaring Luther’s excommunication was
published; and this, coupled with the representations of the legate, induced the emperor to
yield. He wrote to the elector that if Luther would not retract, he must remain at Wittenberg.

Not content with this victory, Aleander labored with all the power and cunning at his command
to secure Luther’s condemnation. With a persistence worthy of a better cause, he urged the
matter upon the attention of princes, prelates, and other members of the assembly, accusing
the Reformer of “sedition, rebellion, impiety, and blasphemy.” But the vehemence and passion
manifested by the legate revealed too plainly the spirit by which he was actuated. “He is moved
by hatred and vengeance,” was the general remark, “much more than by zeal and piety.”(200)
The majority of the Diet were more than ever inclined to regard Luther’s cause with favor.

With redoubled zeal, Aleander urged upon the emperor the duty of executing the papal edicts.
But under the laws of Germany this could not be done without the concurrence of the princes;
and overcome at last by the legate’s importunity, Charles bade him present his case to the
Diet. “It was a proud day for the nuncio. The assembly was a great one: the cause was even
greater. Aleander was to plead for Rome, ... the mother and mistress of all churches.” He was
to vindicate the princedom of Peter before the assembled principalities of Christendom. “He
had the gift of eloquence, and he rose to the greatness of the occasion. Providence ordered
it that Rome should appear and plead by the ablest of her orators in the presence of the most
august of tribunals, before she was condemned.”(201) With some misgivings those who favored
the Reformer looked forward to the effect of Aleander’s speech. The elector of Saxony was not
present, but by his direction some of his councilors attended, to take notes of the nuncio’s
address.

With all the power of learning and eloquence, Aleander set himself to overthrow the truth.
Charge after charge he hurled against Luther as an enemy of the church and the state, the living
and the dead, clergy and laity, councils and private Christians. “In Luther’s errors there
is enough,” he declared, to warrant the burning of “a hundred thousand heretics.”

In conclusion, he endeavored to cast contempt upon the adherents of the reformed faith: “What
are all these Lutherans? A crew of insolent pedagogues, corrupt priests, dissolute monks, ignorant
lawyers, and degraded nobles, with the common people whom they have misled and perverted. How
far superior to them is the Catholic party in number, ability, and power! A unanimous decree
from this illustrious assembly will enlighten the simple, warn the imprudent, decide the waverers,
and give strength to the weak.”(202)

With such weapons the advocates of truth in every age have been attacked. The same arguments
are still urged against all who dare to present, in opposition to established errors, the plain
and direct teachings of God’s word. “Who are these preachers of new doctrines?” exclaim those
who desire a popular religion. “They are unlearned, few in numbers, and of the poorer class.
Yet they claim to have the truth, and to be the chosen people of God. They are ignorant and
deceived. How greatly superior in numbers and influence is our church! How many great and learned
men are among us! How much more power is on our side!” These are the arguments that have a
telling influence upon the world; but they are no more conclusive now than in the days of the
Reformer.

The Reformation did not, as many suppose, end with Luther. It is to be continued to the close
of this world’s history. Luther had a great work to do in reflecting to others the light which
God had permitted to shine upon him; yet he did not receive all the light which was to be given
to the world. From that time to this, new light has been continually shining upon the Scriptures,
and new truths have been constantly unfolding.

The legate’s address made a deep impression upon the Diet. There was no Luther present, with
the clear and convincing truths of God’s word, to vanquish the papal champion. No attempt was
made to defend the Reformer. There was manifest a general disposition not only to condemn him
and the doctrines which he taught, but if possible to uproot the heresy. Rome had enjoyed the
most favorable opportunity to defend her cause. All that she could say in her own vindication
had been said. But the apparent victory was the signal of defeat. Henceforth the contrast between
truth and error would be more clearly seen, as they should take the field in open warfare.
Never from that day would Rome stand as secure as she had stood.

While most of the members of the Diet would not have hesitated to yield up Luther to the vengeance
of Rome, many of them saw and deplored the existing depravity in the church, and desired a
suppression of the abuses suffered by the German people in consequence of the corruption and
greed of the hierarchy. The legate had presented the papal rule in the most favorable light.
Now the Lord moved upon a member of the Diet to give a true delineation of the effects of papal
tyranny. With noble firmness, Duke George of Saxony stood up in that princely assembly, and
specified with terrible exactness the deceptions and abominations of popery, and their dire
results. In closing he said:

“These are some of the abuses that cry out against Rome. All shame has been put aside, and
their only object is ... money, money, money, ... so that the preachers who should teach the
truth, utter nothing but falsehoods, and are not only tolerated, but rewarded, because the
greater their lies, the greater their gain. It is from this foul spring that such tainted waters
flow. Debauchery stretches out the hand to avarice.... Alas, it is the scandal caused by the
clergy that hurls so many poor souls into eternal condemnation. A general reform must be effected.”(203)

A more able and forcible denunciation of the papal abuses could not have been presented by
Luther himself; and the fact that the speaker was a determined enemy of the Reformer, gave
greater influence to his words.

Had the eyes of the assembly been opened, they would have beheld angels of God in the midst
of them, shedding beams of light athwart the darkness of error, and opening minds and hearts
to the reception of truth. It was the power of the God of truth and wisdom that controlled
even the adversaries of the Reformation, and thus prepared the way for the great work about
to be accomplished. Martin Luther was not present; but the voice of One greater than Luther
had been heard in that assembly.

A committee was at once appointed by the Diet to prepare an enumeration of the papal oppressions
that weighed so heavily on the German people. This list, containing a hundred and one specifications,
was presented to the emperor, with a request that he would take immediate measures for the
correction of these abuses. “What a loss of Christian souls,” said the petitioners, “what depredations,
what extortions, on account of the scandals by which the spiritual head of Christendom is surrounded!
It is our duty to prevent the ruin and dishonor of our people. For this reason we most humbly
but most urgently entreat you to order a general reformation, and to undertake its accomplishment.”(204)

The council now demanded the Reformer’s appearance before them. Notwithstanding the entreaties,
protests, and threats of Aleander, the emperor at last consented, and Luther was summoned to
appear before the Diet. With the summons was issued a safe-conduct, insuring his return to
a place of security. These were borne to Wittenberg by a herald, who was commissioned to conduct
him to Worms.

The friends of Luther were terrified and distressed. Knowing the prejudice and enmity against
him, they feared that even his safe-conduct would not be respected, and they entreated him
not to imperil his life. He replied: “The papists do not desire my coming to Worms, but my
condemnation and my death. It matters not. Pray not for me, but for the word of God.... Christ
will give me His Spirit to overcome these ministers of error. I despise them during my life;
I shall triumph over them by my death. They are busy at Worms about compelling me to retract;
and this shall be my retraction: I said formerly that the pope was Christ’s vicar; now I assert
that he is our Lord’s adversary, and the devil’s apostle.”(205)

Luther was not to make his perilous journey alone. Besides the imperial messenger, three of
his firmest friends determined to accompany him. Melanchthon earnestly desired to join them.
His heart was knit to Luther’s, and he yearned to follow him, if need be, to prison or to death. Then
carefully placing the one in his hand down on the ice, in a straight line before him, he stepped
on it, and cautiously lifted up the one over which he had just walked. Using this as he had
handled the other one, as a balancing pole, he thus went on and on, using his poles alternately,
until he reached the strong ice on the other side. Then he returned in the same way and reported
to Mr Ross his opinion, which was that by doubling the under surface of the carioles they could
pass over in safety.

This was quickly done by taking the sleds, which the third Indian driver had in charge, and
securely lashing them to the sides of the carioles, in such a way that the area of surface on
the ice would be doubled, and thus the pressure would be only half. As an extra precaution
a long rope was tied to the rear of each cariole. Then Kinesasis once more crossed over with
his poles to the firm ice. The dogs were put to the gallop, and being urged by those behind,
as well as by Kinesasis's well- known voice in front, the dangerous place was passed in safety.

"Now
I see," said Alec, "the solution of what was bothering me. I wondered how Kinesasis was able to
get along over the weak places in the ice yesterday, but with those
poles to help him it is now plain enough."

"It must require a great deal of practice to do it safely," said Frank. And so in after days he
found it out when he made the attempt himself, and in trying to transfer himself from one
to the other ignominiously fell off, with such force that he broke through the thin ice. Fortunately
he had presence of mind enough to seize hold of one of the poles,
which was in such a position that each end rested on the unbroken ice.

His frightened shouts soon brought help, and he was quickly rescued.

Nothing else occurred to cause delay on the route, and so before noon the dogs, excited by the
near approach to the spot where they had spent their happy summer, sprang into a gallop and fairly
flew over the good ice that was found for the last few miles. Kinesasis and the Indian drivers
had all they could do to keep up with them.

With great delight did the boys spring out of their carioles, and
then and there declared that dog travelling was the most exhilarating
of sports and the very poetry of motion.

Some time later they changed their views. Immediately on their landing they were surrounded by
a crowd of dogs of all ages, and doglike they acted. The old fellows that had done good work in
other years and were now only kept for drawing wood for the fires, or hay from the distant
beaver meadows for the cattle, were dignified and sedate, and yet manifested the greatest affection
for their old master, who was kind and gentle to all the animals
in his possession.

This kindness was well repaid by the intelligent obedience they all gave him. Eagerly the boys
scanned the young dogs, for from among them were to be selected the promised trains which
they were to call their own.

While the boys were discussing the dogs and indicating their preferences,
old Kinesasis had rekindled the fire in the large wigwam, in which
he had passed the summer, and, aided by the other Indians of the party,
busied himself in preparing the dinner out of the supplies which had
been brought along.

Never did a dinner seem to taste better than did that one in that
leather tent to those boys, who had so enjoyed the exhilarating twenty-mile
trip.

After Mr Ross, Frank, Sam, and Alec had dined. An
eager multitude thronged about him, and friendly voices warned him of the purpose of the Romanists.
“They will burn you,” said some, “and reduce your body to ashes, as they did with John Huss.”
Luther answered, “Though they should kindle a fire all the way from Worms to Wittenberg, the
flames of which reached to heaven, I would walk through it in the name of the Lord; I would
appear before them; I would enter the jaws of this behemoth, and break his teeth, confessing
the Lord Jesus Christ.”(209)

The news of his approach to Worms created great commotion. His friends trembled for his safety;
his enemies feared for the success of their cause. Strenuous efforts were made to dissuade
him from entering the city. At the instigation of the papists he was urged to repair to the
castle of a friendly knight, where, it was declared, all difficulties could be amicably adjusted.
Friends endeavored to excite his fears by describing the dangers that threatened him. All their
efforts failed; Luther, still unshaken, declared, “Even should there be as many devils in Worms
as tiles on the housetops, still I would enter it.”(210)

Upon his arrival at Worms, a vast crowd flocked to the gates to welcome him. So great a concourse
had not assembled to greet the emperor himself. The excitement was intense, and from the midst
of the throng a shrill and plaintive voice chanted a funeral dirge, as a warning to Luther
of the fate that awaited him. “God will be my defense,” said he, as he alighted from his carriage.

The papists had not believed that Luther would really venture to appear at Worms, and his arrival
filled them with consternation. The emperor immediately summoned his councilors to consider
what course should be pursued. One of the bishops, a rigid papist, declared: “We have long
consulted on this matter. Let your imperial majesty get rid of this man at once. Did not Sigismund
cause John Huss to be burnt? We are not bound either to give or to observe the safe-conduct
of a heretic.” “No,” said the emperor; “we must keep our promise.”(211) It was therefore decided
that the Reformer should be heard.

All the city were eager to see this remarkable man, and a throng of visitors soon filled his
lodgings. Luther had scarcely recovered from his recent illness; he was wearied from the journey,
which had occupied two full weeks; he must prepare to meet the momentous events of the morrow,
and he needed quiet and repose. But so great was the desire to see him, that he had enjoyed
only a few hours’ rest, when noblemen, knights, priests, and citizens gathered eagerly about
him. Among these were many of the nobles who had so boldly demanded of the emperor a reform
of ecclesiastical abuses, and who, says Luther, “had all been freed by my gospel.”(212) Enemies,
as well as friends, came to look upon the dauntless monk; but he received them with unshaken
calmness, replying to all with dignity and wisdom. His bearing was firm and courageous. His
pale, thin face, marked with the traces of toil and illness, wore a kindly and even joyous
expression. The solemnity and deep earnestness of his words gave him a power that even his
enemies could not wholly withstand. Both friends and foes were filled with wonder. Some were
convinced that a divine influence attended him; others declared, as had the Pharisees concerning
Christ, “He hath a devil.”

On the following day, Luther was summoned to attend the Diet. An imperial officer was appointed
to conduct him to the hall of audience; yet it was with difficulty that he reached the place.
Every avenue was crowded with spectators, eager to look upon the monk who had dared resist
the authority of the pope.

As he was about to enter the presence of his judges, an old general, the hero of many battles,
said to him kindly: “Poor monk, poor monk, thou art now going to make a nobler stand than I
or any other captains have ever made in the bloodiest of our battles. But if thy cause is just,
and thou art sure of it, go forward in God’s name, and fear nothing. God will not forsake thee.”(213)

At length Luther stood before the council. The emperor occupied the throne. He was surrounded
by the most illustrious personages in the empire. Never had any man appeared in the presence
of a more imposing assembly than that before which Martin Luther was to answer for his faith.
“This appearance was of itself a signal victory over the papacy. The pope had condemned the
man, and he was now standing before a tribunal which, by this very act, set itself above the
pope. The pope had laid him under an interdict, and cut him off from all human society; and
yet he was summoned in respectful language, and received before the most august assembly in
the world. The pope had condemned him to perpetual silence, and he was now about to speak before
thousands of attentive hearers drawn together from the farthest parts of Christendom. An immense
revolution had thus been effected by Luther’s instrumentality. Rome was already descending
from her throne, and it was the voice of a monk that caused this humiliation.”(214)

In the presence of that powerful and titled assembly, the lowly-born Reformer seemed awed and
embarrassed. Several of the princes, observing his emotion, approached him, and one of them
whispered, “Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul.” Another
said, “When ye shall be brought before governors and kings for My sake, it shall be given you,
by the Spirit of your Father, what ye shall say.” Thus the words of Christ were brought by
the world’s great men to strengthen His servant in the hour of trial.

Luther was conducted to a position directly in front of the emperor’s throne. A deep silence
fell upon the crowded assembly. Then an imperial officer arose, and pointing to a collection
of Luther’s writings, demanded that the Reformer answer two questions,—whether he acknowledged
them as his, and whether he proposed to retract the opinions which he had therein advanced.
The titles of the books having been read, Luther replied that as to the first question, he
acknowledged the books to be his. “As to the second,” he said, “seeing that it is a question
which concerns faith and the salvation of souls, and in which the word of God, the greatest
and most precious treasure either in heaven or earth, is interested, I should act imprudently
were I to reply without reflection. I might affirm less than the circumstance demands, or more
than truth requires, and so sin against this saying of Christ: ‘Whosoever shall deny Me before
men, him will I also deny before My Father which is in heaven.’(215) For this reason I entreat
your imperial majesty, with all humility, to allow me time, that I may answer without offending
against the word of God.”(216)

In making this request, Luther moved wisely. His course convinced the assembly that he did
not act from passion or impulse. Such calmness and self-command, unexpected in one who had
shown himself bold and uncompromising, added to his power, and enabled him afterward to answer
with a prudence, decision, wisdom, and dignity that surprised and disappointed his adversaries,
and rebuked their insolence and pride.

The next day he was to appear to render his final answer. For a time his heart sunk within
him as he contemplated the forces that were combined against the truth. His faith faltered;
fearfulness and trembling came upon him, and horror overwhelmed him. Dangers multiplied before
him; his enemies seemed about to triumph, and the powers of darkness to prevail. Clouds gathered
about him, and seemed to separate him from God. He longed for the assurance that the Lord of
hosts would be with him. In anguish of spirit he threw himself with his face upon the earth,
and poured out those broken, heart-rending cries, which none but God can fully understand.

“O almighty and everlasting God,” he pleaded, “how terrible is this world! Behold, it openeth
its mouth to swallow me up, and I have so little trust in Thee.... If it is only in the strength
of this world that I must put my trust, all is over.... My last hour is come, my condemnation
has been pronounced.... O God, do Thou help me against all the wisdom of the world. Do this,
... Thou alone; ... for this is not my work, but Thine. I have nothing to do here, nothing
to contend for with these great ones of the world.... But the cause is Thine, ... and it is
a righteous and eternal cause. O Lord, help me! Faithful and unchangeable God, in no man do
I place my trust.... All that is of man is uncertain; all that cometh of man fails.... Thou
hast chosen me for this work.... Stand at my side, for the sake of Thy well-beloved Jesus Christ,
who is my defense, my shield, and my strong tower.”(217)

An all-wise Providence had permitted Luther to realize his peril, that he might not trust to
his own strength, and rush presumptuously into danger. Yet it was not the fear of personal
suffering, a dread of torture or death, which seemed immediately impending, that overwhelmed
him with its terror. He had come to the crisis, and he felt his insufficiency to meet it. Through
his weakness the cause of truth might suffer loss. Not for his own safety, but for the triumph
of the gospel did he wrestle with God. Like Israel’s, in that night struggle beside the lonely
stream, was the anguish and conflict of his soul. Like Israel, he prevailed with God. In his
utter helplessness his faith fastened upon Christ, the mighty deliverer. He was strengthened
with the assurance that he would not appear alone before the council. Peace returned to his
soul, and he rejoiced that he was permitted to uplift the word of God before the rulers of
the nation.

With his mind stayed upon God, Luther prepared for the struggle before him. He thought upon
the plan of his answer, examined passages in his own writings, and drew from the Holy Scriptures
suitable proofs to sustain his positions. Then, laying his left hand on the Sacred Volume,
which was open before him, he lifted his right hand to heaven, and vowed “to remain faithful
to the gospel, and freely to confess his faith, even should he seal his testimony with his
blood.”(218)

When he was again ushered into the presence of the Diet, his countenance bore no trace of fear
or embarrassment. Calm and peaceful, yet grandly brave and noble, he stood as God’s witness
among the great ones of the earth. The imperial officer now demanded his decision as to whether
he desired to retract his doctrines. Luther made his answer in a subdued and humble tone, without
violence or passion. His demeanor was diffident and respectful; yet he manifested a confidence
and joy that surprised the assembly.

“Most serene emperor, illustrious princes, gracious lords,” said Luther, “I appear before you
this day, in conformity with the order given me yesterday, and by God’s mercies I conjure your
majesty and your august highnesses to listen graciously to the defense of a cause which I am
assured is just and true. If, through ignorance, I should transgress the usages and proprieties
of courts, I entreat you to pardon me; for I was not brought up in the palaces of kings, but
in the seclusion of a convent.”(219)

Then, proceeding to the question, he stated that his published works were not all of the same
character. In some he had treated of faith and good works, and even his enemies declared them
not only harmless but profitable. To retract these would be to condemn truths which all parties
confessed. The second class consisted of writings exposing the corruptions and abuses of the
papacy. To revoke these works would strengthen the tyranny of Rome, and open a wider door to
many and great impieties. In the third class of his books he had attacked individuals who had
defended existing evils. Concerning these he freely confessed that he had been more violent
than was becoming. He did not claim to be free from fault; but even these books he could not
revoke, for such a course would embolden the enemies of truth, and they would then take occasion
to crush God’s people with still greater cruelty.

“Yet I am but a mere man, and not God, he continued; “I shall therefore defend myself as Christ
did: ‘If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil.’... By the mercy of God, I conjure you,
most serene emperor, and you, most illustrious princes, and all men of every degree, to prove
from the writings of the prophets and apostles that I have erred. As soon as I am convinced
of this, I will retract every error, and be the first to lay hold of my books and throw them
into the fire.”

“What I have just said plainly shows, I hope, that I have carefully weighed and considered
the dangers to which I expose myself; but far from being dismayed, I rejoice to see that the
gospel is now, as in former times, a cause of trouble and dissension. This is the character,
this is the destiny, of the word of God. ‘I came not to send peace on earth, but a sword,’
said Jesus Christ. God is wonderful and terrible in His counsels; beware lest, by presuming
to quench dissensions, you should persecute the holy word of God, and draw down upon yourselves
a frightful deluge of insurmountable dangers, of present disasters, and eternal desolation....
I might quote many examples from the oracles of God. I might speak of the Pharaohs, the kings
of Babylon, and those of Israel, whose labors never more effectually contributed to their own
destruction than when they sought by counsels, to all appearance most wise, to strengthen their
dominion. ‘God removeth mountains, and they know it not.’ ”(220)

Luther had spoken in German; he was now requested to repeat the same words in Latin. Though
exhausted by the previous effort, he complied, and again delivered his speech, with the same
clearness and energy as at the first. God’s providence directed in this matter. The minds of
many of the princes were so blinded by error and superstition that at the first delivery they
did not see the force of Luther’s reasoning; but the repetition enabled them to perceive clearly
the points presented.

Those who stubbornly closed their eyes to the light, and determined not to be convinced of
the truth, were enraged at the power of Luther’s words. As he ceased speaking, the spokesman
of the Diet said angrily, “You have not answered the question put to you.... You are required
to give a clear and precise answer.... Will you, or will you not, retract?”

The Reformer answered: “Since your most serene majesty and your high mightinesses require from
me a clear, simple, and precise answer, I will give you one, and it is this: I cannot submit
my faith either to the pope or to the councils, because it is clear as the day that they have
frequently erred and contradicted each other. Unless therefore I am convinced by the testimony
of Scripture or by the clearest reasoning, unless I am persuaded by means of the passages I
have quoted, and unless they thus render my conscience bound by the word of God, I cannot and
I will not retract, for it is unsafe for a Christian to speak against his conscience. Here
I stand, I can do no other; may God help me. Amen.”(221)

Thus stood this righteous man, upon the sure foundation of the word of God. The light of heaven
illuminated his countenance. His greatness and purity of character, his peace and joy of heart,
were manifest to all as he testified against the power of error, and witnessed to the superiority
of that faith that overcomes the world.

The whole assembly were for a time speechless with amazement. At his first answer, Luther had
spoken in a low tone, with a respectful, almost submissive bearing. The Romanists had interpreted
this as evidence that his courage was beginning to fail. They regarded the request for delay
as merely the prelude to his recantation. Charles himself, noting, half contemptuously, the
monk’s worn frame, his plain attire, and the simplicity of his address, had declared, “This
monk will never make a heretic of me.” The courage and firmness which he now displayed, as
well as the power and clearness of his reasoning, filled all parties with surprise. The emperor,
moved to admiration, exclaimed, “This monk speaks with an intrepid heart and unshaken courage.”
Many of the German princes looked with pride and joy upon this representative of their nation.

The partisans of Rome had been worsted; their cause appeared in a most unfavorable light. They
sought to maintain their power, not by appealing to the Scriptures, but by a resort to threats,
Rome’s unfailing argument. Said the spokesman of the Diet, “If you do not retract, the emperor
and the states of the empire will consult what course to adopt against an incorrigible heretic.”

Luther’s friends, who had with great joy listened to his noble defense, trembled at these words;
but the doctor himself said calmly, “May God be my helper, for I can retract nothing.”(222)

He was directed to withdraw from the Diet, while the princes consulted together. It was felt
that a great crisis had come. Luther’s persistent refusal to submit, might affect the history
of the church for ages. It was decided to give him one more opportunity to retract. For the
last time he was brought into the assembly. Again the question was put, whether he would renounce
his doctrines. “I have no other reply to make,” he said, “than that which I have already made.”
It was evident that he could not be induced, either by promises or threats, to yield to the
mandate of Rome.

The papal leaders were chagrined that their power, which had caused kings and nobles to tremble,
should be thus despised by a humble monk; they longed to make him feel their wrath by torturing
his life away. But Luther, understanding his danger, had spoken to all with Christian dignity
and calmness. His words had been free from pride, passion, and misrepresentation. He had lost
sight of himself, and of the great men surrounding him, and felt only that he was in the presence
of One infinitely superior to popes, prelates, kings, and emperors. Christ had spoken through
Luther’s testimony with a power and grandeur that for the time inspired both friends and foes
with awe and wonder. The Spirit of God had been present in that council impressing the hearts
of the chiefs of the empire. Several of the princes boldly acknowledged the justice of Luther’s
cause. Many were convinced of the truth; but with some the impressions received were not lasting.
There was another class who did not at the time express their convictions, but who, having
searched the Scriptures for themselves, at a future time became fearless supporters of the
Reformation.

The elector Frederick had looked forward anxiously to Luther’s appearance before the Diet,
and with deep emotion he listened to his speech. With joy and pride he witnessed the doctor’s
courage, firmness, and self-possession, and determined to stand more firmly in his defense.
He contrasted the parties in contest, and saw that the wisdom of popes, kings, and prelates
had been brought to naught by the power of truth. The papacy had sustained a defeat which would
be felt among all nations and in all ages.

As the legate perceived the effect produced by Luther’s speech, he feared, as never before,
for the security of the Romish power, and resolved to employ every means at his command to
effect the Reformer’s overthrow. With all the eloquence and diplomatic skill for which he was
so eminently distinguished, he represented to the youthful emperor the folly and danger of
sacrificing, in the cause of an insignificant monk, the friendship and support of the powerful
see of Rome.

His words were not without effect. On the day following Luther’s answer, Charles caused a message
to be presented to the Diet, announcing his determination to carry out the policy of his predecessors
to maintain and protect the Catholic religion. Since Luther had refused to renounce his errors,
the most vigorous measures should be employed against him and the heresies he taught. “A single
monk, misled by his own folly, has risen against the faith of Christendom. To stay such impiety,
I will sacrifice my kingdoms, my treasures, my friends, my body, my blood, my soul, and my
life. I am about to dismiss the Augustine Luther, forbidding him to cause the least disorder
among the people; I shall then proceed against him and his adherents as contumacious heretics,
by excommunication, by interdict, and by every means calculated to destroy them. I call on
the members of the states to behave like faithful Christians.”(223) Nevertheless the emperor
declared that Luther’s safe-conduct must be respected, and that before proceedings against
him could be instituted, he must be allowed to reach his home in safety.

Two conflicting opinions were now urged by the members of the Diet. The emissaries and representatives
of the pope again demanded that the Reformer’s safe-conduct should be disregarded. “The Rhine,”
they said, “should receive his ashes, as it had received those of John Huss a century ago.”(224)
But princes of Germany, though themselves papists and avowed enemies to Luther, protested against
such a breach of public faith, as a stain upon the honor of the nation. They pointed to the
calamities which had followed the death of Huss, and declared that they dared not call down
upon Germany, and upon the head of their youthful emperor, a repetition of those terrible evils.

Charles himself, in answer to the base proposal, said, “Though honor and faith should be banished
from all the world, they ought to find a refuge in the hearts of princes.”(225) He was still
further urged by the most bitter of Luther’s papal enemies to deal with the Reformer as Sigismund
had dealt with Huss,—abandon him to the mercies of the church; but recalling the scene when
Huss in public assembly had pointed to his chains and reminded the monarch of his plighted
faith, Charles V. declared, “I should not like to blush like Sigismund.”(226)

Yet Charles had deliberately rejected the truths presented by Luther. “I am firmly resolved
to imitate the example of my ancestors,”(227) wrote the monarch. He had decided that he would
not step out of the path of custom, even to walk in the ways of truth and righteousness. Because
his fathers did, he would uphold the papacy, with all its cruelty and corruption. Thus he took
his position, refusing to accept any light in advance of what his fathers had received, or
to perform any duty that they had not performed.

There are many at the present day thus clinging to the customs and traditions of their fathers.
When the Lord sends them additional light, they refuse to accept it, because, not having been
granted to their fathers, it was not received by them. We are not placed where our fathers
were; consequently our duties and responsibilities are not the same as theirs. We shall not
be approved of God in looking to the example of our fathers to determine our duty instead of
searching the Word of truth for ourselves. Our responsibility is greater than was that of our
ancestors. We are accountable for the light which they received, and which was handed down
as an inheritance for us, and we are accountable also for the additional light which is now
shining upon us from the word of God.

Said Christ of the unbelieving Jews, “If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not
had sin: but now they have no cloak for their sin.”(228) The same divine power had spoken through
Luther to the emperor and princes of Germany. And as the light shone forth from God’s word,
his Spirit pleaded for the last time with many in that assembly. As Pilate, centuries before,
permitted pride and popularity to close his heart against the world’s Redeemer; as the trembling
Felix bade the messenger of truth, “Go thy way for this time; when I have a convenient season,
I will call for thee;” as the proud Agrippa confessed, “Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian,”(229)
yet turned away from the Heaven-sent message,—so had Charles V., yielding to the dictates of
worldly pride and policy, decided to reject the light of truth.

Rumors of the designs against Luther were widely circulated, causing great excitement throughout
the city. The Reformer had made many friends, who, knowing the treacherous cruelty of Rome
toward all who dared expose her corruptions, resolved that he should not be sacrificed. Hundreds
of nobles pledged themselves to protect him. Not a few openly denounced the royal message as
evincing a weak submission to the controlling power of Rome. On the gates of houses and in
public places, placards were posted, some condemning and others sustaining Luther. On one of
these were written merely the significant words of the wise man, “Woe to thee, O land, when
thy king is a child.”(230) The popular enthusiasm in Luther’s favor throughout all Germany
convinced both the emperor and the Diet that any injustice shown him would endanger the peace
of the empire, and even the stability of the throne.

Frederick of Saxony maintained a studied reserve, carefully concealing his real feelings toward
the Reformer, while at the same time he guarded him with tireless vigilance, watching all his
movements and all those of his enemies. But there were many who made no attempt to conceal
their sympathy with Luther. He was visited by princes, counts, barons, and other persons of
distinction, both lay and ecclesiastical. “The doctor’s little room,” wrote Spalatin, “could
not contain all the visitors who presented themselves.”(231) The people gazed upon him as if
he were more than human. Even those who had no faith in his doctrines, could not but admire
that lofty integrity which led him to brave death rather than violate his conscience.

Earnest efforts were made to obtain Luther’s consent to a compromise with Rome. Nobles and
princes represented to him that if he persisted in setting up his own judgment against that
of the church and the councils, he would soon be banished from the empire, and then would have
no defense. To this appeal Luther answered: “The gospel of Christ cannot be preached without
offense.... Why then should the fear or apprehension of danger separate me from the Lord, and
from that divine word which alone is truth? No; I would rather give up my body, my blood, and
my life.”(232)

Again he was urged to submit to the judgment of the emperor, and then he would have nothing
to fear. “I consent,” said he in reply, “with all my heart, that the emperor, the princes,
and even the meanest Christian, should examine and judge my works; but on one condition, that
they take the word of God for their standard. Men have nothing to do but to obey it. Do not
offer violence to my conscience, which is bound and chained up with the Holy Scriptures.”(233)

To another appeal he said, “I consent to renounce my safe-conduct. I place my person and my
life in the emperor’s hands, but the word of God—never!”(234) He stated his willingness to
submit to the decision of a general council, but only on condition that the council be required
to decide according to the Scriptures. “In what concerns the word of God and the faith,” he
added, “every Christian is as good a judge as the pope, though supported by a million councils,
can be for him.”(235) Both friends and foes were at last convinced that further effort for
reconciliation would be useless.

Had the Reformer yielded a single point, Satan and his hosts would have gained the victory.
But his unwavering firmness was the means of emancipating the church, and beginning a new and
better era. The influence of this one man, who dared to think and act for himself in religious
matters, was to affect the church and the world, not only in his own time, but in all future
generations. His firmness and fidelity would strengthen all, to the close of time, who should
pass through a similar experience. The power and majesty of God stood forth above the counsel
of men, above the mighty power of Satan.

Luther was soon commanded by the authority of the emperor to return home, and he knew that
this notice would be speedily followed by his condemnation. Threatening clouds overhung his
path; but as he departed from Worms, his heart was filled with joy and praise. “The devil himself,”
said he, “guarded the pope’s citadel; but Christ has made a wide breach in it, and Satan was
constrained to confess that the Lord is mightier than he.”(236)

After his departure, still desirous that his firmness should not be mistaken for rebellion,
Luther wrote to the emperor. “God, who is the searcher of hearts, is my witness,” he said,
“that I am ready most earnestly to obey your majesty, in honor or in dishonor, in life or in
death, and with no exception save the word of God, by which man lives. In all the affairs of
this present life, my fidelity shall be unshaken, for here to lose or to gain is of no consequence
to salvation. But when eternal interests are concerned, God wills not that man should submit
unto man. For such submission in spiritual matters is a real worship, and ought to be rendered
solely to the Creator.”(237)

On the journey from Worms, Luther’s reception was even more flattering than during his progress
thither. Princely ecclesiastics welcomed the excommunicated monk, and civil rulers honored
the man whom the emperor had denounced. He was urged to preach, and notwithstanding the imperial
prohibition, he again entered the pulpit. “I never pledged myself to chain up the word of God,”
he said, “nor will I.”(238)

He had not been long absent from Worms, when the papists prevailed upon the emperor to issue
an edict against him. In this decree Luther was denounced as “Satan himself under the form
of a man and dressed in a monk’s frock.”(239) It was commanded that as soon as his safe-conduct
should expire, measures be taken to stop his work. All persons were forbidden to harbor him,
to give him food or drink, or by word or act, in public or private, to aid or abet him. He
was to be seized wherever he might be, and delivered to the authorities. His adherents also
were to be imprisoned, and their property confiscated. His writings were to be destroyed, and
finally, all who should dare to act contrary to this decree were included in its condemnation.
The elector of Saxony, and the princes most friendly to Luther, had left Worms soon after his
departure, and the emperor’s decree received the sanction of the Diet. Now the Romanists were
jubilant. They considered the fate of the Reformation sealed.

God had provided a way of escape for His servant in this hour of peril. A vigilant eye had
followed Luther’s movements, and a true and noble heart had resolved upon his rescue. It was
plain that Rome would be satisfied with nothing short of his death; only by concealment could
he be preserved from the jaws of the lion. God gave wisdom to Frederick of Saxony to devise
a plan for the Reformer’s preservation. With the co-operation of true friends, the elector’s
purpose was carried out, and Luther was effectually hidden from friends and foes. Upon his
homeward journey, he was seized, separated from his attendants, and hurriedly conveyed through
the forest to the castle of Wartburg, an isolated mountain fortress. Both his seizure and his
concealment were so involved in mystery that even Frederick himself for a long time knew not
whither he had been conducted. This ignorance was not without design; so long as the elector
knew nothing of Luther’s whereabouts, he could reveal nothing. He satisfied himself that the
Reformer was safe, and with this knowledge he was content.

Spring, summer, and autumn passed, and winter came, and Luther still remained a prisoner. Aleander
and his partisans exulted as the light of the gospel seemed about to be extinguished. But instead
of this, the Reformer was filling his lamp from the storehouse of truth; and its light was
to shine forth with brighter radiance.

In the friendly security of the Wartburg, Luther for a time rejoiced in his release from the
heat and turmoil of battle. But he could not long find satisfaction in quiet and repose. Accustomed
to a life of activity and stern conflict, he could ill endure to remain inactive. In those
solitary days, the condition of the church rose up before him, and he cried in despair, “Alas!
there is no one in this latter day of His anger, to stand like a wall before the Lord, and
save Israel!”(240) Again, his thoughts returned to himself, and he feared being charged with
cowardice in withdrawing from the contest. Then he reproached himself for his indolence and
self-indulgence. Yet at the same time he was daily accomplishing more than it seemed possible
for one man to do. His pen was never idle. While his enemies flattered themselves that he was
silenced, they were astonished and confused by tangible proof that he was still active. A host
of tracts, issuing from his pen, circulated throughout Germany. He also performed a most important
service for his countrymen by translating the New Testament into the German tongue. From his
rocky Patmos he continued for nearly a whole year to proclaim the gospel, and rebuke the sins
and errors of the times.

But it was not merely to preserve Luther from the wrath of his enemies, nor even to afford
him a season of quiet for these important labors, that God had withdrawn His servant from the
stage of public life. There were results more precious than these to be secured. In the solitude
and obscurity of his mountain retreat, Luther was removed from earthly supports, and shut out
from human praise. He was thus saved from the pride and self-confidence that are so often caused
by success. By suffering and humiliation he was prepared again to walk safely upon the dizzy
heights to which he had been so suddenly exalted.

As men rejoice in the freedom which the truth brings them, they are inclined to extol those
whom God has employed to break the chains of error and superstition. Satan seeks to divert
men’s thoughts and affections from God, and to fix them upon human agencies; he leads them
to honor the mere instrument, and to ignore the Hand that directs all the events of providence.
Too often, religious leaders who are thus praised and reverenced lose sight of their dependence
upon God, and are led to trust in themselves. As a result, they seek to control the minds and
consciences of the people, who are disposed to look to them for guidance instead of looking
to the word of God. The work of reform is often retarded because of this spirit indulged by
its supporters. From this danger, God would guard the cause of the Reformation. He desired
that work to receive, not the impress of man, but that of God. The eyes of men had been turned
to Luther as the expounder of the truth; he was removed that all eyes might be directed to
the eternal Author of truth.

9. THE SWISS REFORMER.

In the choice of instrumentalities for the reforming of the church, the same divine plan is
seen as in that for the planting of the church. The heavenly Teacher passed by the great men
of earth, the titled and wealthy, who were accustomed to receive praise and homage as leaders
of the people. They were so proud and self-confident in their boasted superiority that they
could not be moulded to sympathize with their fellow-men, and to become co-laborers with the
humble Man of Nazareth. To the unlearned, toiling fishermen of Galilee was the call addressed,
“Follow Me, and I will make you fishers of men.”(241) These disciples were humble and teachable.
The less they had been influenced by the false teaching of their time, the more successfully
could Christ instruct and train them for His service. So in the days of the Great Reformation. It
was the desire of all to reach home before dark. To accomplish this would be no easy matter,
as there were so many untrained dogs. At first it was decided to harness up a number of these,
as harness had been brought for the purpose, but after some consultation with Kinesasis about
the thin ice Mr Ross decided against it, thus leaving the young dogs
to follow.

Only the old dogs were harnessed. This added a couple more trains to the party. The sleds
of these were loaded down with the tent, nets, and other things which had made up Kinesasis's
outfit during the summer.

At length everything was loaded up, and the return trip began. There was some trouble in getting
a number of the younger dogs to take to the ice and keep up with the trains; numbers would persist
in turning round and hurrying back.

"We cannot blame them," Sam said afterward, and his Irish oratory burst forth as he described
what had been their happy condition.

"Just think," he said, "on that beautiful island in the pleasant springtime they were born.
There they have had a happy, careless puppyhood life. There they have spent the pleasant summer
time with plenty to eat and nothing to do. On the sandy beaches and over the smooth rocks they
have gamboled together, and in the warm, rippling waters they have splashed and battled. Now
the cold weather has suddenly come and the snow has covered their favourite romping grounds,
and even their great bathing places are hard with slippery ice."

There was, however, but little sentiment in the minds of Mr Ross and
the Indians.

On the contrary, they were very much annoyed at the delay the refractory young dogs were causing,
and so had to adopt prompt measures, or they well knew that the night would be upon them ere
home was reached. The younger puppies were packed in the carioles around our travellers, and some of
the more obstinate older ones were led by ropes fastened to their collars and tied to the sleds,
while the great majority, coaxed by little pieces of meat occasionally dropped on the ice, kept
well up to the trains. Thus on they pushed until they reached the rapid current in the lake
where the thin ice had given them so much trouble in the morning. Fortunately the additional hours
of bitter cold had so strengthened it that no serious difficulty
was anticipated in crossing over, even if the loads were much heavier.

But
another event occurred, quite unexpected, indeed, and which, while
it did much to impede their progress, created a good deal of excitement
and interest. The first intimation of its coming was the sudden cry
of wild geese not very far away. Their "Honk! honk!" was very distinct,
and not only excited the boys, but also the dogs. He had no intention of allowing
his son to follow the idle and worthless life of the monks. He saw that his future usefulness
was at stake, and directed him to return home without delay.

The command was obeyed; but the youth could not be long content in his native valley, and he
soon resumed his studies, repairing, after a time, to Basel. It was here that Zwingle first
heard the gospel of God’s free grace. Wittembach, a teacher of the ancient languages, had,
while studying Greek and Hebrew, been led to the Holy Scriptures, and thus rays of divine light
were shed into the minds of the students under his instruction. He declared that there was
a truth more ancient, and of infinitely greater worth, than the theories taught by schoolmen
and philosophers. This ancient truth was that the death of Christ is the sinner’s only ransom.
To Zwingle these words were as the first ray of light that precedes the dawn.

Zwingle was soon called from Basel, to enter upon his life-work. His first field of labor was
in an Alpine parish, not far distant from his native valley. Having received ordination as
a priest, he “devoted himself with his whole soul to the search after divine truth; for he
was well aware,” says a fellow-reformer, “how much he must know to whom the flock of Christ
is entrusted.”(242) The more he searched the Scriptures, the clearer appeared the contrast
between their truths and the heresies of Rome. He submitted himself to the Bible as the word
of God, the only sufficient, infallible rule. He saw that it must be its own interpreter. He
dared not attempt to explain Scripture to sustain a preconceived theory or doctrine, but held
it his duty to learn what is its direct and obvious teaching. He sought to avail himself of
every help to obtain a full and correct understanding of its meaning, and he invoked the aid
of the Holy Spirit, which would, he declared, reveal it to all who sought it in sincerity and
with prayer.

“The Scriptures,” said Zwingle, “come from God, not from man, and even that God who enlightens
will give thee to understand that the speech comes from God. The word of God ... cannot fail;
it is bright, it teaches itself, it discloses itself, it illumines the soul with all salvation
and grace, comforts it in God, humbles it, so that it loses and even forfeits itself, and embraces
God.”(243) The truth of these words Zwingle himself had proved. Speaking of his experience
at this time, he afterward wrote: “When ... I began to give myself wholly up to the Holy Scriptures,
philosophy and theology (scholastic) would always keep suggesting quarrels to me. At last I
came to this, that I thought, ‘Thou must let all that lie, and learn the meaning of God purely
out of His own simple word.’ Then I began to ask God for His light, and the Scriptures began
to be much easier to me.”(244)

The doctrine preached by Zwingle was not received from Luther. It was the doctrine of Christ.
“If Luther preaches Christ,” said the Swiss Reformer, “he does what I am doing. Those whom
he has brought to Christ are more numerous than those whom I have led. But this matters not.
I will bear no other name than that of Christ, whose soldier I am, and who alone is my chief.
Never has one single word been written by me to Luther, nor by Luther to me. And why?... That
it might be shown how much the Spirit of God is in unison with itself, since both of us, without
any collusion, teach the doctrine of Christ with such uniformity.”(245)

In 1516 Zwingle was invited to become a preacher in the convent at Einsiedeln. Here he was
to have a closer view of the corruptions of Rome, and was to exert an influence as a Reformer
that would be felt far beyond his native Alps. Among the chief attractions of Einsiedeln was
an image of the Virgin which was said to have the power of working miracles. Above the gateway
of the convent was the inscription, “Here a plenary remission of sins may be obtained.”(246)
Pilgrims at all seasons resorted to the shrine of the Virgin, but at the great yearly festival
of its consecration, multitudes came from all parts of Switzerland, and even from France and
Germany. Zwingle, greatly afflicted at the sight, seized the opportunity to proclaim liberty
through the gospel to these bond-slaves of superstition.

“Do not imagine,” he said, “that God is in this temple more than in any other part of creation.
Whatever be the country in which you dwell, God is around you, and hears you.... Can unprofitable
works, long pilgrimages, offerings, images, the invocation of the Virgin or of the saints,
secure for you the grace of God?... What avails the multitude of words with which we embody
our prayers? What efficacy has a glossy cowl, a smooth-shorn head, a long and flowing robe,
or gold-embroidered slippers?... God looks at the heart, and our hearts are far from Him.”
“Christ,” he said, “who was once offered upon the cross, is the sacrifice and victim, that
had made satisfaction for the sins of believers to all eternity.”(247)

To many listeners these teachings were unwelcome. It was a bitter disappointment to them to
be told that their toilsome journey had been made in vain. The pardon freely offered to them
through Christ they could not comprehend. They were satisfied with the old way to heaven which
Rome had marked out for them. They shrank from the perplexity of searching for anything better.
It was easier to trust their salvation to the priests and the pope than to seek for purity
of heart.

But another class received with gladness the tidings of redemption through Christ. The observances
enjoined by Rome had failed to bring peace of soul, and in faith they accepted the Saviour’s
blood as their propitiation. These returned to their homes to reveal to others the precious
light which they had received. The truth was thus carried from hamlet to hamlet, from town
to town, and the number of pilgrims to the Virgin’s shrine greatly lessened. There was a falling
off in the offerings, and consequently in the salary of Zwingle, which was drawn from them.
But this caused him only joy as he saw that the power of fanaticism and superstition was being
broken.

The authorities of the church were not blind to the work which Zwingle was accomplishing; but
for the present they forbore to interfere. Hoping yet to secure him to their cause, they endeavored
to win him by flatteries; and meanwhile the truth was gaining a hold upon the hearts of the people.

Zwingle’s labors at Einsiedeln had prepared him for a wider field, and this he was soon to
enter. After three years here, he was called to the office of preacher in the cathedral at
Zurich. This was then the most important town of the Swiss confederacy, and the influence exerted
here would be widely felt. The ecclesiastics by whose invitation he came to Zurich were, however,
desirous of preventing any innovations, and they accordingly proceeded to instruct him as to
his duties.

“You will make every exertion,” they said, “to collect the revenues of the chapter, without
overlooking the least. You will exhort the faithful, both from the pulpit and in the confessional,
to pay all tithes and dues, and to show by their offerings their affection to the church. You
will be diligent in increasing the income arising from the sick, from masses, and in general
from every ecclesiastical ordinance.” “As for the administration of the sacraments, the preaching,
and the care of the flock,” added his instructors, “these are also the duties of the chaplain.
But for these you may employ a substitute, and particularly in preaching. You should administer
the sacraments to none but persons of note, and only when called upon; you are forbidden to
do so without distinction of persons.”(248)

Zwingle listened in silence to this charge, and in reply, after expressing his gratitude for
the honor of a call to this important station, he proceeded to explain the course which he
proposed, to adopt. “The life of Christ,” he said, “has been too long hidden from the people.
I shall preach upon the whole of the Gospel of St. Matthew, ... drawing solely from the fountains
of Scripture, sounding its depths, comparing one passage with another, and seeking for understanding
by constant and earnest prayer. It is to God’s glory, to the praise of His only Son, to the
real salvation of souls, and to their edification in the true faith, that I shall consecrate
my ministry.”(249) Though some of the ecclesiastics disapproved his plan, and endeavored to
dissuade him from it, Zwingle remained steadfast. He declared that he was about to introduce
no new method, but the old method employed by the church in earlier and purer times.

Already an interest had been awakened in the truths he taught; and the people flocked in great
numbers to listen to his preaching. Many who had long since ceased to attend service were among
his hearers. He began his ministry by opening the Gospels, and reading and explaining to his
hearers the inspired narrative of the life, teachings, and death of Christ. Can any of you tell old Kinesasis
why it is so?"

CHAPTER THREE.

SELECTING THEIR DOGS--VARIOUS METHODS OF BREAKING THEM IN--FRANK'S SUCCESS BY KINDNESS WITH
MONARCH--SAM'S TROUBLES WITH SPITFIRE-- CONQUERED AT LAST--TRAINING AND CAPTURING DOGS WITH
DOGS--ALEC'S TRAIN OF PART STAGHOUNDS.

With this question of the old Indian ringing in their ears the party in the kitchen broke up,
and as the day had been a long one they all soon retired to rest.

The boys were more than delighted with the day's experience, and were full of joyful anticipation
for the morrow, for then it was that they were to select the dogs
that were to constitute their own trains and at once to begin the
work of breaking them in.

So long and soundly did they sleep the next morning that the second breakfast bell was ringing
when they awoke, and so they had but little time in which to dress ere breakfast was served. However,
to their joy they found that others had also overslept themselves. Even Mr Ross himself, who
was one of these, declared that the capital outing of the previous day had done him a great
deal of good, as he had not slept so well for a long time.

The events of yesterday and the anticipations of the present day were discussed with great animation.
The boys were questioned as to the style and disposition of the dogs
they each desired, and the methods they intended to pursue in their
training.

Frank wanted his to be strong and powerful, able to carry him over any difficult place and
able to draw any reasonable load assigned him. Alec's ambition was for a swift train, that he might
have all the fun and excitement of rapid travelling.

"All right," said Sam, "but give me the darlings with any amount of
mischief and tricks in them. Those are the dogs for me."

A hearty
laugh from all greeted Sam's queer wish.

"I think, as regards the
tricks, we can easily satisfy you," said Mr Ross. "And it will be
amusing to see how a young Irish gentleman can circumvent them; for
you will find out, before you get through with them, that tricky dogs
are not only very clever, but very provoking, in some of their deals."

Mr
Ross had been very careful for years in the selection and breeding
of his dogs.

Every sin had its price, and men were granted free license for crime, if the treasury of the
church was kept well filled. Thus the two movements advanced,—one offering forgiveness of sin
for money, the other forgiveness through Christ,—Rome licensing sin, and making it her source
of revenue; the Reformers condemning sin, and pointing to Christ as the propitiation and deliverer.

In Germany the sale of indulgences had been committed to the Dominican friars, and was conducted
by the infamous Tetzel. In Switzerland the traffic was put into the hands of the Franciscans,
under the control of Samson, an Italian monk. Samson had already done good service to the church,
having secured immense sums from Germany and Switzerland to fill the papal treasury. Now he
traversed Switzerland, attracting great crowds, despoiling the poor peasants of their scanty
earnings, and exacting rich gifts from the wealthy classes. But the influence of the reform
already made itself felt in curtailing, though it could not stop, the traffic. Zwingle was
still at Einsiedeln when Samson, soon after entering Switzerland, arrived with his wares at
a neighboring town. Being apprised of his mission, the Reformer immediately set out to oppose
him. The two did not meet, but such was Zwingle’s success in exposing the friar’s pretensions
that he was obliged to leave for other quarters.

At Zurich, Zwingle preached zealously against the pardon-mongers; and when Samson approached
the place, he was met by a messenger from the council, with an intimation that he was expected
to pass on. He finally secured an entrance by stratagem, but was sent away without the sale
of a single pardon, and he soon after left Switzerland.

A strong impetus was given to the reform by the appearance of the plague, or “great death,”
which swept over Switzerland in the year 1519. As men were thus brought face to face with the
destroyer, many were led to feel how vain and worthless were the pardons which they had so
lately purchased; and they longed for a surer foundation for their faith. Zwingle at Zurich
was smitten down; he was brought so low that all hope of his recovery was relinquished, and
the report was widely circulated that he was dead. In that trying hour his hope and courage
were unshaken. He looked in faith to the cross of Calvary, trusting in the all-sufficient propitiation
for sin. When he came back from the gates of death, it was to preach the gospel with greater
fervor than ever before; and his words exerted an unwonted power. The people welcomed with
joy their beloved pastor, returned to them from the brink of the grave. They themselves had
come from attending upon the sick and the dying, and they felt, as never before, the value
of the gospel.

Zwingle had arrived at a clearer understanding of its truths, and had more fully experienced
in himself its renewing power. The fall of man and the plan of redemption were the subjects
upon which he dwelt. “In Adam,” he said, “we are all dead, sunk in corruption and condemnation.”(254)
“Christ ... has purchased for us a never-ending redemption ... His passion is ... an eternal
sacrifice, and everlastingly effectual to heal; it satisfies the divine justice forever in
behalf of all those who rely upon it with firm and unshaken faith.” Yet he clearly taught that
men are not, because of the grace of Christ, free to continue in sin. “Wherever there is faith
in God, there God is; and wherever God abideth, there a zeal exists urging and impelling men
to good works.”(255)

Such was the interest in Zwingle’s preaching that the cathedral was filled to overflowing with
the crowds that came to listen to him. Little by little, as they could bear it, he opened the
truth to his hearers. He was careful not to introduce, at first, points which would startle
them and create prejudice. His work was to win their hearts to the teachings of Christ, to
soften them by His love, and keep before them His example; and as they should receive the principles
of the gospel, their superstitious beliefs and practices would inevitably be overthrown.

Step by step the Reformation advanced in Zurich. In alarm its enemies aroused to active opposition.
One year before, the monk of Wittenberg had uttered his “No” to the pope and the emperor at
Worms, and now everything seemed to indicate a similar withstanding of the papal claims at
Zurich. Repeated attacks were made upon Zwingle. In the papal cantons, from time to time, disciples
of the gospel were brought to the stake, but this was not enough; the teacher of heresy must
be silenced. Accordingly the bishop of Constance dispatched three deputies to the Council of
Zurich, accusing Zwingle of teaching the people to transgress the laws of the church, thus
endangering the peace and good order of society. If the authority of the church were to be
set aside, he urged, universal anarchy would result. Zwingle replied that he had been for four
years teaching the gospel in Zurich, “which was more quiet and peaceful than any other town
in the confederacy.” “Is not, then,” he said, “Christianity the best safeguard of the general
security?”(256)

The deputies had admonished the councilors to continue in the church, out of which, they declared,
there was no salvation. Zwingle responded: “Let not this accusation move you. The foundation
of the church is the same Rock, the same Christ, that gave Peter his name because he confessed
Him faithfully. In every nation whosoever believes with all his heart in the Lord Jesus is
accepted of God. Here, truly, is the church, out of which no one can be saved.”(257) As a result
of the conference, one of the bishop’s deputies accepted the reformed faith.

The council declined to take action against Zwingle, and Rome prepared for a fresh attack.
The Reformer, when apprised of the plots of his enemies, exclaimed, “Let them come on; I fear
them as the beetling cliff fears the waves that thunder at its feet.”(258) The efforts of the
ecclesiastics only furthered the cause which they sought to overthrow. The truth continued
to spread. In Germany its adherents, cast down by Luther’s disappearance, took heart again,
as they saw the progress of the gospel in Switzerland.

As the Reformation became established in Zurich, its fruits were more fully seen in the suppression
of vice, and the promotion of order and harmony. “Peace has her habitation in our town,” wrote
Zwingle; “no quarrel, no hypocrisy, no envy, no strife. Whence can such union come but from
the Lord, and our doctrine, which fills us with the fruits of peace and piety?”(259)

The victories gained by the Reformation stirred the Romanists to still more determined efforts
for its overthrow. Seeing how little had been accomplished by persecution in suppressing Luther’s
work in Germany, they decided to meet the reform with its own weapons. They would hold a disputation
with Zwingle, and having the arrangement of matters, they would make sure of victory by choosing,
themselves, not only the place of the combat, but the judges that should decide between the
disputants. And if they could once get Zwingle into their power, they would take care that
he did not escape them. The leader silenced, the movement could speedily be crushed. This purpose,
however, was carefully concealed.

The disputation was appointed to be held at Baden; but Zwingle was not present. The Council
of Zurich, suspecting the designs of the papists, and warned by the burning piles kindled in
the papal cantons for confessors of the gospel, forbade their pastor to expose himself to this
peril. At Zurich he was ready to meet all the partisans that Rome might send; but to go to
Baden, where the blood of martyrs for the truth had just been shed, was to go to certain death.
Œcolampadius and Haller were chosen to represent the Reformers, while the famous Doctor Eck,
supported by a host of learned doctors and prelates, was the champion of Rome.

Though Zwingle was not present at the conference, his influence was felt. The secretaries were
all chosen by the papists, and others were forbidden to take notes, on pain of death. Notwithstanding
this, Zwingle received daily a faithful account of what was said at Baden. A student in attendance
at the disputation, made a record each evening of the arguments that day presented. These papers
two other students undertook to deliver, with the daily letters of Œcolampadius, to Zwingle
at Zurich. The Reformer answered, giving counsel and suggestions. His letters were written
by night, and the students returned with them to Baden in the morning. To elude the vigilance
of the guard stationed at the city gates, these messengers brought baskets of poultry on their
heads, and they were permitted to pass without hindrance.

Thus Zwingle maintained the battle with his wily antagonists. He “has labored more,” said Myconius,
“by his meditations, his sleepless nights, and the advice which he transmitted to Baden, than
he would have done by discussing in person in the midst of his enemies.”(260)

The Romanists, flushed with anticipated triumph, had come to Baden attired in their richest
robes and glittering with jewels. They fared luxuriously, their tables spread with the most
costly delicacies and the choicest wines. The burden of their ecclesiastical duties was lightened
by gaiety and reveling. In marked contrast appeared the Reformers, who were looked upon by
the people as little better than a company of beggars, and whose frugal fare kept them but
short time at table. Œcolampadius’s landlord, taking occasion to watch him in his room, found
him always engaged in study or at prayer, and greatly wondering, reported that the heretic
was at least “very pious.”

At the conference, “Eck haughtily ascended a pulpit splendidly decorated, while the humble
Œcolampadius, meanly clothed, was forced to take his seat in front of his opponent on a rudely
carved stool.”(261) Eck’s stentorian voice and unbounded assurance never failed him. His zeal
was stimulated by the hope of gold as well as fame; for the defender of the faith was to be
rewarded by a handsome fee. When better arguments failed, he had resort to insults, and even
to oaths.

Œcolampadius, modest and self-distrustful, had shrunk from the combat, and he entered upon
it with the solemn avowal, “I acknowledge no other standard of judgment than the word of God.”(262)
Though gentle and courteous in demeanor, he proved himself able and unflinching. While the
Romanists, according to their wont, appealed for authority to the customs of the church, the
Reformer adhered steadfastly to the Holy Scriptures. “Custom,” he said, “has no force in our
Switzerland, unless it be according to the constitution; now, in matters of faith, the Bible
is our constitution.”(263)

The contrast between the two disputants was not without effect. The calm, clear reasoning of
the Reformer, so gently and modestly presented, appealed to minds that turned in disgust from
Eck’s boastful and boisterous assumptions.

The discussion continued eighteen days. At its close, the papists with great confidence claimed
the victory. Most of the deputies sided with Rome, and the Diet pronounced the Reformers vanquished,
and declared that they, together with Zwingle, their leader, were cut off from the church.
But the fruits of the conference revealed on which side the advantage lay. The contest resulted
in a strong impetus to the Protestant cause, and it was not long afterward that the important
cities of Bern and Basel declared for the Reformation.

10. PROGRESS OF REFORM IN GERMANY.

Luther’s mysterious disappearance excited consternation throughout all Germany. Inquiries concerning
him were heard everywhere. The wildest rumors were circulated, and many believed that he had
been murdered. There was great lamentation, not only by his avowed friends, but by thousands
who had not openly taken their stand with the Reformation. Many bound themselves by a solemn
oath to avenge his death.

The Romish leaders saw with terror to what a pitch had risen the feeling against them. Though
at first exultant at the supposed death of Luther, they soon desired to hide from the wrath
of the people. His enemies had not been so troubled by his most daring acts while among them,
as they were at his removal. Those who in their rage had sought to destroy the bold Reformer,
were filled with fear now that he had become a helpless captive. “The only remaining way of
saving ourselves,” said one, “is to light torches, and hunt for Luther through the whole world,
to restore him to the nation that is calling for him.”(264) The edict of the emperor seemed
to fall powerless. The papal legates were filled with indignation as they saw that it commanded
far less attention than did the fate of Luther.

Luther at the Wartburg.  “The tidings that he was safe, though a prisoner,
                     calmed the fears of the people.”

The tidings that he was safe, though a prisoner, calmed the fears of the people, while it still
further aroused their enthusiasm in his favor. His writings were read with greater eagerness
than ever before. Increasing numbers joined the cause of the heroic man who had, at such fearful
odds, defended the word of God. The Reformation was constantly gaining in strength. The seed
which Luther had sown sprung up everywhere. His absence accomplished a work which his presence
would have failed to do. Other laborers felt a new responsibility, now that their great leader
was removed. With new faith and earnestness they pressed forward to do all in their power,
that the work so nobly begun might not be hindered.

But Satan was not idle. He now attempted what he has attempted in every other reformatory movement,—to
deceive and destroy the people by palming off upon them a counterfeit in place of the true
work. As there were false christs in the first century of the Christian church, so there arose
false prophets in the sixteenth century.

A few men, deeply affected by the excitement in the religious world, imagined themselves to
have received special revelations from Heaven, and claimed to have been divinely commissioned
to carry forward to its completion the Reformation which, they declared, had been but feebly
begun by Luther. In truth, they were undoing the very work which he had accomplished. They
rejected the great principle which was the very foundation of the Reformation,—that the word
of God is the all-sufficient rule of faith and practice; and for that unerring guide they substituted
the changeable, uncertain standard of their own feelings and impressions. By this act of setting
aside the great detector of error and falsehood, the way was opened for Satan to control minds
as best pleased himself.

One of these prophets claimed to have been instructed by the angel Gabriel. A student who united
with him forsook his studies, declaring that he had been endowed by God Himself with wisdom
to expound His word. Others who were naturally inclined to fanaticism united with them. The
proceedings of these enthusiasts created no little excitement. The preaching of Luther had
aroused the people everywhere to feel the necessity of reform, and now some really honest persons
were misled by the pretensions of the new prophets.

The leaders of the movement proceeded to Wittenberg, and urged their claims upon Melanchthon
and his co-laborers. Said they: “We are sent by God to instruct the people. We have held familiar
conversations with the Lord; we know what will happen; in a word, we are apostles and prophets,
and appeal to Doctor Luther.”(265)

The Reformers were astonished and perplexed. This was such an element as they had never before
encountered, and they knew not what course to pursue. Said Melanchthon: “There are indeed extraordinary
spirits in these men; but what spirits?... On the one hand, let us beware of quenching the
Spirit of God, and on the other, of being led astray by the spirit of Satan.”(266)

The fruit of the new teaching soon became apparent. The people were led to neglect the Bible,
or to cast it wholly aside. The schools were thrown into confusion. Students, spurning all
restraint, abandoned their studies, and withdrew from the university. The men who thought themselves
competent to revive and control the work of the Reformation, succeeded only in bringing it
to the verge of ruin. The Romanists now regained their confidence, and exclaimed exultingly,
“One last struggle, and all will be ours.”(267)

Luther at the Wartburg, hearing of what had occurred, said with deep concern, “I always expected
that Satan would send us this plague.”(268) He perceived the true character of those pretended
prophets, and saw the danger that threatened the cause of truth. The opposition of the pope
and the emperor had not caused him so great perplexity and distress as he now experienced.
From the professed friends of the Reformation had risen its worst enemies. The very truths
which had brought him so great joy and consolation were being employed to stir up strife and
create confusion in the church.

In the work of reform, Luther had been urged forward by the Spirit of God, and had been carried
beyond himself. He had not purposed to take such positions as he did, or to make so radical
changes. He had been but the instrument in the hand of Infinite Power. Yet he often trembled
for the result of his work. He had once said, “If I knew that my doctrine injured one man,
one single man, however lowly and obscure,—which it cannot, for it is the gospel itself,—I
would rather die ten times than not retract it.”(269)

And now Wittenberg itself, the very center of the Reformation, was fast falling under the power
of fanaticism and lawlessness. This terrible condition had not resulted from the teachings
of Luther; but throughout Germany his enemies were charging it upon him. In bitterness of soul
he sometimes asked, “Can such then be the end of this great work of the Reformation?”(270)
Again, as he wrestled with God in prayer, peace flowed into his heart. “The work is not mine,
but Thine own,” he said; “Thou wilt not suffer it to be corrupted by superstition or fanaticism.”
But the thought of remaining longer from the conflict in such a crisis, became insupportable.
He determined to return to Wittenberg.

Without delay he set out on his perilous journey. He was under the ban of the empire. Enemies
were at liberty to take his life; friends were forbidden to aid or shelter him. The imperial
government was adopting the most stringent measures against his adherents. But he saw that
the work of the gospel was imperiled, and in the name of the Lord he went out fearlessly to
battle for the truth.

In a letter to the elector, after stating his purpose to leave the Wartburg, Luther said: “Be
it known to your highness that I am going to Wittenberg under a protection far higher than
that of princes and electors. I think not of soliciting your highness’ support, and far from
desiring your protection, I would rather protect you myself. If I knew that your highness could
or would protect me, I would not go to Wittenberg at all. There is no sword that can further
this cause. God alone must do everything, without the help or concurrence of man. He who has
the greatest faith is he who is most able to protect.”(271)

In a second letter, written on the way to Wittenberg, Luther added: “I am ready to incur the
displeasure of your highness and the anger of the whole world. Are not the Wittenbergers my
sheep? Has not God entrusted them to me? And ought I not, if necessary, to expose myself to
death for their sakes? Besides, I fear to see a terrible outbreak in Germany, by which God
will punish our nation.”(272)

With great caution and humility, yet with decision and firmness, he entered upon his work.
“By the Word,” said he, “must we overthrow and destroy what has been set up by violence. I
will not make use of force against the superstitious and unbelieving.... No one must be constrained.
Liberty is the very essence of faith.”(273)

It was soon noised through Wittenberg that Luther had returned, and that he was to preach.
The people flocked from all directions, and the church was filled to overflowing. Ascending
the pulpit, he with great wisdom and gentleness instructed, exhorted, and reproved. THE GREATNESS
OF THE ROMANS (Contemporary Review)

THE GREATNESS OF ENGLAND (Contemporary Review.)

THE GREAT DUEL OF THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY (Canadian Monthly)
THE LAMPS OF FICTION (A Speech on the Centenary of the Birth of Sir
Walter Scott)

AN ADDRESS TO THE OXFORD SCHOOL OF SCIENCE AND ART

THE
ASCENT OF MAN (Macmillan's Magazine.)

THE PROPOSED SUBSTITUTES FOR
RELIGION (Macmillan's Magazine.)

THE LABOUR MOVEMENT (Canadian Monthly.)

WHAT
IS CULPABLE LUXURY? We have a right to speak: we have not the right to act. Let us preach; the
rest belongs unto God. Were I to employ force, what should I gain? Grimace, formality, apings,
human ordinances, and hypocrisy.... But there would be no sincerity of heart, nor faith, nor
charity. Where these three are wanting, all is wanting, and I would not give a pear-stalk for
such a result.... God does more by His word alone than you and I and all the world by our united
strength. God lays hold upon the heart; and when the heart is taken, all is won....

“I will preach, discuss, and write; but I will constrain none, for faith is a voluntary act.
See what I have done. I stood up against the pope, indulgences, and papists, but without violence
or tumult. I put forward God’s word; I preached and wrote—this was all I did. And yet while
I was asleep, ... the word that I had preached overthrew popery, so that neither prince nor
emperor has done it so much harm. And yet I did nothing; the Word alone did all. If I had wished
to appeal to force, the whole of Germany would perhaps have been deluged with blood. But what
would have been the result? Ruin and desolation both to body and soul. I therefore kept quiet,
and left the Word to run through the world alone.”(274)

Day after day, for a whole week, Luther continued to preach to eager crowds. The word of God
broke the spell of fanatical excitement. The power of the gospel brought back the misguided
people into the way of truth.

Luther had no desire to encounter the fanatics whose course had been productive of so great
evil. He knew them to be men of unsound judgment and undisciplined passions, who, while claiming
to be especially illuminated from heaven, would not endure the slightest contradiction, or
even the kindest reproof or counsel. Arrogating to themselves supreme authority, they required
every one, without a question, to acknowledge their claims. But as they demanded an interview
with him, he consented to meet them; and so successfully did he expose their pretensions, that
the impostors at once departed from Wittenberg.

The fanaticism was checked for a time; but several years later it broke out with greater violence
and more terrible results. Said Luther, concerning the leaders in this movement: “To them the
Holy Scriptures were but a dead letter, and they all began to cry, ‘The Spirit! the Spirit!’
But most assuredly I will not follow where their spirit leads them. May God of His mercy preserve
me from a church in which there are none but saints. I desire to dwell with the humble, the
feeble, the sick, who know and feel their sins, and who groan and cry continually to God from
the bottom of their hearts to obtain His consolation and support.”(275)

Thomas Münzer, the most active of the fanatics, was a man of considerable ability, which, rightly
directed, would have enabled him to do good; but he had not learned the first principles of
true religion. “He was possessed with a desire of reforming the world, and forgot, as all enthusiasts
do, that the reformation should begin with himself.”(276) He was ambitious to obtain position
and influence, and was unwilling to be second, even to Luther. He declared that the Reformers,
in substituting the authority of Scripture for that of the pope, were only establishing a different
form of popery. He himself, he claimed, had been divinely commissioned to introduce the true
reform. “He who possesses this spirit,” said Münzer, “possesses the true faith, although he
should never see the Scriptures in his life.”(277)

The fanatical teachers gave themselves up to be governed by impressions, regarding every thought
and impulse as the voice of God; consequently they went to great extremes. Some even burned
their Bibles, exclaiming, “The letter killeth, but the Spirit giveth life.” Münzer’s teaching
appealed to men’s desire for the marvelous, while it gratified their pride by virtually placing
human ideas and opinions above the word of God. His doctrines were received by thousands. (Canadian
Monthly.)

A TRUE CAPTAIN OF INDUSTRY (Canadian Monthly.)

A WIREPULLER OF KINGS (Canadian Monthly.)

THE EARLY YEARS OF THE CONQUEROR OF QUEBEC (Toronto Nation.)

FALKLAND
AND THE PURITANS (Contemporary Review.)

THE EARLY YEARS OF ABRAHAM
LINCOLN (Toronto Mail)

ALFREDUS REX FUNDATOR (Canadian Monthly)

THE
LAST REPUBLICANS OF ROME (MacMillan's Magazine)

AUSTEN LEIGH'S MEMOIR
OF JANE AUSTEN (New York Nation)

PATTISON'S MILTON (New York Nation)

CLERIDGE'S
LIFE OF KEBLE (New York Nation)

THE GREATNESS OF THE ROMANS

Rome
was great in arms, in government, in law.

This combination was the talisman of her august fortunes. But the three things, though blended
in her, are distinct from each other, and the political analyst is called upon to give a separate
account of each. By what agency was this State, out of all the States of Italy, out of all
the States of the world, elected to a triple pre-eminence, and to the imperial supremacy of
which, it was the foundation? By what agency was Rome chosen as the foundress of an empire which
we regard almost as a necessary step in human development, and which formed the material, and to
no small extent the political matrix of modern Europe, though the spiritual life of our civilization
is derived from another source? We are not aware that this question has ever been distinctly answered,
or even distinctly propounded.


The Romanists exulted, expecting to witness the speedy downfall of the Reformation; and they
blamed Luther, even for the errors which he had been most earnestly endeavoring to correct.
The fanatical party, by falsely claiming to have been treated with great injustice, succeeded
in gaining the sympathies of a large class of the people, and, as is often the case with those
who take the wrong side, they came to be regarded as martyrs. Thus the ones who were exerting
every energy in opposition to the Reformation, were pitied and lauded as the victims of cruelty
and oppression. This was the work of Satan, prompted by the same spirit of rebellion which
was first manifested in heaven.

Satan is constantly seeking to deceive men, and lead them to call sin righteousness, and righteousness
sin. How successful has been his work! How often censure and reproach are cast upon God’s faithful
servants because they will stand fearlessly in defense of the truth! Men who are but agents
of Satan are praised and flattered, and even looked upon as martyrs, while those who should
be respected and sustained for their fidelity to God, are left to stand alone, under suspicion
and distrust.

Counterfeit holiness, spurious sanctification, is still doing its work of deception. Under
various forms it exhibits the same spirit as in the days of Luther, diverting minds from the
Scriptures, and leading men to follow their own feelings and impressions rather than to yield
obedience to the law of God. This is one of Satan’s most successful devices to cast reproach
upon purity and truth.

Fearlessly did Luther defend the gospel from the attacks which came from every quarter. The
word of God proved itself a weapon mighty in every conflict. With that Word he warred against
the usurped authority of the pope, and the rationalistic philosophy of the schoolmen, while
he stood firm as a rock against the fanaticism that sought to ally itself with the Reformation.

Each of these opposing elements was in its own way setting aside the Holy Scriptures, and exalting
human wisdom as the source of religious truth and knowledge. Rationalism idolizes reason, and
makes this the criterion for religion. Romanism, claiming for her sovereign pontiff an inspiration
descended in unbroken line from the apostles, and unchangeable through all time, gives ample
opportunity for every species of extravagance and corruption to be concealed under the sanctity
of the apostolic commission. The inspiration claimed by Münzer and his associates proceeded
from no higher source than the vagaries of the imagination, and its influence was subversive
of all authority, human or divine. True Christianity receives the word of God as the great
treasure-house of inspired truth, and the test of all inspiration.

Upon his return from the Wartburg, Luther completed his translation of the New Testament, and
the gospel was soon after given to the people of Germany in their own language. This translation
was received with great joy by all who loved the truth; but it was scornfully rejected by those
who chose human traditions and the commandments of men.

The priests were alarmed at the thought that the common people would now be able to discuss
with them the precepts of God’s word, and that their own ignorance would thus be exposed. The
weapons of their carnal reasoning were powerless against the sword of the Spirit. Rome summoned
all her authority to prevent the circulation of the Scriptures; but decrees, anathemas, and
tortures were alike in vain. The more she condemned and prohibited the Bible, the greater was
the anxiety of the people to know what it really taught. All who could read were eager to study
the word of God for themselves. They carried it about with them, and read and re-read, and
could not be satisfied until they had committed large portions to memory. Seeing the favor
with which the New Testament was received, Luther immediately began the translation of the
Old, and published it in parts as fast as completed.

Luther’s writings were welcomed alike in city and in hamlet. “What Luther and his friends composed,
others circulated. Monks, convinced of the unlawfulness of monastic obligations, desirous of
exchanging a long life of slothfulness for one of active exertion, but too ignorant to proclaim
the word of God, traveled through the provinces, visiting hamlets and cottages, where they
sold the books of Luther and his friends. Germany soon swarmed with these bold colporteurs.”(278)

These writings were studied with deep interest by rich and poor, the learned and the ignorant.
At night the teachers of the village schools read them aloud to little groups gathered at the
fireside. With every effort, some souls would be convicted of the truth, and, receiving the
word with gladness, would in their turn tell the good news to others.

The words of inspiration were verified: “The entrance of Thy words giveth light; it giveth
understanding unto the simple.”(279) The study of the Scriptures was working a mighty change
in the minds and hearts of the people. The papal rule had placed upon its subjects an iron
yoke which held them in ignorance and degradation. A superstitious observance of forms had
been scrupulously maintained; but in all their service the heart and intellect had had little
part. The preaching of Luther, setting forth the plain truths of God’s word, and then the word
itself, placed in the hands of the common people, had aroused their dormant powers, not only
purifying and ennobling the spiritual nature, but imparting new strength and vigor to the intellect.

Persons of all ranks were to be seen with the Bible in their hands, defending the doctrines
of the Reformation. The papists who had left the study of the Scriptures to the priests and
monks, now called upon them to come forward and refute the new teachings. But, ignorant alike
of the Scriptures and of the power of God, priests and friars were totally defeated by those
whom they had denounced as unlearned and heretical. “Unhappily,” said a Catholic writer, “Luther
had persuaded his followers to put no faith in any other oracle than the Holy Scriptures.”(280)
Crowds would gather to hear the truth advocated by men of little education, and even discussed
by them with learned and eloquent theologians. The shameful ignorance of these great men was
made apparent as their arguments were met by the simple teachings of God’s word. Laborers,
soldiers, women, and even children, were better acquainted with the Bible teachings than were
the priests and learned doctors.

The contrast between the disciples of the gospel and the upholders of popish superstition was
no less manifest in the ranks of scholars than among the common people. “Opposed to the old
champions of the hierarchy, who had neglected the study of languages and the cultivation of
literature, ... were generous-minded youths, devoted to study, investigating Scripture, and
familiarizing themselves with the masterpieces of antiquity. Possessing an active mind, an
elevated soul, and intrepid heart, these young men soon acquired such knowledge that for a
long period none could compete with them.... Accordingly, when these youthful defenders of
the Reformation met the Romish doctors in any assembly, they attacked them with such ease and
confidence that these ignorant men hesitated, became embarrassed, and fell into a contempt
merited in the eyes of all.”(281)

As the Romish clergy saw their congregations diminishing, they invoked the aid of the magistrates,
and by every means in their power endeavored to bring back their hearers. But the people had
found in the new teachings that which supplied the wants of their souls, and they turned away
from those who had so long fed them with the worthless husks of superstitious rites and human
traditions.

When persecution was kindled against the teachers of the truth, they gave heed to the words
of Christ, “When they persecute you in this city, flee ye into another.”(282) The light penetrated
everywhere. The fugitives would find somewhere a hospitable door opened to them, and there
abiding, they would preach Christ, sometimes in the church, or if denied that privilege, in
private houses or in the open air. Wherever they could obtain a hearing was a consecrated temple.
The truth, proclaimed with such energy and assurance, spread with irresistible power.

In vain both ecclesiastical and civil authorities were invoked to crush the heresy. In vain
they resorted to imprisonment, torture, fire, and sword. Thousands of believers sealed their
faith with their blood, and yet the work went on. Persecution served only to extend the truth;
and the fanaticism which Satan endeavored to unite with it, resulted in making more clear the
contrast between the work of Satan and the work of God.

11. PROTEST OF THE PRINCES.

One of the noblest testimonies ever uttered for the Reformation, was the Protest offered by
the Christian princes of Germany at the Diet of Spires in 1529. The courage, faith, and firmness
of those men of God, gained for succeeding ages liberty of thought and of conscience. Their
Protest gave to the reformed church the name of Protestant; its principles are “the very essence
of Protestantism.”(283)

A dark and threatening day had come for the Reformation. Notwithstanding the edict of Worms,
declaring Luther to be an outlaw, and forbidding the teaching or belief of his doctrines, religious
toleration had thus far prevailed in the empire. God’s providence had held in check the forces
that opposed the truth. Charles V. was bent on crushing the Reformation, but often as he raised
his hand to strike, he had been forced to turn aside the blow. Again and again the immediate
destruction of all who dared to oppose themselves to Rome appeared inevitable; but at the critical
moment the armies of the Turk appeared on the eastern frontier, or the king of France, or even
the pope himself, jealous of the increasing greatness of the emperor, made war upon him; and
thus, amid the strife and tumult of nations, the Reformation had been left to strengthen and
extend.

At last, however, the papal sovereigns had stifled their feuds, that they might make common
cause against the Reformers. The Diet of Spires in 1526 had given each state full liberty in
matters of religion until the meeting of a general council; but no sooner had the dangers passed
which secured this concession, than the emperor summoned a second Diet to convene at Spires
in 1529 for the purpose of crushing heresy. The princes were to be induced, by peaceable means
if possible, to side against the Reformation; but if these failed, Charles was prepared to
resort to the sword.

The papists were exultant. They appeared at Spires in great numbers, and openly manifested
their hostility toward the Reformers and all who favored them. Said Melanchthon, “We are the
execration and the sweepings of the world; but Christ will look down on His poor people, and
will preserve them.”(284) The evangelical princes in attendance at the Diet were forbidden
even to have the gospel preached in their dwellings. But the people of Spires thirsted for
the word of God, and notwithstanding the prohibition, thousands flocked to the services held
in the chapel of the elector of Saxony.

This hastened the crisis. An imperial message announced to the Diet that as the resolution
granting liberty of conscience had given rise to great disorders, the emperor required that
it be annulled. This arbitrary act excited the indignation and alarm of the evangelical Christians.
Said one, “Christ has again fallen into the hands of Caiaphas and Pilate.” The Romanists became
more violent. A bigoted papist declared: “The Turks are better than the Lutherans; for the
Turks observe fast-days, and the Lutherans violate them. If we must choose between the Holy
Scriptures of God and the old errors of the church, we should reject the former.” Said Melanchthon,
“Every day, in full assembly, Faber casts some new stone at us Gospelers.”(285)

Religious toleration had been legally established, and the evangelical states were resolved
to oppose the infringement of their rights. Luther, being still under the ban imposed by the
edict of Worms, was not permitted to be present at Spires; but his place was supplied by his
co-laborers and the princes whom God had raised up to defend His cause in this emergency. The
noble Frederick of Saxony, Luther’s former protector, had been removed by death; but Duke John,
his brother and successor, had joyfully welcomed the Reformation, and while a friend of peace,
he displayed great energy and courage in all matters relating to the interests of the faith.

The priests demanded that the states which had accepted the Reformation submit implicitly to
Romish jurisdiction. The Reformers, on the other hand, claimed the liberty which had previously
been granted. They could not consent that Rome should again bring under her control those states
that had with so great joy received the word of God. 

In the Japanese woollen factory the cost of the hands is low individually, but expensive collectively.
An expert suggested that it takes half a dozen of the unskilled girls to do the work of an English
mill-girl. It is much the same with male labour. "An English worker may be expected to produce
work equal to the output of four Japanese hands." Labour for heads of departments is also
difficult to get. There are textile schools and probably a hundred men are graduated yearly.


If this edict were enforced, “the Reformation could neither be extended ... where as yet it
was unknown, nor be established on solid foundations ... where it already existed.”(287) Liberty
of speech would be prohibited. No conversions would be allowed. And to these restrictions and
prohibitions the friends of the Reformation were required at once to submit. The hopes of the
world seemed about to be extinguished. “The re-establishment of the Romish hierarchy ... would
infallibly bring back the ancient abuses;” and an occasion would readily be found for “completing
the destruction of a work already so violently shaken” by fanaticism and dissension.(288)

As the evangelical party met for consultation, one looked to another in blank dismay. From
one to another passed the inquiry, “What is to be done?” Mighty issues for the world were at
stake. “Shall the chiefs of the Reformation submit, and accept the edict? How easily might
the Reformers at this crisis, which was truly a tremendous one, have argued themselves into
a wrong course! How many plausible pretexts and fair reasons might they have found for submission!
The Lutheran princes were guaranteed the free exercise of their religion. The same boon was
extended to all those of their subjects who, prior to the passing of the measure, had embraced
the reformed views. Ought not this to content them? How many perils would submission avoid!
On what unknown hazards and conflicts would opposition launch them! Who knows what opportunities
the future may bring? Let us embrace peace; let us seize the olive-branch Rome holds out, and
close the wounds of Germany. With arguments like these might the Reformers have justified their
adoption of a course which would have assuredly issued in no long time in the overthrow of
their cause.

“Happily they looked at the principle on which this arrangement was based, and they acted in
faith. What was that principle? It was the right of Rome to coerce conscience and forbid free
inquiry. But were not themselves and their Protestant subjects to enjoy religious freedom?
Yes, as a favor specially stipulated for in the arrangement, but not as a right. As to all
outside that arrangement, the great principle of authority was to rule; conscience was out
of court; Rome was infallible judge, and must be obeyed. The acceptance of the proposed arrangement
would have been a virtual admission that religious liberty ought to be confined to reformed
Saxony; and as to all the rest of Christendom, free inquiry and the profession of the reformed
faith were crimes, and must be visited with the dungeon and the stake. Could they consent to
localize religious liberty? to have it proclaimed that the Reformation had made its last convert?
had subjugated its last acre? and that wherever Rome bore sway at this hour, there her dominion
was to be perpetuated? Could the Reformers have pleaded that they were innocent of the blood
of those hundreds and thousands who, in pursuance of this arrangement, would have to yield
up their lives in popish lands? This would have been to betray, at that supreme hour, the cause
of the gospel and the liberties of Christendom.”(289) Rather would they “sacrifice everything,
even their states, their crowns, and their lives.”(290)

“Let us reject this decree,” said the princes. “In matters of conscience the majority has no
power.” The deputies declared: “It is to the decree of 1526 that we are indebted for the peace
that the empire enjoys: its abolition would fill Germany with troubles and divisions. The Diet
is incompetent to do more than preserve religious liberty until the council meets.”(291) To
protect liberty of conscience is the duty of the state, and this is the limit of its authority
in matters of religion. Every secular government that attempts to regulate or enforce religious
observances by civil authority, is sacrificing the very principle for which the evangelical
Christians so nobly struggled. 

The great public is sick of reprints, and with good reason.

The volume might almost have been called Contributions to Canadian
Literature, for of the papers not originally published in Canada several
were reproduced in Canadian journals. The representatives of the free cities were at last summoned
before the Diet, and required to declare whether they would accede to the terms of the proposition.
They pleaded for delay, but in vain. When brought to the test, nearly one half their number
sided with the Reformers. Those who thus refused to sacrifice liberty of conscience and the
right of individual judgment, well knew that their position marked them for future criticism,
condemnation, and persecution. Said one of the delegates, “We must either deny the word of
God, or—be burnt.”(292)

King Ferdinand, the emperor’s representative at the Diet, saw that the decree would cause serious
divisions unless the princes could be induced to accept and sustain it. He therefore tried
the art of persuasion, well knowing that to employ force with such men would only render them
the more determined. But historical criticism, without doing injustice to the poetical aspect of the
mystery, is bound to seek a rational solution. Perhaps in seeking the solution we may in some measure
supply, or at least suggest the mode of supplying, a deficiency which we venture to think is generally
found in the first chapters of histories.

A national history, as it seems to us, ought to commence with a survey of the country or locality,
its geographical position, climate, productions, and other physical circumstances as they bear
on the character of the people. We ought to be presented, in short, with a complete description of
the scene of the historic drama, as well as with an account of the
race to which the actors belong. “To no purpose they sent a deputation
entreating the king to return.” To their remonstrances he answered only, “It is a settled affair;
submission is all that remains.”(294)

The imperial party were convinced that the Christian princes would adhere to the Holy Scriptures
as superior to human doctrines and requirements; and they knew that wherever this principle
was accepted, the papacy would eventually be overthrown. But, like thousands since their time,
looking only “at the things which are seen,” they flattered themselves that the cause of the
emperor and the pope was strong, and that of the Reformers weak. Had the Reformers depended
upon human aid alone, they would have been as powerless as the papists supposed. But though
weak in numbers, and at variance with Rome, they had their strength. They appealed “from the
report of the Diet to the word of God, and from the emperor Charles to Jesus Christ, the King
of kings and Lord of lords.”(295)

As Ferdinand had refused to regard their conscientious convictions, the princes decided not
to heed his absence, but to bring their Protest before the national council without delay.
A solemn declaration was therefore drawn up, and presented to the Diet:

