By this time James, who had been foiled in his first attempt to reach the coast, and had returned
to London, had, with the connivance of the Prince of Orange, been more successful in a second
attempt, and had crossed over to France, where he spent the remainder of his days. The country
was therefore left without king, parliament or legal system for its government. In London the
Corporation of the city was almost the only authority that remained unaffected by the king’s
abdication; and it is significant as well of its power as of the respect which that body commanded
that when William was endeavouring to form an authoritative assembly by summoning all the members
who had ever sat in parliament under Charles II,(1641) he likewise desired that the lord mayor
of the city, the entire Court of Aldermen and fifty representatives of the Common Council should
attend.(1642) This assembly met on the 26th December, and after due consultation decided to
adopt the same procedure as was adopted in 1660 before the return of Charles II. As there was
no king there could be no writs for a parliament, but William could call a Convention, which
would be a parliament in everything but name. A Convention was accordingly summoned to meet
on the 22nd January, 1689. The election of the city members to serve in the convention was
ordered to take place on Wednesday the 9th January,(1643) when the choice of the citizens fell
upon their former well-tried representatives, Sir Patience Ward, Sir Robert Clayton, Pilkington
(who had regained his liberty in August, 1686)(1644) and Love.

(M840)

In the meantime (8 Jan.) the prince wrote to the civic authorities setting forth the inadequacy
of the revenue to supply three pressing wants. These were the maintenance of the navy, the
partial disbandment of the army and the furnishing of a force for the speedy relief of the
Protestants in Ireland. He desired the City, therefore, to advance him such a sum as could
be "conveniently spared."(1645) The City was still to keep up its character as the purse of
the nation. The Common Council, having heard the letter read, at once resolved to assist the
prince to the utmost of their power. A committee was appointed to settle with the revenue officers
the nature of the security, and orders were given for precepts to be sent to the aldermen to
raise subscriptions in the various wards.(1646) Sir Peter Rich, who had recently been re-instated
in the office of city chamberlain from which he had been ousted, was instructed to pay into
the exchequer all money received on account of the loan, and to strike tallies for the same
in his own name in trust for the use of the several lenders. Ten days later (18 Jan.) the committee
reported the steps taken for the security of repayment of the money already paid into the exchequer,
and the council recommended that similar steps should be taken with respect to those sums yet
to be paid in. It was at the same time unanimously agreed to ask the Prince to dinner in the
city, and the recorder, the sheriffs and the common sergeant were instructed to wait on his
highness and learn his pleasure.(1647)

(M841)

On the 22nd January the Convention met. On the 28th the Commons declared the throne to be vacant,
and on the 6th February a vote to similar effect was passed by the Lords. Some over-zealous
inhabitants of the city had in the meanwhile prepared a petition, which they purposed presenting
to the House of Lords, praying that the crown might be offered to the Prince of Orange and
his consort. The prince ordered the lord mayor to put a stop to such proceedings, and a precept
(200 copies of which were ordered to be printed) was accordingly issued to this effect.(1648)

(M842)

A Declaration of Rights was drawn up condemning the unconstitutional acts of James II, and
offering to settle the crown on William and Mary and their children, with remainders over.
On the 13th February this offer was accepted,(1649) and the prince and princess were forthwith
proclaimed king and queen with the usual ceremony. The next day the Common Council unanimously
agreed to wait upon their majesties and congratulate them upon their accession to the throne.(1650)

(M843)

At the coronation banquet of the king and queen, which took place on the 11th April, the masters
of the twelve principal livery companies were for the first time nominated by the Court of
Aldermen to join with the lord mayor in assisting the chief butler,(1651) and they continued
to be so nominated on like occasions up to the coronation of George IV, when in consequence
of a change of masters taking place between the time of their nomination and the day of the
coronation, the new masters presented a petition to the Court of Claims praying to have their
names inserted in the place of the former masters whose term of office had expired. This vow may be
translated as follows: "We will never bring disgrace to this our City by any act of dishonesty
or cowardice nor ever desert our comrades. We will fight for the ideals and sacred things of the City
both alone and with many. We will revere and obey the City laws and do our best to incite a like
respect and reverence in others. We will strive unceasingly to quicken in all the sense of civic duty,
that thus in all ways we may transmit this City, greater, better and more beautiful to all who
shall come after us.

"

(M844)

The Convention having been converted by a formal Act into a true parliament (23 Feb.),(1654)
one of the first motions put to the House was that a special committee should be appointed
to consider the violations of the liberties and franchises of all the corporations of the kingdom,
"and particularly of the city of London." The motion was lost by a majority of 24.(1655) The
House nevertheless resolved to bring in a Bill for repealing the Corporation Act, and ten days
later (5 March) the Grand Committee of Grievances reported to the House its opinion (1) that
the rights of the city of London in the election of sheriffs in the year 1682 were invaded
and that such invasion was illegal and a grievance, and (2) that the judgment given upon the
Quo Warranto against the city was illegal and a grievance. The committee’s opinion on these
two points (among others) was endorsed by the House, and on the 16th March it ordered a Bill
to be brought in to restore all corporations to the state and condition they were in on the
29th May, 1660, and to confirm the liberties and franchises which at that time they respectively
held and enjoyed.(1656)

(M845)

