My Adirondack experiences and studies having excited the desire on the part of several Cambridge
friends to visit the Wilderness, I made up a party which comprised Lowell and his two nephews,
Charles and James Lowell (two splendid young New Englanders afterwards killed during the Civil
War), Dr. Estes Howe, Lowell's brother-in-law, and John Holmes, the brother of Oliver Wendell,
considered by many of the Cambridge set the wittier and wiser of the two, but who, being extremely
averse to publicity, was never known in literature. We made a flying journey of inspection
through the Saranac Lakes and down the Raquette River to Tupper's Lake, and then across a wild
and at that day a little explored section to the head of Raquette Lake, and down the Raquette
River back to the Saranacs; the party returning home and I back to the headwaters of the Raquette
to spend the summer painting. I built a camp on a secluded bay, which still bears my name amongst
the men of the section, and there I worked in a solitude sometimes complete and sometimes shared
by my guide, who passed his time between the camp and the settlement at Saranac, whence I drew
all my supplies beyond those which the lake and the forest furnished us with. The solitude
of the Wilderness at that time can be no longer found anywhere in the vast woodland which,
much mutilated and scarred by fires and clearings, still covers the district between the springs
of the Mohawk and the rivers which empty into the St. Lawrence. There was one settler on the
lake, from whom I could, when necessary, get a loaf of bread, but the solitude for nine days
out of ten was not broken by a strange footfall. My camp was a shelter of bark, raised on poles,
open in front to the morning sun, just sufficing to shed the rain, while my bed was a layer
of the branches of the fir-trees that grew around. Trout from the lake, broiled on the coals
of the camp-fire, with a piece of bread, was the usual and sufficient fare, though we now and
then killed a deer when Steve, my guide, was with me; at other times the dog was my only company,
and in this monotonous life I found the most complete content that my experience has given
me. Here wolves abounded, but only on one occasion did they attempt to disturb me, which was
when I had left by the lake shore a deer we had killed in the morning, and they came at night
to steal the meat. Bears were abundant, but even shyer than the wolves; and though we heard,
now and then, the cry of a panther (puma), we never saw one.

Here the morbid passion of solitude grew on me. The serene silence was seldom broken save by
the cry of an eagle or an osprey, high overhead, the chirping of the chickadee flitting about
the camp to find a crumb, or the complaining note of the Canada jay, most friendly of all wild
birds, seeking for the scraps of venison we used to throw out for him. No other birds came
to us, and one of the most striking features in the Wilderness was the paucity of bird life
and voice. As I sat painting, I would see the gray eagle come down, with his long cycloidal
swoop, skimming along the surface of the water, and catch, as he passed, the trout that sunned
itself on the surface; or the osprey seizing it with his direct plunge into the lake, from
which, after a struggle that lasted sometimes a minute, the only sign of his presence being
the agitated water, he would emerge with the fish in his claws and sail aloft, hurrying to
escape to the forest with his prey lest the eagle, always watching from the upper air, should
rob him of his hard-earned booty. Once I saw the eagle make the mighty plunge from far above,
the frightened osprey dropping the fish to escape the shock, and the eagle catching it in midair
as it fell. The little incidents of woodland life took the place of all other diversions and
left no hour void of interest. I broke up the camp only when the autumn was so far advanced
that it was uncomfortable to live in the open air. It is difficult for one who has not had
the experience to understand the fascination of this absolute solitude, or the impressiveness
of the silence, unbroken sometimes through whole days. I had absolutely no desire for human
society, and I broke camp with reluctance, to return to my studio at Cambridge.

The next summer the party was formed which led to the foundation of the Adirondack Club, and
the excursion it made is commemorated by Emerson in his poem "The Adirondacs." The company
included Emerson, Agassiz, Dr. Howe, Professor Jeffries Wyman, John Holmes,--who became as
fond as I was of this wild life,--Judge Hoar (later Attorney-General in the cabinet of President
Grant), Horatio Woodman, Dr. Binney, and myself. Of this company, as I write, I am the only
survivor. I did my best to enroll Longfellow in the party, but, though he was for a moment
hesitating, I think the fact that Emerson was going with a gun settled him in the determination
to decline. "Is it true that Emerson is going to take a gun?" he asked me; and when I said
that he had finally decided to do so, he ejaculated, "Then somebody will be shot!" and would
talk no more of going.

Perhaps the final reason, or that which would in any case have indisposed him to join the company,
was his want of sympathy with Emerson. Emerson and he were in fact of antagonistic intellectuality,
both in the quality of the exquisite courtesy which distinguished them equally, and in the
fibre of intellectual working and the quality of mental activity. Longfellow was of the most
refined social culture, disciplined to self-control under all circumstances and difficulties;
sensitive in the highest degree to the forms of courtesy, and incapable by nature as by training
of an act or word which could offend the sensibilities of even a discourteous interlocutor,--capable
at worst of an indignant silence, but incapable of invading the personality of another; not
serene, but of an invincible tranquillity; with no sympathy for mystery or obscurity; supremely
above the general and commonplace by the exquisite refinement to which he carried the expression
of what the general and commonplace world felt and thought; remote from roughness in the form
or the substance of his thought; in short, the ne plus ultra of refinement as man and poet.
Emerson was too serene ever to be discourteous, and was capable of the hottest antagonism without
rudeness, and the most intense indignation without quickening his speech or raising his tone;
grasping and exhausting with imaginative activity whatever object furnished him with matter
for thought, and throwing to the rubbish heap whatever was superficial; indifferent to form
or polish if only he could find a diamond; reveling in mystery, and with eyes that penetrated
like the X-ray through all obscurities, and found at the bottom of them what there was to find;
arrested by no surfaces, inflexible in his devotion to truth, and indifferent to all personalities
or artificial conditions of men or things. Nothing but the roots of things, their inmost anatomy,
attracted him; he brushed away contemptuously the beauties on which Longfellow spent the tenderness
of his character, and threw aside like an empty nutshell the form to which an artist might
have given the devotion of his best art, for the art's sake. In his temper there was no patience
with shams, little toleration of forms. It would, I should think, be clear to one who was well
acquainted with both men, that there was little in common between them beyond culture, but
I never heard Emerson speak of Longfellow, and can only judge by induction that he never occupied
himself much with him.

We tried also to get Dr. Holmes to join us; but the Doctor was devoted to Boston, and could
not have lived long out of its atmosphere, and with the woods and savagery he had no sympathy.
He loved his Cambridge friends serenely, Lowell, Agassiz, and Wyman, I think, above others;
but he enjoyed himself most of all, and Boston more than any other thing on earth. He was lifted
above ennui and discontent by a most happy satisfaction with the rounded world of his own individuality
and belongings. Of the three men whom I have personally known in the world who seemed most
satisfied with what fate and fortune had made them,--viz., Gladstone, Professor Freeman, and
Holmes,--I think Holmes enjoyed himself the most. There was a tinge of dandyism in the Doctor;
not enough to be considered a weakness, but enough to show that he enjoyed his personal appearance
and was content with what he had become, and this in so delightful a way that one accepted
him at once at his own terms. The Doctor stood for Boston as Lowell for Cambridge, the archetype
of the Hub. Nobody represented it as he did. Tom Appleton was nearest him, but Tom loved Paris
better, and was a "globe-trotter," as often in Europe as in Massachusetts, while the Doctor
hardly left the Hub even for a vacation; there was nothing beyond it that was of great import
to him. He was the sublimation of Yankee wit as Lowell was of Yankee humor and human nature,
and he made of witticism a study; polished, refined, and prepared his "bons mots", and, at
the best moment, led the conversation round to the point at which it was opportune to fire
them off. He had a large medical knowledge of human nature and intellectual pathology, but
I could never realize that he was a physician; I should not have trusted myself to his doctoring.
As with Longfellow, his family affections were absorbing, and his love for his son, the present
Mr. Justice Holmes, and his pride in him, were very pleasant to see, and they ran on the surface
of his nature like his love for Boston; but I could never feel that his feeling for his outside
friends was more than a mild, sunny glow of kindliness and vivid intellectual sympathy. Of
course I judge him from a difficult standard, that of the Cambridge circle, in which the personal
relations were very warm, and especially comparing him with Lowell and the Nortons, with whom
friendship was a religion.

Holmes and Lowell were the antitheses of the New England intellect, and this more in their
personality than in their writing. If Lowell could have acquired Holmes's respect for his work,
he would have left a larger image in the American Walhalla; but he never gave care to the perfection
of what he wrote, for his mind so teemed with material that the time to polish and review never
came. Holmes, like a true artist, loved the limae labor. He was satisfied, it seemed to me,
to do the work of one lifetime and then rest, while Lowell looked forward to a succession of
lifetimes all full of work, and one can hardly conceive him as ever resting or caring to stop
work. Lowell's was a generous, widely sympathizing nature, from which radiated love for humanity,
and the broadest and most catholic helpfulness for every one who asked for his help, with a
special fund for his friends. Holmes drew a line around him, within which he shone like a winter
sun, and outside of which his care did not extend. The one was best in what he did, the other
in what he was. Holmes always seemed to me cynical to the general world; Lowell to have embodied
the antique sentiment, "I am a man, and hold nothing human as indifferent to me." Both were
adored by those around them, and the adoration kindled Holmes to a warmer reflection to the
adorers; Lowell felt it as the earth feels sunshine, which sinks into the fertile soil and
bears its fruit in a richer harvest.

Excepting Holmes, Norton, and Longfellow, our company included most of what was most distinct
in the world in which we lived, with some who were eminent only in their social relations,
and who neither cared to be nor ever became of interest to the general world. The care of arranging
the details of the excursion was left to me, and I had, therefore, to precede the company to
the Wilderness, and so missed what must have been to the others a very amusing experience.
The rumor of the advent of the party spread through the country around Saranac, and at the
frontier town where they would begin the journey into the woods the whole community was on
the qui vive to see, not Emerson or Lowell, of whom they knew nothing, but Agassiz, who had
become famous in the commonplace world through having refused, not long before, an offer from
the Emperor of the French of the keepership of the Jardin des Plantes and a senatorship, if
he would come to Paris and live. Such an incredible and disinterested love for America and
science in our hemisphere had lifted Agassiz into an elevation of popularity which was beyond
all scientific or political dignity, and the selectmen of the town appointed a deputation to
welcome Agassiz and his friends to the region. A reception was accorded, and they came, having
taken care to provide themselves with an engraved portrait of the scientist, to guard against
a personation and waste of their respects. The head of the deputation, after having carefully
compared Agassiz to the engraving, turned gravely to his followers and said, "Yes, it's him;"
and they proceeded with the same gravity to shake hands in their order, ignoring all the other
luminaries.

I had in the mean time been into the Wilderness and selected a site for the camp on one of
the most secluded lakes, out of the line of travel of the hunters and fisherfolk,--a deep cul
de sac of lake on a stream that led nowhere, known as Follansbee Pond. There, with my guide,
I built a bark camp, prepared a landing-place, and then returned to Saranac in time to meet
the arriving guests. I was unfortunately prevented from accompanying them up the lakes the
next morning, because a boat I had been building for the occasion was not ready for the water,
and so I missed what was to me of the greatest interest,--the first impressions of Emerson
of the Wilderness, absolute nature. I joined them at night of the first day's journey, in a
rainstorm such as our summer rarely gives in the mountains, and we made the unique and fascinating
journey down the Raquette River together; Agassiz taking his place in my boat, each other member
of the party having his own guide and boat.

The scene, like the company, exists no longer. There is a river which still flows where the
other flowed; but, like the water that has passed its rapids, and the guests that have gone
the way of all those who have lived, it is something different. Then it was a deep, mysterious
stream, meandering through unbroken forests, walled up on either side in green shade, the trees
of centuries leaning over to welcome and shelter the voyager, flowing silently in great sweeps
of dark water, with, at long intervals, a lagoon setting back into the wider forest around,
enameled with pond lilies and sagittaria, and the refuge of undisturbed waterfowl and browsing
deer. Our lake lay at the head of such a lagoon, a devious outlet of the basin of which the
lake occupied the principal expanse, reached through three miles of no-man's route, framed
in green hills forest-clad up to their summits. The camp was a shelter of spruce bark, open
wide in front and closed at the ends, drawn on three faces of an octohedron facing the fireplace.
The beds were made of layers of spruce and other fir branches spread on the ground and covered
with the fragrant twigs of the arbor vitae. Two huge maples overhung the camp, and at a distance
of twenty feet from our lodge we entered the trackless, primeval forest. The hills around furnished
us with venison, and the lake with trout, and there we passed the weeks of the summer heats.
We were ten, with eight guides, and while we were camping there we received the news that the
first Atlantic cable was laid, and the first message sent under the sea from one hemisphere
to the other,--an event which Emerson did not forget to record in noble lines.

CHAPTER XIII

THE ADIRONDACK CLUB--EMERSON AND AGASSIZ

In the main, our occupations were those of a vacation, to kill time and escape from the daily
groove. Some took their guides and made exploration, by land or water; after breakfast there
was firing at a mark, a few rounds each, for those who were riflemen; then, if venison was
needed, we put the dog out on the hills; one boat went to overhaul the set lines baited the
evening before for the lake trout. When the hunt was over we generally went out to paddle on
the lake, Agassiz and Wyman to dredge or botanize or dissect the animals caught or killed;
those of us who had interest in natural history watching the naturalists, the others searching
the nooks and corners of the pretty sheet of water with its inlet brooks and its bays and recesses,
or bathing from the rocks. Lunch was at midday, and then long talks, discussions de omnibus
rebus et quibusdam aliis; and it was surprising to find how many subjects we found germane
to our situation.

Emerson has told the daily life in verse in "The Adirondacs," adding his own impressions of
the place and time. It is not generally considered among the most interesting of his poems,
being a narrative with reflections, and such a subject could hardly rise above the interest
of the subject of the narration, which was only a vacation study; but there are in it some
passages which show the character of Emerson's intellect better than anything else he has written.
His insight into nature, like that of the primitive mind as we find it in the Greek poetry,
the instinctive investment of the great mother with the presence and attribute of personality,
the re-creation from his own resources of Pan and the nature-powers, the groping about in that
darkness of the primeval forest for the spiritual causes of the things he felt,--all this is
to me evident in the poem; and it is the sufficient demonstration of the antique mould of his
intellect, serene, open-eyed to natural phenomena, seeing beyond the veil they are, to the
something beyond, but always questioning, hardly concluding, and with no theories to limit
his thought or bend it to preconceived solutions. Knowing that all he saw in this undefiled
natural world, this virgin mother of all life (for around Follansbee Pond, at the time we went,
there was the primeval woodland, where the lumberer had not yet penetrated, and the grove kept
still the immaculacy of the most ancient days), that all this was the mask of things, he was
ever on the watch if perchance he might catch some hint of the secret,--secret never to be
discovered, and therefore more passionately sought. This seems to me contained in "The Adirondacs"
as in no other work of the philosopher. And to me the study of the great student was the dominant
interest of the occasion. I was Agassiz's boatman on demand, for while all the others had their
personal guides and attendants, I was his; but often when Emerson wanted a boat I managed to
provide for Agassiz with one of the unoccupied guides, and take the place of Emerson's own
guide. Thus Emerson and I had many hours alone on the lake and in the wood. He seemed to be
a living question, perpetually interrogating his impressions of all that there was to be seen.
The rest of us were always at the surface of things,--even the naturalists were only engaged
with their anatomy; but Emerson in the forest, or looking at the sunset from the lake, seemed
to be looking through the phenomena, studying them by their reflections on an inner speculum.

In such a great solitude, stripped of the social conventions and seeing men as they are, mind
seems open to mind as it is quite impossible for it to be in society, even the most informal.
Agassiz remarked, one day, when a little personal question had shown the limitations of character
of one of the company, that he had always found in his Alpine experiences, when the company
were living on terms of compulsory intimacy, that men found each other out quickly. And so
we found it in the Adirondacks: disguises were soon dropped, and one saw the real characters
of his comrades as it was impossible to see them in society. Conventions faded out, masks became
transparent, and for good or for ill the man stood naked before the questioning eye,--pure
personality. I think I gathered more insight into the character of my companions in our greener
Arden, in the two or three weeks' meetings of the club, than all our lives in the city could
have given me.

And Emerson was such a study as can but rarely be given any one. The crystalline limpidity
of his character, free from all conventions, prejudices, or personal color, gave a facility
for study of the man, limited only by the range of vision of the student. How far my vision
was competent for this study is not for me to decide; so far as it went I profited, and so
far as my experience of men goes he is unique, not so much from intellectual power, for I should
be indisposed to accept his as the mind of the greatest calibre among those I have known, but
as one of absolute transparency of intellect, perfect receptivity, and devotion to the truth.
In the days of persecution and martyrdom Emerson would have gone to the stake smiling and undismayed,
but questioning all the time, even as to the nature of his own emotions. It was this serene
impassibility in his study of human nature which gave the common impression of his coldness,--an
impression which is shown, by the anecdote I have elsewhere recorded of Longfellow, to have
been shared by one who might have been supposed to know him well for years. But Emerson was
not cold or disposed to make mere subjects of analysis of his friends, as Longfellow thought;
he was an eager student of men as of nature, but superficial men he tired of and dropped, nothing
being to be learned from them, though where he found what he looked for in a character he never
tired of it. His friendships were of the most constant because of this temper, and it was only
their serenity and almost impersonality that made them seem frigid to those whose temperament
was widely different. Wrong, injustice to man or beast, roused his warmth in indignation,--he
could be hot enough on occasion; though the quiet warmth of his affection for his friends was
like the sun of May. But undoubtedly his greater passion was for the truth in whatever form
he could find it.

Of all the mental experiences of my past life nothing else survives with the vividness of my
summers in the Adirondacks with Emerson. The last sight I had of him was when, on his voyage
to Egypt, he came to see me at my home in London, aged and showing the decay of age, but as
alert and interrogative as ever with his insatiate intellectual activity. And as I look back
from the distance of years to the days when we questioned together, he rises above all his
contemporaries as Mont Blanc does above the intervening peaks when seen from afar, not the
largest in mass, but loftiest in climb, soaring higher if not occupying the space of some of
his companions, even in our little assemblies. Emerson was the best listener I ever knew, and
at the other meeting-place where I saw him occasionally, the Saturday Club, his attention to
what others were saying was far more notable than his disposition to enter into the discussions.
Now and then he flashed out with a comment which lit up the subject as an electric spark might,
but in general he shone unconsciously. I remember that one day when, at the club, we were discussing
the nature of genius, some one turned to Emerson and asked him for a definition of the thing,
and he instantly replied, "The faculty of generalizing from a single example;" and nobody at
the table could give so good and concise a definition. There is a portrait of him by Rowse,
who knew and loved him well, which renders this side of Emerson in a way that makes it the
most remarkable piece of portraiture I know, the listening Emerson.

His insatiability in the study of human nature was shown curiously in our first summer's camp.
He had the utmost tenderness of animal life and had no sympathy with sport in any form,--he
"named the birds without a gun,"--and when we were making up the outfit for the outing he at
first refused to take a rifle; but, as the discussion of make, calibre, and quality went on,
and everybody else was provided, he at length decided, though no shot, to conform, and purchased
a rifle. And when the routine of camp life brought the day of the hunt, the eagerness of the
hunters and the passion of the chase, the strong return to our heredity of human primeval occupation
gradually involved him, and made him desire to enter into this experience as well as the rest
of the forest emotions. He must understand this passion to kill. One Sunday morning, when all
the others went out for the drive of the deer,--necessary for the larder, as the drive the
day before had failed,--Emerson asked me to take him out on the lake to some quiet place for
meditation. We landed in a deep bay, where the seclusion was most complete, and he went into
the woods to meditate. Presently we heard the baying of the hound as he circled round the lake,
on the hillsides, for the deer at that season were reluctant to take to the water, and gave
a long chase; and, as he listened, he began to take in the excitement of the hunters, and finally
broke out abruptly, "Let us go after the deer;" and down the lake we went, flying at our best,
but we arrived too late,--Lowell had killed the deer.

He said to me later, and emphatically, "I must kill a deer;" and one night we went out "jack-hunting"
to enable him to realize that ambition. This kind of hunting, as most people know, is a species
of pot-hunting, much employed by the hunters for the market, and so destructive to the deer
that it is now forbidden by the law in all the Adirondack country. The deer are stalked by
night along the shores, where they come in to feed, the hunter carrying in his boat a light
so shaded that it illuminates only the space directly in front of the boat, the glare blinding
the animal so that he does not see the boat or the boatman. In this way the deer may be approached
within a few yards if the paddler is skillful; but as he stands perfectly still, and is difficult
to see in the dim light, the tyro generally misses him. We paddled up to within twenty yards
of a buck, and the guide gave the signal to shoot; but Emerson could see nothing resembling
a deer, and finally the creature took fright and ran, and all we got of him was the sound of
galloping hoofs as he sped away, stopping a moment, when at a safe distance, to snort at the
intruders, and then off again. We kept on, and presently came upon another, toward which we
drifted even nearer than to the first one, and still Emerson could see nothing to distinguish
the deer from the boulders among which he stood; and we were scarcely the boat's length from
him, when, Emerson being still unable to see him, and not caring to run the risk of losing
him, for we had no venison in camp and the luck of the morning drive was always uncertain,
I shot him. We had no other opportunity for the "jack-hunt," and so Emerson went home unsatisfied
in this ambition,--glad, no doubt, when he recalled the incident, that he had failed.

The guides--rude men of the woods, rough and illiterate, but with all their physical faculties
at a maximum acuteness, senses on the alert and keen as no townsman could comprehend them--were
Emerson's avid study. This he had never seen,--the man at his simplest terms, unsophisticated,
and, to him, the nearest approach to the primitive savage he would ever be able to examine;
and he studied every action. When the dinner was over, and the twilight coming on, he sometimes
asked me to row him out on the lake to see the nightfall and watch the "procession of the pines,"
that weird and ghostly phenomenon I have before alluded to.

More than a generation has passed since then. Twenty-five years afterward I went back to the
scene of the meeting. Except myself, the whole company are dead, and the very scene of our
acting and thinking has disappeared down to its geological basis, pillaged, burnt, and become
a horror to see; but, among the memories which are the only realities left to it, this image
of Emerson claiming kinship with the forest stands out alone, and I feel as if I had stood
for a moment on a mount of transfiguration, and seen, as if in a vision, the typical American,
the noblest in the idealization of the American, of all the race. Lowell was of a more cosmopolitan
type, of a wider range of sympathies and affections, accepted and bestowed, and to me a friend,
loved as Jonathan loved David; but, as a unique, idealized individuality, Emerson looms up
in that Arcadian dream more and more the dominant personality. It is as character, and not
as accomplishment or education, that he holds his own in all comparisons with his contemporaries,
the fine, crystallized mind, the keen, clear-faceted thinker and seer. I loved more Agassiz
and Lowell, but we shall have many a Lowell and Agassiz before we see Emerson's like again.
Attainments will be greater, and discovery and accomplishments will surpass themselves as we
go on, but to be, as Emerson was, is absolute and complete existence.

Agassiz was, of all our company, the acknowledged master; loved by all, even to the unlettered
woodsmen, who ran to meet his service as to no other of the company; by all the members of
it reverenced as not even Emerson was; the largest in personality and in universality of knowledge
of all the men I have ever known. No one who did not know him personally can conceive the hold
he had on everybody who came into relations with him. His vast command of scientific facts,
and his ready command of them for all educational purposes, his enthusiasm for science and
the diffusion of it, even his fascinating way of imparting it to others, had even less to do
with his popularity than the magnetism of his presence and the sympathetic faculty which enabled
him to find at once the plane on which he should meet whomever he had to deal with. Of his
scientific position I cannot speak, though I can see that his was the most powerful of the
scientific influences of that epoch in America. When we were traveling it was always in my
boat, and we moved as his investigations prompted, wherever there seemed to be a promise of
some addition to his collections. We dredged and netted water and air wherever we went, and
of course there arose a certain kind of intimacy, which was partly that of a camaraderie in
which we were approximately equals, that of the backwoods life in which I was, if a comparison
were to be made, the superior, and partly that of teacher and pupil; for, with trifling attainments,
I had the passion of scientific acquisition, and all that Agassiz needed to open the store
of his knowledge was the willingness of another to learn.

The odium scientificum, which I notice is no less bitter than the variety theologicum, has,
in these years, poured on Agassiz the floods of its opprobrium, and even the little dogs of
physical science bark at his name; but his greater contemporaries knew and esteemed him better.
The revival of the evolutionary hypothesis by Darwin, and the controversies growing out of
it, then filled the air, and Agassiz paid the penalty of his eminence and constancy to the
system in which he had been grounded by his master, Cuvier. He was attacked and insulted by
men who had never made an observation, and, what was more curious, as a panderer to the theological
prejudices of the past. But in my mind was still the memory of a former outcry and theological
persecution of him, because he had himself laid down what might be considered the forerunner
of the doctrine of evolution,--the declaration that the human race could not have been the
offspring of one Adam, but must have had a multiple beginning. The result of this was to bring
on his head the execrations of the theological world in a storm which no one who had witnessed
it was likely to forget or take for other than what it was, the proof of his absolute scientific
honesty,--a proof needed by no one who knew him personally, but which, in view of the later
animosity shown him, requires reaffirmation.

As I was much with him at this time, and perhaps, out of his family, the one to whom he talked
with the greatest freedom and fullness on the subject, owing to my own intense interest in
it, it cannot be amiss that I state his exact position as far as he let me see it. It must
be remembered that the doctrine of evolution, as he knew it, and in the only form in which
it was then stated, was simply and purely that of development by natural selection acting on
chance variation, and differing mainly by this from the doctrine of Lamarck, which had long
been rejected by the scientific world at large. We have seen since then that this primitive
doctrine has been largely supplemented by other theories, and that it no longer stands before
the scientific world in the bare simplicity of Darwin's original statement, though even he,
at a later date, claimed natural selection not as the only but as the most influential agency
of variation of species in creation; repudiating, however, a plan in the universe, and not
demanding the influence of the conscious mind on creation. Agassiz's primary objection to the
doctrine was that it left the creator out of creation, for it distinctly repudiated the element
of design in it; and, though he did not recognize the Creator of Genesis, he could not dispense
with the supreme mind.

Myself a convert to the doctrine of evolution, in as absolute a form as it is held even by
the materialists, though differently, I am persuaded that if Agassiz had lived long enough
to see the latest development of it he would have accepted it, as did Professor Owen, who was,
like Agassiz, and possibly even more literally, a believer in the designer of the universe.
The fundamental ground for Agassiz's rejection of it is stated by himself in one of the lectures
delivered at Cambridge, as follows: "I believe that all these correspondences between the different
aspects of animal life are the manifestations of mind acting consciously with intention towards
one object from beginning to end. This view is in accordance with the working of our minds;
it is an instinctive recognition of a mental power with which our own is akin, manifesting
itself in nature. For this reason, more than any other, perhaps, do I hold that this world
of ours was not the result of the action of unconscious organic forces, but the work of an
intelligent, conscious power." Whatever might have been the process by which the orderly creation
was produced (into which he did not inquire), it was the result of a definite plan and the
work of design. The immutability of species, as he defined species, was the logical consequence
of this theory, and that, it seems to me, is the substantial difference between him and Darwin.

But Agassiz was no sectarian, and held no other creed than a belief in the Creator. In the
fibre of the man was the consciousness of the immanent deity, rooted, perhaps, in that influence
of his early theological environage from which no man can ever escape, though he may rebel
against it; and the almost universal deduction by the scientific world from Darwin's theory
then was that there could be no divine design in creation. It was this negation of the direction
of the great artist in the process of creation against which Agassiz rebelled; and although,
at a later phase of the conflict, Darwin himself protested against the implication sometimes
drawn from his theory, there can be no question that at that moment the general evolutionary
opinion was that the hypothesis of a divine authorship of creation was superfluous. Agassiz
maintained the presence of "Conscious Mind in Creation;" Darwin did not deny it explicitly,
nor did he admit it.

As a matter of observation, no case of a development of one species from another has ever been
noted, and the evidence for it is precisely analogous to that adduced by Agassiz, "that it
is in accordance with the working of our minds," still further illuminated by the side-lights
which science has thrown on it since Agassiz died. The ultimate decision in the individual
mind will be according to the bias for or against the "conscious mind" or automatic creation;
and it must not be forgotten that one of the most powerful arguments for a large evolution
was the discovery by Agassiz that the embryo of the highest organizations passes through an
evolution similar to that of the animal creation. Professor Martins--a leading French scientist
and an evolutionist--says of Agassiz: "Another of these precursors of modern science is Louis
Agassiz. The oldest fossil forms have a simpler organization than the later ones, and represent
some stage of the embryonic development of the latter. This truth, established by Agassiz,
has, more than any other, enlightened the history of creation, and prepared for the generalization
by which the whole may be comprehended. The oldest fishes known are all more or less related
to the sharks and skates; their teeth and scales only, with small portions of the skeleton,
have been preserved. Their form, widely different from that of the living species, recalls
that of the embryo of our living fishes. This is a truth which Louis Agassiz was the first
to proclaim to the scientific world."[1]

[Footnote 1: De l'Origine du Monde organique.]

But, beyond this question as to the evidence of mutability of species which Agassiz did not
find, he took the position "that the hypothesis of the method of creation by evolution exceeded
physical science and became theology, which belonged to the province of theology, into which
he had no intention of venturing." That was his statement to me during the interval between
the two attacks of brain trouble from the latter of which he died. Science, to his understanding,
was observation and classification, arrangement, and it had no function in investigating the
causes or modus operandi through which things became what they were.

Amongst the evolutionists whom I have known there have been several who did not accept without
modification the theory of natural selection, and supplemented it by design, amongst whom I
may mention the great American botanist, Asa Gray,--one of the most distinguished of Darwinians,--who
accepted the method of evolution as the modus operandi of the Supreme Intelligence. Professor
Jeffries Wyman, the associate of Agassiz in the University, who was one of the doctors of our
Adirondack company, accepted in a qualified manner the theory of evolution, but his premature
and lamented death set the seal to his conclusions before they were complete, though I have
always had the impression that his position was similar to that of Gray. To my question one
day as to his conclusions, he replied, with a caution characteristic of the man and very unlike
the resolute attitude of Agassiz before the question which the Sphinx proposes still, "An evolution
of some sort there certainly was," but nothing more would he say. The loss to American science
in his death can never be estimated, for his mind was of that subtle and inductive nature which
is needed for such a study, fine to poetic delicacy, penetrating with all the acumen of a true
scientific imagination, but modest to excess, and personally so attached to Agassiz that he
would with reluctance give expression to a difference from him, though that he did differ was
no occasion for abatement of their mutual regard. Wyman's was the poetry of scientific research,
Agassiz's its prose, and they offered a remarkable example of mental antithesis, from which,
had Wyman lived, much might have been expected through their association in study. Wyman had
all the delicacy of a fine feminine organization, wedded unfortunately to a fragile constitution,
but the friendship he held for the robust and dominating character of the great Switzer was
to the utmost reciprocated.

And Agassiz's disposition was as generous as large. He had absolutely no scientific jealousy
or sectarian feeling. The rancor which was shown him by some of the Darwinians never disturbed
his serenity an instant; for of the world's opinion of him and his ideas, even when the "world"
was scientific, he never took account other than to regret that science was the loser, by running
off on what he considered side issues. We had much conversation on the question of evolution
and allied topics, in which my part was naturally that of listener and only occasional questioner,
and I remember the warm appreciation he always expressed for Darwin and his researches, for
his fineness of observation and scientific honesty. He regarded the widespread acceptance of
the theory of natural selection as one of the epidemics which have swept the scientific world
from time to time, and looked with absolute serenity to the return of science one day to the
conception of creation by design.

I am neither qualified nor disposed to pass judgment on Agassiz as a scientist, or institute
any kind of comparison of his relative authority, and probably the time is far away at which
his comparative eminence can be estimated impartially. I have only to do with his personality
as it appeared to me in our relations, and, as the latest survivor of those who enjoyed that
greenwood intimacy, to put on record my impression of the great, lovable, magnanimous man.
Of his unbounded generosity and indifference to personal advantage, his freedom from scientific
jealousy, everybody who came in contact with him was witness. He refused all offers of emolument
from any quarter, and spent all his surplus earnings for the aggrandizement of the great natural-history
museum he founded at Cambridge. The propositions of the Emperor Napoleon III. he had declined
with thanks as soon as made, and without a thought. He had come to America to study natural
history, and did not propose to be diverted from this purpose. To a lecturing agent who offered
him a very large sum for delivering a course of lectures in the principal cities of the Union,
he replied that he had no time to make money; and he died of overwork, insatiate in the pursuit
of the completion of his museum and the classification of his observations. I have heard him
speak with pain of the animosity shown him by a Swiss associate in his glacial investigations,
who had once been his warm advocate, but there was no bitterness in his manner. I am convinced
that there was no bitterness in him, and that all personal feeling was overshadowed and minimized
by his absolute devotion to scientific truth, with his loyalty to which nothing ever interfered.

His influence even on the business men of the city of Boston and the legislature of the State
of Massachusetts was the most remarkable phenomenon of the kind ever witnessed in that frugal
and matter-of-fact community, for he had only to announce that he wanted for his museum or
department in the University a donation or an appropriation, to obtain either, so absolutely
recognized was his unselfish devotion to science by all classes. There are few of us left who
can remember the sudden shadow that fell on our community at his unexpected death, and the
universal grief that told of the hold he had on the entire nation; and the mourning extended
far beyond the circle of personal acquaintance with Agassiz. Even men who had no interest in
physical science took it into consideration on account of him, carried away by his enthusiastic
advocacy of its advancement. The religious world forgot the indignation at his repudiation
of Adam in the refuge it found from absolute atheism in his affirmation of a Supreme Intelligence,
as Creator of all things, though to theological contentions he never gave the slightest consideration.

It is needless to say that this was the effect, not of scientific education or of the capacity
in the great majority of those who accepted his position to judge of a theory or a scientific
line of demonstration, but of the dominance of personal character in the man, his inflexible
honesty and disinterestedness. The last time I saw him was when he came to make me a brief
visit in a glen of the White Mountains, where I was encamped near a subject which I was painting,
and which was in part composed of huge boulders, dropped in the gorge by a primeval glacier,
and brought, perhaps, from beyond Lake Superior. He had then had the first attack of the brain
trouble, from which he was recovering, and was making a mountain trip where he could, if possible,
study and rest at once. But his want of common prudence in regard to overwork prevented his
recovery, and he died just as he was beginning to elaborate his conclusions on the doctrine
of evolution, for which he had a colossal plan, cut short in its opening. He was always too
hurried in his work, as if he knew that his life would not suffice for its completion, if indeed
completion were possible in such work, and he persisted in accumulation of material without
pause either to coordinate his ideas or to rest and reflect. I one day said to him that I was
intending to write a little book, and he exclaimed: "Oh, I wish I had time to write a little
book! All my books come large, and I have not the time to condense them."

CHAPTER XIV

LOWELL

The third magnate of our Club was Lowell, with whose personality the world at large is already
well acquainted. In his own day and presence it was impossible to form a satisfactory personal
judgment of him, and even now, through the perspective of the years since he died, it is out
of the question for me to pronounce a dispassionate judgment. Of all that New England world,
so hospitable, so brotherly to me that if I had been born in Cambridge it could hardly have
been more kind, Lowell and Norton were those who most made my welcome free from any embarrassment
to myself. Norton, almost exactly my contemporary, is still living, and which of us two shall
say the last word for the other is in the lap of the gods, but in the Adirondack Club life
he does not appear. No kinder or wiser friend have I ever had. Himself the son of one of the
most distinguished of the great Unitarian leaders of liberal New England, his broad, common-sense
views of sectarian questions first widened my religious horizon, emancipated me from the tithes
of mint and cummin, and helped me to see the value of observances, and his hand was always
held out to me in those straitened moments in which my impulsive and ill-regulated manner of
life continually landed me. I shall not disturb the serenity of his old age by the indiscreet
garrulity of mine. But the brotherhood between him and Lowell brought our lives together, and
Lowell was the pole to which both our needles swung. Norton's delicate health made it impossible
for him to take part in the excursions made by the Club, though he was enrolled as a member.

Of Lowell much has been said by many people, some of whom were less, and others, perhaps, better
acquainted with him than I was, but of him I can speak at least without restraint, other than
that which love and gratitude impose. And to-day, more than forty years since I found his friendship
what it ever remained, the judgment I formed of him at first acquaintance comes up again in
one point dominant. He seemed to me a man whom good fortune, and especially the favor of society,
had prevented from filling the rôle that fate had intended for him. There was in not a few
of his poems the promise of reaching a height which was attainable only to a man who climbs
light. There was in him the possible making of a great reformer, an evangelist, which possibility
never became actuality, owing to the weight which social success laid on him.

All through his early poems runs the thread of a fine morality, the perception of the highest
obligations of religion and philanthropy, the subtle distinction of the purest Christianity,
the defense of the weak and oppressed, the succor of the poor; in fine, the creed of a practical
religion which required its adherent to go into the slums and out on the highways to carry
out his convictions in acts. In the warfare he waged on slavery when the anti-slavery cause
was very unpopular, and, in the case of Garrison and others, brought on its advocates continual
danger and occasional violence, Lowell was unsparing in the denunciation of the national sin;
but whether because the anti-abolition public which ruled Boston thought denunciation in form
of verse had no practical value, or because the personal fascination the man always exercised
on all around him was such as to disarm hostility, it happened that he was never made the object
of aggression.

There was a gracious indolence in him, an imperturbable serenity, which made proclamation in
advance of a truce to all forms of brute collision. No doubt if they had hunted him out for
a victim of the political animosity which led to so many tragedies in the early days of our
anti-slavery agitation, he would have stood up to the stake as gayly as one of the martyrs
of old; but the man's nature was repugnant to discords, and shrank from combats ruder than
those of the printing-press. But, possibly from the fact that in those days human slavery in
our country summed up all villainies and crimes, and in the war against that he threw all his
surplus energy, he never took part in the crusade then beginning against the more familiar
iniquities nearer home. But in his constitution there was, I think, another reason why the
author of "Sir Launfal," "Hunger and Cold," "The Landlord," and "The Search" should not have
emulated Howard or Miss Fry, and have gone into the realms of destitution to relieve its wrongs.
He was extremely fastidious, and anything that offended his taste by vulgarity or crudeness
repelled him with such force that the work of practical philanthropy would have been impossible
to his temperament. The indolence I have above spoken of--which must not be confounded with
slothfulness, but is, as the true meaning of the word indicates, the following of the dictates
of the temperament, whether in activity or rest--led him to contemplation rather than action.

The refined idealism of his nature, made more subtle by the indulgence of an idolizing circle
of relatives and friends, who saw in him the promise of more even than he ever attained, or
than was possible to the smooth prosperity of his life, made it impossible for him to thrust
himself into the social conflicts, whether of poverty or of politics, though the finest and
most exalted passages of his work were not so fine and exalted as his personality; he was better
than anything he ever wrote, and this is understood by all who knew him, and that what he wrote
was only the overflow of a mind which never needed a stimulus to divine cogitation. The fascination,
the subtle personal glamour he unconsciously threw over those who came in true contact with
him, made them always expect more than he accomplished, for in that there was not even the
stimulus of ambition. What he did was done with the spontaneousness of the wind or the sunshine.
If he had a vanity, it was to be in all points accoutred for his place in society; but even
this was so lightly held that few knew him well enough to see it, and it was never a motive
power in him.

Knowing all his earlier work before I knew him, I thought I detected a want of that profounder
sympathy with humanity and the pathos of life which comes from actual suffering, and I remember
saying to one of his admirers, before I saw him, that what he wanted to make him a great poet
was suffering. This he had gained somewhat of when I made his acquaintance. His wife had died
not long before I went to Cambridge to see him and to enlist his assistance in "The Crayon,"
and he was in the earliest phase of the reaction from a sorrow which had made him insist on
solitude. All his surroundings had kept up the impressions of his bereavement, and all his
associates sympathized with and respected it, and I came in with a new life just as he came
to need relief from the depression which had become morbid. He has told it in one of his first
letters to me:--

    "I am glad you had a pleasant time here. I had, and you made me
    fifteen years younger while you stayed. When a man gets to my age,
    enthusiasms don't often knock at the door of his garret. I am all
    the more charmed with them when they come. A youth full of such
    pure intensity of hope and faith and purpose, what is he but the
    breath of a resurrection trumpet to us stiffened old fellows,
    bidding us up out of our clay and earth if we would not be too
    late?

    "Your inspiration is still to you a living mistress; make her
    immortal in her promptings and her consolations by imaging her
    truly in art. Mine looks at me with eyes of paler flame, and
    beckons across a gulf. You came into my loneliness like an
    incarnate inspiration. And it is dreary enough sometimes; for a
    mountain peak on whose snow your foot makes the first mortal print
    is not so lonely as a room full of happy faces from which one is
    missing forever."

The tone of his life at that period is given in the few poems of the time, published later:
the "Ode to Happiness," which he read to me unfinished during that first visit; "The Wind-Harp,"
in which

  "There murmured, as if one strove to speak,
    And tears came instead; then the sad tones wandered
  And faltered among the uncertain chords
  In a troubled doubt between sorrow and words;
    At last with themselves they questioned and pondered,
  'Hereafter?--who knoweth?' and so they sighed
  Down the long steps that lead to silence and died;"

But the man was too robust in body and mind to linger long in the shadows of melancholy, and
though the effects of bereavement--which, in the few years before I knew him, had taken his
only boy, who died in Rome, his elder daughter, of whose death "The First Snow-Fall" keeps
a touching record, and finally his wife--deepened his character as expressed in his subsequent
writing, the buoyancy and elasticity which he found in his enjoyment of nature, and his severe
application to the studies of the new position to which the retirement of Longfellow from the
professorship of modern languages at Harvard promoted him, restored his old tone of life, while
his very happy marriage with his second wife made him, as may now be said without indiscretion,
happier than he had ever been.

The second Mrs. Lowell was a woman of the rarest mental, moral, and personal qualities, and
her influence on Lowell was of the happiest and sunniest. She was one of three daughters of
a merchant of Maine, who had left them without other resources than what their own excellent
education gave them, and with the charge of a younger brother, for whose education they provided
after the New England way. The other sisters I never knew; but Fannie, Mrs. Lowell, was one
of the most remarkable women I ever knew for the combination of resolute and persistent courage
and serene religious temperament. She was a Swedenborgian, and probably owed to that form of
faith her serenity and imperturbable faith in a Divine Providence; but her unflinching courage
in adversity and her extreme sweetness of character were of her New England birth and education.
After her father's death she became a governess, and came to Lowell's house in that capacity
after the death of his wife; but she had, before that, gone through many vicissitudes of fortune.
She told me one day an incident of travel which is worth recording as indicating her character.
She had been in a situation in Charleston, S.C., and had accepted another in the valley of
the Ohio, to reach which, there being then no railway that traversed the distance, she had
to make a long journey by stagecoach, traveling day and night across the Alleghanies. One night
she found herself in the coach with a single fellow-passenger, apparently a gentleman, who
took his place with her on the back seat, and who, after a time, pretending to be asleep, fell
over towards her, so that his head lay on her shoulder, but, correcting himself, sat upright
again, to repeat the feint again and again, each time with more abandon, until his arm dropped
behind Fannie's waist, with an unmistakable attempt to embrace her. She quietly drew out her
shawl-pin and drove it into his arm, without any remark or other attention to him. He sat up
instantly, at the next stopping-place took an outside seat, and discontinued his journey at
the first town they came to.

Mrs. Lowell fitted her husband as sunshine fits calm, and the gravest sorrow he ever felt with
her was her having no children. When, two or three years after the time I am now writing of,
I had decided to go to Europe again, and he tried to dissuade me from going, and I, for reasons
I could not tell him, persisted, he brought me one day, just before I sailed, six hundred dollars,
insisting on my accepting it as a gift, saying: "I shall never want it. I know now that I shall
never have another child, and I can well spare it." Lowell had never been wealthy, but he had
an income sufficient for all needs in the state of life which he preferred, and his generosity
towards his friends who were poorer than he took all the surplus. He rejoiced in the addition
to his income in the salary of his professorship, but it added nothing to his own expenditure.
And yet I have always felt that if he had been a poor man, compelled to work for his daily
bread, he would have occupied a larger place in the world of letters. He was not one of the
"intellectual giants buried under mountains of gold," but he was a greater man than he ever
showed him self, always cushioned by a sufficiency of fortune for all his needs, and by his
tastes inclined to a simple and tranquil life; for, though he became later a political personage,
he cared little, au fond, for the political world. Perhaps the little was too much for his
attainment as a poet, and some of his best friends have always held that his diplomatic life
was a disaster for his intellectual completion.

I have elsewhere alluded to his going to Europe to complete the preparations to enter into
his professorship, and when he came back from this voyage he said to me, "I must study yet
a good deal before I attempt to produce anything more." He finally felt the carelessness of
form in his work, and in the succeeding years he worked very hard in his professorial work,
which was, perhaps, not the best for his advancement as an author, but it certainly gave more
solidity to the production of those years which intervened between his simpler life and his
diplomatic career. His lectures before the students and the public (the popularity of Lowell
as a lecturer was immense) solidified an education which, as he himself humorously avowed,
was often broken by freaks of irrepressible youthful spirit; and the saddening and indelible
effects of the war, which came between and sharply divided those phases of his career, had
so modified his character for the graver and more profound that I agree with those of his friends
who consider his entry into the diplomatic career as a misfortune for American letters, and
that his mind flowed to waste in those later years. Nor was he at home in diplomacy. It was
a reversal of all the conditions of his habitual existence; but it flattered his amour propre
that the country should recognize the part he had taken in the cultivation of the anti-slavery
sentiment of the nation, and the trace of worldly feeling which I have noted grew under the
stimulus to a motive in life. His social gifts were very great, and his patriotic pride intensified
the pleasure of his successes in a line of life which was really secondary in his nature.

In those years of his diplomatic life we saw little of each other. Our intimate intercourse
was suspended by my going to Europe in 1859. We were nearest each other in our Adirondack life,
in which he had all the zest of a boy. He was the soul of the merriment of the company, fullest
of witticisms, keenest in appreciation of the liberty of the occasion, and the genius loci.
One sees through all his nature-poetry the traces of the heredity of the early settler, the
keen enjoyment of the fresh and unhackneyed in nature, even of the angularity of the New England
farmhouse and the brightness and newness of the villages, so crude to the tastes founded in
the picturesqueness of the Old World. Not even Emerson, with all his indifference to the mere
form of things, took to unimproved and uncivilized nature as Lowell did, and his free delight
in the Wilderness was a thing to remember, and perhaps by none so keenly appreciated as by
me, to whom the joy of forest life was a satisfactory motive for living.

CHAPTER XV

THE ADIRONDACK AND FLORIDA

Of the rest of our company in that famous old camp by "Follansbee Water" there is little more
to be said which will interest others or recall names known to the world. I painted a study
of the camp and its inhabitants, with the intention of making from it, at a future time, a
picture which should commemorate the meeting; but, owing to changes in my plans, it remained
a study, and was purchased by Judge Hoar, the most eminent of my companions still to be described.
He had been a justice of the Superior Court of Massachusetts,--a man as well known for his
intellectual fibre and sympathy with letters as for his judicial abilities. He was one of the
most brilliant members of the old Saturday Club, of which ours might be considered the offspring
and succursal; of wit the most spontaneous and electric, whose sallies burst in the merriment
of our al fresco camp dinners with the flash and surprise of rockets, and left behind them
the perfume of erudition as did no others of the company, not even Lowell's. In my study the
party is divided in the habit of the morning occupations: Lowell, Hoar, Binney, Woodman, and
myself engaged in firing at the target; Agassiz and Wyman dissecting a trout on a tree-stump,
while Holmes and Dr. Howe watch the operation; but Emerson, recognizing himself as neither
a marksman nor a scientist, choosing a position between the two groups, pilgrim-staff in hand,
watches the marksmen, with a slight preference as between the two groups. My own figure I painted
from a photograph, the company insisting on my putting myself in; but it was ill done, for
I could never paint from a photograph.

When the company left me I returned to my painting, and remained in camp as long as the weather
permitted. On my return to Cambridge I became affianced to Miss Mack, the eldest daughter of
Dr. David Mack, with whom I had been boarding while I was occupied in painting the various
pictures of the Oaks at Waverley.

The excursion had been so satisfactory that when the whole company had come together again,
in the autumn, at Cambridge, the formal organization of the Club was called for, and to the
number of those who had been at Camp Maple there was a large accession of the most prominent
members of the intellectual society of Boston and Cambridge. It was decided to purchase a tract
in the Adirondack Wilderness, the less accessible the better, and there to build a permanent
club-house, and I was appointed to select the site and lay it out. The meeting was late in
the autumn, and the winter had set in with heavy snow before I had my orders. I caught a severe
cold at New York,--a trivial matter to notice, but one which very narrowly escaped the gravest
consequences to me; for the cold became aggravated to a bronchial attack, disregarding which
I pushed on into the Wilderness, and drove from the settlements in to the Saranac in a storm,
facing a northwesterly wind which, filling the air with a cold fog as penetrating as the wind,
crystallized on every tree and twig, and made the entire forest, as far as the eye could reach,
like a forest of frosted silver. It was a spectacle for a lifetime, and has never been offered
to me again; but I reached Martin's, where we had to put up, dangerously chilled.

Next day, however, I had all the guides of the neighborhood in for consultation as to a certain
tract which I had fixed on from report and general knowledge of the region, and we planned
a survey in the snow. It was fourteen miles from any house to the lake I had fixed on,--that
known as the Ampersand Pond; but, fortunately, there were, amongst the guides called in, some
who had been assistants in the official survey, and, with their practical knowledge and memory
of the lines, I was enabled, without leaving the inn, to draw a map of the section of a township
which included the lake, and determine its exact position, with the fact that it had been forfeited
to the State at the last tax sale, and was for sale at the land office in Albany. We bought
the entire section, less 500 acres, taxes on which had been paid, for the sum of $600,--thus
securing for the Club a tract of 22,500 acres. My cough was increasing alarmingly, and, when
I consulted a physician at New York, he advised me to get home and to bed as quickly as I might;
so, returning to Boston, I called together the executive committee of the Club to dinner, made
my report, drank a glass of champagne to the future lodge, and went to bed in the early stages
of pneumonia, which kept me prostrate six weeks.

I owed it to the fortunate and intelligent woodcraft of my guides that I was not caught in
the depth of the forest by the increasing lung trouble, probably never to return to civilization.
It was the closest shave to death that I have ever had, and the actual survey of the tract,
buried four feet deep in snow, without a shelter or other bed than the ground, would in all
probability have finished me, for I barely escaped as it was; but I was determined to finish
my work, animated by the same incomprehension of, rather than indifference to, the danger before
me which had obtained in my Hungarian expedition and in many other circumstances of my life.
Something of the splendid physical health I brought back with me from the Wilderness helped
me, no doubt, through the attack of pneumonia and pleurisy, which released me in the early
spring, when I was ordered off to Florida to recuperate. Being advised not to occupy myself
with painting while there, I bought a photographic apparatus, and learned photography as it
was practiced in 1857,--a rude, inefficient, and cumbersome apparatus and process for field
work, of which few amateurs nowadays can conceive the inconveniences.

This trip--for the means to make which I was indebted to Norton, my illness having exhausted
my resources, and the great crisis which had broken over New York the year before having swept
off the fortune of my brother--gave me a sight of the South before the war, with slavery and
the patriarchal system at its perfection. I went up the St. John's River, and took board at
a plantation called Hibernia, one of numerous similar establishments on the river, hotels proper
not existing there. The owner of the plantation, old Colonel Fleming, was one of the traditional
patriarchal planters, and the experience I gained there certainly agreed with the views of
the institution of slavery entertained by the great majority of Southern people I have known.
I never heard of the punishment of a slave, or saw a discontented negro; the black children
were the jolliest little creatures I ever saw in clothes, and the adults seemed to do as much
or as little work as they pleased.

I had carried my rifle with me, and young Fleming and I used to go hunting for alligators,
still abundant in the river. The thickets of palmetto and the groves of magnolia filling the
air with new and cloying fragrance, alternating with other unaccustomed odors which made the
grove resemble an orchestra of perfumes, were to me a new and delightful experience. There
was a mythical wild turkey in the woods around, and the hope of a shot at him carried me many
a mile, though he proved only a myth; but of rattlesnakes and copperheads there was no lack.
As I was collecting specimens for the natural-history museum of Cambridge, I canned the largest
snakes that I came across, and I secured one rattlesnake which measured nine feet; but the
fear of his kind never damped my enthusiasm for the luxuriant forest. Into the great cypress
swamps, with their centennial trees, swarming with reptiles of infinite variety, there run
devious inlets which they call "creeks," and up these I used to paddle my skiff, and lie and
watch the teeming life, wishing I were a naturalist. I spent a week at the ancient (for America)
town of St. Augustine, on the Atlantic coast,--then the sleepy watering-place of a few Southern
invalids,--and enjoyed greatly its local color, so different from that of all other American
towns, its picturesque fortress of the days of Spanish rule, and its Spanish fishermen, in
their undiluted nationality and costume. I here poisoned myself dreadfully, rubbing with my
legs some poison plant as I shinned up the trees for epiphytal orchids, new to me and an irresistible
attraction.

To naturalists, this part of Florida must have been a most interesting field before the bird-slaughterers
had invaded it to the extermination of its myriad population of feathered winterers from the
Northern regions. The geological formation is a concrete of shells of enormous thickness, which
has hardened to the only semblance of rock which the coast affords, and the low dunes have
shut off from the Atlantic long lagoons which swarm with life, marine and aquatic creatures
occurring in numberless species and orders; alligators lie in wait for their prey, and schools
of porpoises come in by the inlets in pursuit of other schools of fat mullet which swarm in
the water. Such teeming life I had never before any conception of. In the surf the sharks lurked
and coasted up and down, watching us as we waded in fishing for bass, if by chance we should
give them an opportunity for a bite; the sharp, warning fin showing in the hollow green of
the combing breaker ever and anon as we stood thigh-deep in the foam. It made one shudder to
see that silent terror patrolling up and down the margin of the deep water, waiting for an
incautious venture of the bather beyond the shallows, into which the shark dared not come.

I went with a fishing party down the coast to Matanzas, an abandoned fort of the early Spanish
days, and passed there the most impressive open-air night in my recollection. We camped on
the beach, and my shelter was a gauze mosquito netting stretched over four poles, about three
feet high, driven in the sand, and as wide as high, and my bed was the sea sand, no covering
being required. Through the gauze the sea breeze blew gently; on one side of the long, narrow
beach the great Atlantic breakers roared a monotonous bass, and on the other there came from
the lagoon the many-toned murmur of a thousand bird voices, some familiar and some strange,
whooping of cranes and chattering of coots, ducks, and divers, cries of pelicans, and now and
then the sound of flapping wings, as if some great bird had been routed out and had changed
his feeding-ground. Around me on the sand ran and crawled the host of crabs, some pulling curiously
at the gauze of my shelter; and now and then a huge spider crab climbed up the netting like
a squirrel and danced an infernal jig over my head, skipping about on the very tips of his
claws, until I tired of his frivolity and hit him from underneath, when he scuttled away, and
after half an hour, more or less, was succeeded by another, as if they found an intoxication
in dancing over my head. The gnats sang their monody, and the midges put in their treble, but
the meshes of my gauze were too fine to let them pass; and after hours of this strange pandemonium
I fell asleep, to be waked in the morning by the sun streaming over me from the broad Atlantic.

It is worthy to note here, in justice to the old days of the Floridian society, a society now
utterly extinct, and a subject of history, that the kindliness to the slaves was universal
on the St. John's River. At nightfall they used to gather in their quarters and sing; and they
had a peculiar yodel, which, starting from one plantation, was caught up by the others, and
ran round and off along the river into the distance and back, going and coming again and again
with a peculiar fascination, like the voice of a happy and careless common life. It was a kindly
and indulgent community, and that it was a slave-holding society never forced itself on the
attention. The lazy social virtues had, no doubt, their lazy vices, but we never saw them on
the surface. The negro quarters were as merry as the day was long, and the negro was a more
important and better appreciated element of social life than in the North. The whole valley
joined in unreserved malediction of a planter, one of our neighbors, who had profited by the
accidental burning of the free papers of a black family which had been bought out of slavery
by the father, with money earned as pilot to the steamers of the United States Army during
the Seminole War, to compel him to purchase himself and his wife and children again, and the
thief was spoken of as the meanest of white men, out of the social pale of self-respecting
folk; cheating a slave being far worse than cheating one of his own class. The old scoundrel
was the reproach of the whole community; but no more formal indictment of the system of slavery,
as established in the United States, is required than the fact that a former master could recall
to slavery an emancipated slave family, the head of which had paid in hard cash for himself,
his wife, and all his children, because his free papers had been burned, in a fire of which,
moreover, the neighbors accused the former owner of being the incendiary. While those papers
were in existence the negro could legally sue and be sued; but without them he had no more
legal rights than a dog. The life which honest people lived in that primitive community was
Arcadian, and it is probable that even in Arcadia they had slaves. Certainly, in my experience
of living in many countries and under various systems, I have not found that the most primitive
system secures the largest personal liberty; rather the contrary.

I returned to my painting with the early summer, and, when the season came, to the organization
of the Club and the inauguration of its club-house and grounds. It was certainly the most beautiful
site I have ever seen in the Adirondack country,--virgin forest, save where the trappers or
hunters had cut wood for their camp-fires, the tall pines standing in their long ranks along
the shores of a little lake that lay in the middle of the estate, encircled by mountains, except
on one side, where the lake found its outlet; and the mountains were cloaked to their summits
in primeval woods. In a little valley where a crystal spring sent its water down to the lake,
and a grove of deciduous trees gave high and airy shelter, I pitched the camp,--a repetition
slightly enlarged of that on Follansbee Pond. As usual I preceded the Club party, accompanied
by S.G. Ward and his son, and also the son of Emerson, to prepare the ground. The solitude
of the locality may be judged from the first hunt. We had arrived late in the day, and had
no food except the bread we took with us, and the next morning we had to kill our breakfast
before we could eat it. I took Mr. Ward and the boys in my boat and paddled down to the foot
of the lake, where was a wide beach, on which we found a two-year-old buck grazing. I paddled
to within fifty yards of him, and, though I found that my rifle would not go off and had to
change it for another, with considerable movement, the deer took no notice of us, and I dropped
him in his tracks with a feeling of compunction only overcome by the fact that we had no breakfast
if he went away. So peaceful was our realm! I have often paddled within easy shot of a deer
on other waters, but only by remaining motionless when he was looking round, for the movement
of a hand would send him flying in panic; but this poor deer might have been reared in Eden.

The meeting of the Club that year was a most successful one; and when it was over, and I was
left alone to my painting, I selected a subject in which, for the first time, I introduced
a dramatic element. I supposed that a hunter and a buck had had a hand-to-horn fight, and,
during it, had fallen together over a ledge of rocks, at the bottom of which both lay dead.
A perpendicular ledge of granite, about twenty feet high, mosses and ferns clinging in its
crevices, overhanging a level space covered with a heavy growth of luxuriant fern, furnished
the background. There I laid the first large buck I killed, and painted him with extreme care,
and then painted my guide with his arms locked in the antlers of the deer. The hour was the
late afternoon, when the red sunlight slanted through the trees and fell in broken masses on
the face of the cliff, catching the leaves here and there in its path. All this was painted
carefully from the scene, with as much of the details of the forest as the time permitted,
on a canvas twenty-five by thirty inches, on which I worked about two months, till the lake
began to freeze and the snow fell. The thermometer was about zero Fahrenheit before I broke
off, early in November.

I never enjoyed so entirely the forest life as that autumn. I had laid a line of sable traps
for miles through the woods, and caught several "prime" sable which I intended as a present
to my fiancée, and the long walks over the line in the absolute silence of the great forest,
the snowfall, and the gorgeous autumn were more fascinating than ever before. The bears left
their tracks around me, and several pumas made themselves heard, but of wolves, which I had
heard in other parts of the woods, I heard none. Returning in the gloaming from my traps, one
day, I heard at a distance a wailing cry like that of a woman in distress, to which I replied
by hallooing at the top of my voice. After a few minutes I heard the cry again, approaching
me, and again responded. The cry continued, still nearer and nearer, but slow in its approach;
and, wondering why so slow, I finally fired my rifle three times rapidly, which is the conventional
signal for help, and at the same time a reply to the call for help; and it was only when this
evoked no further call that I remembered that the cry was that of a puma.

As usual I lived alone, save for the weekly visit of my guide bringing me bread and my post.
It was with the greatest reluctance that I obeyed the necessity to return to the state of civilization,
and took leave of that most charming retreat of the natural man from the artificial life. That
was my last serious experience of woodland life. The uneasy and thriftless spirit which drove
me out, like the possessed of the Scripture, to wander in strange places at times, again drove
me that winter to England, putting, as it happened, against my intention or prevision, an end
to the American period of my life.

CHAPTER XVI

ENGLAND AGAIN

I have generally been happy at sea; and when not so, it has been from reasons apart from the
sea itself,--preoccupations which kept me insensible to the old charm, or mental troubles which
made me insensible to everything beside them. On this voyage I had the company of an old friend
of the days of "The Crayon," one of our most thoughtful and successful portrait painters, George
Fuller, and a young friend of his, a Mr. Ames. We sailed just before Christmas, in an old sailing
ship of about eight hundred tons burthen; for, unless time is of importance, I prefer a sailing
ship to a steamer, and one pleasant companion is worth a shipload of commonplace fellow-voyagers.
A stiff westerly blow caught us off Sandy Hook, and never left us till we were halfway across
the Atlantic, increasing in violence every day, until it gave me, what I had always longed
for, but never seen, a first-class gale on the open ocean.

I had said to the captain (one of the old sort of Cape Cod sailors, still a young man, however)
that I wanted to see a real gale; and one day, after we had been out nearly a week, he called
me up on deck, saying, "You wanted to see a gale, and now you may see it; for unless you get
into a tornado you will never see anything worse than this." I went on deck, obliged to hold
firmly to the rails or some part of the rigging, for the wind was such as to have carried me
overboard if I had attempted to stand alone on the quarter-deck. We were running with the wind
dead abaft, under a reefed fore-topsail and a storm jib, everything else having been taken
in the night before. The studding-sail boom of the foreyard, which had been carelessly left
out, had been broken off short in the earing, from the pressure of the wind on the bare spar.
The roaring of the wind through the rigging was such as only one who has heard it can conceive.

I gripped close the quarter-deck railing, and drew myself aft to the shelter of the wheelhouse,
where, securing myself from being blown away like a piece of paper, I watched the sea. It rose
behind us in huge mountains, the summits of which were always combing over and sliding down
the weltering flanks of the wave,--not like the surf on a shore, but pushed over like snow;
and as a wave overtook us lying in the bottom of the valley, it so overhung that it seemed
impossible that when it broke it should not bury us; but the stern was always caught by the
forefoot of it, and the old ship began to rise, and went up, up, up, until I was dizzy. Then
we hovered on the summit a moment, looking out on such an expanse of gigantic waves as I had
never pictured to myself, the distance lost in the driving spray; and, while I looked, the
wave passed from under us, and we went down and down with a rapidity of descent which was almost
like falling from a balloon. Then, after another moment's rest in the valley, came the shuddering
half apprehension of the next wave as it rose above us, threatening again, and then, after
again soaring aloft, down again into the driving of the spray; the old ship rolling, plunging,
and now and then quivering, as some side wave struck her, with a complication of motions, sidelong
and headlong, the huge waves flying before us and yet carrying us on,--wild motions, rolling,
pitching, sinking down the long green slope into the valley, to be flung up into the tumult
of wind and wave again. In all this complexity of forces we were as helpless as feathers in
the wind, cut off from mother earth as much as if we were carried away on the clouds; the feeling
of absolute insignificance growing on one as the ship drove on, the creaking of the ship and
the hissing rush of the waters hardly audible for the shrieking of the gale through the rigging.
In all my life I have never so understood the utter impotence and triviality of humanity as
I felt it then.

The ship, though not in measure with the colossi of later times, was yet a huge mass as measured
by the man, and she was no more than a cork on the tide. Up and down she went, like a child's
swing,--wallowing and rolling, with the sea breaking over the side till the channels were full,
and pouring over the bows in green torrents, and then in blinding deluges of spray and water
over the stern; tearing along ten knots an hour, and yet always seeming to be left behind by
the waves that tore by us,--the great waves, that obeyed the wind only to be crushed down again
by it, spurting up here and there fitfully in pinnacles which were instantly driven off in
foam and froth; no combing waves, such as the land dweller sees, for no wave could rise enough
to comb,--only great hills of water, crystalline with wavelets, streaked with spun foam, heaving
as if from a blind impulse, and leaving us, in a contemptuous toleration, to keep afloat if
we could. And now and then two great waves raced each other, as they will at long intervals,
till they ran close to each other and united, and we were thrown aloft a little higher, to
see nothing more than a wild waste of foam, spray, and watery chaos which defies human language
to express it.

This was the sea as I had wanted to see it, and as no painter has ever painted, or probably
ever will paint it, and as very few could ever have seen it; for in seventy thousand miles
of sea travel I have seen it only once. For three days and nights our captain never left the
bridge to rest. Of two other ships that left New York the same day that we did, one was dismasted
to the south of us, and the other had her quarters stove in and barely escaped foundering just
to the north of us. The gale blew out and left us in a dead calm, which lasted a couple of
days, when another gale of three days drove us in the direction we wanted to go, and dropped
us off Torquay in the morning of what seemed a delicious spring day, all sunshine and south
wind. We hailed a fishing boat and went ashore. We had left a land buried in snow and ice,
and we reached one in early spring, though it was still January, the gorse in odorous blossoming,
and in the hedgerows the early wild flowers in profusion. But we learned, on landing, that
the recent gales had strewn the shores of England with wrecks, with great loss of life. It
had been one of those terrible winters which have helped make the British sailor the sea dog he is.

I took lodgings in Charles Street, Middlesex Hospital, near Wehnert, and worked hard. I had
brought my "Bed of Ferns," a large study from nature on Saranac Lake, and one or two smaller
studies. I had visits from Dante Rossetti, Leighton (then in all the glory of his Cimabue picture,
and in the promise of even a greater career than he finally attained), Millais, Val Prinsep,
and Boyce. I had brought letters from Lowell to Tom Hughes, from Norton to Arthur Hugh Clough,
from Agassiz to Professor Owen. Hughes introduced me to the Cosmopolitan Club, where I made
the acquaintance, amongst others whom I do not remember, of Millais and Monckton Milnes.

The artists who came seemed to be interested in my work, especially in the "Bed of Ferns,"
of which Rossetti--whose opinion I valued more than any other, for he was very honest and blunt
in his criticisms, and not at all inclined to flattery--expressed himself in strong terms of
praise. As it was the first thing in which I had attempted to introduce a human interest in
the landscape, I was naturally inclined to consider it my most important work, and I was dismayed
when Ruskin came to see me, and, in a tone of extreme disgust, said, pointing to the dead deer
and man: "What do you put that stuff in for? Take it out; it stinks!" My reverence for Ruskin's
opinion was such that I made no hesitation in painting out the central motive of the picture,
for which both subject and effect of light had been selected. Unfortunately, I habitually used
copal varnish as a medium. When Rossetti called again, he asked me, with a look of dismay,
what I had done to my picture. I explained to him that on Ruskin's advice I had painted out
the figures, and exclaiming, "You have spoiled your picture!" he walked out of the room in
a rage. However, I sent it to the Academy as it was, and had it back, "Not hung, for want of
room," or something equivalent. I then tried to remove the pigment which hid my figures; but
the varnish was refractory, and, after a vain attempt, I finally cut the picture up and stuck
it in the fire.

The incident, though it cost me the work of three months, and was in fact the only important
outcome of the summer's study, did not diminish my confidence in Ruskin's judgment and correct
feeling for art. It required a still more severe experience. As all the world knows, that knows
anything of Ruskin's ways with artists, he was blunt and outspoken in his criticisms, and not
in the least tender of their feelings, unless indeed they happened to be women. Knowing this,
I took his praise for certain studies and drawings I had brought with me as a patent of ability;
and though I was never extravagant in my opinion of my own capacities for art, his approbation
of some things that I had done, and his assurance of a respectable attainment if I followed
the best methods of study, encouraged me, and I took it without question that the methods were
his, and it was a costly experience which undeceived me.

Of the people with whom I made acquaintance in London at this visit, those who most interested
me were Clough and Owen. Of the artists I saw little, as they and myself had other things to
do than to frequent one another's studios; but by the Rossetti family I profited largely, as
I had been more or less in intimate relations with William since he undertook the correspondence
of "The Crayon" from England. Of Dante, indeed, I saw little at that time, as he lived by himself;
but with William my relations were constant and cordial, and he was for many years my most
valued English friend. Through his extreme honesty and liberality, and his extensive knowledge
of and wide feeling for art, there was great community of appreciation between us, and our
friendship lasted long beyond the direct interest I had in English art matters.

Of Christina I saw a good deal, for the hospitality of the Rossetti family was informal and
cordial. She was then in excellent health, and, though she was never what would be, by the
generality of tastes, considered a beautiful woman, there was a noble serenity and dignity
of expression in her face which was, as is often said of women of the higher type of character,
"better than beauty," and in which one saw the spiritual exaltation that, without the least
trace of the dévote, dominated in her and made her, before all other women of whom I know anything,
the poetess of the divine life. The faith in the divine flamed out in her with a mild radiance
which had in it no earthly warmth. She attracted me very strongly, but I should as soon have
thought of falling in love with the Madonna del Gran Duca as with her. Being myself in the
regions of dogmatic faith, I was in a position to judge sympathetically her religion, and,
though we differed in tenets as far as two sincere believers in Christianity could, I found
in our discussions of the dogmas a broad and affectionate charity in her towards all differences
from the ideal of credence she had formed for herself. I do not remember ever meeting any one
who held such exalted and unquestioning faith in the true spiritual life as was hers. From
my mother, who was in most respects the most purely spiritual woman I have ever known, Christina
differed by this serenity, which in my mother was often disturbed by the doubts that had their
seeds in the old and superstitious Calvinism mingled with the ground of her creed, and from
which she never could liberate herself.

Christina believed in God, in heaven, in the eternal life, with an unfaltering constancy and
fullness which left no questionings except, it might be, concerning her fulfillment of her
religious obligations. And while I thought her belief in certain dogmas, such as transubstantiation,
and in the fasting and ritual of her High Church observances, to be too trivial for such a
really exalted intellect, so near the perception of the essential truth, she held them with
such a childlike and tranquil faith that I would sooner have worshiped with her than have disturbed
her tranquillity in it. She gave me a demonstration of doctrinal charity which was to me a
novelty, and showed me that tenets which are to me, and those trained like me, idle formalities
were in reality the steps of a ladder by which she must climb to the realization of the abstract
good. Dogmas and observances apart, I felt that her religion was so much loftier than my own
that, though it would have been impossible for me to profess acceptance of it, it was equally
impossible to argue with her about it,--that it was so woven into the fibre of her existence
that to move it in the least would be impossible, or, if possible, only at the cost of mental
and spiritual dislocation. But, with all this, there was not in her a trace of the assumption
of a religious superiority which I have so often found in the driest non-conformist, or the
putting me apart with the creatures that perish and are doomed which I have oftener found in
Catholic friends, with whom I have felt that they regarded me with a sort of pitiful friendship,
as one certain to be damned, and so only worth a limited regard, lest love should be wasted.
In after years I saw her not infrequently, and when illness and grief had touched her, and
I saw always the same serenity and the same wide personal charity.

Much of Christina's character one could see in her mother, a noble and worshipful woman, in
whom the domestic virtues mingled with the spiritual in a way that set off the singleness of
life of Christina singularly, as if it were the same light in an earthen vessel. Mrs. Rossetti
was what one often hears spoken of as "a dear, good woman," whose motherly life had absorbed
her existence,--one of the witnesses (martyrs) of the practical Christianity, who go, unseen
and unknown, to build the universal church of humanity, and whom we reverence without naming
them. Of Maria, the elder sister of Christina, I saw less, but enough to know that the same
ardent, beautiful religious spirit burned in her, mute. In the years when I, later, saw most
of the family, Maria lived in a sisterhood. She had none of the genius or the personal charm
of her sister, but possessed the same elevation and serene religious sentiment.

Of Clough I saw a good deal, though his occupation in a government office left him not much
leisure; and it seemed to me that, of all public officials I ever knew, he was the most misplaced
at an office desk. Of fragile health and with the temperament of a poet, gentle as a woman
can be, he often reminded me of Pegasus in harness. I had a commission from Norton to paint
a small full-length portrait of him, and had several sittings; but it did not get on to suit
me, and his being compelled to go to Italy for his health before I had finished with it, for
well or ill, put an end to it. He left me in occupation of his house while they were away.
Of all the people of the poet's temper I ever knew, Clough was the least inclined to talk of
poetry, and but for the sensitive mouth and the dreamy eye, with a reflective way he had when
talking, as if an undercurrent of thought were going on while he spoke, one might have taken
him for a well-educated man of business, a poet-banker, or publisher. Perhaps it is in the
memory more than it was in the life, but as I recall him there seemed to be in him an arcanum
of thought, something beyond what came into every-day existence,--a life beyond the actual
life, into which he withdrew, and out of which he came to speak. I should have liked to live
beside him and know him always, for in that phase of him was infinite study. What I did see,
however, left on me the impression of a man who was able only to sketch out the life he would
have lived,--a life of far greater capabilities than anything accomplished could indicate.

In giving me the letter to Tom Hughes, Lowell had remarked that, though he had never seen him,
yet, as Hughes had edited his "Biglow Papers," he thought he might assume an acquaintance sufficient
to warrant a letter of introduction. He was not mistaken, for Hughes did the fullest honor
to his letter; and as long as I was in London, and indeed for many years after, our relations
were of the most cordial, and not long before his death he made me a visit at Rome. Very much
of the enjoyment of that winter in London was due to the hospitable and companionable welcome
of the author of "Tom Brown," and one of the most enjoyable items was the introduction to the
evenings at Macmillan's, where the contributors to the magazine used to meet on Thursday evenings,
if I remember rightly, and where I saw the Kingsleys,--Charles only once, but Henry often enough
to contract with him a pleasant friendship. Hughes was one of the largest and most genial English
natures I knew,--robust, all alive to all his human obligations; and in those troublesome days
when the American question was coming to the crisis of our Civil War he was a consistent friend
of the North, when the dominant feeling in English society was hostile to it, and this was
a strong bond between us.

Owen I saw frequently, and, though my scientific education was, and is, superficial, he interested
me greatly; for he had, like Agassiz, the gift of making his knowledge accessible to those
who only understood the philosophy and not the facts of science, and I knew enough of the former
to profit by his knowledge. Then he was a warm friend of Agassiz, and we used to talk of his
theories and studies, of which I knew more than of any other scientific subject. Like Agassiz,
he had at first resisted the theory of natural selection, but had, unlike Agassiz, come to
recognize the necessity of admitting the idea of evolution in some form, like Asa Gray and
Jeffries Wyman. How far he finally went in recognizing the agency of natural selection as the
sufficient element in this I do not know, for at that time the battle waged over that phase
of the question; but that he did not accept the solution proposed by Darwin as final I have
reason to believe, from the fact that, the last time I saw him, he assured me that he was confident
that if he could have seen Agassiz again before he died he could have persuaded him that evolution
was the solution of the problem of creation, though knowing that Agassiz could never have accepted
the doctrine of natural selection in its bareness, absolutely convinced as he was of the agency
of Conscious Mind in creation. And I had the further declaration of Owen himself in his expressed
conviction that the process of evolution was directed by the Divine Intelligence. One statement
he made struck me forcibly in this connection, viz.: that he believed that the evolution of
the horse reached its culmination synchronously with the evolution of man, and that the agreement
was a part of the divine plan, while Darwin refuses to admit a plan in creation. I have heard
amongst evolutionists much bitterness expressed concerning Owen for what they considered his
yielding to the pressure of public opinion, and adopting the theory of evolution in contradiction
to his real convictions; but I saw enough of him to be certain that he really believed in evolution
subject to the dominance of the Divine Intelligence, nor did any of the accusations I heard
against him persuade me of the least insincerity in his acceptance of the theory with that
qualification,--a position, I am convinced, held by many, even then, who did not openly support
it, not caring to go counter to the very general advocacy of natural selection.

The teaching of Owen completed my conversion to the theory of evolution as a general law, not
on grounds of physical science, the demonstration by which is and must remain forever incomplete,
but on the philosophical ground, which I was more capable of measuring; and with the acceptance
of evolution disappeared, logically and, in the subsequent years, completely, the influence
of the old anthropomorphic religion, with its terrible dogmas of the inheritance of Adam's
transgression and an angry God with His vicarious punishment of His only son, with all the
puzzles of miraculous intervention and the perplexities of an infallible revealed word which
continually contradicts itself. The conception of Deity thus liberated from the fetters of
a materialistic faith rose to a dignity I had never before comprehended, and brought me the
new perception of a spiritual religion and life, which was more consoling and vivifying by
far than the old belief.

It is possible that the impressions of that time have been modified by my subsequent intercourse
with scientific men in England; but they are that the very wide and rapid acceptance of the
theory of evolution by natural selection was largely due to the relief it offered from the
incubus of the old theological conception of the Deity as a personal agency, always interfering
with the course of events,--an infinite, omnipotent, and omniscient stage manager,--a conception
under which the Christian world at large lay when Darwin announced his solution of the problem.
The religious world had been, up to that time, chained to the anthropomorphic conception of
Deity, and it was even less due to the purely scientific faculty than to the philosophic that
Darwin came as a liberator from a depressing superstition,--the belief in the terrible Hebrew
God, ingrained in the conscience of every reverently educated boy, and become in his growth
inseparable from the maturer beliefs. The evolution of the human mind itself had finally reached
the point at which this anthropomorphism became a thing impossible to maintain reasonably any
longer, and the magic word was spoken by Darwin which broke the spell and set us free--who
wished to be free--from a mental servitude grown dangerously dear to our deepest faculties,
those of reverence and devotion. That evolution took hold slowly with some who finally adopted
it was owing to the fact that, with them, that servitude had never been slavish, but always
held less sway than pure reason. And contemporaneously with this evolution of the human mind
had come the liberation from religious persecution, either inquisitorial, legal, or social;
and, perhaps for the first time in the history of the religious dogma, a man might openly dispute
the fundamental ideas of a dominant religion and suffer no penalty for his skepticism.

CHAPTER XVII

SWITZERLAND

Though my "Bed of Ferns" was sent back from the Academy, one of my large studies was exhibited
at the British Society, and the result of the year's work was, on the whole, satisfactory.
Ruskin invited me to go to Switzerland with him for the summer, finding in some of my studies
and drawings the possibility of getting from me some of the Alpine work he wanted done. Unfortunately
for both of us I could not draw well in traces, and he did not quite well know how to drive,
and the summer ended in disappointment, and finally in disaster. I was too undisciplined to
work except when the mood suited, and our moods rarely agreed: he wanted things which were
to me of no interest, and I could not interest myself vicariously enough to do them to his
satisfaction. He preceded me some weeks, and it was arranged that I should come to meet him
at Geneva early in June. Certainly I owe to him my earliest and most delightful memories of
the Alps and of Switzerland. More princely hospitality than his no man ever received, or more
kindly companionship; but, as might have been expected, we agreed neither in temperament nor
in method, if indeed the mainly self-taught way in which I worked and thought could be called
method.

He met me with a carriage at Culoz, to give and enjoy my first impressions of the distant Alps,
and for the ten days we stopped at Geneva I stayed with him at the Hotel des Bergues. We climbed
the Saleve, and I saw what gave me more pleasure, I confess, than the distant view of Mont
Blanc, which he expected me to be enthusiastic over,--the soldanella and gentians. The great
accidents of nature,--Niagara and the high Alps,--though they awe me, have always left me cold;
and all that summer I should have been more fruitfully employed in some nook of English scenery,
where nature went undisturbed by catastrophes and cataclysms.

Our first sketching excursion was to the Perte du Rhone, and, while Ruskin was drawing some
mountain forms beyond the river, he asked me to draw some huts near by,--not picturesque cottages,
thatched roofs and lichen-stained walls, but shanties, such as the Irish laborers on our railways
build by the roadside, of deal boards on end, irregular and careless without being picturesque,
and too closely associated with pigsty construction, in my mind, to be worth drawing. When
Ruskin came back I had made a careless and slipshod five minutes' sketch, not worth the paper
it was on, as to me were not the originals. Ruskin was angry, and he had a right to be; for
at least I should have found it enough that he wanted it done, to make me do my best on it,
but I did not think of it in that light. We drove back towards Geneva in silence,--he moody
and I sullen,--and halfway there he broke out, saying that the fact that he wanted the drawing
done ought to have been enough to make me do it. I replied that I could see no interest in
the subject, which to me only suggested fever and discomfort, and wretched habitations for
human beings. We relapsed into silence, and for another mile nothing was said, when Ruskin
broke out with, "You were right, Stillman, about those cottages; your way of looking at them
was nobler than mine, and now, for the first time in my life, I understand how anybody can
live in America."

We went to Bonneville to hunt out the point of view of a Turner drawing which Ruskin liked,
but, needless to say, though we ransacked the neighborhood for views, we never found Turner's;
and then we went on to St. Martin, the little village opposite Sallanches, on the Arve. For
a subalpine landscape with Mont Blanc in the distance, this is the most attractive bit of the
Alpine country I know, with picturesque detail and pleasant climbing up to 7000 feet. The view
of Mont Blanc, too, is certainly the finest from below which can be found. In fine weather
the mountain is hidden to the summit by clouds which clear away at sunset, and from the little
and picturesque bridge over the Arve we saw the huge dome come out, and glow in the sunlight,
when we were all in shadow. It was to me new and startling, this huge rosy orb, which at its
first appearance suggests a huger moon rising above the clouds, until, slowly, the clouds below
melt away, and the mountain stands disclosed to its base. If anything in the Alps can be called
truly picturesque, it is the view of the Aiguille de Varens which overhangs the village of
St. Martin, with the quaint and lichenous church and cemetery in the foreground, and I made
a large drawing of it from the bridge, intending to return and work it up after Ruskin had
left me. The little inn of the village was the most comfortable auberge I was ever in, and
its landlord the kindest and most hospitable of hosts. Twenty years later I went back to the
locality, hoping to find something of the old time; but there was only a deserted hostel, the
weeds growing over the courtyard, and the sealed and mouldy doors and windows witnessing ancient
desertion.

Hardly had I become interested in my drawing when Ruskin decided to move on to Chamounix, where
we might hope to get really to work. When the first sublime and overpowering impression of
Chamounix and the majesty and gloom of its narrow valley wore off, it began to oppress me,
and long before we got away I felt as if I were in a huge grave. The geological interest was
great, and the sublimity overpowering. But to my mind sublimity does not suffice for art; the
beautiful must predominate, and of the beautiful there is little in the valley. The sublime
rendered on a small scale is not satisfactory; the beautiful loses nothing by reduction.

I was disappointed in the High Alps,--they left me cold; and after visiting the points of view
Turner had taken drawings from, we went up to the Montanvert, where Ruskin wished me to paint
for him a wreath of Alpine rose. We found the rose growing luxuriantly against a huge granite
boulder, a pretty natural composition, and I set to work on it with great satisfaction, for
botanical painting always interested me. Ruskin sat and watched me work, and expressed his
surprise at my facility of execution of details and texture, saying that, of the painters he
knew, only Millais had so great facility of execution. We were living at the little hotel of
the Montanvert, and he was impatient to get back to the better accommodation of the valley
hotels; so that when the roses and the rocks were done we went back, the completion of the
picture being left for later study. From Paris, in the ensuing winter, I sent it to Ruskin,
the distance being made of the actual view down the valley of Chamounix; and he wrote me a
bitter condemnation of it, as a disappointment; for he said that he "had expected to see the
Alpine roses overhanging an awful chasm," etc. (an expectation he should have given expression
to earlier), and found it very commonplace and uninteresting. So it was, and I burnt it after
the fashion of the "Bed of Ferns." As Rowse said of him later, "he wanted me to hold the brush
while he painted." But our ideas clashed continually, and what he wanted was impossible,--to
make me see with his eyes; and so we came to great disappointment in the end.

I was very much interested in his old guide, Coutet, with whom I had many climbs. He liked
to go with me, he said, because I was very sure-footed and could go wherever he did. He was
a famous crystal-hunter, and many of the rarest specimens in the museum of Geneva were of his
finding. There was one locality of which only he knew, where the rock was pitted with small
turquoises like a plum pudding, and I begged him to tell me where it was. There is a superstition
amongst the crystal-hunters that to tell where the crystals are found brings bad luck, and
he would never tell me in so many words; but one day, after my importunity, I saw him leveling
his alpenstock on the ground in a very curious way, sighting along it and correcting the direction,
and when he had finished he said, as he walked past me, "Look where it points," and went away.
It was pointing to a stratum halfway up to the summit of one of the aiguilles to the west of
the Mer de Glace, a chamois climb. He told me later that he found the crystals in the couloir
that brought them down from that stratum. A dear old man was Coutet, and fully deserving the
affection and confidence of Ruskin. Connected with him was a story which Ruskin told me there
of a locality in the valley of Chamounix, of which the guides had told him, haunted by a ghost
which could be seen only by children. It was a figure of a woman who raked the dead leaves,
and when she looked up at them the children said they saw only a skull in place of a face.
Ruskin sent to a neighboring valley for a child who could know nothing of the legend, and went
with him to the locality which the ghost haunted. Arrived there he said to the boy, "What a
lonely place! There is nobody here but ourselves." "No," said the child, "there is a woman
there raking the leaves," pointing in a certain direction. "Let us go nearer to her," said
Ruskin; and they walked that way, when the boy stopped, saying that he did not want to go nearer,
for the woman looked up, and he said that she had no eyes in her head,--"only holes."

The valley of Chamounix finally became to me the most gloomy and depressing place I was ever
in. We made excursions and a few sketches; but I had little sympathy with it, though I tried
to do what Ruskin wanted, and to get a faithful study of some characteristic subject in the
valley. Every fine day we climbed some secondary peak, five or six thousand feet, and in the
evenings we discussed art or played chess, mainly in rehearsing problems, until midnight. Sundays
no work was done, but we used to climb some easy hilltop; and there he spent the afternoon
in writing a sermon for a girls' school in which he was much interested, but not a hue of drawing
would he do. To me, brought up in the severity of Sabbatarianism, the sanctity of the first
day of the week had always been a theological fiction, and the result of the contact with the
larger world of thinkers and the widening of my range of thought by the study of philosophy
had also made me see that the observances of "new moons and fast-days" had nothing to do with
true religion, and that the Eden repose of the Creator was too large a matter to be fenced
into a day of the week. This slavery to a formality in which Ruskin was held by his terrible
conscience provoked me, therefore, to the discussion of the subject.

I showed him that there was no authority for the transference of the Christian weekly rest
from the seventh to the first day of the week, and we went over the texts together, in which
study my Sabbatarian education gave me an advantage in argument; for he had never given the
matter a thought. Of course he took refuge in the celebration of the weekly return of the day
of Christ's resurrection; but I showed him that the text does not support the claim that Christ
rose on the first day of the week, and that the early fathers, who arranged that portion of
the ritual, did not understand the tradition of the resurrection. "Three days and three nights,"
according to the gospel, Christ was to lie in the tomb,--not parts of three times twenty-four
hours. But the women went to the tomb "in the end of the Sabbath, as it began to dawn toward
the first day of the week," and they found that he had already risen and was gone. Now, as
by the Jewish ritual the day began at sunset, the first day of the week began with the going
down of the sun on Saturday, and, therefore, as Christ had already risen, he must have risen
on the seventh day. And the reason of this twilight visit was in the prohibition to touch a
dead body on the Sabbath, and the zeal of the disciples sent them to the sepulchre at the earliest
possible moment. And I showed him how careless or ignorant of the record the redisposition
of the sacred time had been, in the fact of the total disregard of the words of Christ, that
he should lie in the earth three days and three nights; for they assumed him to have been crucified
on Friday, while he must have lain buried Thursday, Friday, and Saturday, and was therefore
buried on Wednesday, just before sunset. And this is confirmed by the text which says that
the disciples hastened to bury Christ on the day of crucifixion, because the next day was the
day of preparation for one of the high Sabbaths, which the early church, which instituted the
observance of the first day, confounded with the weekly Sabbath, not knowing that a high Sabbath
could not fall on the weekly Sabbath.

To this demonstration Ruskin, always deferent to the literal interpretation of the gospel,
could not make a defense; the creed had so bound him to the letter that the least enlargement
of the stricture broke it, and he rejected the whole tradition,--not only the Sunday Sabbath,
but the authority of the ecclesiastical interpretation of the texts. He said, "If they have
deceived me in this, they have probably deceived me in all," and he came to the conclusion
of rejecting all. This I had not conceived as a possible consequence of the criticism of his
creed, and it gave me great pain; for I was not a skeptic, as he, I have since learned, for
a time became. It was useless to argue with him for the spirit of the gospel; he had always
held to its infallibility and the exactitude of doctrine, and his indignation was too strong
to be pacified. He returned somewhat, I have heard, to his old beliefs in later years, as old
men will to the beliefs of their youth, and his Christianity was too sincere and profound for
a matter of mistaken credence in mere formalities ever to affect its substance, and the years
which followed showed that in no essential trait had the religious foundations of his character
been moved. For myself, I was still a sincere believer in the substantial accuracy of the body
of Christian doctrine, and the revolt of Ruskin from it gave me great pain. My own entire liberation
from the burdens of futile beliefs had yet to come, and at that time he went further than I
could go with him. But we never discussed theological matters any more.

I finally found a subject which interested me in a view of the foot of the Mer de Glace from
the opposite side of the river, looking up the glacier, with the bridge under the Brevent,
and a cottage in the foreground, and set to work on it energetically. Ruskin used to sit behind
me and comment on my work. My methods of painting were my own, for I had never painted under
any one except the few months with Church, whose method had taught me nothing; and I had a
way of painting scud clouds, such as always hang around the Alpine peaks, by brushing the sky
in thinly with the sky-blue, and then working into that, with the brush, the melting clouds,
producing the grays I wanted on the canvas. It imitated the effect of nature logically, as
the pigment imitated the mingling of the vapor with the blue sky; but Ruskin said this was
incorrect, and that the colors must be laid like mosaic, side by side, in the true tint. Another
discouragement! I used to lay in the whole subject, beginning with the sky, rapidly and broadly,
and, when it was dry, returning to the foreground and finishing towards the distance; and Buskin
was delighted with the foreground painting, insisting on my doing nothing further to it. In
the distance was the Montanvert and the Aiguille du Dru; but where the lines of the glacier
and the slopes of the mountain at the right met, five nearly straight lines converged at a
point far from the centre, and I did not see how to get rid of them without violating the topography.
I pointed it out to Ruskin, and he immediately exclaimed: "Oh, nothing can he done with a subject
like that, with five lines radiating from an unimportant point! I will not stay here to see
you finish that study." And the next day we packed up and left for Geneva.

At Lausanne I made some careful architectural drawings, which he praised,--some pencil sketches
on the lake; and then we drove across country to Freiburg, and finally to Neuchâtel, where
I found a magnificent subject in the view from the hill behind the city, looking over the lake
towards the Alps, with Mont Blanc and the Bernese Alps in the extreme distance. In the near
distance rise the castle and its old church, which Ruskin drew for me in pencil with exquisite
refinement of detail, for in this kind of drawing he was most admirable. As we should stay
only a few days, I could not paint anything, and spent all my time, working nine hours a day,
hard, on the one subject in pencil. We still spent our evenings till late in discussions and
arguments, with a little chess, rarely going to bed before midnight; and the steady strain,
with my anxiety to lose none of my time and opportunities, finally told on my eyes. One day,
while working hard on the view of Neuchâtel, I felt something snap behind my eyes, and in a
few minutes I could no longer see my drawing; the slightest attempt to fix my vision on anything
caused such indistinctness that I could see neither my work nor the landscape, and I was obliged
to suspend work altogether. In a few days we went to Basle, and, after a rest, my vision came
back partially, and we went to Laufenburg, where Turner had found the subject for one of his
Liber Studiorum engravings. Here the subjects were entirely after my feeling, and, as my eyes
had ceased to trouble me, I set to work on a large drawing of the town and fall from below.
In the midst of it the snapping behind my eyes came back, worse than ever, and that time not
to leave me for a long time. It was followed by an incessant headache, which made life a burden,
with obstinate indigestion. Here Ruskin suddenly found that he must go back to England, and
I returned with him as far as Geneva, and thence went to St. Martin, where I spent the rest
of the autumn, as helpless for all work as a blind man.

My summer with Ruskin, to which I had looked for so much profit to my art, had ended in a catastrophe
of which I did not then even measure the extent. It was nearly two years before I recovered
from the attack at Neuchâtel enough to work regularly, and these circumstances threw me still
further from my chosen career. More exciting and absorbing occupation called me, and I obeyed,
whether for better or worse it now matters not. When I was free to return with undivided attention
to my painting my enthusiasm had cooled, and human interests claimed and kept me. Ruskin had
dragged me from my old methods, and given me none to replace them. I lost my faith in myself,
and in him as a guide to art, and we separated definitely, years later, on a personal question
in which he utterly misunderstood me; but, apart from questions of art, he always remains to
me one of the largest and noblest of all the men I have known, liberal and generous beyond
limit, with a fineness of sympathy in certain directions and delicacy of organization quite
womanly. Nothing could shake my admiration for his moral character or abate my reverence for
him as a humanist. That art should have been anything more than a side interest with him, and
that he should have thrown the whole energy of his most energetic nature into the reforming
of it, was a misfortune to him and to the world, but especially to me.

At St. Martin I waited the return of my vision. I climbed, and tried chamois-hunting with no
success so far as game was concerned, though I saw the beautiful creatures in their homes,
and now rejoice that I did not kill any, though I fear I wounded one mortally, where we could
not retrieve him. One of my excursions was to the summit of the Aiguille de Varens, by a path,
in one place cut in the face of a precipice, only wide enough for one's feet, with sheer cliff
above and below, and nothing to hold by. I have a good head, but to follow my guide on that
path was something which only mauvaise honte brought me to. I was ashamed to hesitate where
he walked along so cheerily. We arranged to spend the night at a chalet where a milkmaid with
the figure of the Venus of Milo tended a remnant of the herd, most of which had already descended
to the valleys below. As the sun was setting I walked out to the brow of the aiguille, which
from below seemed a point, but was in reality only the perpendicular face of a mass of mountain
which in the other direction sloped away towards Switzerland for miles. The view of Mont Blanc,
directly opposite, then bare of clouds from the base to the summit, with the red sunset light
falling full on the great fields of snow, of which I had never realized the extent from any
other point, was by far the most imposing view of the great mountain I have ever found. I stood
at an elevation of about 7000 feet, halfway to the summit of Mont Blanc, with the whole broad
expanse of glacier and snowfield glowing in the rosy twilight; and, while I watched the sun
set, at my feet lay the valley of the Arve, with the town of Sallanches and its attendant villages
in the blue distance of gathering night, thousands of feet below me. As I looked, enchanted,
the chimes of the convent below rang out a Gregorian air, which came up to my heights like
a solemn monition from the world of dreams, for nothing could be distinguished of its source.
We started a chamois, and saw him race across the broad field of snow like the wind, while
I could only follow, laboring knee-deep in the snow, like a tortoise after a hare. We slept
that night buried in the hay. I am glad to say that the hunt in the morning was without other
result than a delightful walk, for my guide was a better climber than huntsman.

A few days later, I made, with another guide, an excursion to the Col des Fours, on the other
side of the valley. The guide was an old professional hunter, and knew the habits of the chamois
well. We climbed up leisurely in the afternoon, and slept in the hay of a deserted chalet;
for from there the cattle had already been all driven down. While the guide prepared the supper,
I walked out to the edge of the cliffs to get the view. The landscape had become a sea of mist,--a
river, rather; for the whole valley was filled with a moving, billowy flood of fog flowing
from Mont Blanc, and enveloping mountain and valley alike in a veil of changing vapor, melting,
forming, and flowing beneath my feet, hiding every object in the landscape below the cliffs
I stood on. It made me dizzy, for I seemed to be in the clouds. And while I waited there came
a transfiguration of the scene,--the mist began to grow rosy, and deeper and deeper, till it
was almost like a sea of blood. No source of light was visible from my point of view, but,
of course, the phenomenon, though seemingly mysterious, was evident. The sun, in setting, illuminated
the fields of snow at the summit of the mountain beyond, which reverberated its flaming light
into the vapor below, penetrating it down to my feet, but the mountain itself was, from my
elevation, invisible. It passed like all glories, and quicker than most.

The next morning we went to take our posts for a chamois drive. A friend of the guide, whom
he had picked up to profit by my coming, took one side of the valley, and I the other, while
a boy with an umbrella went down the valley to drive the chamois up to us. Having posted me,
the stupid guide crossed the line of the drive between me and the meadow where the chamois
would come to feed, and took his post, hiding nearer the peaks where they had passed the night.
Soon after sunrise they made their appearance on a field of snow which sloped down into the
Val,--nine, young and old. I shall never see anything prettier than the play of those young
chamois on the snow. They butted and chased each other over the snow, frolicked like kittens,
standing on their hind legs and pushing each other, until, probably, they grew hungry, and
then came down to the grass to feed. This was the moment for the driver to come in, and he
came up the valley waving his arms and umbrella and shouting. The chamois came in my direction
till they crossed the track of the old hunter, scenting which they halted, sniffed the air,
and then broke in panic, the majority running back past the driver and within a few yards of
him, so that if he had had a gun he could easily have killed one, and went down the valley
out of sight; three came up the valley, taking the flank of the almost perpendicular rocks,
within shot of me, but at full gallop, and I fired at the middle one of the group. They passed
behind a mass of rock as I fired, and two came out on the other side. If I hit one I could
not know, for the place was inaccessible, but I hope that I missed. I have often thought of
the possibility that I might have hit the poor beast, and sent him mortally wounded amongst
the rocks to die, and I never recur to the incident without pain. It becomes incomprehensible
to me, as my own life wanes, how I could ever have found pleasure in taking the lives of other
creatures filling their stations in the world better than I ever did. The late educated soul
pays the penalty of earlier ignorance, but there is no atonement to the victims.

I stayed at St. Martin while the plebiscite and annexation to France took place. It was a hollow
affair, the voting being a mockery, but the Sardinian government had never made itself seriously
felt in Savoy, for either good or ill; the people were a quiet and law-abiding race, and while
I was in the country I never heard of a crime or a prosecution. The regiments of Savoyard troops
went into the French army with ill will, and there was a bloody fight between them and the
French soldiers at Lyons when the former went into the barracks there.

I was at St. Martin when the Emperor and Empress made their tour through the new possession.
The state carriages had to be left at Sallanches when the sovereigns went up to the great ball
offered them at Chamounix, and, when they returned, the little mountain carriages which brought
them down halted under the windows of the auberge of St. Martin, in which I lived, to wait
for the state carriages to come across the river. They had to wait about half an hour, and
as they walked up and down in the road under my window, beside which stood my loaded rifle,
I thought how easily I could change the course of European politics, for I could have hit any
button on the Emperor's clothes, and I hated him enough to have killed him cheerfully, as an
enemy of mankind; but regicide has always seemed to me a great mistake, as it would have been
in that case, for it would only have placed the young Prince Imperial on the throne, under
the regency of the Empress. I was then a radical republican, with all the sympathies of a Parisian
Red, for I had not learned that it is less the form of the government than the character of
the governed which makes the difference between governments. I did not spare the life of the
Emperor from any apprehension of consequences to me, for I had none. I knew the paths up the
mountain at the back of the hotel, and before the confusion should have been overcome, and
a pursuit organized, I could have been beyond danger, on my way to the Swiss frontier, for
the pine woods came to the back door of the hotel; and beyond that, I never had the habit of
thinking of the consequences of what I proposed to do. When I returned to Paris, after the
autumn had passed, I told the story to an artist friend, an ultraradical, how I stood at my
window with a loaded rifle by my side, and the Emperor twenty feet below, and he shouted with
fury, "And you didn't kill him?" Time and fate have punished him more fitly than I should have
done, and wise men leave these things to time and fate.

CHAPTER XVIII

PARIS AGAIN THE CIVIL WAR IN AMERICA

I remained in Paris all that winter, and took a studio with an American friend,--Mr. Yewell,--but
I could do no work; the headache never left me, and, though I could draw a little, my vision
failed when it was strained, and I seemed to have lost my color sense. I was desperate, and,
when Garibaldi set out on the Marsala expedition, I was just on the point of sailing to join
him when I received a letter from the father of my fiancée, telling me that her perplexities
and distress of mind over our marriage had so increased that they feared for her reason if
she were not set at rest. I took the next steamer, and ended the vacillation by insisting on
being married at once. Nothing but a morbid self-depreciation had prevented her from coming
to a decision in the matter long before, and there was no other solution than to assume command
and impose my will. We were married two days after my landing, and returned to Paris a few
days after. When the spring opened we went down into Normandy, and there, returning to the
study of nature and living in quiet and freedom from anxiety, I slowly and partially recovered
my vision, and began to regain in a measure the power of drawing. The landscape of the quiet
French country suited me perfectly, and I made two or three good studies, but without getting
into a really efficient condition for painting, which I only did a year or two later at Rome.

Our winter in Paris had been greatly brightened by the acquaintance of the Brownings, the father
and sister of the poet. We lived in the same section of Paris, near the Hotel des Invalides,
and much of our time was passed with them. He had, many years before we knew him, inherited
an estate in Jamaica, but on learning that to work it to profit he must become a slave owner
he renounced the heritage. And, knowing him as we knew him, it is easy to see that he would
renounce it cheerfully and without any hesitation. A man of a rougher and more energetic type
might have tried the experiment, or questioned the judgment, at least have regretted his own
integrity, but Browning could have done neither. The way was clear, and the decision must have
been as quick as that of a child to reject a thing it abhorred. His unworldliness had not a
flaw. So beautiful a life can never have become distinguished in the struggles and antagonisms
which make the career of the man of the world, or even the man of letters, as letters are now
written; for he was a man, and the only one I ever knew, of whom one would say that he applied
in the divine sense the maxim of Christ, "Resist not evil,"--he simply, and by the necessity
of his own nature, ignored it.

He had a curious facility in drawing heads of quaint and always varied character, which character
he could not foresee when he began the drawing. They were always in profile, and he began at
one extremity and ran his pencil round to the other, always bringing out an individuality,
but without any intention as to what that should be; and he named it, when it was done, according
to the type it offered, generally in character, with a trace of caricature, and, for the most
part, subjects from the courts of law,--a judge or a puzzled juror, a disappointed or a triumphant
client, etc., etc. He would draw a dozen or twenty in an evening, all different and all unforeseen,
as much to him as to us, and he was as much amused as we were when it turned out more than
usually funny. His chief amusement was hunting through the bookstalls along the quays, and
I have, amongst my old books, an early life of Raphael, which he gave me, with his name on
the fly leaf.

Of Miss Browning, who still lives, I will not speak; but what she told me of the poet's mother
may, I think, be told without indiscretion. She had the extraordinary power over animals of
which we hear sometimes, but of which I have never known a case so perfect as hers. She would
lure the butterflies in the garden to her, and the domestic animals obeyed her as if they reasoned.
Robert had been given a pure-blooded bulldog of a rare breed, which tolerated no interference
from any person except him or his mother, and which would allow no familiarity with her on
the part of strangers; so that when a neighbor came in he was not permitted to shake hands
with her, for the dog at once showed his teeth. Not even her husband was allowed to take the
slightest liberty with her in the dog's presence, and when Robert was more familiar with her
than the dog thought proper he showed his teeth to him. They one day put him to a severe test,
Robert putting his arm around his mother's neck as they sat side by side at the table. The
dog went round behind them, and, putting his feet upon the chair, lifted Robert's arm off her
shoulder with his nose, giving an intimation that he would not permit any liberty of that kind
even from him. They had a favorite cat, to which the dog had the usual antipathy of dogs, and
one day he chased her under a cupboard, and, unable to reach her, kept her there besieged and
unable to escape, till Mrs. Browning intervened and gave the dog a lecture, in which she told
him of their attachment for the cat, and charged him never to molest her more. If the creature
had understood speech he could not have obeyed better; for from that time he was never known
to molest the cat, and she, taking her revenge for past tyranny, bore herself most insolently
with him, and when she scratched him over the head he only whimpered and turned away, as if
to avoid temptation. An injury to one of his feet made an operation necessary, and the family
surgeon was called in to perform it, but found him so savage that he could not touch the foot
or approach him. Mrs. Browning came and talked to him in her way, and the dog submitted at
once, without a whimper, to the painful operation. She had been long dead when I knew the family.

We had planned to go together--the elder Browning, Robert and Mrs. Browning, Miss Browning,
my wife, and myself--to pass the summer at Fontainebleau, and we were awaiting the arrival
of Robert and his wife from Florence when the news came of Mrs. Browning's illness, followed
not much later by that of her death. The intrusion even of a friend was too much for this catastrophe,
and we saw little more of the Brownings until years after, when other and many changes of fortune
had come over us, and we met again in Italy.

Out of a quiet and happy life in Normandy I was aroused by the complications of our Civil War.
An intimate friend living in Paris, the late Colonel W.B. Greene, a graduate of West Point,
had applied for the command of a regiment of Massachusetts troops, and offered me a position
on his staff if he got it and I would come. We agreed to go together, but his impatience carried
him away, and he sailed without giving me notice. I followed by the next steamer, and, leaving
my wife with my parents, I went on to Washington and to Greene's headquarters. I was too late
for Greene, and I could not pass the medical examination, which was then very rigid, for all
the North was volunteering. "Go home," said Greene; "we have already buried all the men like
you. We have not seen the enemy yet, and we have buried six per cent. of the regiment. It is
no place for you." But I had no choice; there were 800,000 men enlisted, and further enlistments
were countermanded. I tried to get some position with Burnside,--who was fitting out an expedition
to North Carolina,--even as cook; for I could not pass for the rank and file, and Burnside,
as a friend of my friends in Rhode Island, might, I thought, help me. He replied that he had
already nine applications for every post at his disposal. As a last resource, I went up into
the Adirondacks to raise a company of sharpshooters. My backwoodsmen were all ready to go,
but they wanted special rifles and special organization, for they meant to go to "shoot secesh,"
not to be regular infantry. Their ambition was not reconcilable with the plans of the military
authorities, so that the company was never raised, and I then turned to my plan for the consulate.

I suppose that there are few now living who knew by personal investigation and remember clearly
the condition of the country at that epoch. We had suffered the defeat of Bull Run, and the
country at large was in a state of flaming patriotism; but sober people had many doubts whether
the government was strong enough to carry through the plans of the President, and he also had,
I was told by some one who knew him, been very uncertain whether the population at large would
respond, even when he made the first call for 75,000 volunteers. Persons in positions of great
influence were of the opinion that the North had no right to coerce the South. General Scott,
the commander-in-chief, urged separation peacefully, and Horace Greeley, the most influential
member of the press in the country, opposed coercion, while the mass of the Democratic party
were either on the fence or openly in favor of the South, and this opposition of the Democrats
was probably what gave Lincoln the most serious consideration. Some of the most earnest and
patriotic people I knew had grave doubts if the Northern people had any conception of the work
they had undertaken, and if they would be constant when they came to realize it.

While I was in Washington I saw Lincoln and some of those around him, and my opinion is that,
but for his faith in the Supreme Providence and in the destiny of our Republic, his courage,
and with it the whole scheme of defense, would have broken down. Future generations will not
understand the difficulties before him,--perhaps he himself did not. The administration of
Buchanan had prepared for the secession, and Buchanan as minister to England had already established
the opinion of the governing class in that country in the certainty of impending separation,--a
fact which should be remembered when we judge the attitude of England; the fleet had been dispersed
to the ends of the earth, and the officers of the army were mainly Southerners. The support
of New York and Massachusetts was of the gravest importance. The former was largely under the
influence of Seward, and he was inclined by nature to conciliation; in the latter State, General
Butler, a Democrat, and of seriously questioned loyalty, had an influence which might easily
become the dominant one and carry the State over to the Democratic opposition, which was in
the country at large distinctly opposed to coercion. The government and the ruling class in
England were clearly hostile to the North, and the position on that side was menacing.

Had the South then been content with separation on the lines of "Mason and Dixon's line," I
am convinced that it would have taken place without a struggle, if the position could have
been defined without bloodshed. But this was what the most sagacious of the Southern leaders
did not desire. It became evident that the majority in the South did not desire separation,
and the leaders knew that a peaceful separation would be followed by reconstruction on something
like the old lines, for the South could not stand alone industrially; so that they had not
concealed their determination to invade the Middle and Western States, and carry them forcibly
over to the new Confederacy, "leaving out New England." It was generally known that Pennsylvania
and New Jersey were Democratic and lukewarm for the old Union, and that Ohio and the West would
not resist if there were a successful beginning of a movement and a military invasion. So far
as the sentiments of the politicians were concerned, the South had a very correct idea of the
probabilities of the situation; what they were utterly ignorant of was the spirit of the masses
in the North, which they thought to coerce easily. There they were mistaken, and there Lincoln
saw his strength, and that saved the country; for, with the firing on Fort Sumter and the open
insult to the flag, the Northern masses took fire, and the conflagration burned out the roots
of sympathy for the South. Butler was given a command in the field; others of the same class
were given commands, and the dangerous demagogue class was enlisted for the war.

When I landed, the entire able-bodied population of the North was seeking to enlist, and the
troops were pouring by thousands into Washington, and only the most uncertain and prudent of
the Northern leaders doubted of victory, though no one dreamed what it would cost. And, looking
at the corruption of American politics to-day, the venality and the indifference to the true
interests of the nation of most of the men who control the political life at its most important
centres, and the general tendency of our politics, it needs a serene and far-reaching faith
in human progress to enable a citizen of the United States, who believes in a political ideal,
to regard the sacrifices then made as having been profitable. I see things dispassionately
and as an old man removed from the chance of personal gains or losses, and, but for a faith
in human progress being the result of an eternal and inevitable law, I should say that the
blood of that war had been wasted. It is a painful conviction to die with,--but I expect to
die with it,--that generations and unparalleled disasters must pass before my country reaches
the goal its founders believed to be its destiny.

Having exhausted every appliance to open a way into the army, I made my appeal to Dr. Nott,
and received by return of the Washington post my commission as consul at Rome, as I have told
in a previous chapter. I went on to Cambridge to get information and advice, and, at Lowell's,
met Howells for the first time. We could, each of us, offer condolence for the other's disappointment;
for Howells had asked for Dresden and was appointed to Venice, while I had asked for Venice,
intending to write the history of Venetian art. But Rome had always been given to an artist;
and, though there was no salary, but fees only, it seemed to have been a much-sought-for position,
and I accepted.

Leaving my wife at home, for her confinement, I sailed for England, en route for Italy, just
when the capture of Mason and Slidell had thrown the country into a new agitation; for it was
foreseen that England would not submit to this disrespect to her flag, though the step was
in strict accordance with her own precedents. Seward and the more prudent part of the public
were in favor of releasing the prisoners at once, and before any demand could be made by the
English government; but it was said that Lincoln and the West were in favor of holding them,
and letting England do her worst. It is possible that he thought that a foreign enemy would
decide all the wavering minds, and possibly open the way to a pacification between the North
and South. I left New York before we had heard of the reception of the news in England, and
found the agitation there intense. The consul at Liverpool told me that he could not go into
the Exchange for the insults offered him there, and American merchants were insulted on the
street. In London, at the restaurants where I dined, the conversation turned altogether on
the incident, and the language was most violent.

As I was in the service of the government I waited on Mr. Adams, the minister, and remained
in London until the question was settled, in daily communication with him. He thought the danger
of war still great, as Lincoln had not decided to accept the ultimatum, and the English ministry
was, in Adams's opinion, desirous of having a casus belli, or at least a justification for
recognizing the Southern Confederacy. That war had not already become inevitable he considered
due entirely to the attitude of the Queen, who resisted any measure calculated to precipitate
a hostile solution, and had refused her assent to a dispatch demanding the release of the envoys,
and worded in such peremptory terms that Lincoln could not have hesitated to repel it at any
cost,--an outcome which, in the opinion of Mr. Adams, was what Palmerston, Gladstone, and Lord
John Russell wanted. But, on the insistence of the Queen, the offensive passage was struck
out, and peace was preserved, though at that moment the reply of our government had not been
received, and Adams did not consider that, even in its modified form, the demand of the English
ministry might not be rejected. As the crisis was still undecided, I waited until the solution
was definite. The favorable reply came by the next steamer. To the peace-loving heart of the
Queen mainly, and next to the tact and diplomatic ability of Mr. Adams, the world owes that
the war most disastrous possible for the civilization of the west was avoided. Put at rest
with regard to this danger, I continued my journey and entered upon my functions as representative
of my government at Rome.

I have since heard various versions of this crisis and its solution, but the above is, I believe,
substantially the truth. I have heard that the English dispatch was referred to the French
Minister of Foreign Affairs, and that he advised against it; but this is impossible. The Emperor
of France was more determined even than Palmerston to destroy the United States, if possible,
as his Mexican enterprise showed, and we knew from other sources that he was pressing the English
government to recognize the belligerency of the South. Day by day I heard from Mr. Adams of
the position, and he said to me emphatically that he did not consider the declaration of war
impossible until he received the reply of Lincoln to the English ultimatum; and it is impossible
that such a transaction as that of the consultation with the French government should have
taken place without Adams knowing of it, for his information from the surroundings of the Queen
was minute and incessant. He said to me, without the slightest qualification, that the preservation
of peace was due solely to the insistence of the Queen, strengthened by the advice of Prince
Albert, on the demand for the release of the envoys being made in terms which should not offend
the amour propre of the North.

CHAPTER XIX

MY ROMAN CONSULATE

The convenient road from London to Rome, when I went there as consul, was via Paris to Marseilles,
and thence by sea to Civita Vecchia. It was December when I left London, and the journey from
Paris to Marseilles, in a third-class carriage, took twenty-six hours. The Mont Cenis tunnel
had not been opened yet, and the voyage by diligence was tedious, costly, and at that season
uncomfortable on account of the cold. I arrived at Rome shortly before Christmas, when the
city was astir with the preparations for the great ceremonies which were then the principal
attraction for foreigners there, but the number of visitors was very small compared with that
which now gathers to their diminished religious and spectacular interest. The foreign quarter
was limited to that immediately about the Piazza di Spagna, and only the artist folk lived
in the remoter quarters, where they found cheap and commodious apartments in the palaces of
fallen nobility, glad to let their upper stories; and there were few or no new houses.

Rome was given up to art and religion; it was still decaying, picturesque, pathetic, and majestic.
Where now we find the prosperous and hideous new quarters,--the Via Nazionale, and the expanse
of structures to the east of it, the region between the Coliseum and the Lateran, the 20 Settembre,
Via Veneto, and the vicinity where were the Ludovisi gardens, and now are long streets of ugly
houses, with the entirely new quarter of the Prati, were then expanses of vineyards and gardens,
and we used to cross the Tiber by a ferry to visit the farm of Cincinnatus, now buried under
twenty feet of rubbish, on which are built the palaces of the Prati, huge, ugly barracks; and
even the Campagna has lost much of its desolate beauty. Down the Tiber, where the ghastly embankment
walls in the yellow stream, there was then a picturesque riverbank, with a delightful foreground
in every rood of it. Where now is the Piazza delle Terme and the great railway station, we
used to go to get studies of the ruins of the baths of Diocletian, one of the most picturesque
objects of the region.

Political or social life there was none, and the foreign element, whether the regular or the
transitory, was divided by its nationalities, and cut off absolutely from the Roman. Only the
English and American mingled to any extent, the foreign Catholics finding their way, with such
Protestants as gave hope of conversion, into the clerical world, which, from all that I could
see of it, offered little attraction to the fugitive visitors. Wide-eyed, hurried Americans
came, saw, and bought a picture, and went away again; English sightseers came for Christmas
or Easter, and bought a few old masters; but the mass of those who stayed for long were invalids,
who settled down and tried to keep as much in the sun as possible, for the universal belief
then was that to live out of the sunshine was to contract mortal malaria. It was the most unreal
world I have ever lived in, whether we use the word unreal in the sense of shadowy or poetical.

Rome was in fact at that time a spectacle never before or since seen in the world. Ruled by
an absolute government, theocratic and therefore considering its authority beyond all human
attack, but besieged on all sides by an invading liberalism, which had already captured all
its outposts and undermined its position at the centre, it, still defiant, refused to make
a single concession to the spirit of the epoch, and bade defiance to diplomacy and insurrection
alike. All its former allies from north and south were in refuge within the walls of the city,
the King of Naples and all his court offering the daily spectacle of a parade of their downfall
as they drove through the streets. Rome itself was a huge cloister in which the only animation
was in the processions of priests and students of the theological seminaries, or the more melancholy
funerals in which the hooded and gowned friars added gloom to the mystery of our common lot,--no
industry except those of jewelry and art and that of ecclesiastical apparatus. The principal
revenues were the charity of the outside world,--St. Peter's pence. Government was not by law,
but by the arbitrary decisions of the most incompetent of officials, enforced by the bayonets
of a foreign army, the soldiers of which despised the population, and lived in the most complete
separation from it. The Pope himself had little affection for his French protectorate, which
urged, and sometimes effected, certain improvements which he regarded as innovations and invasions.

I had, soon after my arrival, a case before the lower tribunal which showed how the administration
of justice was regarded. Having a relapse into the malady that had followed my breakdown in
Switzerland, which was exaggerated by the heat of Rome, I was ordered by my physician to Ariccia
to recruit, and I left my apartment, which was also the consulate, and took quarters at the
little Ariccian inn which was the resort of the artists at that date.

As I could not absent myself from the office longer than ten days at a time without permission
of the government at Washington, I had to return pro forma at that term, when, to my surprise,
I found my apartment in possession of a stranger. I intimated his dislodging, to which he replied
that he had taken the rooms and paid his rent and would not go. At that time there was a temporary
occupation--merely nominal, however--of the legation by ex-Governor Randall of Wisconsin. The
minister had taken an apartment where he could mount the arms of the Republic, and had then
gone off on his European tour, leaving me in occupation of the post as chargé d'affaires and
in care of his rooms. As I had thus another place to sleep in, I evacuated the consular quarters
not unwillingly, removing all my effects except a set of silver spoons which my mother had
given me on my leaving home, and which were heirlooms. The spoons were being cleaned, the landlady
said, and would be ready the next day. I called for them again, and was again deferred, when
I went at once to the tribunal and made a claim for my spoons. On statement of the case, the
judge gave an order for the immediate and unconditional delivery of the plate; but when I went
to get them at the tribunal, he said it was lucky for me that I came when I did, as the landlady
had come in the afternoon and applied for an order against me to pay another month's rent (always
paid in advance), and that if she had come first he should have been obliged to give it to
her. I explained that I had been driven out of the apartment by another occupant; but that,
he said, made no difference, the first applicant for justice would alone have been heard.

Not long after, a similar case called for my more or less official recognition. My colleague
the consul at Florence had come for a visit to Rome, and had taken a cab to make the rounds
of the sights, and, making his visit to the church of Ara Coeli, he of course left the cab
at the foot of the stairs. He found little which interested him in the church, and, returning
sooner than the cabman expected, he found no cab there. In the course of the day he went to
the police court and asked for a punishment for the cabman for having deserted him on his round.
The cabman was summoned and fined accordingly; but the magistrate remarked to my friend when
he came to give evidence that it was fortunate for him that he complained first, for the cabman
had come later in the day and asked for his fare for the night which he had passed at the foot
of the stairs waiting for the return of the forestiero; and he added that if the cabman had
come first, my friend would have been obliged to pay the claim. It was simple and expeditious,
first come being first served, but hardly good civil administration.

At the time of the expedition of Garibaldi which ended at Aspromonte, the excitement in the
city was intense, and the panic on the part of the ecclesiastical population so great that
they mainly took refuge in the convents and villages of the mountain country. I had occasion
to see the Pope at that time, and found him in profound despondency, evidently persuaded that
Garibaldi would come to Rome. He said to me that he was convinced that the great day of tribulation
prophesied for the church had come, and it would have its fifty years of oppression, after
which it would arise again more glorious than ever; but there was no question that in his mind
the French garrison was not for the moment an efficient protection. The Italian party in the
city was very small, but active, and in those days especially so. The priests were insulted
and menaced whenever it was possible to reach them covertly, and finally one was stabbed in
a crowd. Many arrests were made, and amongst those arrested was an exile who had ventured into
the city to visit his friends. He was put on trial for the stabbing, and, though he proved
an alibi, he was condemned to death, for "some example must be made," they said. There was
not the slightest evidence against him except that he was an exile who had no right to be in
the city, and he was executed. Every day the police had to obliterate rebellious inscriptions
from the walls, and a constant correspondence was kept up with the patriots in Florence. To
belong to the order of Freemasons was punishable by death, but a lodge was in full activity,
and when Lincoln was assassinated it sent me, for his widow, a letter of condolence. It was
given me by Castellani, who, not being initiated, had received it from a brother known to him.
About the same time, the revolutionary committee decided to contribute a stone from the agger
of Servius Tullius to the Washington monument at Washington, and got out one of the largest,
had it dressed and appropriately inscribed, and forwarded it to Leghorn for shipment to America,
the bill of lading being sent to me for transmission.

The police regulations were extremely severe against heresy, but brigandage was common, and
the darker streets were unsafe at night to strangers. People were not infrequently robbed in
their own doorways, and there was a recognized system of violent robbery known as "doorway
robbing." The streets were very badly lighted, and the entrance halls on the ground floor were
scarcely ever lighted, so that we always carried wax tapers to light ourselves up to our rooms,
or to visit our friends. Incautious foreigners, ignorant of this need for precaution, entering
the dark passages, were sometimes seized by robbers hidden behind the door, gagged, and stripped
of all valuables without a possibility of assistance unless a friend happened to enter the
house at the moment, for the police were never seen about the streets at night. I had, in the
second year of my residence, a very narrow escape from capture by brigands, which might have
been a serious matter. I was making, with my wife and son, our villeggiatura at Porto d'Anzio,
then a miserable fishing village, but, except Civita Vecchia, the only convenient seaside locality
in the States of the Church where one could find lodgings. With an American lady friend staying
with us, we planned to make an excursion by boat to the Punta d'Astura, where are the ruins
of a villa of Cicero; but when half way there we were driven back by a passing shower. On the
same day a party of Roman sportsmen, out quail shooting, were "held up" in the ruins and obliged
to pay a ransom of five thousand scudi. The brigands of the kingdom of Naples were constantly
given refuge and sustenance on our side the frontier, and on a visit to Olevano, in the Sabine
hills, I was witness of a band of over two hundred taking refuge from the Italian troops in
the Papal territory, and being furnished with provisions and refreshments as at a festa. Artists
out sketching were never molested, not because the Papal influence protected us, but because
the brigands knew their poverty, and had a tinge of sympathy with the arts.

The ecclesiastical authorities were so severe on heresy that a friend of mine, who had married
an English lady who remained a Protestant, was brought before the Inquisition (the "Holy Office")
and put under the severest pressure to compel his wife to abstain from attending the English
church outside the Porta del Popolo. He escaped ulterior consequences only by appealing to
the French authorities, he being a surgeon in the service of the French garrison. For common
morality there was little care. The sexual relations were flagrantly loose, and the scandal
even of some of the great dignitaries was widespread. Antonelli's amours were the subject of
common gossip, and most of the parish priests were in undisguised marital relations with their
housekeepers; nor was this considered as at all to their discredit by the population at large.
One of the leading Liberals, permitted to remain in the city on account of the importance of
his industry, one of the great goldsmiths' works, told me that the Liberals never permitted
the priests to frequent their houses, as they invariably conspired to corrupt the newly married
women, unmarried girls being unmolested. In the lower circles of the bourgeoisie it was a matter
of common knowledge that the husbands openly made a traffic of the virtue of their wives; and
in my personal acquaintance amongst the artists, I knew of a number of cases in which the artist
had the wife as a mistress for a fixed compensation to the husband.

For this kind of immorality the police had no eyes, and, admitting enormous exaggeration in
the common report of the conduct of the younger priesthood and the students of the theological
schools (and there is no smoke without some fire), the conditions of morality amongst the younger
Italian clergy was a gross scandal. Houses of ill-fame were notorious, and it used to be said
that when Pius IX. was urged by the French authorities to put them under control and license
he replied that "every house was a brothel, and it was useless to license any." There was another
saying which I heard often, that "if you wanted to go to a brothel you must go in the daytime,
for at night they were full of priests." How far this was justified I do not know, but I remember
that two American acquaintances went one night to one of the best recognized houses of the
kind, a place of the most common notoriety on the Corso, and they were told at the door that
there was no room,--"every place was occupied."

Let me not be charged with making of this state of things an accusation against the Catholic
religion. The English, Irish, and American students, who were those with whom I principally
came in contact, were ardent and enthusiastic devotees, as earnest in their religious observances
as any of the most devoted members of any other church I have known. Indeed, it is my personal
experience that so far as regards the younger men, I have never found so many animated by the
true apostolical spirit as amongst the students of theology of British and American birth whom
I then knew at Rome. At the head of all the Catholics of all nations whom I have ever known
are the English, in respect of sincere and ardent devotion to their church, with the minimum
of animosity towards other creeds, and the most healthy morality. With the great majority of
Italian ecclesiastics, on the contrary, religion is a mere formality, and its influence on
the life is inconsiderable and unconsidered. It was, therefore, not because it was a Catholic
city that the morality of Rome was so low, but because the energies of the hierarchy were so
occupied with the difficulties of the position of a government of priests unused to civil administration
and by their own education disqualified for it, that the ordinary functions of government were
impossible to it. The situation was made still worse by the Italian constitutional indifference
to questions of common morality. As the government of the church lies in the hands of the Italian
clergy, it will be forever impossible for a government organized on the principles of the Papal
temporal power to be other than that which has been suppressed by Italy. To the majority of
the higher Italian ecclesiastics, the church has become merely a political instrument, into
the management of which the spiritual interests of the people do not enter, and the efforts
of the Catholics of other countries to bring about a reform will never succeed while the power
is in the hands of the Italian clergy, which it will be as long as the Papacy is an Italian
institution; and as the Pope is Pope merely because he is the Bishop of Rome, it is difficult
to see how the situation can be made different.

Pius IX. was personally a most sincere and devout, though worldly, man, and it is difficult
to believe that any other than a devotee could now be elected to the Holy See, for even the
most corrupt civil or ecclesiastical intellect must see the importance of a reputation for
sanctity in the Pontiff, while, as the influence of the Papacy is no longer of vital importance
to the government of any country in the world (though doubtless of considerable utility to
several), there is little political importance in the personality of the Pontiff, and slight
motive for foreign governments to exercise influence on the election. If removed from Italy
and established in a seat surrounded by a population like that of the masses in France (out
of Paris and the large cities), amenable to purely spiritual influences, the church would revert
to its normal functions and abandon politics,--a result never to be hoped for while it remains
Italian. I have no sympathy with its creed, or any other of the creeds, for I conceive no healthy
conformity of belief possible to men and women differing in intellectual and spiritual capacities;
but I have seen good work done by the Catholic church in many quarters, and I have many and
admirable Catholic friends, and, to be frank, I do not believe that the creed makes much difference
in the religion.

As to Pius IX., I am convinced that he was not only a devout man, but an excellent and admirable
man, as men go, a genuine believer in the divine direction of his pontificate, and incapacitated
for civil government simply because no one could carry on a civil government on ecclesiastical
principles. He loved his people, and, personally and generally, was beloved by them; but the
progress of liberalism and democracy had driven out of the Papal States, or into a mute and
inflexible opposition, all the most active and potent intellects amongst them, and the clergy
without them could not administer the government; so that, wishing to do good to his subjects,
he could not improve their political condition without inviting those elements of liberalism
which he considered the inexorable enemies of the church, which was to him the highest interest
of humanity, He reposed his faith on the abilities of clerics who knew nothing of human nature
or practical politics, but comprehended only a paternal control, absolute, and to be enforced
by the rod, actual or figurative; or on those of civilian devotees and fanatics less intelligent
even than the clerical functionaries.

As I was, for the greater part of my term, in charge of the legation interests and duties,
I saw Pius IX. often and liked him much. One day when I was having an audience in his little
room, the windows of which looked west, there came up a great thunder storm, with frequent
flashes of lightning, at each of which he crossed himself and devoutly said a prayer. His conversation
convinced me that he felt profoundly convinced of his divinely appointed function as the vicegerent
of God on earth, and his sincerity inspired me with great respect for the man; but, naturally,
with little for his intellect. His bonhomie was remarkable, and he had a keen sense of humor,
which led him to make sarcastic, and often telling remarks, on men and things, in which he
was sometimes the reverse of diplomatic. He had, for my advantage, many jibes at our past ministers,
of some of whom he had diverting memories, and especially of Major Cass,--of whom he always
spoke as "quel Cass," who had curious habits of night wandering and adventure seeking, or,
as Pius put it, "could not be quiet of nights." Either he or his predecessor, I forget which,
had insisted on putting his horse through a ride round the parapet of the Pincian balustrade,
where a slip or a yielding stone meant death to the rider, which might have been of no importance,
but to the horse also, which would have been a pity. And the old man liked a sly thrust at
any of us who had made a blunder.

While thus in charge of the diplomatic relations of my government without its recognition,
the Department sent out a chaplain, an ex-chaplain of the House of Representatives, who, having
served his time in that capacity, was entitled to a vacation in Europe, and came with recommendations
to me. Protestant worship was forbidden within the walls of Rome, but to induce the English
Protestants to come to Rome and spend their money there, they were allowed to worship in a
sort of warehouse outside the Porta del Popolo. This was repugnant to our democratic ways,
and the new chaplain insisted on having his chapel inside the walls. So I "put on cheek" and
hired in the name of the legation an apartment with a huge reception room close to the Piazza
di Spagna, put up the arms of the United States of America, and opened the reception room for
public worship as the chapel of the legation,--the first instance in recorded time of Protestant
worship in the Papal city. The sequel was amusing, for as Sunday was my only holiday, and I
always spent it on the Campagna, the chaplain cut me dead for not attending his services and
keeping Sunday.

I expected some admonitory allusion to this achievement when next I saw the Pope, but no notice
was ever taken of it either by the superior or the lower authorities, and so far as I know
the church of my planting flourished as long as the city remained under the Papal rule, but
with no more of my watering. The Pope was, I am persuaded, quite indifferent to it, for, devout
and unquestioning believer in his own divine authority as he was, he was not a bigot, and not
of a persecuting disposition, but he was only a part of an immense and intricate machine, over
the movements of which neither he nor any other Pope could have much control. He had every
possible disposition to be that ideal ruler, a benevolent despot, but even in that little realm
the details of government were impossible of control by the most competent head of a government;
they were necessarily left to the incompetent, bigoted, and zealous administrators chosen by
the secondary chiefs of the departments, all the most conservative of men, with a reverence
for the abuses and usages of the old régime. It was personal government down to the lowest
grade of responsibility. The Pope presided and bore the responsibility of the proceedings,
but Antonelli was the real ruler of the States of the Church.

And Antonelli was the very impersonation of unscrupulous and malignant intellect, subtle with
all the Italian subtlety, and unscrupulous as any of the brigands from the community in which
he had his origin. He was in those days a cardinal of the order of deacons, and only in his
later career a priest, which fact is sometimes made the excuse for his frank and notorious
disregard of the rule of chastity, nor did he seem to be concerned that his amours were the
common gossip of Rome. I was one day in his anteroom waiting for an audience when a lady came
to visit him, and when she was announced he flew to receive her with the ardor of a boy in
love, and with such open and passionate expressions of affection as could be seen only in a
southern nature. But he had none of the slowness of action or decision which we attribute sometimes
to the languor of tropical natures. In business, as in love, he lost no time, and never was
at a loss for his expedient, but came at once to a decision, and gave it on the spot. When
the cruise of the Alabama gave rise to diplomatic correspondence, and our government protested
against her receiving such treatment from neutrals as would facilitate her career, I was, amongst
my colleagues under similar obligations, charged to protest against her being admitted to the
privileges of a national man-of-war in the port of Civita Vecchia. Antonelli replied to my
communication of the protest that she would be admitted to the port with the same privileges
as a man-of-war of any other nation, and the reply was given with almost explosive promptness
and vivacity. But until a request for relaxation of the passport regulations in favor of Southerners
was made by some one professing to speak on behalf of our own government, which was in my second
year, he never permitted the least bending of them, and only in important cases, where strong
personal influence was brought to bear, issued passports of the Foreign Office for Southern
Americans to leave the city.

Antonelli had a face which gave one an idea of the expression "beauté du Diable," for a more
perfect type of Satanic intelligence and malignity than it showed at times I cannot conceive.
If I had been a figure painter, I should certainly have painted him as Mephistopheles, as he
appeared in the audience room in his close-fitting purple costume with scarlet trimmings, his
long coat-tails flying behind him when he moved like the fringe of a flame. He was the most
curious contrast to the Pope, with his humorous and kindly manner, that it is possible to conceive,
for the Cardinal was nothing if not sardonic and serious. The very slightest trace of humor
would have transformed him completely.

Unique as was the government, so was the position of a consul. It had something of the exterritoriality
of the same position in the Turkish empire. The arms of my government over my door were a protection
against legal process, and I imagine that my predecessor had so employed it, for when I had
my first clothes made the tailor refused to send them to the consulate till they were paid
for. I had a right to carry arms and shoot anywhere in the territory of the Pope, and I had
an absolute control over the passports, i.e. over the movements of my fellow citizens, for
no one who had come to Rome with the passport of the United States of America could leave it
without my visa, and I could sequestrate the passport whenever I saw fit. But on the part of
my own government the consideration afforded was the minimum of its kind. I had no salary,
and my compensation was in fees, viz. those on passports and the few invoices of goods sent
to America, with such notarial business as might arise. The late consul had resigned, and gone
home to fight for the Confederate cause, leaving the consulate in the hands of a French secretary,
an old and needy teacher of his native language whenever he could find a pupil. He was satisfied
with the pittance my own means allowed me to give him, and he wrote, in a much better French
than mine would have been, the dispatches to the Vatican. I could talk French fluently if not
correctly, and that sufficed. Before leaving Washington, I had received a hint from a friend
in the Department of State that the fewer dispatches I troubled them with the higher would
be my favor in the department, so that, with the exception of my quarterly accounts, I had
little official writing to do; but when I came to Rome again in 1882, I was told by my successor
of that date that my file of dispatches to the department was the only one which existed in
the consular archives of the Papal occupation of Rome.

Rome was in those days the Lotophagitis of our century, whose population lived in an artificial
peace, a sort of dreamland--artists who, whether German, French, English, Americans, or Russians,
were more or less imbued with the feeling of the old art, and who found their clientéle in
people who believed, as I have heard some say, that any picture painted in Rome was better
than any picture painted elsewhere! There was, therefore, a continual exportation of copies,
good and bad, of the old masters and a few landscapes for the remembering of localities, but
the quality of the art was of trifling importance to the buyers--it was "done in Rome," and
that sufficed as merit. The Café Greco, haunt of the race of artists since Salvator Rosa, was
in its original and charming, if rude, simplicity, and there came all the artists to take their
after-dinner cup. Old John Gibson, though not the oldest of the habitués, was the chief of
our Anglo-American community; Randolph Rogers, Mosier, Reinhart, Story, and two or three other
sculptors, whose names I have forgotten, and two or three American landscape painters, of whom
Tilton was chief at the time of my arrival, had the monopoly of American patronage, and every
wealthy American who came conceived it his duty to patronize American art, while our government
had the tradition of always sending an artist to Rome as consul.

Charlotte Cushman, a famous actress of her day, was the nucleus of a little clique of women
sculptors, Miss Stebbins, Harriet Hosmer, and one or two others of lesser fame. Accordingly,
she made war on sculptors of the other sex in all the curious ways of womanly malice, in order
to the exclusive reaping by her protégées of the golden harvest. I had known her years before,
when she was still on the stage and I the dramatic and art critic of the New York "Evening
Post," and, as our relations had then been cordial, it was natural that she should "take me
up" on my arrival. Her hospitality was large--dinners, musical evenings, etc., and she had
a "salon," to all which I was a welcome guest, and the cordiality lasted until she thought
it time to make use of me. She then proposed to me to undertake the demolition of the fictitious
reputations of the leading American sculptors, especially Story, Mosier, and Rogers, and, when
I replied that I had then the intention of returning to the occupation of a landscape painter,
and that in that position, as well as in that of consul and in a manner the protector of all
my countrymen, it would be inconsistent with the position to publish criticisms on my fellow
artists, the thermometer of her regard fell at once, and I had instant evidence that I was
out of her list of friends.

Her coolness was changed to active hostility by another case of conflicting interests. The
recognition of passports issued before the rebellion having been interdicted by the government,
the consuls received an order to cancel all such as had been issued prior to the order, and
to issue new ones only on the oath of allegiance being taken by the recipient. There was also
a charge of five dollars for the passport, which was to be renewed after a year. Charlotte
was, amongst her other qualities, avaricious, and though wealthy and ostentatious she rebelled
at expenditure which did not show, and when it came time for her to leave Rome for the summer,
and her passport came for visa, I stopped it and notified her to take out a new one. She refused,
and confiding in the friendly personal relations which had existed between her and Seward,
she wrote to the department protesting against my action and making formal complaint of my
discourtesy. Seward replied that I was obeying my orders and that the passport must be taken
and paid for. From that day war was open and malignant. Of course I was interdicted from responding
in any way to her attacks, but I found them of no great importance; though when I was sent
to Crete, four years later, she had influence enough to get her nephew appointed consul in
succession.

In the years when Miss Cushman was on the stage I had understood her pretty well, and, though
she had done what was possible to give me a good impression of her, I do not think I was ever
much persuaded of her goodness or surprised at the enmity she showed when I came into collision
with her interests. I think she possessed an utterly selfish nature, was not at all scrupulous
in the attainment of her purposes, and was, in effect, that most dangerous member of society,
a strong-willed and large-brained woman without a vestige of principle. She had a diabolical
magnetism which in her best part, Meg Merrilies, had a sensuous attraction I have never known
so powerful in another woman. Her Queen Katherine was a failure, and she could not play the
part of a refined woman, but into that of Meg Merrilies, an adaptation of her own of Sir Walter
Scott's novel, she put her whole nature--it was her very self as far as she would let herself
be seen.

When I had a studio in New York I had as next-door neighbor an artist who was scene painter
to the company in which Charlotte used to play at the old Park Theatre, and the stories he
told me of her in that connection were terrible. My friend had never dared to speak of her
openly, and only did so to me with a caution that if what he told me got to Miss Cushman's
ears she was quite capable of silencing him in the most effective manner. I am of opinion that
he judged her correctly, for she must have been a tiger when her passions were aroused, capable
of anything, and I was careful never to give her more serious cause of offense than the doing
of my official duty. Over those whom she chose to fascinate, she had an extraordinary power,
and I have known young women who were so completely under her control as to be unable to escape
from it when they found out her real nature except by flight.

If she had been beautiful she might have set the social world topsy-turvy. I think she was
the cleverest woman I ever knew. Her tact was extraordinary, and she never failed to impress
the visitors to Rome with her sincerity and benevolence, though she really possessed neither
of those qualities. She was an immense illustration of a maxim of Dante Rossetti to the effect
that artists had nothing to do with morality. She was always on the stage--in the most familiar
act and in the presence of strangers she never lost sight of the footlights, and the best acting
I ever saw her in was in private and in the representation of some comedy or tragedy of her
own interests. She played with a marvelous power one part, and all others were but variations
of that or failures--it was not art which dominated her, but the simulation of nature, and
that her own, which is not the same thing as art, as we all ought to know.

Between herself and the sculptor Rogers, who was, in his way, as clever as she, there was an
implacable war, veiled by the ordinary forms of civility, which both were careful never to
break over. Miss Cushman had begun her career as a singer, but, her voice failing, she had
to be content to remain on the stage of the theatre; but she always retained a certain dramatic
quality of voice, and, within a very limited register, she sang with great power and pathos.
Two of her favorite songs were Kingsley's "The Sands of Dee" and the "Three Fishermen," which,
as she sang them, rarely failed to affect those who heard them for the first time to tears.
Rogers was an admirable mimic and sang those songs with such a close rendering of the voice
and manner (for Miss Cushman's voice was rather that of a man than one belonging to her own
sex), with just a touch of burlesque, that he brought out roars of laughter; and when the two
cordial enemies met in society somebody was sure to ask Rogers to sing "The Sands of Dee,"
which he did with good will, and Miss Cushman was obliged, to her intense anger, to applaud
the caricature of her best performance. It was cruel, but he was merciless, and spared no exaggeration
of her voice, her dramatic manner, and a way she had of sprawling over the piano, producing
an ensemble which made it impossible to hear her again in the same songs without a disposition
to laugh.

An incident occurred at this time which made Miss Cushman's position in regard to the quarrel
with the consulate still more difficult. It was not long after the advent of the famous horse-tamer
John S. Rarey, of whom she had been a pupil in America when he first came out. A person professing
to be Rarey was touring Europe and teaching his manner of breaking horses, beginning at Copenhagen
and following the seashore to Naples, whence he came to Rome and was received with great enthusiasm
by Miss Cushman, for at that time, and while the war was in its critical stage, American lions
were very rare in Rome. The horse-tamer was, on her authority, made the guest of the American
community, breakfasted, dined, and fêted, and a large subscription was made for a class in
horse-breaking. At this juncture I heard of a performance of the soi-disant Rarey at Naples,
in which he had nearly killed a beautiful young mare, and, knowing that the system of Rarey
did not include cruelty, I began to doubt the identity of the tamer. I called for the passport
with which he had come, and which was, as usual, deposited at the police office, and discovered
that it was issued by a "vice-consul pro tempore" at Dresden, an officer not recognized by
our regulations, bad and loose as they were, and a man whose name, moreover, was not on the
consular list, though the passport was on a regular form. I at once wrote to the police, requesting
them to cause the said John S. Rarey to prove his identity.

The summons to the police office brought him to the consulate the next morning before I was
out of bed (the office and my bedroom constituted the headquarters of the government of the
United States of America at Rome), with a petition to me to request the police to delay the
examination until the next day, as he had two friends who would identify him, but who were
that day (it was Sunday) at Tivoli for the day. As an escape was impossible, and he was in
a nervous trepidation which, it was clear to see, was awful funk, I wrote the note desired;
and, before the day was out, he had gone to my English colleague, the amiable Severn, and confessed
that he was an impostor, a Canadian, and asked for English protection. Severn replied that
without my consent he could do nothing for him; he had come with an American passport and must
abide by it, unless I gave him up. He was wilted, in such a fright as I never saw a man in
before or since, and he had good reason, for the penalty of coming to Rome with a false passport
was imprisonment in St. Angelo. Meanwhile Miss Cushman had gone into heroics over the insult
I was offering so distinguished a man as to suspect his identity, and all her clique were united
in abusing me; but on Monday the impostor slipped out of Rome by the connivance of Severn,
the police, and myself, after I had attached the amount of the subscriptions for his class,
which were still lying at the bankers', and pledged him to abstain in future from any similar
impersonation. As Miss Cushman had stood sponsor for him, she having been a pupil of the real
Rarey, his confession was a mortification which she visited on my head, but as it disarmed
her I was tranquil over the consequences.

I was continually at war with the Confederate Americans, galled to extreme bitterness by the
right I had of compelling them to take the oath of allegiance before renewing their passports.
Amongst them was a very beautiful woman, a Virginian, and the wife of a commodore in the navy
of the United States of America, then on service in the Potomac. She refused to take the oath,
and insulted me in the grossest manner and in public, as an insulter of ladies, etc., etc.
But all the influence she could bring to bear could not get her passport from the police without
my visa; and at last, despairing of escape from Rome, she came to make her peace, meeting me
at the bank, but unwilling to accept the degradation of coming to the consulate. "You are not
going to make me come to your dirty little consulate, are you?" she said; to which I replied,
"Oh, no; my secretary shall administer the oath to you in your bedroom, if you choose;" but,
in the end, she had to take the oath and sign it, as did many of her compatriots. Amongst the
Southerners who came under my administration was the wife of General Winfield Scott, commander-in-chief
of our army, who actually died under my care, without a friend or relative near her.

This social warfare, the consequence of my official position, had the effect of giving me occupation
and excitement, and I was sustained cordially by the loyal Americans in Rome, so that the position,
though unremunerative, was rather pleasant than otherwise. In the course of the summer after
my arrival, ex-Governor Randall of Wisconsin came as minister, his appointment being intended
to "keep the place warm" for General Rufus King, a personal friend of Seward, to whom the place
was promised whenever he should be tired of fighting, or qualified by glory for future political
contests. Randall was a mere party hack; he knew nothing of diplomacy or good manners, or of
any language but Western American. I took for him the house on the Pincian now known as the
House of the Four Winds, a magnificent situation for the summer. He saw the sights, generally
in a carriage, with a paper of fruit on the front seat and me as cicerone; was presented at
the Vatican, presented me as chargé d'affaires, and, having his leave of absence in his pocket,
departed for a tour of Europe, bequeathing to me the honor of paying his bills, rent, etc.,
down to the washing bill, to be settled on his return, and never appeared again. I was left
to pay out of my empty pocket; and I never heard from him, though, a long time after, I succeeded
in recovering from the Treasury the amount of those bills I had paid for Randall for which
I could show vouchers; those for which I had none I had to put to account of profit and loss,
which was, as long as I was in Rome, largely to the loss account, drafts on my brother making
up the deficiency. I was also, until it suspended publication, Roman correspondent of John
Bright's paper, which I think was called the "Star."

After an interregnum of some months came another bed-warmer for General King, this one a New
York politician, also a friend of Seward's, an ancient politician, who had recently married
a young wife desirous of a stay in some European capital, and, if possible, at the expense
of the government. These at least were gentlefolk, and paid their bills without doing anything
to scandalize the Romans. They spent the winter and went home, and finally came General King.

Finding that my fees and sales of pictures (for I had taken up my painting again and had sold
a few small pictures) amounted to about six hundred dollars a year, and were slowly increasing,
I decided to go home and bring my wife and child out. I had been absent more than a year, and
several months after being in Rome had the news of the birth of a son. It was near being my
death, for, on the evening of receiving the news, I had gone to make a call on an English lady
who lived in the Villa Negroni, where the railway station now is, and close by the prison where
all the political offenders were kept, and which was guarded by French soldiers. I was in a
vein of profound meditation on the news I had just received, and absorbed to that extent that
I kept on my course along the sidewalk in front of the prison, walking towards the sentry,
and did not hear his challenge till it had been repeated three times, when I heard his rifle
rattle as it came down to the take aim, and suddenly became conscious that I had heard a sound,
the meaning of which must be "Qui vive?" I sung out lustily, "Ami" and was told that if I was
a friend the other side of the road was my place.

I had discovered that the consular agent left by my predecessor at Civita Vecchia was engaged
in a system of espionage on behalf of the Papal authorities, and had been issuing American
passports to spies whom they were employing in Italian territory, and I at once dismissed him
and informed the Italian government through Mr. Marsh, our minister to Italy, and received
a letter of thanks from that government. From Washington a new consular agent was sent, and,
putting him in charge of the consulate, I started for home, going by way of Turin, to see Mr.
Marsh, and by diligence over Mont Cenis. Subsequent events brought me much in contact with
that admirable diplomat and scholar, at that time the one bright feature of our diplomatic
service on the Continent. Our government received great credit for sending such a man abroad
to represent us, but the chance of it was in the fact that he was closely related to Senator
Edmunds of Vermont, whose influence with the administration was sufficient to secure any single
nomination he insisted on, and who did insist on the maintenance of Marsh in the diplomatic
service. As Marsh had been conspicuous in the advocacy of the Italian cause during the unitary
movement, he was designated by the circumstances for the American legation to Italy, in which
he honored his appointment as few of our representatives at that epoch had done.

In fact, with the exception of Adams, at London, and Marsh, at Turin, we had hardly a representative
abroad, either consular or diplomatic, who was a credit to the country. As the war continued,
the importance of being respected in Europe became more evident, and a change took place; but
the few men of respectable standing who were in foreign countries representing the United States
of America were appointed on account of political pressure, and not on their merits. My colleague
at Venice, Howells, one of Mr. Lincoln's most fortunate appointments, owed his position, not
to his literary abilities, which were then unknown to the country at large, but to his having
written a campaign life of Lincoln, a service which was always considered by the successful
candidate as entitling the biographer to some appointment. A term of consular service was and
is still considered the reward for campaign services, personal or vicarious, and at the next
change of administration the consul was superseded by another, equally crude, and with all
to learn in his business.

What the character of the Americans as well as of the government, as such, has suffered of
derogation abroad from this political huckstering with public offices, no one can know who
was not much abroad in the years preceding our war. Marsh was honored and beloved at Rome by
both King and people, as was Adams by the Court of St. James, but the dead weight which the
standing disrepute of our diplomacy imposed on both those distinguished men can hardly now
be estimated. My predecessors at Rome, and the ministers before my time, had left a bad odor
behind them. One of them was notorious for his devotion to a form of dissipation much and scandalously
known at Naples during the reign of the Bourbons as a springtime sport, and which has since
been the occasion of a noted crusade in England led by Mr. Stead. Of a minister of the United
States of America found drunk in the streets of Berlin by the police, and a chargé d'affaires
who, in an outbreak at Constantinople, hoisted the flag over a brothel he frequented, the memory
is perhaps too old to have reached men born much later than I, but for the twenty years of
my first knowledge of European matters our representation abroad was a disgrace to America.

I landed in New York the day after the battle of Gettysburg, and for the first time in the
history of our trouble I felt assured as to the end, for I perceived that the attempt at invasion
by the Confederacy showed that the government of it felt its affairs to be in a desperate condition,
and the determination on the part of the North was evidently unshaken. From that time I never
felt any anxiety as to the final result. I found my brother at the head of the construction
department of the revenue service, his friend Salmon P. Chase being Secretary of the Treasury.
He was desirous to keep me at home to assist him, with which desire I was ready to conform,
but the opposition of his wife was so bitter that he had to decide against my staying, and,
taking my wife and boy, I returned to Rome. My brother was already attacked by the malady of
which, two years later, he died.

Arriving in Rome, and resuming the direction of the consulate, I found to my dismay that General
King had appointed as secretary of legation a local American banker, a "Copperhead," who had
in the name of the government, but without authority, requested the Roman Ministry of Foreign
Affairs to dispense with the visa on the passports of all American visitors, and Antonelli
was, of course, too glad to be relieved of the embarrassment which had been often caused him
by the regulation, which all the Southerners had asked to be relieved from. Thus I found that
the principal resource of the consulate was gone. As the home government had given the strongest
orders to protest against any such exception being made of American passports, I, of course,
protested, but was informed that the rule had been taken at the request of my own government;
and, though Antonelli knew perfectly that Hooker had no authority to enter into any negotiations
with him on any subject, and that he had no official position, it suited him to accept the
contrary, and my remonstrances to the minister, General King, had no effect. I then laid the
matter before the Department of State at Washington, but, as General King was the close personal
friend of Seward, who was quite indifferent to diplomatic scandals away from England, no attention
was paid to my complaints, and I gave up the consulate to Brown, the consular agent at Civita
Vecchia, to get what he could from it, and devoted myself entirely to painting, by which, with
a little writing, I made enough to live in the simple manner which I was accustomed to.

Released from all obligations to remain at the consulate, I spent the most of my time in sketching
on the Campagna. Of all the landscape I have ever seen, in the Alps, Sicily, Greece, the American
forests and lakes, or semi-tropical Florida, nothing has impressed me as did the Roman Campagna
in its then condition of decay and neglect. The beauty of line of its mountain framework is
still there, and passages here and there are untouched, but the improvements of progress have
intruded in so many points that, as a whole, the solemn and poetic aspect of those days is
irretrievably lost. I used to sit out in the most lonely passages painting into the twilight
until I could no longer distinguish my colors, and then tramp back to Rome at my fastest, to
get in before the gates closed for the night. If it was not the rapture of art, it was the
passion of poetic nature.

As fortune would have it, there was in Rome that winter Mr. George G. Fogg, the minister of
the United States of America at Berne, a personal friend of Lincoln, and chairman of the Young
Men's National Committee, which arranged the convention that nominated him. On Lincoln's election
Fogg was offered his choice of the diplomatic appointments, and selected Berne, the most modest
position he could take. He came to pass the Christmas holidays at Rome, and of course I laid
my case before him. He in turn put it before his late colleagues in the House, and the committee
on foreign affairs made a strong representation at the Department of State; and, when Seward
refused to recall King, or take any measures to correct the injustice done me, they struck
out from the consular and diplomatic appropriation bill the appropriation for the legation
at Rome, which meant the abolition of the legation, and I was a little later transferred to
Crete, a salaried post, where there was supposed to be nothing to do but make my quarterly report.

My commission must have been one of the very last Lincoln signed, for he was assassinated before
it reached me. I was spending the evening at the quarters of one of my best Roman friends,
Mr. John A. King (a cousin of, but not a sympathizer with, the general), when the news came
of the murder of Lincoln and the attempt on Seward, and very vivid still is the recollection
of the horror and grief we all felt. But we also felt that the President's work was done, and
that his fame was set securely in history, beyond the chance of any political blunder to damage
it. Could he ever have devised a better death in view of his future influence and honor? I
learned from one of Lincoln's Illinois friends, whom I later saw in Rome, that the appointment
in Crete was intended by the President as the recognition of the injustice with which Seward
had treated my case. My experience of Seward's way of looking at public appointments and public
interests, when crossed by his personal relations, certainly went to confirm the apprehensions
of Mr. Fogg and his friends that Seward's personal following would stand between him and the
best interests of the state. As Fogg used to put it, "He won't steal, himself, but he don't
care how much his friends steal." But my misfortune brought about the abolition of what had
always been a scandal and a job--the legation of the United States of America to the Pope.