There are, as might be expected, some commonplace pieces in the volume,-- a few failures in
the line of humor.  The Spectre Pig, the Dorchester Giant, the Height of the Ridiculous, and
one or two others might be omitted in the next edition without detriment.  They would do well
enough for an amateur humorist, but are scarcely worthy of one who stands at the head of the
profession.

It was said of James Smith, of the Rejected Addresses, that "if he had not been a witty man,
he would have been a great man."  Hood's humor and drollery kept in the background the pathos
and beauty of his sober productions; and Dr. Holmes, we suspect, might have ranked higher among
a large class of readers than he now does had he never written his Ballad of the Oysterman,
his Comet, and his September Gale.  Such lyrics as La Grisette, the Puritan's Vision, and that
unique compound of humor and pathos, The Last Leaf; show that he possesses the power of touching
the deeper chords of the heart and of calling forth tears as well as smiles.  Who does not
feel the power of this simple picture of the old man in the last-mentioned poem?

Dr. Holmes has been likened to Thomas Hood; but there is little in common between them save
the power of combining fancy and sentiment with grotesque drollery and humor.  Hood, under
all his whims and oddities, conceals the vehement intensity of a reformer.  The iron of the
world's wrongs had entered into his soul; there is an undertone of sorrow in his lyrics; his
sarcasm, directed against oppression and bigotry, at times betrays the earnestness of one whose
own withers have been wrung.  Holmes writes simply for the amusement of himself and his readers;
he deals only with the vanity, the foibles, and the minor faults of mankind, good naturedly
and almost sympathizingly suggesting excuses for the folly which he tosses about on the horns
of his ridicule.  In this respect he differs widely from his fellow-townsman, Russell Lowell,
whose keen wit and scathing sarcasm, in the famous Biglow Papers, and the notes of Parson Wilbur,
strike at the great evils of society and deal with the rank offences of church and state. 
His verse smacks of the old Puritan flavor.  Holmes has a gentler mission.  His careless, genial
humor reminds us of James Smith in his Rejected Addresses and of Horace in London.  Long may
he live to make broader the face of our care- ridden generation, and to realize for himself
the truth of the wise man's declaration that a "merry heart is a continual feast."

                             FAME AND GLORY.

Notice of an Address before the Literary Society of Amherst College, by Charles Sumner.

THE learned and eloquent author of the pamphlet lying before us with the above title belongs
to a class, happily on the increase in our country, who venture to do homage to unpopular truths
in defiance of the social and political tyranny of opinion which has made so many of our statesmen,
orators, and divines the mere playthings and shuttlecocks of popular impulses for evil far
oftener than for good.  His first production, the True Grandeur of Nations, written for the
anniversary of American Independence, was not more remarkable for its evidences of a highly
cultivated taste and wide historical research than for its inculcation of a high morality,--the
demand for practical Christianity in nations as well as individuals.  It burned no incense
under the nostrils of an already inflated and vain people.  It gratified them by no rhetorical
falsehoods about "the land of the free and the home of the brave."  It did not apostrophize
military heroes, nor strut "red wat shod" over the plains of battle, nor call up, like another
Ezekiel, from the valley of vision the dry bones thereof.  It uttered none of the precious
scoundrel cant, so much in vogue after the annexation of Texas was determined upon, about the
destiny of the United States to enter in and possess the lands of all whose destiny it is to
live next us, and to plant everywhere the "peculiar institutions" of a peculiarly Christian
and chosen people, the landstealing propensity of whose progressive republicanism is declared
to be in accordance with the will and by the grace of God, and who, like the Scotch freebooter,--

              "Pattering an Ave Mary
               When he rode on a border forray,"--

while trampling on the rights of a sister republic, and re-creating slavery where that republic
had abolished it, talk piously of "the designs of Providence" and the Anglo-Saxon instrumentalities
thereof in "extending the area of freedom."  On the contrary, the author portrayed the evils
of war and proved its incompatibility with Christianity,-- contrasting with its ghastly triumphs
the mild victories of peace and love.  Our true mission, he taught, was not to act over in
the New World the barbarous game which has desolated the Old; but to offer to the nations of
the earth, warring and discordant, oppressed and oppressing, the beautiful example of a free
and happy people studying the things which make for peace,--Democracy and Christianity walking
hand in hand, blessing and being blessed.

His next public effort, an Address before the Literary Society of his Alma Mater, was in the
same vein.  He improved the occasion of the recent death of four distinguished members of that
fraternity to delineate his beautiful ideal of the jurist, the scholar, the artist, and the
philanthropist, aided by the models furnished by the lives of such men as Pickering, Story,
Allston, and Channing.  Here, also, he makes greatness to consist of goodness: war and slavery
and all their offspring of evil are surveyed in the light of the morality of the New Testament.
He looks hopefully forward to the coming of that day when the sword shall devour no longer,
when labor shall grind no longer in the prison-house, and the peace and freedom of a realized
and acted-out Christianity shall overspread the earth, and the golden age predicted by the
seers and poets alike of Paganism and Christianity shall become a reality.

The Address now before us, with the same general object in view, is more direct and practical.
We can scarcely conceive of a discourse better adapted to prepare the young American, just
issuing from his collegiate retirement, for the duties and responsibilities of citizenship.
It treats the desire of fame and honor as one native to the human heart, felt to a certain
extent by all as a part of our common being,--a motive, although by no means the most exalted,
of human conduct; and the lesson it would inculcate is, that no true and permanent fame can
be founded except in labors which promote the happiness of mankind.  To use the language of
Dr. South, "God is the fountain of honor; the conduit by which He conveys it to the sons of
men are virtuous and generous practices."  The author presents the beautiful examples of St.
Pierre, Milton, Howard, and Clarkson,--men whose fame rests on the firm foundation of goodness,--for
the study and imitation of the young candidate for that true glory which belongs to those who
live, not for themselves, but for their race.  "Neither present fame, nor war, nor power, nor
wealth, nor knowledge alone shall secure an entrance to the true and noble Valhalla.  There
shall be gathered only those who have toiled each in his vocation for the welfare of others."
"Justice and benevolence are higher than knowledge and power It is by His goodness that God
is most truly known; so also is the great man.  When Moses said to the Lord, Show me Thy glory,
the Lord said, I will make all my goodness pass before thee."

We copy the closing paragraph of the Address, the inspiring sentiment of which will find a
response in all generous and hopeful hearts:--

"Let us reverse the very poles of the worship of past ages.  Men have thus far bowed down before
stocks, stones, insects, crocodiles, golden calves,--graven images, often of cunning workmanship,
wrought with Phidian skill, of ivory, of ebony, of marble, but all false gods.  Let them worship
in future the true God, our Father, as He is in heaven and in the beneficent labors of His
children on earth.  Then farewell to the siren song of a worldly ambition!  Farewell to the
vain desire of mere literary success or oratorical display!  Farewell to the distempered longings
for office!  Farewell to the dismal, blood-red phantom of martial renown!  Fame and glory may
then continue, as in times past, the reflection of public opinion; but of an opinion sure and
steadfast, without change or fickleness, enlightened by those two sons of Christian truth,--love
to God and love to man.  From the serene illumination of these duties all the forms of selfishness
shall retreat like evil spirits at the dawn of day.  Then shall the happiness of the poor and
lowly and the education of the ignorant have uncounted friends.  The cause of those who are
in prison shall find fresh voices; the majesty of peace other vindicators; the sufferings of
the slave new and gushing floods of sympathy.  Then, at last, shall the brotherhood of man
stand confessed; ever filling the souls of all with a more generous life; ever prompting to
deeds of beneficence; conquering the heathen prejudices of country, color, and race; guiding
the judgment of the historian; animating the verse of the poet and the eloquence of the orator;
ennobling human thought and conduct; and inspiring those good works by which alone we may attain
to the heights of true glory.  Good works!  Such even now is the heavenly ladder on which angels
are ascending and descending, while weary humanity, on pillows of storfe, slumbers heavily
at its feet."

We know how easy it is to sneer at such anticipations of a better future as baseless and visionary.
The shrewd but narrow-eyed man of the world laughs at the suggestion that there car: be any
stronger motive than selfishness, any higher morality than that of the broker's board.  The
man who relies for salvation from the consequences of an evil and selfish life upon the verbal
orthodoxy of a creed presents the depravity and weakness of human nature as insuperable obstacles
in the way of the general amelioration of the condition of a world lying in wickedness.  He
counts it heretical and dangerous to act upon the supposition that the same human nature which,
in his own case and that of his associates, can confront all perils, overcome all obstacles,
and outstrip the whirlwind in the pursuit of gain,--which makes the strong elements its servants,
taming and subjugating the very lightnings of heaven to work out its own purposes of self-aggrandizement,--must
necessarily, and by an ordination of Providence, become weak as water, when engaged in works
of love and goodwill, looking for the coming of a better day for humanity, with faith in the
promises of the Gospel, and relying upon Him, who, in calling man to the great task-field of
duty, has not mocked him with the mournful necessity of laboring in vain.  We have been pained
more than words can express to see young, generous hearts, yearning with strong desires to
consecrate themselves to the cause of their fellow-men, checked and chilled by the ridicule
of worldly-wise conservatism, and the solemn rebukes of practical infidelity in the guise of
a piety which professes to love the unseen Father, while disregarding the claims of His visible
children.  Visionary!  Were not the good St.  Pierre, and Fenelon, and Howard, and Clarkson
visionaries also?

What was John Woolman, to the wise and prudent of his day, but an amiable enthusiast?  What,
to those of our own, is such an angel of mercy as Dorothea Dix?  Who will not, in view of the
labors of such philanthropists, adopt the language of Jonathan Edwards: "If these things be
enthusiasms and the fruits of a distempered brain, let my brain be evermore possessed with
this happy distemper"?

It must, however, be confessed that there is a cant of philanthropy too general and abstract
for any practical purpose,--a morbid sentimentalism,--which contents itself with whining over
real or imaginary present evil, and predicting a better state somewhere in the future, but
really doing nothing to remove the one or hasten the coming of the other.  To its view the
present condition of things is all wrong; no green hillock or twig rises over the waste deluge;
the heaven above is utterly dark and starless: yet, somehow, out of this darkness which may
be felt, the light is to burst forth miraculously; wrong, sin, pain, and sorrow are to be banished
from the renovated world, and earth become a vast epicurean garden or Mahometan heaven.

               "The land, unploughed, shall yield her crop;
               Pure honey from the oak shall drop;
               The fountain shall run milk;
               The thistle shall the lily bear;
               And every bramble roses wear,
               And every worm make silk."

                    [Ben Jenson's Golden Age Restored.]

There are, in short, perfectionist reformers as well as religionists, who wait to see the salvation
which it is the task of humanity itself to work out, and who look down from a region of ineffable
self-complacence on their dusty and toiling brethren who are resolutely doing whatsoever their
hands find to do for the removal of the evils around them.

The emblem of practical Christianity is the Samaritan stooping over the wounded Jew.  No fastidious
hand can lift from the dust fallen humanity and bind up its unsightly gashes.  Sentimental
lamentation over evil and suffering may be indulged in until it becomes a sort of melancholy
luxury, like the "weeping for Thammuz" by the apostate daughters of Jerusalem.  Our faith in
a better day for the race is strong; but we feel quite sure it will come in spite of such abstract
reformers, and not by reason of them.  The evils which possess humanity are of a kind which
go not out by their delicate appliances.

The author of the Address under consideration is not of this class.  He has boldly, and at
no small cost, grappled with the great social and political wrong of our country,--chattel
slavery.  Looking, as we have seen, hopefully to the future, he is nevertheless one of those
who can respond to the words of a true poet and true man:--

              "He is a coward who would borrow
               A charm against the present sorrow
               From the vague future's promise of delight
               As life's alarums nearer roll,
               The ancestral buckler calls,
               Self-clanging, from the walls
               In the high temple of the soul!"

                         [James Russell Lowell.]

                               FANATICISM.

THERE are occasionally deeds committed almost too horrible and revolting for publication. 
The tongue falters in giving them utterance; the pen trembles that records them.  Such is the
ghastly horror of a late tragedy in Edgecomb, in the State of Maine.  A respectable and thriving
citizen and his wife had been for some years very unprofitably engaged in brooding over the
mysteries of the Apocalypse, and in speculations upon the personal coming of Christ and the
temporal reign of the saints on earth,--a sort of Mahometan paradise, which has as little warrant
in Scripture as in reason.  Their minds of necessity became unsettled; they meditated self-destruction;
and, as it appears by a paper left behind in the handwriting of both, came to an agreement
that the husband should first kill his wife and their four children, and then put an end to
his own existence.  This was literally executed,--the miserable man striking off the heads
of his wife and children with his axe, and then cutting his own throat.

Alas for man when he turns from the light of reason and from the simple and clearly defined
duties of the present life, and undertakes to pry into the mysteries of the future, bewildering
himself with uncertain and vague prophecies, Oriental imagery, and obscure Hebrew texts!  Simple,
cheerful faith in God as our great and good Father, and love of His children as our brethren,
acted out in all relations and duties, is certainly best for this world, and we believe also
the best preparation for that to come.  Once possessed by the falsity that God's design is
that man should be wretched and gloomy here in order to obtain rest and happiness hereafter;
that the mental agonies and bodily tortures of His creatures are pleasant to Him; that, after
bestowing upon us reason for our guidance, He makes it of no avail by interposing contradictory
revelations and arbitrary commands,--there is nothing to prevent one of a melancholic and excitable
temperament from excesses so horrible as almost to justify the old belief in demoniac obsession.

Charles Brockden Brown, a writer whose merits have not yet been sufficiently acknowledged,
has given a powerful and philosophical analysis of this morbid state of mind--this diseased
conscientiousness, obeying the mad suggestions of a disordered brain as the injunctions of
Divinity--in his remarkable story of Wieland.  The hero of this strange and solemn romance,
inheriting a melancholy and superstitious mental constitution, becomes in middle age the victim
of a deep, and tranquil because deep, fanaticism.  A demon in human form, perceiving his state
of mind, wantonly experiments upon it, deepening and intensifying it by a fearful series of
illusions of sight and sound.  Tricks of jugglery and ventriloquism seem to his feverish fancies
miracles and omens--the eye and the voice of the Almighty piercing the atmosphere of supernatural
mystery in which he has long dwelt.  He believes that he is called upon to sacrifice the beloved
wife of his bosom as a testimony of the entire subjugation of his carnal reason and earthly
affections to the Divine will.  In the entire range of English literature there is no more
thrilling passage than that which describes the execution of this baleful suggestion.  The
coloring of the picture is an intermingling of the lights of heaven and hell,--soft shades
of tenderest pity and warm tints of unextinguishable love contrasting with the terrible outlines
of an insane and cruel purpose, traced with the blood of murder.  The masters of the old Greek
tragedy have scarcely exceeded the sublime horror of this scene from the American novelist.
The murderer confronted with his gentle and loving victim in her chamber; her anxious solicitude
for his health and quiet; her affectionate caress of welcome; his own relentings and natural
shrinking from his dreadful purpose; and the terrible strength which he supposes is lent him
of Heaven, by which he puts down the promptings and yearnings of his human heart, and is enabled
to execute the mandate of an inexorable Being,--are described with an intensity which almost
stops the heart of the reader.  When the deed is done a frightful conflict of passions takes
place, which can only be told in the words of the author:--

"I lifted the corpse in my arms and laid it on the bed.  I gazed upon it with delight.  Such
was my elation that I even broke out into laughter. I clapped my hands, and exclaimed, 'It
is done!  My sacred duty is fulfilled!  To that I have sacrificed, O God, Thy last and best
gift, my wife!'

