One exception must be made to the statement that no attention is paid to mouth-pharynx resonance.
This is found in an interpretation of the empirical precept, "Sing with open throat." Several
vocal theorists take this precept literally, and hold that it describes a function of mouth-pharynx
resonance. According to their idea the cavity must be expanded to the largest size possible,
on the theory that a large resonance cavity secures a proportionately greater reinforcement
of the tone. "The greater the size of the pharynx, whether through practice or natural gifts,
the stronger in proportion is the tone." Still this idea,--a literal interpretation of the
"open throat" precept,--receives much attention in practical instruction.

Only one muscular action has ever been defined by which the throat might be "opened." That
is, the lowering of the larynx and the raising of the soft palate. Many teachers therefore
direct that the throat be "opened" gradually in this way for the swelling of the tone. It is
assumed that the power of the voice is developed by singing with the larynx low in the throat.
This manner of instruction is, however, very loosely given. En route, he waited on the Countess of Northumberland
at Leconfield, and was graciously rewarded with a gold ring and twenty
shillings.

These "visitations" seem to have been characterized by feasting and
merriment and some undesirable mummery. Vocal teachers are in fair accord in believing the resonance
of the air in the chest to be the most important influence in imparting power and "color" to
the voice, and particularly to the lower notes of its compass. Students of singing are in almost
all cases urged to acquire a proper command of chest resonance. But when it comes to telling
the student how to learn to govern the chest resonance, the teacher has practically nothing
to offer. No direct means has ever been found for causing the air in the thorax to vibrate;
this cannot be effected, so far as has yet been determined, by any voluntary muscular action
on the part of the singer.

This being the case, intelligible instruction in the use and management of chest resonance
is hardly to be expected. Teachers of singing are obliged to fall back on purely empirical
instruction on this topic. This usually takes the form of a description of the sensations experienced
by the singer when producing tones in the chest voice. How this description of the singer's
sensations is applied, is discussed in the following chapter.

Nasal Resonance

The lack of connection between the theories of vocal scientists and the practical methods of
singing teachers is well illustrated in the subject of nasal resonance. A striking feature
of all the discussions concerning the use or avoidance of nasal resonance is the fact that
vocal theorists base their opinions entirely on empirical observations. The use of nasal resonance
is condemned by almost every prominent authority on Vocal Science. Yet the only reason ever
advanced for condemning nasal resonance is the fact that a tone of objectionable nasal quality
seems to "come through the nose." This fact cannot, of course, be questioned. It is mentioned
by Tosi, who speaks of the "defect of singing through the nose," and is observed by everybody
possessed of an ear keen enough to detect the nasal quality of sound.

It is generally stated by vocal theorists that the nasal quality is imparted to the tone by
the influence of the resonance of the air in the nasal cavities. In order to prove this assertion
Browne and Behnke offer the following experiment, (quoted in substance): "Hold a hand-mirror
flat, face up, just below the nostrils. Then sing a nasal tone; you will note that the mirror
is clouded, showing that part of the breath has passed through the nasal cavities. Now sing
another tone, free from the fault of nasal quality; this time the mirror is not clouded, which
proves that no air has passed through the cavities in question." (Voice, Song and Speech.)
This experiment is simplified by other authorities, who direct that the nostrils be pinched
by the fingers, and then allowed to open by the removal of the pressure of the fingers. A steady
tone is meanwhile to be sung. It will be noted, according to these theorists, that with the
nostrils open the tone is nasal, and with the nostrils closed the tone is not nasal. This proves
to their satisfaction that a tone passing in whole or in part through the nasal cavities must
be nasal in quality.

It must be noted here that these experiments are not in any sense convincing. A tone of objectionable
nasal quality can be sung equally well with the nostrils either closed or open, and so can
a tone free from the nasal quality.

In theory, the mechanical prevention of nasal resonance is very simple. It is necessary only
to raise the soft palate in singing, and thus to cut off the expired breath from passing into
the nasal cavities. Most vocal scientists advise that the singer hold the soft palate raised
for every tone.

Practical teachers of singing pay little attention to the theoretical discussions concerning
nasal resonance. The overwhelming majority of teachers are firm believers in nasal resonance,
and make it an important feature of their methods. They believe that this resonance is the
most important factor in giving to the tone its "point," brilliance, and carrying power.

So far as instruction in the use of nasal resonance is concerned, teachers owe but little to
the mechanical doctrines of Vocal Science. No voluntary muscular operation has ever been found,
by which the air in the nasal cavities can be directly thrown into vibration, and so made to
reinforce the tones of the voice. Instruction in the management of nasal resonance is therefore
similar to that in chest resonance. The teacher describes the sensations experienced by a singer
who produces the exact quality of tone desired. Use is also made of special vowels and consonants,
for (supposedly) acquiring command of nasal resonance. A description of this form of instruction
is given in the following chapter.

Sounding-Board Resonance

The acoustic principle of sounding-board resonance, in its application to the voice, is discussed
by several vocal scientists. It is usually treated under two heads: first, the entire body
is looked upon as a sounding board, capable of reinforcing the tones of the voice under certain
conditions. Second, the bones of the chest and of the head are thought to be thrown into vibration,
in sympathy with the vibrations of the air in the chest and nasal cavities respectively.

The importance attached by Howard to the sounding-board resonance of the entire body has already
been noticed. Aside from the teachers of the Howard system, very few masters pay any attention
to this feature of vocal reinforcement. Those who do so have no difficulty in dealing with
the subject. When the singer stands in the position generally considered correct for singing,
the body is said to be in the position most favorable for securing the benefits of this form
of resonance. For this no special rules or exercises are needed.

Very little attention is paid, in practical instruction, to the vibrations of the bones of
the resonance cavities. Each cavity is treated as a whole; the fact is only occasionally mentioned
that the bones inclosing the cavities may vibrate, as well as the inclosed air.

CHAPTER V

EMPIRICAL MATERIALS OF MODERN METHODS

A series of topics included in modern methods is now to be considered, different in scope from
the strictly mechanical features of tone-production so far described. It must be apparent to
the reader that the present understanding of the muscular processes of singing is not sufficient
to furnish a complete method of instruction. This fact is thoroughly appreciated by the teachers
of singing. Almost without exception they seek to supplement the mechanical doctrines by instruction
of an entirely different character. The subjects included in this form of instruction are of
several classes. They comprise the manner of emission of the tone, the traditional precepts
of the old Italian school, the singer's sensations, and the use of certain vowels and consonants
for special purposes.

Emission and Forward Placing

Of all the traditional precepts, the one most frequently cited in theoretical treatises on
the voice is, "Place the tone forward." For this precept it is generally believed that a satisfactory
explanation has been found in the accepted doctrine of tone emission.

The characteristic effect of perfect singing known as the "forward tone" is thoroughly well
known to every lover of singing. In some peculiar way the tone, when perfectly produced, seems
to issue directly from the singer's mouth. When we listen to a poorly trained and faulty singer
the tones seem to be caught somewhere in the singer's throat. We feel instinctively that if
the singer could only lift the voice off the throat, and bring it forward in the mouth, the
tones would be greatly improved in character. It is commonly believed that the old masters
knew some way in which this can be done. Just what means they used for this purpose is not
known. But the accepted scientific interpretation of the "forward tone" precept is held by
vocal theorists to render the subject perfectly clear.

Sir Morell Mackenzie states the correct emission of the tone as one of the three cardinal principles
of the vocal action. "The regulation of the force of the blast which strikes against the vocal
cords, the placing of these in the most favourable position for the effect which it is desired
to produce, and the direction of the vibrating column of air which issues from the larynx are
the three elements of artistic production." (The Hygiene of the Vocal Organs, London, 1886.)
His analysis of the mechanical and acoustic processes involved in emission may be cited as
typical of the views of the great majority of vocal scientists. "It (the column of sound) must
be projected against the roof of the cavity behind the upper front teeth, from which it rebounds
sharply and clearly to the outside." Mme. Seiler expresses the idea somewhat differently, but
the meaning is about the same. "A correct disposition of the tones of the voice consists in
causing the air, brought into vibration by the vocal ligaments, to rebound from immediately
above the front teeth, where it must be concentrated as much as possible, rebounding thence
to form in the mouth continuous vibrations." (The Voice in Singing, Phila., 1886.)

To the vocal theorists this is no doubt thoroughly convincing and satisfactory. But as a topic
of practical instruction in singing this theory of tone emission is utterly valueless. How
can the "column of vocalized breath" be voluntarily directed in its passage through the pharynx
and mouth? No muscular process has ever been located, by which the singer can influence the
course of the expired breath, and direct it to any specific point in the mouth. Even if the
expired breath does, in perfect singing, take the course described, knowledge of this fact
cannot enable the singer to bring this about. The accepted doctrine of tone emission is of
no benefit whatever to the teacher of singing. He knows what the "forward tone" is, that is,
what it sounds like, just as well no doubt as did the old Italian master. But if the latter
knew how to enable his pupils to obtain the "forward" character of tone, the modern teacher
is to that extent not so well off.

In view of the prevailing ignorance of any means for securing the (supposedly) correct emission
of tone, intelligible instruction on this topic is hardly to be expected. But the great majority
of teachers lay great stress on the need of acquiring the correct emission. The best they can
do is to explain the scientific doctrine to their pupils; the students are generally left to
find for themselves some way of applying the explanation. In many cases the master tries to
assist the student by describing the singer's sensations, experienced when producing a "forward"
tone.

Certain vowels and consonants are usually held to be especially favored by a "forward position,"
and exercises on these are very widely used for securing a "forward" tone. These exercises
are described in a later paragraph. It will be noticed however that this use of vowels is not
an application of the theory of "forward emission." The vowel sounds are believed to owe their
"forward position" to resonance, while "emission" is purely a matter of direction or focusing
of the breath-blast. The whole subject of emission and forward placing is in a very unsatisfactory
condition.

The Traditional Precepts in Modern Instruction

So much importance is attached by modern teachers to the traditional precepts of the old school
that this subject calls for somewhat lengthy treatment. Before discussing the manner in which
the precepts are applied in practical instruction, it will be well to review first the interpretations
of the precepts offered by different vocal scientists.

It must be remarked, in the first place, that no single one of the precepts has ever been satisfactorily
explained; that is, no direct means of performing the actions indicated by the precepts has
ever been found. If ever the precepts had a definite meaning, considered as specific directions
for performing certain actions in a special way, that meaning has been lost. Mechanical analysis
has not reduced the precepts to a form in which they are of direct value to the modern teacher.

That the "forward tone" is interpreted as a reference to the emission of the voice was noted
earlier in this chapter. The explanation of the "open throat" precept as a function of mouth-pharynx
resonance has also been mentioned.

"Singing on the breath" is a very perplexing subject for vocal theorists. Many authorities
assert that this precept describes an effect obtained by the "opposed muscular action" breath-control.
(See citation from Shakespeare in Chapter II.) But this explanation is hardly satisfactory;
if the precept had meant no more than breath-control, it would have been forgotten long ago.

The "support of the tone" is mentioned by a large number of theoretical writers on the voice.
These writers generally state, in substance, that "the tone must be supported by the breathing
muscles of the chest, and not by the throat muscles." (See The Technics of Bel Canto, by G.
B. Lamperti, New York, 1905.) But this explanation is hardly to be considered as a scientific
doctrine. Every one knows that a tone has no weight, so in the physical sense it can need no
support. In short, scientific analysis has thrown no more light on this than any other of the
old precepts.

Notwithstanding the modern teacher's complete ignorance of the mechanical operations which
they seem to indicate, the old precepts form a very important feature of instruction in singing.
The great majority of teachers cite these precepts constantly, and frequently direct their
pupils to "open the throat," to "bring the tone forward," etc. Is it to be believed that an
intelligent master would use these directions in any occult or cabalistic sense? Such a statement
is occasionally made by a consistent upholder of the mechanical system of Voice Culture. Paulo
Guetta, for example, in a recent exhaustive work on the subject, ridicules the use of the old
precepts. Says this ardent advocate of mechanical instruction in singing:

"Nowadays alchemy and necromancy awaken nothing but curiosity. How then can one who thinks
and reasons admit that an art can be cultivated and sustained by theories extravagant, fantastic,
enigmatic, explained and condensed in abstruse phrases and sentences, which not only have no
meaning whatever, but even lead one to doubt whether the teacher himself knows what result
it is desired to obtain? Do you wish a little example? Behold!

"'Press the whole voice against the mask.' 'Place the voice in the head.' 'The voice is directed
to the nasal cavities.' 'Place the voice forward.'

"Others, with the most austere gravity, will tell you that your voice is too far back, or that
you send the voice to the lower teeth, and promise in a few days to place the voice forward,
at the upper teeth, or wherever else it should be." (Il Canto nel suo Mecanismo, Milan, 1902.)

This statement is by no means justified. The precepts have a real and definite meaning for
the vocal teacher. Any one familiar with the highest type of artistic singing must have observed
that the singer's "throat seems to be open"; the tones impress the hearer as being in some
way "forward in the singer's mouth," and not at the vocal cords; the voice "seems to be supported"
somewhere; the tones float out freely on the breath. A harsh and badly produced voice seems
to be held in the singer's throat by main force. The critical hearer feels instinctively that
such a singer's voice would be greatly improved if the tones could only be supported in a forward
position in the mouth, and kept from slipping back into the throat. It seems that this would
relieve the throat of the strain of holding the tone; the throat would then be open, and the
voice would float out freely on the breath.

In short, the traditional precepts describe accurately the most striking points of difference
between perfect singing and bad singing, so far as the effect on the listener is concerned.
Modern teachers are thoroughly familiar with the highest standards of the vocal art; they fully
appreciate how well the precepts describe the perfection of singing. Through long continued
listening to voices, the precepts come to have a very real meaning. It is inevitable therefore
that the teacher should try to impart to the pupil this intimate feeling for the voice. True,
this acquaintance with the voice is purely empirical; as has just been remarked, no mechanical
analysis of this empirical knowledge has ever been successfully made. The modern teacher's
apprehension of the meaning of the precepts is only very vaguely connected with a supposed
insight into the mechanical processes of tone-production.

Yet there is nothing vague about the impression made on the teacher in listening to his pupils.
On the contrary, every faulty tone impresses the teacher very keenly and definitely as being
too far back, or as caught in the throat, or as falling back for lack of support, etc. How
could it be expected then, that the teacher should refrain from telling the pupil to correct
the faulty production, in the manner so clearly and directly indicated by the tones?

But this direct application of the precepts is of absolutely no value in instruction, because
of the teacher's ignorance of the mechanical processes supposedly involved. There is after
all some justification for Guetta's criticism of empirical instruction. It is all very well
for the teacher to feel that the pupil's voice is gripped in the throat, and to bid him "open
your throat." The pupil may strive ever so earnestly to open his throat, but he does not know
how, and the teacher is utterly unable to tell him.

All instruction based on the empirical precepts is thus seen to be extremely unsatisfactory.
While the precepts convey a very valuable meaning to the teacher, no way has ever been found
for translating this meaning into rules for the mechanical management of the vocal organs.
Recourse is had, to some extent, to a description of the singer's sensations; exercises on
special vowels and consonants are also much used, for imparting the ideas embodied in the precepts.
Both of these topics are now to be considered.

The Singer's Sensations

The correct use of the voice awakens in the singer a variety of sensations generally held to
be different from those accompanying any incorrect vocal action.

One important fact must first be noted regarding the manner in which the singer's sensations
are described by various authorities. The use of the voice awakens a wide variety of local
sensations, which bear no necessary relation to each other. A singer may, at will, pay entire
attention to any one, or to any particular set, of these sensations, and for the time being
completely ignore all the others.

Physiologically considered, the singer's sensations are of two classes,--first, muscular sensations
strictly speaking; and second, a sense of tingling or vibration, definitely located usually
about the breast bone, and in the front and upper part of the head.

Muscular Sensations of Singing

It is very difficult to analyze and describe exactly the muscular sensations which accompany
any complex action. Swimming, diving, dancing, skating,--each awakens a set of extremely vivid
muscular feelings; yet to describe these sensations so graphically that they could be felt
in imagination by one who had never experienced them actually,--that would be almost impossible.

This peculiar aspect of muscular sensations is particularly true as regards the action of singing.
While every vocal teacher knows exactly how it feels to sing properly, all descriptions of
the singer's muscular sensations are extremely vague. But the vividness of these sensations
keeps them constantly before the teacher's mind, and some application of them, in the present
state of Voice Culture, is almost inevitable.

The basic sensation of correct singing, as generally described, is a feeling of perfect poise
and harmony of the whole body; this is accompanied by a sense of freedom about the throat and
jaw, and firm grasp and control of the expiratory muscles. Attempts are frequently made to
amplify this description, but the results are always very vague. A feeling of "absence of local
effort" at the throat is much spoken of, or "perfect relaxation of the vocal muscles."

A few specially localized muscular sensations are also much discussed. Descriptions of this
class however are often so loosely given as to render a definite statement almost impossible.
Most frequently mentioned are the feeling of "backward pressure in the throat," and of "drinking
in the tone," instead of sending it out. Then again, the "tone must be felt at the upper front
teeth." A feeling as of an "expanded and flexible vocal tube, extending from the base of the
lungs to the lips," is also much talked of. "Feel that you grow bigger as the tone swells"
is about as intelligible as the feeling of "floating jaw."

On the whole, the subject of the singer's muscular sensations is usually rather mystifying
to the student.

Sensations of Tingling or Vibration

Descriptions of sensations of this class are much more coherent than those just considered.
A definite location is given to the feelings, in the chest and in the head.

A feeling of trembling in the upper chest is usually held to indicate that the chest cavity
is working properly as a resonator. This sensation is therefore the chief reliance of most
teachers in "placing" the lower tones, especially for low voices. Sensations in the nasal cavities
and head are utilized for acquiring control of nasal resonance, for placing the upper notes
of the voice, and for "bringing the voice forward." Exercises for control of both cavities,
on special vowels and consonants, combine the two topics, "vowel position" and sensation.

Singing in the Mask

In recent years a method of instruction has been developed in France, which is commonly called
by its advocates "singing in the mask." The basic idea of this method is that the singer must
imagine his face to be covered by a mask, and must "sing into this mask." This idea may seem
rather vague at first; but a few trials will show how easy it is for the singer to persuade
himself that he projects his voice into his face.

This method goes to the extreme in utilizing the sensations of vibration in the nose and forehead.
These sensations are analyzed, localized, and described, down to the most minute detail. While
other topics of instruction are included,--breathing, registers, position of tongue, larynx,
palate, etc., everything else is subordinated to nasal resonance. "Singing in the mask" is
of course a purely empirical method, and little has been attempted in the way of justifying
it on scientific principles.

* * *

All instruction based on the singer's sensations is purely empirical, in the meaning ordinarily
attached to this word in treatises on Vocal Science. Theoretical works on the voice seldom
touch on the subject of sensations, nor do the vocal teachers generally make this subject prominent
when speaking of their methods.[6]

[Note 6: An exception to this statement is seen in the recently published book of Mme. Lilli
Lehmann, Meine Gesangskunst, Berlin, 1902. This famous artist and teacher devotes by far the
greater part of her book to a minute analysis and description of the singer's sensations.]

Sensations occupy a rather peculiar position in modern methods. They are a distinctly subsidiary
element of instruction and are seldom raised to the dignity accorded to the mechanical doctrines
of vocal management. The use of the singer's sensations, as applied in practical instruction,
is almost exclusively interpretive. In the mechanical sense the traditional precepts have no
meaning whatever; this is also true of several of the accepted doctrines of Vocal Science.
For example, the precept "Support the tone," is absolutely meaningless as a principle of mechanical
vocal action. But, when interpreted as referring to a set of sensations experienced by the
singer, this precept takes on a very definite meaning. Nobody knows what the support of the
tone is, but every vocal teacher knows how it feels. In the same way, no means is known for
directly throwing the air in the nasal cavities into vibration. But the sensation in the front
of the head, which indicates, presumably, the proper action of nasal resonance, is familiar
to all teachers. Most of the positive materials of modern methods are thus interpreted in terms
of sensations.

True, the accepted theory of Vocal Science does not directly countenance this interpretation.
The basic principle of modern Voice Culture is the idea of mechanical vocal management. All
instruction is supposed to aim at direct, conscious, and voluntary control of the muscular
operations of singing. Teachers always impart to their pupils this idea of the mechanical control
of the voice. The vocal action is always considered from the mechanical side. Even those expressions
whose mechanical meaning is vague or unscientific are yet used as referring definitely to muscular
actions. The conscious thought of the teacher is always turned to the mechanical idea supposedly
conveyed by scientific doctrine and empirical precept. The translation of this idea into a
description of sensations is almost always the result of a sub-conscious mental process.

It therefore follows that in practical instruction the appeal to sensations is more often indirect
than direct. For example, when a student's tones are caught in the throat, the master says
explicitly,--"Free the tone by opening your throat." The master explains the (supposed) wrong
vocal action, and describes how the tone should be produced. Incidentally, the master may also
tell how and where the tone should be felt.

There is also a great deal of instruction based frankly and directly on the singer's sensations.
Instruction of this type usually takes the form of special exercises on certain vowels and
consonants, which are believed to be peculiarly suited for imparting command of particular
features of the correct vocal action. The topics generally covered are chest resonance, nasal
resonance, open throat, and forward placing of the tone. This form of instruction is held to
be referable in some way to scientific principles. The laws of vowel and consonant formation
formulated by Helmholtz are often cited in proof of the efficacy of exercises of this type.
There is also much discussion of the "location" of the tone. But there is little justification
for the statement that instruction based on the singer's sensations is scientific in character.
A misconception of acoustic principles is evidenced by most of the statements made concerning
the use of special vowels and consonants in securing the correct vocal action. The exercises
which aim to utilize the singer's sensations in producing particular vowels and consonants
are now to be described.

Exercises on Special Vowels and Consonants

Of the rules concerning the use of special vowels, probably the most important is that a (as
in far) is the most favorable vowel for the general purposes of voice training. Teachers generally
have their pupils sing most of their exercises on this vowel. Much attention is paid to the
exact pronunciation of the vowel, and fine distinctions are drawn between its various sounds
in Italian, French, German, and English. The preference for the Italian pronunciation is very
general. It is claimed for this sound that it helps materially in acquiring command of the
"open throat." Indeed, a peculiar virtue in this regard is ascribed to the Italian vowels generally.
No convincing reason has ever been given for this belief. But the usual custom is to "place
the voice" on the Italian a, and then to take up, one at a time, the other Italian vowels.

The labial consonants, p, b, t, d, are believed to have a peculiar influence in securing the
"forward position" of the tone. Much the same influence is also ascribed to the vowel oo, although
many authorities consider i (Italian) the "most forward" vowel. Exercises combining these consonants
and vowels are very widely used, on single tones, and on groups of three, four, or five notes.
The syllables boo, poo, too, doo are practised, or if the teacher hold to the other "forward"
vowel, bee, pee, tee, dee; the student is instructed to hold the vowel in the "forward position"
secured by the initial consonant. Later on, the "forward" vowel is gradually widened into the
other vowels; exercises are sung on boo-ah, doo-ah, etc. This form of instruction is capable
of great elaboration. Many teachers use a wide variety of combinations of these vowels and
consonants; but as the basic idea is always the same, this class of exercises calls for no
further description. The singer's sensations, notably those of "open throat," "expanded vocal
tube," "forward tone," and vibration in the chest, are generally brought to the pupil's attention
in this form of exercise.

Another set of sounds are held to be specially adapted for securing the use of nasal resonance.
These are the letters m, n, and ng, when used for starting a tone, and also the vowel i (Italian).
The exercises used are similar in character to those just described. In singing these exercises,
the student is supposed to "start the tone high up in the head on the initial m or n, and to
hold it there, while gradually and smoothly opening the mouth for the vowel," etc. The sensations
specially noticed in this type of exercise are the feelings of vibration in the nose and forehead.
The "forward tone," as well as the nasal resonance, is supposed to be favored by the practice
of these exercises.

Enunciation

Vocal teachers always recognize the importance of a clear delivery of the text in singing.
Correct enunciation is therefore considered in all methods. A few teachers believe that a clear
pronunciation helps greatly to establish the correct vocal action. Some even go so far as to
say that a clear delivery of the words will of itself insure a correct tone-production. But
this theory calls for only passing comment. One has but to turn to the vaudeville stage to
see its falsity. For singers of that class, the words are of the utmost importance, while the
tone-production is usually of the very worst.

A few teachers base their methods on the theory that correct tone-production results necessarily
from the singing of "pure vowels." This is no doubt interesting, but still far from convincing.
The problem of tone-production is not solved quite so simply.

As a rule, vocal teachers consider the subject of pronunciation as quite distinct from tone-production.
Methods differ with regard to the use of exercises in articulation, and to the stage of progress
at which these exercises are taken up. Some teachers insist on their pupils practising singing
for months on the vowels, before permitting them to sing even the simplest songs with words.
Others have the pupils sing words from the beginning of instruction. As a rule, teachers begin
to give songs, and vocalises with words, very early in the course.

Throat Stiffness and Relaxing Exercises

Teachers of singing generally recognize that any stiffening of the throat interferes with the
correct action of the voice. Yet for some strange reason vocal students are very much inclined
to form habits of throat stiffness. This constantly happens, in spite of the fact that teachers
continually warn their pupils against the tendency to stiffen. On this account, exercises for
relaxing the throat are an important feature of modern instruction in singing.

Naturally, relaxing exercises are not thought to have any direct bearing in bringing about
the correct vocal action. They are purely preparatory; their purpose is only to bring the vocal
organs into the right condition for constructive training. For this reason, the means used
for relaxing the throat are seldom mentioned among the materials of instruction. But almost
every vocal teacher is obliged to make frequent use of throat relaxing exercises. Indeed, throat
stiffness is one of the most serious difficulties of modern Voice Culture. A student frequently
seems to be making good progress, and then without much warning falls into a condition of throat
stiffness so serious as to undo for a time the good work of several months' study. In such
a case there is nothing for the teacher to do but to drop the progressive work, and devote
a few lessons to relaxing exercises.

Little difficulty is usually found in relaxing the throat, when once the necessity becomes
strikingly apparent. That is, provided progressive study is dropped for a time, and attention
paid solely to relaxing exercises. But such cases are comparatively rare. A much more constant
source of trouble is found in the prevailing tendency of vocal students to stiffen their throats,
just enough to interfere with the (supposed) application of the teacher's method.

The exercises used for relaxing the throat are fairly simple, both in character and scope.
They consist mainly of toneless yawning, of single tones "yawned out" on a free exhalation,
and of descending scale passages of the same type. The subject next to be considered is the
manner in which these materials are utilized in practical instruction. In other words, what
is a method of Voice Culture?

In the present state of Vocal Science, the subject of tone-production overshadows everything
else in difficulty. When once the correct vocal action has been acquired, the student's progress
is assured. Every other feature of the singer's education is simply a matter of time and application.
But, under present conditions, the acquirement of the correct vocal action is extremely uncertain.
On account of its fundamental importance, and more especially of its difficulty, the subject
of tone-production is the most prominent topic of instruction in singing. The term "method"
is therefore applied solely to the means used for imparting the correct vocal action.

This use of the word is in accordance with the accepted theory of Voice Culture. The general
belief is that tone-production is entirely distinct from vocal technique. Technical studies
cannot profitably be undertaken, according to the prevailing idea, until the correct management
of the vocal organs has been established. This idea is supposed to be followed out in modern
instruction. It is generally assumed that the voice is brought under control through a definite
series of exercises; these exercises are supposed to follow, one after the other, according
to a well-defined system. The term "method" implies this systematic arrangement of exercises.
It indicates that vocal training is a matter of precise knowledge and orderly progression.

This represents the accepted ideal of Voice Culture, rather than the actual condition. The
idea that the vocal management should be imparted specially, as something preliminary to the
technical training of the voice, is not carried out in practice. Teachers generally are striving
to bring their systems into conformity with this ideal standard. They use the expression, "placing
the voice," to describe the preliminary training in tone-production. But no successful system
of this type has ever been evolved. The correct management of the voice never is imparted in
the manner indicated by this ideal of instruction. Tone-production continues, throughout the
entire course of study, to be the most important topic of instruction.

In order to understand the nature of a method of Voice Culture, it is necessary first to consider
the relation which exists, in modern instruction, between training in tone-production, and
the development of vocal technique. According to the accepted theory, the voice must be "placed"
before the real study of singing is undertaken. After the voice has been properly "placed,"
it is supposed to be in condition to be developed by practice in singing technical exercises.
But in actual practice this distinction between "voice-placing" exercises and technical studies
is seldom drawn. The voice is trained, almost from the beginning of the course of study, by
practice in actual singing. The earliest exercises used for "placing the voice" are in every
respect technical studies,--single tones and syllables, scale passages, arpeggios, etc. It
is impossible to produce even a single tone without embodying some feature of technique. Practice
therefore serves a double purpose; it brings the voice gradually to the condition of perfect
action, and at the same time it develops the technique. The student advances gradually toward
the correct manner of tone-production, and this progress is evidenced solely by the improved
technical use of the voice. Considerable technical facility is attained before the tone-production
becomes absolutely perfect.

A vocal student's practice in singing is not confined to technical exercises, strictly speaking.
Vocalises, songs, and arias are taken up, usually very early in the course of study. Moreover,
attention is nearly always paid to musical expression and to artistic rendition, as well as
to the vocal action and the technical use of the voice. This is true, whether the student sings
an exercise, a vocalise, a song, or an aria.

For daily home practice, the student sings, usually, first some exercises, then a few vocalises,
and finally several songs and arias. Every teacher has at command a wide range of compositions
of all these kinds, carefully graded as to technical and musical difficulty. As the pupil advances,
more and more difficult works are undertaken. For each stage of advancement the teacher chooses
the compositions best adapted to carry the student's progress still further.

There is no point in this development at which instruction in tone-production ceases, and the
technical training of the voice is begun. On the contrary, the means used for imparting the
correct vocal action are interspersed with the other materials of instruction, both technical
and artistic, throughout the entire course of study. Moreover, the training in tone-production
is carried on during the singing of the compositions just described, as well as by practice
on "voice-placing" exercises strictly speaking.

A method of instruction in singing therefore consists primarily of a set of mechanical rules
and directions for managing the voice, and secondarily of a series of exercises, both toneless
and vocal, so designed that the student may directly apply in practising them the rules and
directions for vocal management. It must not be understood however that the mechanical rules
are applied only to the exercises specially designed for this purpose. These rules and directions
are also intended to be applied to everything the student sings,--exercises, technical studies,
and musical compositions.

It will be recalled that the review of the topics of modern vocal instruction covered three
distinct types of materials. First, the purely mechanical doctrines, commonly regarded as the
only strictly scientific principles of Voice Culture. These are, the rules for the management
of the breath, of the registers, of laryngeal action, and of the resonance cavities, and also
the directions for attacking the tone, and for forward emission. The second class of materials
is held by strict adherents of the scientific idea to be purely empirical; this class includes
the traditional precepts of the old Italian school, and also all the topics of instruction
based on the singer's sensations. A third class of materials is found in the attempts to interpret
the empirical doctrines in the light of the scientific analysis of the vocal action.

To enumerate and classify all the methods of instruction in vogue would be almost an impossibility.
Absolutely no uniformity can be found on any topic. Even among the accepted doctrines of Vocal
Science there are many controverted points. Five distinct schools of breathing are represented,
two of breath-control. Of well worked-out systems of registers, at least twenty could be enumerated.
Fully this number of theories are offered regarding the correct positions of the larynx, soft
palate, and tongue. Two opposed theories are held as to nasal resonance. Further, the empirical
doctrines are always stated so loosely that no real unanimity of view can be found on any one
of them.

Every vocal teacher selects the materials of instruction from these controverted doctrines,
but neither rule nor reason determines what materials shall be embodied in any one method.
There is no coherence whatever in the matter. Further, there is no agreement as to which topics
of instruction are most important. One teacher may emphasize breath-control and support of
tone as the foundations of the correct vocal action, another may give this position to nasal
resonance and forward placing. Yet both these teachers may include in their methods about the
same topics. The methods seem entirely different, only because each makes some one or two doctrines
the most important. In short, it might almost be said that there are as many methods as teachers.

Three fairly distinct types of method may be defined, depending on the class of materials adopted.
At one extreme are found those teachers who attempt to follow strictly the scientific principles.
These teachers generally profess to employ only the purely mechanical doctrines of Vocal Science,
and to ignore all empirical interpretations of these doctrines. They generally devote a portion
of every lesson to toneless muscular drills, and insist that their pupils practise every exercise
in singing, with special attention to the throat action. These teachers attempt to follow a
definite plan and order in the giving of exercises and rules. This systematic arrangement of
instruction is, however, seldom followed out consistently with any one student. An important
reason for this is considered in Chapter I of Part II.

A very different type of method is taught by many teachers who pay special attention to the
empirical topics of instruction. Of course no teacher professes to teach empirically; on the
contrary, every method is called scientific, no matter what materials it embodies. Indeed,
a very little attention paid to breathing, attack, registers, and nasal resonance, is enough
to relieve any teacher of the reproach of empiricism. The teachers now being considered touch
to some extent on these topics; but most of their instruction is based on the traditional precepts,
the singer's sensations, and the special vowel and consonant drills. In the first few lessons
of the course they usually give some special breathing exercises, but almost always ignore
breath-control. Not much is done for vocal control in the strictly muscular sense. Special
"voice-placing" exercises are not used to any such extent as in the strictly scientific methods
just described, the voice-placing work being usually done on vocalises, songs, and arias. No
system whatever is followed, or even attempted, in the sequence of topics touched upon. The
directions, "Breathe deeper on that phrase," "Bring that tone more forward," "Open your throat
for that ah," "Feel that tone higher up in the head," may follow one after the other within
five minutes of instruction.

Teachers of this type are frequently charged, by the strict advocates of mechanical instruction,
with a practice commonly known as "wearing the voice into place." This expression is used to
indicate the total abandonment of system in imparting the correct vocal action. It means that
the teacher simply has the pupil sing at random, trusting to chance, or to some vague intuitive
process, to bring about the correct use of the voice. To the vocal scientist, "wearing the
voice into place" represents the depth of empiricism.

The great majority of teachers occupy a middle ground between the two types just described.
Teachers of this class touch, more or less, on every topic of instruction, mechanical, empirical,
and interpretive. Their application of most of the topics of instruction is not quite so mechanical
as in the first type of method considered. The student's attention is always directed to the
vocal organs, but the idea of direct muscular control is not so consistently put forward. As
a rule, the attempt is made in the first stages of instruction to follow a systematic plan.
Breathing, and perhaps breath-control, are first taught as muscular drills, and then applied
on single tones. Attack is generally taken up next, then simple exercises in the medium register.
Following this, the chest and head registers are placed, and the attention is turned to emission
and resonance. But in most cases, when the pupil has covered three or four terms of twenty
lessons each, all system is abandoned. The method from that time on is about of the type described
as empirical.

It must be remembered that this classification of methods is at best very crude. It would not
be easy to pick out any one teacher who adheres consistently to any of the three forms of instruction
described. All that can be said is that a teacher usually tends somewhat more to one type than
to another.

Further, the degree of prominence given to the idea of direct mechanical control of the voice
does not classify a method quite satisfactorily. Without exception every teacher adheres to
the prevailing idea, that the voice must be controlled and guided in some direct way,--that
the singer "must do something" to cause the vocal organs to operate properly. All the materials
of instruction, mechanical and empirical, are utilized for the sole purpose of enabling the
student to learn how to "do this something."

Several names are used by teachers to describe their methods. One professes to teach a "natural
method," another the "pure Italian school of Bel Canto," a third the "old Italian method as
illustrated by Vocal Science," a fourth the "strict scientific system of Voice Culture." No
attention need be paid to these expressions, as they are seldom accurate descriptions.

Vocal lessons are usually of thirty minutes' duration. Each student generally takes two such
lessons every week, although in some cases three, four, or even more are taken. A description
of a few typical lessons will show how the materials of instruction are practically utilized.

Example 1: The student takes a few preliminary toneless breaths. Then follow, in the order
given, a few short tones for practice on attack, some sustained tones on the vowel ah, exercises
on three, four, and five notes, ascending and descending, a single tone followed by the octave
jump up and descending scale, this last rising by semitones through several keys. In these
exercises the student's attention is directed at random to the correct use of the registers,
to nasal resonance, forward emission, etc. This consumes ten or twelve minutes of the lesson
time. More elaborate exercises on scale passages are then sung, lasting another five minutes.
These are followed by a vocalise or two, and a couple of songs or arias, which fill out the
thirty minutes.

Example 2: A few breathing exercises are practised, followed by single tones and short scale
passages, the whole lasting about five minutes. Then the student is drilled for some ten minutes
on "placing the head tones," in the manner described in the section on special vowel and consonant
drills. These exercises are varied by swelling the high tone, by changing the vowels, and by
elaborating the descending scale passages. The remaining fifteen minutes are devoted to vocalises
and songs.

Example 3: This is an advanced pupil, whose voice is supposed to be fairly well "placed." Technical
exercises of some difficulty are sung, covering a range of an octave and a half, or a little
more. The teacher interrupts occasionally to say "Sing those lower notes more in the chest
voice," "Place the upper notes higher in the head," "Don't let your vocal cords open on that
ah," "Sing that again and make the tones cleaner," etc. One or two arias are then sung, interspersed
with instructions of the same sort, and also with suggestions regarding style, delivery, and
expression.

For daily practice between lessons, the student sings usually the same exercises and studies
included in the previous lesson, and also commits to memory compositions assigned for future study.

Examples of this kind might be multiplied indefinitely, but the main points have been fairly
well brought out. Most important to be noticed is the fact that the voice is trained by practice
in actual singing. In the whole scheme of modern Voice Culture, toneless muscular drills consume
only an insignificant proportion of the time devoted to lessons. Further, the number of exercises
and musical compositions embraced in a single half-hour lesson is very small. On the other
hand, no limit can be set to the number of topics of vocal control touched on in any one lesson.
These latter are used, throughout the whole range of instruction, without any systematic sequence.
Whatever fault of production the pupil's tones indicate, the teacher calls attention to the
fault, and gives the supposedly appropriate rule for its correction. This is, that the voice
must be consciously controlled. In all the conflict of methods, this basic mechanical idea
has never been attacked. On the contrary, it is everywhere accepted without question as the
foundation of all instruction in singing.

The idea of mechanical vocal control is also the starting-point of all analysis of the vocal
action. Every investigator of the voice approaches the subject in the belief that an exact
determination of the muscular operations of correct singing would lead to an absolutely infallible
method of training voices. The problem of tone-production is identical, in the common belief,
with the problem of the vocal action. Three sciences, anatomy, mechanics, and acoustics, are
believed to hold somewhere among them the secret of the voice. All investigation has therefore
been carried on along the lines of these three sciences. It is on this account that modern
methods are called scientific, and not because they are in conformity with general scientific
principles. Before taking up the question whether the idea of mechanical vocal control is well
grounded in fact and reason, let us consider further the influence of this idea on modern methods
of instruction.

All instruction in singing is intended to teach the student to "do something," in order that
the vocal organs may be directly caused to act properly. No matter how vague and indefinite
the directions given, their aim is always to inform the student what to do, how to guide the
vocal action. Even when used in a purely empirical way the directions for open throat, etc.,
are always given in this spirit. That these directions are utterly meaningless in the mechanical
sense does not alter the fact; nobody has ever found any other connection in which they would
take on a definite meaning.

In this regard the empirical directions are no more unsatisfactory than the mechanical doctrines
of the accepted Vocal Science. It was pointed out that no means has ever been discovered for
applying several of these doctrines in practical instruction. The rules contained in the theoretical
works on Voice Culture for managing the registers and vocal-cord action, for forward emission
of tone, and for control of the resonance cavities, are of no value whatever to the student
of singing. It will be asked, how does the conscientious teacher get over this difficulty?
How are the deficiencies of the scientific doctrines supplied in instruction? In many cases
the deficiency is absolutely ignored. The student is simply told to "make the vocal cords act
properly," to "direct the tone against the roof of the mouth," to "bring in the nasal resonance,"
etc., and no further help is given. That this works severe hardship on the earnest student
need hardly be mentioned.

Other teachers, as has been explained, rely on a description of the singer's sensations, and
on the use of several vowel and consonant combinations, for imparting control of resonance
and forward emission. These means are purely empirical makeshifts, and as a rule they are not
sanctioned by the consistent advocates of scientific instruction. But for acquiring control
of the correct vocal-cord action, absolutely no means has ever been found, scientific or empirical.
On this, the surpassingly important feature of the vocal action, Vocal Science has thrown no
light whatever.

It was also remarked that the strictly scientific idea of Voice Culture is very seldom carried
out, to its logical conclusion, in actual instruction. One important reason for this is that
a student seldom remains long enough with a teacher to cover the entire ground of mechanical
instruction. Students move about from teacher to teacher. In the class of any one master the
proportion of pupils who have never had any previous instruction does not average one in ten.
To carry the idea of averages further, the length of time a student takes lessons of one instructor
may be set down as seldom more than two years.

How long it would take to apply the complete system of mechanical vocal training has never
been precisely stated. Cases are on record of pupils being kept on mechanical drills and elementary
exercises for four years, without being allowed to attempt a simple song. But these instances
are extremely rare. It seldom happens that a teacher can hold a pupil long enough to carry
out the complete course of mechanical study.

There are however many teachers who try conscientiously to have their pupils pay attention
to all the mechanical features of the vocal action. What it would mean to sing in this way
can only be imagined. Before starting a tone, the singer would prepare by taking a breath in
some prescribed way, and retaining this breath an instant by holding the chest walls out. Meanwhile
the lips, tongue, soft palate, and larynx would each be placed in the correct position. The
jaw would be held relaxed, and the throat loose and open. The expected tone would be felt,
in imagination, high up in the head, to assure the proper influence of nasal resonance. The
vocal cords would be held in readiness to respond instantly to the mental command, so as to
assure the exact state of tension necessary. Preparation would be made to direct the "column
of vocalized breath," through the pharynx and mouth, to the proper point on the hard palate.
Then, at the same precise instant, the breath would be started, and the vocal cords would be
brought together, but without touching.

So the tone would be begun. And all this would have to be done, with due attention to each
operation, in the fraction of a second preceding the starting of the tone! The downright absurdity
of this idea of singing must be apparent to any one who has ever listened to a great singer.

Under the influence of the idea of mechanical vocal management there is little room for choice
between voice culture along empirical lines, and the accepted type of scientific instruction.
Modern empirical voice training has little practical value. Describing to the student the sensations
which ought to be felt, does not help in the least. Even if the sensations felt by the singer,
in producing tone correctly, are entirely different from those accompanying any incorrect use
of the voice, nothing can be learned thereby. The sensations of correct singing cannot be felt
until the voice is correctly used. An effect cannot produce its cause. Correct tone-production
must be there to cause the sensations, or the sensations are not awakened at all. Nothing else
can bring about the sensations of correct singing, but correct singing itself.

Further, these sensations cannot be known until they are actually experienced. No description
is adequate to enable the student to feel them in imagination. And, finally, even if the sensations
could be described with all vividness, imagining them would not influence the vocal organs
in any way. This is true, whether the description is given empirically, or whether it is cited
to explain a mechanical feature of the vocal action. Instruction based on the singer's sensations
is absolutely valueless.

It would seem that modern methods contain very little of real worth. The investigation of the
mechanical operations of the voice can hardly be said to have brought forth anything of definite
value to the vocal teacher. But this is not the worst that can be said about the mechanical
doctrines of tone-production. When critically examined, and submitted to a rigid scientific
analysis, several of these doctrines are found to be erroneous in conception. These are the
theories of breath-control, chest resonance, nasal resonance, and emission of tone. It will
be observed that these doctrines comprise more than half of the materials of the accepted Vocal
Science. Yet notwithstanding the fact that they are accepted without question by the great
majority of vocal theorists as important elements of instruction in singing, each of these
doctrines involves a distinct misconception of scientific principles. An examination of these
doctrines is therefore the next subject to be undertaken.

CHAPTER II

THE FALLACY OF THE DOCTRINE OF BREATH-CONTROL

When Dr. Mandl advanced the statement that the laryngeal muscles are too weak to withstand
the pressure of a powerful expiratory blast, the theory of the vocal action therein embodied
met with immediate acceptance. This idea is so plausible that it appeals to the thoughtful
investigator as self-evident, and seems to call for no proof. The doctrine of breath-control
was at once adopted, by the most influential vocal scientists, as the basic principle of tone-production.

Curiously, neither Dr. Mandl, nor any other advocate of breath-control, seems to have read
an article by Sir Charles Bell dealing with this same action, the closing of the glottis against
a powerful exhalation. This paper, "On the Organs of the Human Voice," was read before a meeting
of the London Philosophical Society on February 2, 1832.

Dr. Bell dispels all the mystery concerning the closure of the glottis, and the holding of
the breath against a powerful contraction of the expiratory muscles. He points out that this
action occurs in accordance with the law of the distribution of pressure in a fluid body, commonly
known as Pascal's law of fluid pressures.

Pascal's law is stated as follows:--"Pressure exerted anywhere upon a mass of fluid is transmitted
undiminished in all directions, and acts with equal force on all equal surfaces, and in a direction
at right angles to those surfaces." (Atkinson's Ganot's Physics, 4th ed., New York, 1869.)

The hydraulic press furnishes the familiar illustration of this law. Two vertical cylinders,
one many times larger than the other, are connected by a pipe. The cylinders are fitted with
pistons. Both the cylinders, and the pipe connecting them, are filled with water, oil, air,
or any other fluid; the fluid can pass freely from one cylinder to the other, through the connecting
pipe. Suppose a horizontal section of the smaller cylinder to measure one square inch, that
of the larger to be one hundred square inches. A weight of one pound on the smaller piston
will balance a weight of one hundred pounds on the larger. If a downward pressure of one pound
be exerted on the smaller piston, the larger piston will exert an upward pressure of one hundred
pounds. Conversely, a downward pressure of one hundred pounds, exerted on the larger piston,
will effect an upward pressure of only one pound on the smaller piston.

A type of the hydraulic press is presented by the chest cavity and the larynx, considered as
one apparatus. This fact is illustrated in the following quotation: "If a bladder full of water
be connected with a narrow upright glass tube, heavy weights placed on the bladder will be
able to uphold only a very small quantity of liquid in the tube, this arrangement being in
fact a hydraulic press worked backwards. If the tube be shortened down so as to form simply
the neck of the bladder, the total expulsive pressure exerted by the bladder upon the contents
of the neck may seem to be very small when compared with the total pressure exerted over the
walls of the bladder upon the whole contents." (A Text Book of the Principles of Physics, Alfred
Daniell, London, 1884.)

That the glottis-closing muscles are too weak to withstand a powerful expiratory pressure is
therefore an entirely erroneous statement. Owing to the small area of the under surfaces of
the vocal cords, the air pressure against them is very small, in comparison with the total
pressure exerted on the contents of the thorax by the expiratory contraction. The glottis-closing
muscles are fully capable of withstanding this comparatively slight pressure. The doctrine
of breath-control is therefore scientifically untenable. This doctrine has no place in Vocal
Science.

As the basic doctrine of breath-control is unsound, the singer does not need any direct means
for controlling the breath. The attempt to check the flow of the breath in any mechanical way
is entirely uncalled for. This being the case, it is hardly to be expected that the systems
devised to meet this fancied need would stand the test of scientific examination. Each of these
systems of breath-control, opposed muscular action and ventricular, is in fact found on analysis
to embody a misconception of scientific principles.

Opposed-Action Breath-Control

A curious misapprehension of mechanical processes is contained in the doctrine of breath-control
by opposed muscular action. This can best be pointed out by a consideration of the forces brought
to bear on a single rib in the acts of inspiration and expiration. One set of muscles contract
to raise this rib in inspiration, an opposed set, by their contraction, lower the rib for the
act of expiration. In the opposed-action system of breath-control, the action of the rib-raising
muscles is continued throughout the expiration, as a check upon the pull in the opposite direction
of the rib-lowering muscles. Theoretically, the downward pull is "controlled" by the upward
pull. To express this idea in figures, let the expiratory or downward pull on the rib be said
to involve the expenditure of five units of strength. According to the theory of opposed-action
breath-control, this downward pull would have to be opposed by a slightly less upward pull,
say four units of strength.

Thus graphically presented, the fallacy of the "opposed-muscular" theory is clearly exposed.
The rib is lowered with a degree of strength equal to the excess of the downward over the upward
pull. If the downward pull equals five units of strength, and the upward pull four units, the
rib is lowered with a pull equivalent to one unit of strength. Exactly the same effect would
be obtained if the downward and upward pulls were equal respectively to twenty and nineteen
units, or to two and one units. Further, the result would be the same if the downward pull
involved the exertion of one unit of strength, and there was no upward pull whatever. In every
case, the actual result is equivalent to the excess of the downward over the upward pull.

In the case of the expiratory pressure of five units of strength being "controlled" by an inspiratory
contraction of four units, nine units of strength are exerted, and the same result could be
obtained by the exertion of one unit. There is a clear waste of eight units of strength. The
power of the expiratory blast is just what it would be if one unit of strength were exerted
in an "uncontrolled" expiration. The singer exerts just nine times as much strength as is necessary
to effect the same result. This is why the practice of breath-control exercises is so extremely
fatiguing.

So far as the effect of the expiratory blast on the vocal cords is concerned, "controlling"
the breath has no influence whatever. The vocal cords respond to the effective air pressure;
they are not affected in any way by the opposed contractions of the breath muscles. "Opposed-muscular"
breath-control is a sheer waste of time and effort.

Probably no particular harm has ever resulted to any singer's throat from the practice of breath-control
exercises. But the attempt to hold back the breath has a very bad effect on the singer's delivery.
The "breath-control" type of singer is never found in the ranks of the great artists. There
is something utterly unnatural about this holding back of the breath, repugnant to every singer
endowed with the right idea of forceful and dramatic delivery. The vast majority of the successful
pupils of "breath-control" teachers abandon, very early in their careers, the tiresome attempt
to hold back the breath. These singers yield, probably unconsciously, to the instinctive impulse
to sing freely and without constraint.

But in the ranks of the minor concert and church singers are many who try conscientiously to
obey the instructions of the "breath-control" teachers. Singers of this type can always be
recognized by a curious impression of hesitancy, or even timidity, conveyed by their tones.
They seem afraid to deliver their phrases with vigor and energy; they do not "let their voices
out." Frequently their voices are of excellent quality, and their singing is polished and refined.
But these singers never give to the listener that sense of satisfaction which is felt on hearing
a fine voice freely and generously delivered.

As for the particular fallacy contained in the theory of ventricular breath-control, that must
be reserved for a later chapter. Suffice it to say here that this theory disregards the two
basic mechanical principles of tone-production,--Pascal's law, and the law of the conservation
of energy. The application of this latter physical law to the operations of the vocal organs
is considered in Chapter VI of Part III. That this analysis involves a complete misunderstanding
of the laws of acoustics need hardly be said. When stated in precise terms, the fallacy of
the "forward emission" theory is evident:

"On issuing from the vocal cords the tone is directed in a curved path, around the back of
the tongue. There the tone is straightened out, and made to impinge on the roof of the mouth
at a precisely defined point. From this point the tone is reflected, not directly back, as
it should be, since the angles of incidence and reflection must be equal. Instead of this,
the tone is reflected forward, out of the mouth, necessarily again taking a curved path, to
avoid striking the front teeth." Naturally, no muscular action has ever been defined for causing
the tone to perform this remarkable feat.

The "forward emission" theory assumes the existence of a current of air, issuing from the vocal
cords as a tone. In other words, the tone is supposed to consist of a stream of air, which
can be voluntarily directed in the mouth, and aimed at some precise point on the roof of the
mouth. This is an utter mistake.

There is no "column of vibrating air," or "stream of vocalized breath," in the mouth during
tone-production. In the acoustic sense, the air in the mouth-pharynx is still air, not air
in a current. The only motion which takes place in the air in this cavity is the oscillatory
swing of the air particles. To imagine the directing of air vibrations in the mouth, as we
direct a stream of water out of a hose, is absurd.

What then is the "forward tone"? There must be some reason for this well-known effect of a
perfectly produced voice,--the impression made on the hearer that the tones are formed in the
front of the mouth. There ought also to be some way for the singer to learn to produce tones
of this character. A consideration of this feature of the vocal action is reserved for Chapter
IV of part III.

Chest Resonance

Who was originally responsible for the doctrine of chest resonance, it would be impossible
now to determine. Were it not for the fact of this doctrine having received the support of
eminent scientists (Holmes, Mackenzie, Curtis, and many others), it might be looked upon as
a mere figure of speech. That the tones of the voice are reinforced by the resonance of the
air in the chest cavity, is an utter absurdity. In the acoustic sense, the thorax is not a
cavity at all. The thorax is filled with the spongy tissue of the lungs, not to mention the
heart. It is no better adapted for air resonance than an ordinary spherical resonator would
be, if filled with wet sponges.

Nasal Resonance

Enough was said of the theories of nasal resonance in Chapter IV of Part I to show the unscientific
character of all these theories. It remains only to point out the misconception of acoustic
principles, contained in all the discussions of the subject. This is very much the same as
in the theory of "forward emission," viz., that the tones of the voice consist physically of
a "stream of vocalized breath." The mistaken idea is, that nasal resonance results from part
or all of the expired breath passing through the nose.

What is nasal resonance? How is it caused? What is its effect on the tones of the voice? These
questions have never been answered. It can however be proved that a satisfactory science of
Voice Culture is not in any way dependent on obtaining an answer to these questions. This much
is definitely known:

1. If the resonance of the air in the nasal cavities exerts any influence on the tones of the
voice, this influence cannot be increased, diminished, or prevented by any direct action on
the part of the singer. Shutting off the entrance of the breath, by raising the soft palate,
is possible as a muscular exercise. But it is impossible to perform this action, and to sing
artistically, at the same time. To produce any kind of tone, while holding the soft palate
raised, is extremely difficult. In a later chapter it will be seen that this action has no
place whatever in the correct use of the voice.

2. As the nasal cavities are fixed in size and shape, the singer cannot control or vary any
influence which they may exert as a resonator.

3. Independent of any thought or knowledge of how the nasal quality of tone is caused, the
singer has perfect voluntary control over this quality by the simple, direct influence of the
will. A singer may produce nasal tones, or tones free from this faulty sound, at will, with
no thought of the mechanical processes involved. All that is required is that the singer have
an ear keen enough to recognize the nasal quality in his own voice, as well as in the voice
of any other singer.

CHAPTER IV

THE FUTILITY OF THE MATERIALS OF MODERN METHODS

Of the strictly scientific or mechanical materials of modern methods, four have been seen to
be utterly erroneous. The remaining topics of instruction, mechanical and empirical, may with
equal justice be submitted to a similar examination.

Several of these topics have already been critically examined. The rules for registers and
laryngeal management were seen to be of no value to the student of singing. So also was it
observed that all instruction which attempts to utilize the singer's sensations is futile.
All that is left of the materials of modern methods, in which any valuable idea might be contained,
are the rules for breathing.

Without undertaking to decide whether one system of breathing can be right, to the exclusion
of all other systems, one general remark can be applied to the whole subject. It has never
been scientifically proved that the correct use of the voice depends in any way on the mastery
of an acquired system of breathing. True, this is the basic assumption of all the discussions
of the singer's breathing. As Frangçon-Davies justly remarks,--"All combatants are agreed on
one point, viz., that the singer's breath is an acquired one of some kind." (The Singing of
the Future, David Frangçon-Davies, M.A., London, 1906.) This is purely an assumption on the
part of the vocal theorists. No one has ever so much as attempted to offer scientific proof
of the statement.

Further, it is frequently stated that the old Italian masters paid much attention to the subject
of breathing; the assumption is also made that these masters approached the subject in the
modern spirit. Neither this statement, nor the assumption based on it, is susceptible of proof.
Tosi and Mancini do not even mention the subject of breathing.

Breathing has been made the subject of exhaustive mechanical and muscular analysis, for one
reason, and for only one reason. This is, because the action of breathing is the only mechanical
feature of singing which can be exhaustively studied. The laryngeal action is hidden; the influence
of the resonance cavities cannot well be determined. But the whole muscular operation of breathing
can be readily seen and studied; any investigator can personally experiment with every conceivable
system.

Furthermore, the adoption of any system of breathing has no influence whatever on the operations
of the voice. A student of singing may learn to take breath in any way favored by the instructor;
the manner of tone-production is not in the least affected. Even if the correct use of the
voice has to be acquired, the mode of breathing does not contribute in any way to this result.

All that need be said in criticism of the various doctrines of breathing is, that the importance
of this subject has been greatly overestimated. Breath and life are practically synonymous.
Nothing but the prevalence of the mechanical idea has caused so much attention to be paid to
the singer's breathing. A tuba player will march for several hours in a street parade, carrying
his heavy instrument, and playing it fully half the time; yet the vocal theorist does not consider
him an object of sympathy.

No doubt the acquirement of healthy habits of breathing is of great benefit to the general
health. But this does not prove that correct singing demands some kind of breathing inherently
different from ordinary life. To inspire quickly and exhale the breath slowly is not an acquired
ability; it is the action of ordinary speech. Singing demands that the lungs be filled more
quickly than in ordinary speech, and perhaps a fuller inspiration is also required. This is
readily mastered with very little practice. It does not call for the acquirement of any new
muscular movements, nor the formation of any new habits.

What is left of all the materials of modern vocal instruction? To sum them up in the order
in which they were considered in Part I:

Breathing does not need to be mastered in any such way as is stated in the theoretical works
on the voice. Breath-control is a complete fallacy. The doctrines of registers and laryngeal
action are utterly valueless. Chest resonance, nasal resonance, and forward emission, are scientifically
erroneous. The traditional precepts are of no value, because nobody knows how to follow or
apply them. Empirical teaching based on the singer's sensations is of no avail.

In other words, modern methods contain not one single topic of any value whatever in the training
of the voice. It will be objected that this statement is utterly absurd, because many of the
world's greatest singers have been trained according to these methods. No doubt this is in
one sense true; modern methods can point to many brilliant successes. But this does not prove
anything in favor of the materials of modern methods.

Singers are trained to-day exactly as they were trained two hundred years ago, through a reliance
on the imitative faculty. The only difference is this: In the old days, the student was directly
and expressly told to listen and to imitate, while to-day the reliance on the imitative faculty
is purely instinctive. A fuller consideration of the important function of imitation as an
unrecognized element of modern Voice Culture is contained in Chapter V of Part IV.

CHAPTER V

THE ERROR OF THE THEORY OF MECHANICAL VOCAL MANAGEMENT

A fundamental difference was pointed out, at the close of the preceding chapter, between the
old Italian method and modern systems of vocal instruction. This is worthy of repetition. The
old Italian method was founded on the faculty of imitation. Modern methods have as their basis
the idea of conscious, direct, mechanical control of the vocal organs. All the materials of
instruction based on this idea of mechanical control were seen to be absolutely valueless.
It is now in order to examine still further the structure of modern Voice Culture, and to test
this basic idea of mechanical control.

As a muscular operation, the actions of singing must be subject to the same physiological and
psychological laws which govern all other voluntary muscular actions. What are these laws?
How do we guide and control our muscular movements? At first sight, this seems a simple question.
We know what we want to do, and we do it. But the important point is, how are we able to do
the things we want to do? You wish to raise your hand, for example, therefore you raise it.
How does your hand know that you wish to raise it? Does the hand raise itself? Not at all;
it is raised by the contraction of certain muscles in the arm, shoulder, and back. That is,
when you wish to raise your hand, certain muscles contract themselves. But these muscles are
not part of the hand. What leads these muscles in the shoulder and back to contract, when you
will to raise your hand? Normally you are not even aware of their contraction. Yet in some
way these muscles know that they are called on to contract, in response to the wish to raise
the hand. This takes place, even though you know nothing whatever of the muscles in question.
The process is by no means so simple, when looked at in this light.

A complicated psychological process is involved in the simplest voluntary movements. This is
seen in the following analysis:

"To move any part of the body voluntarily requires the following particulars: (1) The possession
of an educated reflex-motor mechanism, under the control of the higher cerebral centers which
are most immediately connected with the phenomena of consciousness; (2) certain motifs in the
form of conscious feelings that have a tone of pleasure or pain, and so impel the mind to secure
such bodily conditions as will continue or increase the one, and discontinue or diminish the
other; (3) ideas of motions and positions of the bodily members, which previous experience
has taught us answer more or less perfectly to the motifs of conscious feeling; (4) a conscious
fiat of will, settling the question, as it were, which of these ideas shall be realized in
the motions achieved and positions attained by these members; (5) a central nervous mechanism,
which serves as the organ of relation between this act of will and the discharge of the requisite
motor impulses along their nerve-tracts to the groups of muscles peripherally situated." (Elements
of Physiological Psychology, Geo. T. Ladd, New York, 1889.)

Let us again consider the action of raising the hand, and see how the psychological analysis
applies in this movement. We note in the first place that we are concerned only with the third,
fourth, and fifth particulars of Prof. Ladd's analysis. These are:

The idea of the movement.

The fiat of will which directs that this movement be performed.

The discharge of the requisite motor impulses, along the nerve-tracts, to the muscles whose
contraction constitutes the movement.

It will be simpler, and will answer the purpose equally well, to combine the third and fourth
elements, and to consider as one element the idea of the movement and the fiat of will to execute
the movement.

The Idea of a Movement

The mental picture of a purposed movement is simple and direct. No reference is involved to
the muscles concerned in the performance of the movement. When you will to raise your hand,
the action is pictured to your mind as the raising of the hand, and nothing more. Certain muscles
are to be contracted. But the mental picture of the movement does not indicate what these muscles
are, in what order they are to be brought into play, nor the relative degrees of strength to
be exerted by each muscular fiber. You do not consciously direct the muscles in their contractions.

The Discharge to the Muscles of the Nerve Impulse

How then are the muscles informed that their contraction is called for? They have no independent
volition; each muscular fiber obeys the impulse transmitted to it by the nerve, from the nerve
center governing its action. These nerve centers are in their turn controlled by the central
nervous mechanism. And in complex voluntary movements the central nervous mechanism is under
the control of the higher cerebral centers. The wish to raise the hand appears to the mind
as an idea of the hand being raised. This idea is translated by the central nervous mechanism
into a set of motor nerve impulses. Does consciousness or volition come into play here? Not
at all. On this point Prof. Ladd remarks: "As to the definite nature of the physical basis
which underlies the connection of ideas of motion and the starting outward of the right motor
impulses, our ignorance is almost complete."

Is it necessary for the performance of a complex muscular action that the individual know what
muscles are involved and how and when to contract them? No; this knowledge is not only unnecessary,
it is even impossible. Prof. Ladd says of this: "It would be a great mistake to regard the
mind as having before it the cerebral machinery, all nicely laid out, together with the acquired
art of selecting and touching the right nervous elements in order to produce the desired motion,
as a skilful player of the piano handles his keyboard."

How then are the muscles informed of the service required of them? Or more precisely, how does
the central nervous mechanism know what distribution of nerve impulses to make among the different
nerve centers governing the muscles? As Prof. Ladd says, our ignorance on this point is almost
complete. There resides in the central nervous mechanism governing the muscles something which
for lack of a better name may be called an instinct. When a purposeful movement of any part
of the body is willed, the mental picture of the movement is translated by the central nervous
mechanism into a succession of nerve impulses; these impulses are transmitted through the lower
centers to the muscles. The instinct informing the central nervous mechanism how to apportion
the discharges of nerve impulse among the various muscular centers is to a high degree mysterious.
The present purpose will not be served by carrying the analysis of this instinct further.[7]

[Note 7: The evolutionary development of this instinct is not altogether mysterious. Science
can fairly well trace the successive steps in the development of the central nervous mechanism,
from the amoeba to the highest type of vertebrate. "Nerve channels" are worn by the repeated
transmission of impulses over the same tracts. Coördinations become in successive generations
more complex and more perfect. As consciousness develops further, in each succeeding type,
actions originally reflex tend to take on a more consciously purposeful character. But all
we are concerned with now is the problem of tone-production. Our purpose is best served by
accepting the faculty of muscular adaptation as an instinct, pure and simple.]

There is therefore no direct conscious guidance of the muscles, in any movement, simple or
complex. So far as the command of voluntary muscular actions is concerned, the first simple
statement of the process sums up all that for practical purposes need be determined;--we know
what we want to do, and we do it. The mind forms the idea of an action and the muscles instinctively
respond.

But the fact remains that the muscles need to be guided in some way. We do not perform instinctively
many complex actions,--writing, dancing, rowing, swimming, etc. All these actions, and indeed
most of the activities of daily life, must be consciously learned by practice and repeated
effort. How are these efforts guided? To arrive at an answer to this question let us consider
how a schoolboy practises his writing lesson.

The boy begins by having before him a copy of the letters he is to write. Under the guidance
of the eye the hand traces these letters. At each instant the eye points out to the hand the
direction in which to move. As the hand occasionally wanders from the prescribed direction
the eye immediately notes the deviation and bids the hand to correct it. The hand responds
to the demands of the eye, immediately, without thought on the boy's part of nerve impulse
or of muscular contraction. By repeated efforts the boy improves upon his first clumsy attempts;
with each repetition he approaches nearer to the model.

In the course of this progress the muscular sense gradually comes to the assistance of the
eye as a sort of supplementary guidance. But at no time is the eye relieved of the responsibility
of guiding the hand in writing. To sum this up, the movements of the hand in writing are guided,
so far as the consciousness is aware, directly by the sense of sight.

We have here the law of voluntary muscular guidance. In all voluntary movements the muscles
are guided in their contractions, through some instinctive process, by the sense or senses
which observe the movements themselves, and more especially, the results of the movements.
In most actions the two senses concerned are sight and muscular sense. The more an action becomes
habitual the more it tends to be performed under the guidance of muscular sense, and to be
free from the necessity of the guidance of the eye. But muscular sense does not usually rise
so high into consciousness as sight, in the guidance of muscular activities. Many oft-repeated
movements, especially those of walking, become thoroughly habitual and even automatic; that
is, the muscular contractions are performed as purely reflex actions, without conscious guidance
of any kind. But even in walking, the necessity may at any instant arise for conscious guidance.
In such a case the sense of sight immediately comes into service; from reflex the movements
become voluntary, and consciously guided. In the case of most complex actions the sense of
sight furnishes the most important guidance.

If the muscular operations of singing are subject to the general laws of psychological control,
the guidance of the vocal organs must be furnished by the sense which observes the results
of the movements involved. This is the sense of hearing. Just as in writing the hand is guided
by the eye, so in singing the voice is guided by the ear. There can be no other means of guiding
the voice. Muscular sense may under certain conditions supplement the sense of hearing, but
under no circumstances can muscular sense assume full command. The net result of the application
of psychological principles to the problem of tone-production is simply this, that the voice
is guided directly by the ear.

It is thus seen that the idea of mechanical vocal management is utterly erroneous. On pushing
the analysis still further the fallacy of this idea is found to be even more glaring.

Is a knowledge of anatomy of any assistance in the acquirement of skill in performing complex
muscular actions? Not in the least. An understanding of muscular processes does not contribute
in any way to skilful execution. The anatomist does not play billiards or row a boat one whit
the better for all his knowledge of the muscular structure of the body.

Even if the precise workings of the vocal mechanism could be determined, the science of Voice
Culture would not benefit thereby. Knowing how the muscles should act does not help us to make
them act properly. It is utterly idle to tell the vocal student that as the pitch of the voice
rises the arytenoid cartilages rotate, bringing their forward surfaces together, and so shortening
the effective length of the vocal cords. Whatever the vocal cords are required to do is performed
through an instinctive obedience to the demands of the mental ear.

And finally, a precise analysis of muscular contractions is impossible, even in the case of
comparatively simple actions. When, for example, the hand describes a circle in the air, a
number of muscles are involved. True, it is known what these muscles are, and what effect the
combined contractions of any group would have on the position of the hand. The direction of
the hand's motion at any instant is determined by the resultant of all the forces exerted on
this member. But as this direction constantly changes, so must the relative degrees of strength
exerted by the muscles also constantly change. At no two successive instants are the muscular
adjustments the same. This simple action, performed without thought or knowledge of the muscular
processes, presents features too complex to be analyzed on the basis of mechanical law and
anatomic structure.

A complete analysis of the muscular operations of tone-production is absolutely impossible.
The adjustments of the laryngeal muscles involve probably the most minute variations in degree
of contraction performed in the whole voluntary muscular system. What we do know of the mechanical
operations of the voice is exceedingly interesting, and a further knowledge of the subject
is greatly to be desired. But we can never hope to clear up all the mystery of the vocal action.

This statement must not be construed to mean that the study of the vocal mechanism has been
devoid of valuable results. On the contrary, the present understanding of the mechanical operations
of the voice will be found of very great value in erecting a true science of Voice Culture.
The only weakness of the present results of vocal investigation is due to the fact that this
investigation has always been carried on under the influence of the idea of mechanical vocal
management. This influence has led all theoretical students of the subject to attempt to apply
their knowledge in formulating rules for direct mechanical guidance of the voice. That these
rules are valueless is due solely to the fundamental error involved in the mechanical idea.

Voice Culture must be turned from the idea of mechanical vocal management. The old Italian
masters were right in that they relied, even though empirically, on the imitative faculty.
Modern teachers may do better, for in the light of present knowledge reliance on the faculty
of vocal imitation can be shown to be in strict accord with sound scientific principles. Empirical
knowledge must be the basis of every science. To be available in forming a science, empirical
knowledge of a subject must be so carefully gathered that all probability of error is eliminated;
the observations must be so exhaustive as to embrace every possible source of information.
From the knowledge thus obtained a set of verified general rules must be worked out with which
all the observed facts and phenomena are shown to be in accord. Then a science has been erected.
There is no possibility of conflict between empirical and scientific knowledge. The discovery
of a single fact, at variance with the supposed general laws bearing on any subject, is sufficient
to overthrow the entire structure which had been accepted as a science.

In the accepted Vocal Science the terms empirical and scientific are used in a sense entirely
different from that which properly attaches to these words. Present knowledge of the operations
of the voice is called scientific, solely because it is derived from the sciences of anatomy,
acoustics, and mechanics. The term "empirical knowledge of the voice" is used as a name for
knowledge of the subject drawn from any source other than these sciences. Yet so far as the
modern vocal world seems to be aware, it possesses no knowledge of the voice other than that
commonly called scientific. It is supposed that the old Italian masters had some "empirical
understanding of the voice." But, if this was the case, their empirical knowledge has apparently
been utterly lost.

Thus far in the present work, the usage of the terms empirical and scientific, accepted by
vocal theorists generally, has been adopted. A distinction has been drawn between knowledge
of the voice obtained through the study of the vocal mechanism and that obtained through observation
of any other kind. The purpose will best be served by continuing this same usage.

It must be apparent to the reader, from the analysis of modern methods, that no real Science
of Voice has thus far been erected. This is due to the fact that the general principles of
scientific investigation have not been applied to the study of the voice. Under the influence
of the idea of mechanical vocal management the attention of all investigators has been turned
exclusively to the mechanical features of tone-production. Meanwhile the empirical knowledge
of the old masters seems to have been forgotten. As a matter of fact, as will now be seen,
this empirical knowledge has never been lost. Every modern teacher of singing shares the empirical
knowledge which formed the sole material of the old method. But this knowledge is not applied
effectually in modern instruction for two reasons. First, modern teachers do not realize the
importance of this knowledge; indeed, they are practically unaware of this valuable possession.
Although in fact the basis of nearly all modern instruction in singing, empirical knowledge
is always unconsciously used. Second, empirical knowledge is always applied in the prevailing
mechanical spirit. The attempt is always made to translate the sub-conscious empirical understanding
of the voice into rules for direct mechanical management. Under the influence of the mechanical
idea the modern teacher's most valuable possession, empirical knowledge of the voice, becomes
utterly unserviceable.

Thus far, the whole result of this work has been destructive. The accepted Vocal Science has
been shown to be erroneous in its conception and unsound in its conclusions. The work cannot
halt here. Vocal Science must be reconstructed. This can be done only by following the general
plan of all scientific investigation, beginning with the observation of all ascertainable facts
bearing on the voice.

How can any facts be observed about the voice other than by the study of the vocal mechanism?
An answer to this question is at once suggested so soon as scientific principles are applied
to the subject. Strictly speaking, the voice is a set of sounds, produced by the action of
the vocal organs. The scientific method of inquiry is therefore to begin by observing these
sounds. Sounds as such can be observed only by the sense of hearing. It follows then that the
attentive listening to voices is the first step to be taken.

Can any empirical knowledge of the voice be obtained by the mere listening to voices? If so,
we ought now to be in possession of any facts which might be thus observed. Is it possible
that information of this character is already a common possession of the vocal world, and yet
that this information has never been applied in the investigation of the voice? This is exactly
the case. Many facts regarding the voice have been observed so continually that they are a
matter of common knowledge, and yet these facts have never been recorded in a scientific manner.

Consider, for example, this remark about a famous singer, made by one of the foremost musical
critics of the United States: "Mme. T---- 's lower medium notes were all sung with a pinched
glottis." How did this critic know that the singer had pinched her glottis? He had no opportunity
of examining her throat with the laryngoscope, nor of observing her throat action in any other
way. In fact, the critic was seated probably seventy-five feet from the artist at the time
the tones in question were sung. The critic had only one means of knowing anything about the
singer's throat action, and that was contained in the sound of the tones. There must therefore
have been something in the sound of the tones which conveyed this information to the critical
listener. For many years this gentleman had been in the habit of listening closely to singers,
and he had found some way of estimating the singer's throat action by the character of the
tones produced.

This same means of judging the manner of production from the sound of the tones seems to have
been utilized nearly two hundred years ago. Speaking of the most frequent faults of tone-production,
Tosi remarks: "The voice of the scholar should always come forth neat and clear, without passing
through the nose or being choked in the throat." Mancini also speaks of the faults of nasal
and throaty voice: "Un cantare di gola e di naso." A throaty tone, therefore, impressed these
writers as being in some way formed or caught in the singer's throat. It may be set down as
certain that no pupil ever explained to either of these masters how the objectionable sounds
were produced. How then did Tosi and Mancini know the manner in which a throaty tone is produced?

We need not go back to the early writers to find out what is meant by a throaty tone. Fully
as many throaty singers are heard nowadays as the old masters ever listened to. What do we
mean when we say that a singer's voice is throaty? The answer to this question seems at first
sight simple enough: The tones impress us as being formed in the singer's throat. But what
conveys this impression? Something in the sound of the tone, of course. Yet even that is not
enough. How can a tone, merely a sound to which we listen, tell us anything about the condition
of the singer's throat during the production of the tone? Here again the answer seems simple:
The listener knows that, in order to produce a tone of like character, he would have to contract
his own throat in some way.

Here we have a highly significant fact about the voice. On hearing a throaty tone, the listener
can tell how this tone is produced; he feels that he would have to contract his own throat
in order to produce a similar tone. Let us carry this discussion a little further. How does
the listener know this? Certainly not by actually singing a throaty tone. When seated in a
concert hall, for example, and listening to a throaty singer, the hearer cannot rise from his
seat, sing a few throaty tones himself, and then note how his throat feels. The critic just
mentioned did not sing some notes with "pinched glottis" in order to learn how Mme. T---- sang
her low tones. Evidently it is not necessary actually to imitate the singer; the hearer gets
the same result by imitating the sounds mentally. In other words, when we hear throaty tones
we mentally imitate these tones; thus we know that we should have to contract our own throats
in order to produce similar tones.

But even here we cannot stop. To imitate the singer actually is one thing; mental imitation
is something entirely different. In the first case, actual imitation, our muscular sense would
inform us of the state of throat tightening. But in the case of mental imitation there is no
actual tightening of the throat, nothing, at any rate, comparable to what takes place in actual
imitation. There is then a dual function of the imagination; first, the mental imitation of
the sound; second, the imaginary tightening of the throat. The analysis of the mental process
must therefore be modified, and stated as follows: When we listen to a throaty tone we mentally
imitate the tone; an imaginative function of the muscular sense informs us what condition the
singer's throat assumes for the production of the tone.

A similar operation takes place in listening to nasal voices. An impression is conveyed by
a nasal tone, through which the hearer is informed of a condition of tightness or contraction
somewhere in the singer's nose.

The terms applied to the two most marked forms of faulty tone-production, nasal and throaty,
are derived from impressions conveyed by the sounds of the tones. These names, nasal and throaty,
refer to a feeling of tightness or contraction experienced in imagination by the hearer; in
one case this feeling is located in the nose, in the other, in the throat. But the terms nasal
and throaty are general descriptions of faulty tones. Each one covers a wide range of tone
qualities. There is an almost infinite variety of throaty tones, and of nasal sounds as well.
The knowledge of the voice obtained by listening to vocal tones is of equally wide extent.
Every throaty tone, whatever its precise character, informs the hearer of the exact condition
of the singer's throat in producing the tone. In short, every vocal tone is thus analyzed by
the critical listener, and referred in imagination to his own throat. An insight into the singer's
vocal action is imparted to the hearer through an imaginative process which always, of necessity,
accompanies the attentive listening to vocal tones.

Every vocal tone awakens in the hearer a set of imagined muscular sensations. These sensations
furnish the means for an exhaustive analysis of the operations of the voice. The production
of tone therefore awakens two sets of muscular sensations, one actually felt by the singer,
the other felt in imagination by the listener. The former are commonly known as the "singer's
sensations"; but, as will be explained later, this expression is often very loosely applied.
It is advisable on this account to give a new name to the singer's sensations, and also to
give a name to the muscular sensations awakened in the hearer. Let us therefore call the sensations
experienced by the singer in the production of tone the "direct sensations of tone." To the
imaginary sensations of the hearer let us give the name, the "sympathetic sensations of tone."

These two terms will be used throughout the remainder of this work in the meanings here given
to them.

Direct sensations of tone are the sensations actually felt by the singer as a result of the
exercise of the vocal organs.

Sympathetic sensations of tone are the muscular sensations experienced in imagination by the
hearer as a result of the listening to the tones of voices other than his own.

CHAPTER II

SYMPATHETIC SENSATIONS OF VOCAL TONE

A peculiar relation of sympathy exists between the human voice and the human ear. So intimate
is this relation that the two might almost be considered as forming one complete organ. One
aspect of this relation has already been noted, the guidance of the vocal organs by the sense
of hearing. There is now to be considered another feature of this relation between voice and
ear,--the assistance rendered by the vocal organs to the sense of hearing.

That a sub-conscious adjustment of the vocal organs may supplement the sense of hearing in
the estimation of pitch is mentioned by Prof. Ladd. Speaking of the ability, by no means uncommon,
to tell the pitch of any musical note heard, Prof. Ladd says: "Such judgment, however, may
be, and ordinarily is, much assisted by auxiliary discriminations of other sensations which
blend with those of the musical tone. Among such secondary helps the most important are the
muscular sensations which accompany the innervation of the larynx and other organs used in
producing musical tones. For we ordinarily innervate these organs (at least in an inchoate
and partial way)--that is, we sound the note to ourselves--when trying carefully to judge of
its pitch." (Elements of Physiological Psychology.)

Much more important in the study of the problem of tone-production are the adjustments of the
hearer's vocal organs which were named the sympathetic sensations of tone. This peculiar auxiliary
to the sense of hearing calls for the closest attention.

Sympathetic sensations of tone are awakened in the hearer through the mere listening to the
sounds of the human voice. Vocal tones impress the listener's ear in a manner entirely different
from any other sounds. Not only are the tones of the voice heard, just as other sounds are
heard; in addition to this, every vocal tone heard is mentally imitated, and this mental reproduction
of the tone is referred in imagination to the hearer's own vocal organs. Besides hearing the
vocal tone as a sound pure and simple, the listener is also informed of the manner of throat
action by which the tone is produced.

This mental imitation and judgment of vocal tones is not a voluntary operation. On the contrary
it cannot even be inhibited. It is impossible for us to listen to the voices of those about
us, even in ordinary conversation, without being to some extent aware of the various modes
of tone-production.

This idea of the mental imitation of voices may impress us at first as highly mysterious. Sympathetic
sensations of tone have been felt and noted, probably ever since the human voice and the human
ear were developed. Yet the process is purely sub-conscious. It is performed involuntarily,
without thought on the part of the hearer, even without any consciousness of the process. The
hearer simply knows how the voices to which he listens are produced. A throaty voice simply
sounds throaty; the hearer feels this, and pays no attention to the source of the information.
We take it as a matter of course that a nasal voice seems to come through the speaker's nose.
Why a certain quality of sound gives this impression we never stop to inquire. The impressions
of throat action conveyed by other people's voices seem so simple and direct that nobody appears
to have thought to analyze the psychological process involved.

This psychological process is found on analysis to be highly complex. In addition to the actual
physical exercise of the sense of hearing, three distinct operations are performed in imagination.
These are the mental imitation of the tone, the imagined adjustments of the vocal organs, and
the imaginative exercise of the muscular sense. Although simultaneously performed, each of
these four operations may be considered separately.

Hearing

As the judgment of vocal tones by sympathetic sensations is purely a function of the sense
of hearing, the keenness of these sensations varies in each individual in proportion to the
keenness of the ear. It would be a great mistake to assert that we all feel these sympathetic
sensations with equal vividness. On the contrary, many people are so inattentive to the qualities
of sounds that they hardly know the meaning of the term "nasal tone."

One trait in particular distinguishes the musician and the music lover; this is, the possession
of a keen sense of hearing. The ear is trained by exercise in its own function,--hearing. The
more attentively we listen to music the higher do we develop our ability to discriminate between
musical sounds. Moreover, natural endowments vary in different individuals, with regard to
the ear, as with all other human faculties. To appreciate fully the wonderful insight into
vocal operations conveyed by the sympathetic sensations of tone, a naturally keen musical ear
is required; further, this natural gift of a good ear must be developed by attentive listening
to music, vocal and instrumental, carried on through several years.

Mental Imitation of Vocal Tones

That every sense has its counterpart in the imagination need hardly be said. We know what it
means to feel warm or cold, hungry or thirsty; we know the taste of an apple, the scent of
a rose. We can at will create pictures before the mind's eye. In the same way we can hear in
imagination any sound we choose to produce mentally.

An inseparable function of the sense of hearing is the impulse to imitate mentally the tones
of speakers and singers. The imitation of sounds is an instinctive operation. "Talking proper
does not set in till the instinct to imitate sounds ripens in the nervous system." (The Principles
of Psychology, Wm. James, N. Y., 1890.) Little can be said about the impulse to imitate voices
mentally, further than that it is an exercise of this same instinct.

Imagined Adjustments of the Vocal Organs

It has already been seen that the vocal organs have the ability to adjust themselves, through
instinctive guidance, for the production of any tone demanded by the ear. This same ability
is invoked in the mental imitation of tones. In one case the muscular contractions are actually
performed; in the other the muscular adjustments are wholly or in part imaginary.

It is highly probable that actual contractions of the laryngeal muscles take place, under certain
conditions, as an accompaniment to the listening to voices. This is evident in the case of
extremely aggravated throaty and forced voices. In listening to the harsh, raucous cries of
many street vendors, when calling out their wares, the hearer frequently feels a sense of actual
pain in his own throat.

Involuntary and unconscious contractions of the laryngeal muscles, somewhat similar to those
under consideration, are well known to experimental psychologists. Prof. Ladd's statement that
these contractions assist the ear in the judgment of absolute pitch has already been cited.
Another example of unconscious laryngeal movements has been investigated by Hansen and Lehmann
("Ueber unwillkuerliches Fluestern," Philos. Studien, 1895, Vol. XI, p. 47), and by H. S. Curtis
("Automatic Movements of the Larynx," Amer. Jour. Psych., 1900, Vol. XI, p. 237). The laboratory
experiments of these investigators show that when words, or ideas definitely expressed in words,
are strongly thought but not uttered, the vocal organs unconsciously adjust themselves to the
positions necessary for uttering the words. Curtis says of these unconscious laryngeal contractions:
"Such movements are very common with normal people, and are comparatively easy of demonstration."

The apparatus used by Hansen and Lehmann in their experiments consists of two large concave
reflectors. These are placed at a convenient distance, one facing the other, so that two experimenters
may be seated, the first having his mouth at the focal point of one reflector, the second with
his ear at the focal point of the other. As the first experimenter repeats mentally any words
or phrases, these are found to be unconsciously whispered. These sounds of whispering, inaudible
under ordinary conditions, are so magnified by the two reflectors as to be distinctly heard
by the second experimenter.

Curtis proved that actual movements of the larynx unconsciously accompany intense thought.
His demonstrations were conducted along lines familiar to all students of experimental psychology.
Similar experiments would probably show that unconscious movements of the larynx also occur
during the listening to vocal tones.

A peculiarity of the laryngeal adjustments accompanying the listening to voices is seen in
the fact that the possession of a fine or well-trained voice is not required in this process.
It does not matter whether the physical organs are capable of producing fine musical tones.
The nervous equipment alone is involved; this is frequently highly developed, even though the
physical voice is very poor. A keen and highly-trained ear is the only requisite. Players in
the opera orchestras often develop this faculty to a high degree, even though they may never
attempt to sing a note.

Muscular Sense

An exhaustive analysis of the various classes of sensations, commonly grouped under the general
heading of muscular sense, would involve a mass of technicalities not necessary to the present
purpose. It is sufficient to bear in mind the limitations of this sense, and to notice what
it tells us, and what it does not tell.

Through the exercise of the muscular sense we are informed of the movements, positions, and
conditions of the different parts of the body. Of specific muscular contractions very little
information is conveyed. Thus, when the arm is bent at the elbow the muscular sensations of
the movement are clear and definite; but, under normal conditions, these sensations do not
inform us that the movement results from the contraction of the biceps muscle. Knowledge of
the muscular structure of the body is not involved in muscular sense. The muscular sensations
of bending the arm are felt in precisely the same way by the professor of anatomy and the ignorant
child.

Further, no amount of attention paid to muscular sensations will inform us exactly what muscles
are contracted in any complex action. A single stroke in the game of tennis, returning a swift
service for example, may involve some contraction of every muscle of the entire body. A skilful
player may observe with the utmost care the muscular sensations accompanying this stroke; he
would never be able to learn from these sensations whether the number of muscles in his forearm
is ten or one hundred.

For the same reason the sympathetic sensations of tone tell us nothing whatever of the muscular
structure of the vocal organs. When listening to a throaty voice, we feel that the singer's
throat is tightened, stiffened, or contracted. But no matter how keen and vivid this sensation
may be, it leaves us in complete ignorance of the names and locations of the muscles wrongly
contracted. This is true, however thoroughly we may know the anatomy of the vocal organs.

Much of the prevailing confusion about the voice is due to a misunderstanding of this point.
When, for example, the musical critic asserted that Mme. T---- sang certain tones with "pinched
glottis," he fell into this error. His sympathetic sensations informed him of some unnecessary
tightening of the singer's throat. From these sensations he seems to have inferred that the
glottis-closing muscles were too strongly contracted. This assumption was not warranted by
any information conveyed in the sympathetic sensations.

It is not necessary now to determine to what extent the muscular sensations accompanying the
listening to voices are purely imaginative, and to what extent they result from actual, though
unconscious, contractions of the listener's throat muscles. The psychological process is the
same in either case.

Sympathetic sensations of tone always accompany the listening to voices. While the psychological
process is complex, this process is performed unconsciously and involuntarily. Even though
the attention may be definitely turned to the sympathetic sensations themselves, the mental
imitation and the laryngeal adjustments seldom rise into consciousness. As a rule, the entire
operation is purely sub-conscious. The listener simply knows how the voices to which he listens
are produced. This knowledge has always been accepted as intuitive; but this is merely another
way of saying that the process of its acquirement is sub-conscious.

Direct Sensations of Tone

In addition to the source of misunderstanding of the vocal action just mentioned,--the attempt
to define the precise muscular contractions indicated in the sympathetic sensations, another
common misinterpretation of these sensations must be noted. As a consequence of the sub-conscious
character of the sympathetic sensations, the two classes of muscular sensation of vocal tone,
direct and sympathetic, are frequently confounded and classed together as the "singer's sensations."
A third source of confusion is seen in the attempt to apply the sympathetic sensations, by
formulating rules for the guidance of the student, in performing specific actions for the management
of the vocal organs. All three of these topics will be considered in a later chapter. Before
approaching this subject let us see just what information may be derived from the observation
of the direct sensations of tone.

The direct sensations of tone are never so vivid, so precise, nor so reliable as the sympathetic
sensations. In other words, the hearer is better able to judge of the singer's throat action
than the singer himself. This may seem a paradoxical statement, but a brief consideration will
show it to be fully justified.

In the case of teacher and pupil, it will hardly be questioned that the master hears the pupil's
voice to better advantage than the pupil. This is also true when a trained singer's tones are
observed by a competent hearer. The singer's direct sensations are highly complex. They include
the muscular sensations accompanying the exertion of the breathing muscles, and these are usually
so intense as to overshadow the sensations due to the laryngeal adjustments. On the other hand,
the hearer is free to pay close attention to the sensations of throat action, and therefore
feels these much more keenly than does the singer. On this account the direct sensations of
tone are of vastly less value in the study of the vocal action than are the sympathetic sensations.

CHAPTER III

EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE OF THE VOICE

Through attention paid to the sympathetic sensations of tone, the listener may carry on mentally
a running commentary on the throat actions of all those whose voices are heard. Continuing
to use the word empirical in the sense thus far adopted, it may be said that the summary of
the impressions conveyed in the sympathetic sensations of tone constitutes empirical knowledge
of the voice. In other words, empirical knowledge of the voice is an understanding of the operations
of the vocal mechanism, obtained through the attentive listening to voices.

Let us consider first the running commentary on the throat action, mentally carried on by the
listener. This mental commentary is an inseparable accompaniment of the listening to the voices
of others, whether in speech or song. As we are concerned now only with the problem of tone-production
in artistic singing, our consideration will be limited to the critical hearer's observation
of the tones of singers.

Let us imagine two friends to be seated side by side in the concert hall, listening to the
performance of a violin sonata by an artist of about mediocre ability. Suppose one of the friends
to be a highly trained musical critic, the other to be almost unacquainted with music of this
class. Let us now inquire how the tones of the violin will impress these two hearers; and further,
let the inquiry be limited strictly to the matter of tone, leaving out of consideration all
questions of composition and rendition.

As a matter of course, the tones of the violin will impress these two listeners in widely different
ways. The untrained observer will greatly enjoy the beautiful tones,--supposing of course that
he be gifted with a natural fondness for music. But so far as musical value is concerned, all
the tones will sound to him practically alike.

For the trained hearer, on the other hand, every note drawn by the performer from his instrument
will have a distinct value. Some of the tones will be true in pitch and perfect in quality.
Some will vary slightly from the correct pitch; others will perhaps be in perfect tune, and
yet be marred in quality by faults of scratching, thinness, roughness, etc.

When the two come to compare notes at the end of the performance the trained critic will be
utterly unable to convey to his friend his impressions of the player's technique. Vividly clear
as it is to the critic, his understanding of tonal values is lodged solely in his cultivated
ear. This understanding cannot be imparted in words; it must be acquired by experience in actual
listening to music.

Let us now imagine this same critic to be listening to a singer, not an artist of the first
rank, but one whose voice is marred by some slight faults of production. In this case the critic
will note exactly the same sort of differences in tonal value as in the case of the violinist.
Some of the singer's notes will be perfect musical tones, others will be marred by faults of
intonation or of quality. But a great difference will be noted between faulty tones played
on the violin, and faulty tones sung by the human voice. In addition to their blemishes as
musical tones, the faulty notes of the voice also convey to the critical listener an idea of
the state of the singer's throat in producing them.

Every blemish on the beauty of a vocal tone, every fine shade of quality which detracts from
its perfection, indicates to the critical hearer some faulty action of the singer's vocal organs.
The more faulty the musical character of the singer's tones the more pronounced is this impression
of faulty production. On the other hand, just so nearly as the singer's tones approach perfection
as musical sounds, so do they also impress the ear of the critical listener as indicating the
approach to the perfect vocal action.

The critic could not impart to his untrained friend the impressions made by the violinist's
tones. Somewhat the same is true of the impressions made by the tones of the voice on the critical
ear. In voices of extremely nasal or throaty sound these blemishes can, of course, be detected
by the ordinary hearer. But the fine shades of difference in vocal tone quality, heard by the
trained critic, cannot be noted by the inexperienced listener.

This fine ability to discriminate between musical sounds comes only through experience in listening
to music, better still, when this has been combined with the actual study of music. But the
ability to judge the vocal actions of singers, through the sympathetic sensations of tone,
does not depend on any actual exercise of the listener's own voice. For the developing of this
ability the exercise of the ear suffices. The mere exercise of the ear, in listening to singers,
entails also the training of what may be called the "mental voice." Attentive listening to
voices, involving as a natural consequence the sub-conscious impressions of sympathetic sensations,
results in the development of a faculty to which this name, the mental voice, very aptly applies.

A music-lover whose experience of hearing singing and instrumental music has been wide enough
to develop the mental voice in a fair degree, possesses in this faculty a valuable means for
judging singers. The mental voice carries on a running commentary on the manner of production
of all the voices to which this music-lover listens. At every instant he is informed of the
exact condition of the singer's throat. For him there is an almost infinite variety of throaty
tones, each one indicating some degree and form of throat tension or stiffening. A perfect
vocal tone, on the other hand, is felt to be perfectly produced, as well as heard to be musically
perfect.

Equipped with a highly trained sense of hearing, and the resulting faculty of mental voice,
the lover of singing has an unfailing insight into the operations of the vocal mechanism. This
understanding of the workings of the vocal organs is the empirical knowledge of the voice.

This empirical knowledge of the voice can be possessed only by one who is equipped with a highly
cultivated ear. The keener the ear the more precise and definite is this understanding of the
voice. Season after season, as the music-lover continues to attend concerts, operas, and recitals,
his feeling for the voice becomes gradually more keen and discerning.

Further, empirical knowledge of the voice can be acquired in no other way than by actual experience
in listening to voices. No matter how keen and definite are the impressions of throat action
felt by the experienced hearer, these impressions cannot be described to the uninitiated. In
fact, these impressions are to a great extent of a character not capable of being recorded
in precise terms. The general nature of a throaty tone, for example, is thoroughly understood.
But of the thousands of varieties of the throaty tone no adequate description can be given.
Each observer must learn for himself to hear these fine shades of difference in tone quality. 

But as for thieves, of which these places be full, and which never fall from the craft after
they once fall thereunto, it is a pity that Sanctuary should screen them, and much more man-quellors,
whom God bade to take from the altar and kill them, if their murder were wilful; and where
it is otherwise there need we not the sanctuaries that God appointed in the old law. For if either
necessity, his own defence or misfortune draweth him to that deed, a pardon serveth, which
either the law granteth of course, or the King of pity. Then look we now how few Sanctuary
men there be whom any favourable necessity compel to go thither; and then see, on the other
side, what a sort there be commonly therein of them whom wilful unthriftiness have brought
to nought. What rabble of thieves, murderers, and malicious heinous traitors, and that in two places
especially; the one the elbow of the city [that of Westminster] and the other [St. Martin's-le-Grand]
in the very bowels.

I dare well avow it, weigh the good they do with the hurt that cometh of them, and ye shall
find it much better to lack both than to have both; and this I say, although they were not
abused as they now be, and so long have been that I fear me ever they will be, while men be
afraid to set their hands to amend them; as though God and St. Peter were the patrons of ungracious
living. Now unthrifts riot and run in debt upon the boldness of these places; yea, and rich
men run thither with poor men's goods. There they build, there they spend, and bid their creditors
go whistle.

Men's wives run thither with their husband's plate, and say they dare not abide with their
husbands for beating. Thieves bring thither their stolen goods, and live thereon riotously; there
they devise new robberies, and nightly they steal out they rob and rive, kill and come in
again, as though those places give them not only a safeguard for the harm they have done, but
a licence also to do more."

There is one aspect of the privilege, not mentioned in this balanced judgment, which deserves consideration
and that is the inadequacy of the law to assure victims of injustice against oppression. As an
instance of the sort which, it may be hoped, was not too common, we may take the following (undated)
petition:

"Margery, who was the wife of Thomas Tany, late chivaler of the College of Windsor, & is Executrix
of his last will and testament, pleads that whereas on the Thursday ... in the Feast of Corpus
Christi in the late insurrection proclamation was made that all who had any right or title to
recover any debts or bequests whatsoever should come before the King
at the Tower of London and shew their evidence, &c, without delay,
she, the s'd Margery, and her eldest son John Thorpe, came with a
bill to present to the King for recovery of debts due to her by force
of the will & test of her s'd baron & of the judgments given & rendered
by three Chancellors of the King; and they had not leisure to present
the bill then, but on the morrow, Saturday, delivered the s'd bill
to the King in his Wardrobe in London.

But forasmuch as the Father in God, the Archb'p of Canterbury, then Chancellor of England and
Judge in this, ... had sequestrated all the goods and chattels of Sir William Mugge, then Dean
of the said College, escheated into the hands of Walter Almaly, present Dean of the s'd College,
commanding by letters patent the s'd Walter, under certain penalties, that no livery should
be made until satisfaction had been done to the s'd Margery for the debts due from the said W^m. to
the said M. by the said test, and that John de Thorp, younger son of the s'd Marg^t., had received
a mandate from the s'd Chancellor to summon the s'd Walter and Sir Richard Metford to appear
& answer before the Chancellor, the s'd Sir Walter caused the s'd
John Thorp, eldest son of the s'd Margery, to be arrested and kept
him in prison for three days, wrongfully and in contempt of the King
... and besides this the s'd Sir Walter caused the s'd John de Thorp,
younger son of the s'd, M., to be arrested in Suthwerk by John Chirche,
serjeant of London; and while he was under arrest the s'd Walter,
of malice prepense, assaulted him, beating him on the head and other
parts of the body, which beating & punishment of the body caused his
death in the prison of Newgate; where, though he offered repeatedly
to find as sureties good and sufficient men of the City of London
to offer themselves before the Mayor & Sheriffs of London, to wit,
the then mayor, William Walleworth, to be responsible for him, body
for body, yet was he not delivered out of prison until he was dead,
and moreover the s'd Walter threatened to destroy the s'd Margery
as he had destroyed her son, so that she took sanctuary and dared
not issue forth for fear of death," etc.

It has been stated that
all churches, parochial, collegiate, and cathedral, were sanctuaries;
but there were in different parts of England about thirty supreme
sanctuaries, of which Westminster, York, Durham, Glastonbury, Ely,
Ripon, and Beverley may be taken as types.

They owed this pre-eminence to the possession of relics and stories of miracles wrought by the
tutelar saint for the protection of suppliants or the chastisement of those who violated the
shrine. The origin of the civil sanction is most obscure. Individual churches attributed their
franchise to the favour of ancient kings--Hexham to Ecfrith, King
of Northumbria; Ripon and Beverley to Athelstan, and York to Edward
the Confessor.

Tradition affirms that in primitive times the term of protection
at Durham was thirty-seven days and at Beverley thirty days on the
first and second occasions, and if the fugitive resorted thither a
third time, he had to become serviens ecclesiæ imperpetuum.

These intimations, if true, point to a process of evolution from
small beginnings represented by the three nights' protection to which
the sanctuary rights of an ordinary church were limited by the laws
of Alfred (887) to the extraordinary privileges which, if we accept
Mr. R. H. Forster's conclusions, existed at Durham.

These concerned both the area and the duration of the immunity. At other places the right of sanctuary
comprised the precinct as well as the church itself. For instance, at Beverley, the story goes
that Athelstan, on his return from a victorious campaign against King Constantine, conferred the
privilege on the church of St. John and a portion of the surrounding country. The bounds were
indicated by crosses. The base and part of the shaft of one of them is, or was lately, to be
seen in a hedge on the road to Skidby. Others were erected at Molescroft, on the road towards
Cherry or North Burton, and near Killingwoldgrove, on the Bishop's Burton road. At Durham, however,
if we follow Mr. Forster--and he makes out an excellent case--the
precinct included the whole of the County Palatine, and the term of
protection, instead of being confined to the ordinary period of forty
days, was perpetual.

At York, Beverley, and Hexham there was what may be termed an outermost precinct and various
inner precincts, the relative sanctity of which is shown by the scale of punishments inflicted for
violation. In Prior Richard's history of Hexham it is stated that there were at that place
four crosses, each of them erected at a distance of one mile from the church, and in a different
direction.

Anyone who arrested a fugitive within these limits was fined two
hundreth, or sixteen pounds.

For an arrest "infra villam" the penalty was twofold. If the person were seized "infra muros
atrii ecclesiæ," it was threefold; and if within the church itself, sixfold, to which was
added penance "sicut de sacrilegiis." Supposing, however, that anyone, "vesano spiritu agitatus
diabolico ausu quemquam capere præsumpserit in cathedra lapidea juxta altare quam Angli vocant
fridstol, id est, cathedram quietudinis vel pacis, vel etiam ad feretrum sanctarum reliquiarum
quod est post atlare"--then the crime was botolos (without remedy); no monetary payment could
be received as compensation.

When Leland was at Beverley, he was shown a frithstool, on which he made the following note:
"Hæc sedes lapidea Freedstool dicitur, i.e., Pacis Cathedra, ad quam reus perveniens omnimodam
habet securitatem." There was a frithstool endowed with similar privileges at York Minster, and
another at Durham. Stone seats claimed to be frithstools are still shown at Hexham and Beverley.

Of
all the localities which drew to themselves especial distinction
as sanctuaries none rivals in antiquarian interest the monastery of
Durham.

This is because of the existence of an ancient work on the "Rites of Durham," which enters
in considerable detail into the ceremonial observed on such occasions, and was received for a long
time as authoritative. Recent criticism by Mr. R. H. Forster has rather impaired the credibility
of the document. He points out that its professed date is 1593, or more than fifty years after
the dissolution of the Priory; and maintains that it is not a first-hand chronicle of events of "the
floryshinge tyme" before the suppression of the house, but a compilation
based partly on old records and partly on the reminiscences of aged
residents.

Nevertheless, the narrative must be considered to possess a high degree of historical value, and is
undeniably picturesque. We catch a glimpse of the fugitive "knocking and rapping" at the grim
twelfth-century knocker "to have yt opened." We see him "letten in" by "certen men that did lie
alwaies in two chambers over the said north church door," and running
straightway to the Galilee bell and tolling it.

("In the weste end in the north allie and over the Galleley dour there, in a belfray called the Galleley
Steple, did hing iiii goodly great bells.") The work goes on to state that "when the Prior had intelligence
thereof, then he dyd send word and command them that they should keape themselves within the sanctuary,
that is to saie, within the Church and Churchyard."

This was until the official of the convent and witnesses had assembled for the formal admission
and registration of the fugitive, which took place in the nave, in the Sacrist's exchequer, which
was in the north aisle of the choir or "in domo registrali." The official who presided over the ceremony
was commonly the Sacrist, but the duty was sometimes performed by the Chancellor of the Cathedral,
the Sub-prior, or a monk qualified as a notary public.

As for the witnesses, they might be monks, servants of the convent, clerks, masons employed on
the fabric, or they might be friends of the fugitive who had attended him to Durham as a bodyguard.
Frequently, however, they were casual onlookers or persons who had flocked out of curiosity
to the "show."

On admission, the "grithman" received a gown of black cloth "maid with a cross of yeallowe cloth called
St. Cuthbert's Cross, sett on the lefte shoulder of the arme" and was permitted to lie "within
the church or saunctuary in a grate ... standing and adjoining unto
the Galilei dore on the south side," and "had meite, cost and charge
for 37 days."

The writer of the book alleges that maintenance was found for fugitives "unto such tyme as the prior
and convent could gett them conveyed out of the dioces," but Mr. Forster traverses this statement
and adduces documentary evidence to show that, in various instances, "grithmen" were permanently
domiciled in the diocese.

We have, however, an account of one such "conveyance."

A certain Coleon de Wolsyngham, in the year 1487, on retiring from the church, was delivered by
the sheriff to the nearest constables, and after that by constables to constables, that he might
be conducted to the nearest seaport, there to take shipping and never return. He is stated to have
received a white cross made of wood.

Bracton and Britton both state that the criminal could elect his own port, but we generally
hear of a port being assigned him by the coroner, and he was required
to proceed thither without deviating.

A case is on record where "one A. had abjured the King's realm and went a little out of the highway;
the menee was raised upon him, and he was taken in the highway, and this was found by the jury."
Nobody was suffered to molest the felon on his journey seawards on
pain of forfeiting goods and chattels.

This part of our subject receives excellent illustration from the customary of the Cinque Ports:

"And
when any shall flee into the church or churchyard for felony, claiming thereof the privilege for
any action of his life, the head officer of the same liberty, where the said church or churchyard
is, with his fellow jurats or coroners of the said liberty, shall
come to him and shall ask him the cause of his being there, and if
he will not confess felony, he shall be had out of the said sanctuary;
and if he will confess felony immediately it shall be entered in record,
and his goods and chattels shall be forfeited, and he shall tarry
there forty days--or before, if he will, he shall make his abjuration
in form following before the head officer, who shall assign to him
the port of his passage, and after his abjuration there shall be delivered
unto him by the head officer, or his assignees, a cross, and proclamation
shall be made that while he be going by the highway towards the port
to him assigned, he shall go in the King's peace, and that no man
shall grieve him in so doing on pain to forfeit his goods and chattels;
and the said felon shall lay his right hand on the book and swear
thus:

"'You hear, Mr. Coroner, that I, A. B., a thief, have stolen
such a thing, or have killed such a woman, or man, or a child, and
am the King's felon; and for that I have done many evil deeds and
felonies in this same his land, I do abjure and forswear the lands
of the Kings of England, and that I shall haste myself to the port
of Dover, which you have given or assigned me; and that I shall not
go out of the highway; and if I do, I will that I shall be taken as
a thief and the King's felon; and that at the same place I shall tarry
but one ebb and flood if I may have passage; and if I cannot have
passage in the same place, I shall go every day into the sea to my
knees, and above, crying, "Passage for the love of God and King N.
his sake;" and if I may not within forty days together, I shall get
me again into the church as the King's felon.

So God me help, and by this book, according to your judgment.'

"And
if a clerk, flying to the church for felony, affirming himself to
be a clerk, he shall not abjure the realm, but yielding himself to
the laws of the realm, shall enjoy the liberties of the church, and
shall be delivered to the ordinary, to be safe kept in the convict
prison, according to the laudable custom of the realm of England."

When it became known that a malefactor had taken refuge in a church it was the duty of the authorities
to beset the place, and send for the coroner, who parleyed with the person in the manner described
in the above recital

.
 It is only sensuously beautiful;
it speaks to the ear, but does not appeal to the intellect.

Yet it may well be asked whether the highest type of coloratura singing, pure tonal beauty,
does not appeal to a deeper, more elemental set of emotions than are reached by dramatically
expressive singing. This question would call for a profound psychological discussion, hardly
in place in a work devoted to the technical problem of tone-production. But this much is certain:
Coloratura singing still has a strong hold on the affections of the music loving public. Even
to-day audiences are moved by the vocal feats of some famous queen of song fully as profoundly
as by the performance of a modern dramatic or realistic opera.

To describe a sound is an extremely difficult task. The tone of the muted horn, for example,
is perfectly familiar to the average musician. Yet who would undertake to describe in words
the tone of the muted horn? A description of the sounds produced by a perfectly managed voice
is almost as difficult to frame in words. Still the old Italian masters succeeded in finding
words to describe perfect singing. These few simple phrases--open the throat, support the tone,
sing the tones forward, sing on the breath--embody a most beautiful and complete description
of vocal perfection. The empirical study of the voice can hardly be expected to go further
than this. From the old masters we have received a complete record of all that need be known
empirically about the voice.

CHAPTER V

EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE IN MODERN VOICE CULTURE

It was pointed out in Chapter I of Part III that there is no possibility of conflict between
empirical and scientific knowledge. Modern Voice Culture seems to present a direct contradiction
of this statement. The vocal teacher's empirical understanding of the voice conflicts at every
step with his supposedly scientific knowledge. No doubt the reader is already aware of the
real meaning of this apparent contradiction. It only bears out the philosophic rule; an accepted
science must be abandoned so soon as its deductions are found to be not in accord with observed
facts.

Modern methods of instruction in singing can be understood only by following out this idea
of conflict between known facts and accepted, though erroneous, scientific doctrines. As we
have seen, the only universally accepted theory of supposedly scientific Voice Culture is the
idea of direct mechanical guidance of the voice. Every vocal teacher attempts to make his empirical
knowledge conform to this mechanical idea. As the empirical knowledge is correct, and the mechanical
idea a complete mistake, conflict between the two is inevitable.

Every modern teacher of singing possesses in full measure the empirical understanding of the
voice. To this statement hardly an exception need be made. Probably the most startling fact
concerning the wide diffusion of this knowledge is that the nature of this knowledge is so
thoroughly ignored. Because the psychological process is purely sub-conscious, empirical knowledge
is always indirectly and generally unconsciously applied. In the teacher's mind the most prominent
idea is that of mechanical vocal guidance. His attention is always directly turned to this
idea. Empirical knowledge, consisting merely of a succession of auditory and muscular sensations,
lurks in the background of consciousness.

To the intelligent vocal teacher there is something peculiarly fascinating about the study
of tone-production. In listening to any faulty singer we feel with the utmost precision what
is wrong with the voice. Each imperfect tone informs us clearly and definitely just where the
wrong muscular contraction is located. It seems so easy to tell the singer what to do in order
to bring the tone out perfectly. Under the influence of the mechanical idea we try to express
this feeling in the terms of muscular action. This attempt is never successful; the singer
cannot be brought to understand our meaning. Yet it is so clear in our own minds that our inability
to express it is extremely tantalizing. We go on, constantly hoping to find a way to define
the mechanical processes so clearly indicated to the ear. We always feel that we are just on
the verge of the great discovery. The solution of the problem of tone-production is almost
within our grasp, yet it always eludes us.

It was stated in Chapter V of Part I that empirical knowledge of the voice, based on the singer's
sensations, is used to supplement and interpret the doctrines of mechanical vocal guidance.
This is in the main true, so far as the vocal teacher is aware. But here again the result of
the sub-conscious character of empirical knowledge of the voice is seen. As a matter of fact
the real situation is the direct reverse of that described in the chapter mentioned. The mechanical
doctrines are used in the attempt to interpret the empirical knowledge. This fact is well brought
out in the following passage from Kofler: "The teacher must imitate the wrong muscle-action
and tone of his pupil as an illustration of the negative side." (The Art of Breathing, N. Y.,
1889.) Kofler does not touch on the question, how the teacher is able to locate the wrong muscle-action
of the pupil. He takes this ability for granted; it is so purely an intuitive process that
he does not stop to inquire into the source of this information of the pupil's vocal action.
Through his sense of hearing he sub-consciously locates the faults in the pupil's tone-production.
His only conscious application of this knowledge is the attempt to explain to the pupil the
wrong muscle-action. This he naturally tries to do in the terms of mechanical action and muscular
operation. Thus the mechanical doctrine is used in the attempt to explain the empirical knowledge.
Yet the teacher is conscious only of citing the mechanical rule, and believes this to cover
the entire instruction.

In the preceding chapter it was seen that the perfectly produced vocal tone may be considered
in a variety of aspects. Each one of these aspects is characterized by a fairly distinct set
of sympathetic sensations. Of faulty modes of throat action, as revealed by sympathetic sensations,
there is an almost infinite variety. Of this wide variety of forms of throat tension the most
prominent are those indicated by sets of sympathetic sensations, the direct opposites of those
characterizing the perfect vocal action. Thus the open throat is indicated by one set of sympathetic
sensations, the lack of this characteristic of tone by an opposite set, etc.

Whatever distinct fault of production the pupil's tone indicates, the master immediately notes
the character of the faulty throat action. The master feels, simply and directly, what is wrong
with the student's tone-production. Whence this knowledge comes he does not stop to inquire.
Suppose the pupil to sing an exercise, and to produce tones which stick in the throat, instead
of coming out freely. The master simply hears that the pupil's voice is caught in the throat;
he does not observe that he is informed of this condition by muscular as well as auditory sensations.

This ignoring of the psychological nature of the impressions of tone is not necessarily detrimental
to successful instruction. On the contrary, the master's empirical insight into the vocal operations
of the pupil would probably not be advanced by an understanding of the psychological process.
It is sufficient for the teacher's purpose to hear that the pupil's voice is caught in the
throat. What robs this hearing, or feeling, of all value is this: the master attempts to interpret
the sensation as an indication of the need of some specific muscular action, to be directly
performed by the pupil. To this end he cites the mechanical rule, assumed to be indicated by
the pupil's faulty vocal action. This may be, for example, the opening of the throat to give
room for the tone to expand. It seems so perfectly simple to the teacher;--the pupil narrows
his throat, and so holds in the tone; let him expand his throat and the tone will come out
freely. This conclusion seems so clearly indicated by the sound of the tones that the master
almost inevitably gives the precise instruction: "Open your throat and let your voice come
out." This sums up, to the master's satisfaction, everything the pupil need do to correct this
particular fault of tone-production.

Other sets of sympathetic sensations, awakened by badly produced tones, are interpreted in
the same manner. A tone heard to be held in the back of the throat is believed to indicate
the need of bringing the voice forward in the mouth. Other forms of throaty production are
taken to show a lack of support, a wrong management of the breath, a need of breath-control,
a misuse of nasal resonance, or an improper action of the vocal cords. In all these attempts
to interpret sympathetic sensations by means of mechanical doctrines the teacher naturally
relies on those doctrines in which he believes most firmly. Sympathetic sensations are indeed
sometimes cited in proof of certain theories of breath-control, and also of nasal resonance.
Both these topics are worthy of separate attention.

Sympathetic Sensations and Nasal Resonance

One of the most widely accepted theories of the vocal action is that the higher notes of the
voice are influenced by reinforcing vibrations located in the nose and forehead. Whether this
idea was derived more from direct than from sympathetic sensations need not be determined now.
It is at any rate certain that a perfectly sung tone gives to the hearer the impression of
nasal influence of some kind. The exact nature of this influence has never been determined.
It may be air resonance, or sounding-board resonance, or both combined. Satisfactory proof
on this point is lacking. In the belief of the practical teacher, however, this impression
of nasal influence is the strongest argument in favor of nasal resonance.

Turning now to the question of nasal quality, strictly speaking, tones of this objectionable
character always awaken the sympathetic sensations of contraction somewhere in the nose. Why
such a contraction should cause this unpleasant sound of the voice is a profound mystery. Perhaps
wrong tension of the soft palate exerts an influence on the actions of the vocal cords; or
it may be that the form of the nasal cavities is altered by the muscular contraction. This
aspect of the vocal action has never been scientifically investigated. The sympathetic sensation
of nasal contraction or pinching is at any rate very pronounced. Curiously, this sympathetic
sensation is cited as an argument in favor of their respective theories, by both the advocates
and the opponents of nasal resonance.

Sympathetic Sensations and Breath-Control

Certain forms of exaggerated throat stiffness are frequently held to indicate the need of breath-control.
The faulty vocal action in question is analyzed by the breath-control advocates substantially
as follows: "Owing to the outflow of the breath not being checked at the proper point, the
entire vocal mechanism is thrown out of adjustment. The singer exerts most of his efforts in
the endeavor to prevent the escape of the breath; to this end he contracts his throat and stiffens
his tongue and jaw. His tones are forced, harsh, and breathy; they lack musical quality. His
voice runs away with him and he cannot control or manage it. In the attempt to obtain some
hold on his voice he 'reaches' for his tones with his throat muscles. The more he tries to
regain control of the runaway breath the worse does his state become."

This extreme condition of throat stiffness is unfortunately by no means rare. So far as concerns
the sympathetic sensations awakened by this kind of singing the condition is graphically described
by the breath-control advocates. But the conclusion is entirely unjustified that this condition
indicates the lack of breath-control. Only the preconceived notion of breath-control leads
to this inference. The sympathetic sensations indicate a state of extreme muscular tension
of the throat; this is about the only possible analysis of the condition.

* * *

Empirical impressions of vocal tones determine the character of most present-day instruction
in singing. This means no more than to say that throughout all vocal training the teacher listens
to the pupil's voice. The impressions of tone received by the teacher's ear cannot fail to
inform the teacher of the condition of the pupil's throat in producing the voice. For the teacher
to seek to apply this information in imparting the correct vocal action to the pupil is inevitable.

Almost every teacher begins a course of instruction by having the pupil run through the prescribed
series of mechanical exercises and rules. Breathing is always taken up first. Breath-control,
laryngeal action, registers, and resonance follow usually in this order. The time devoted to
this course of training may vary from a few weeks to several months. This mechanical instruction
is almost always interspersed with songs and arias. The usual procedure is to devote about
half of each lesson to mechanical doctrines and the remainder to real singing.

Blind faith in the efficacy of this mechanical training is the teacher's only motive in giving
it. Very little attention is paid to the sound of the pupil's voice during the study of mechanical
rules and doctrines. It is simply taken for granted that the voice must be put through this
course. Once the mechanical course has been covered, the pupil's voice is supposed, in a vague
way, to be "placed." From that time on, whether it be at the end of two months of study or
of two years, the instruction is based solely on empirical impressions of tone.

Little remains to be said of the nature of this empirical instruction. It always retains the
mechanical aspect. Whatever fault of production is noted, the teacher seeks to correct the
fault by applying some mechanical rule. The futility of this form of instruction has already
been pointed out.

Only two ways of applying empirical knowledge of the voice are known to the modern vocal teacher.
These are, first, to tell the pupil to "open the throat," or to "support the tone," or to perform
whatever other mechanical operation seems to be indicated as necessary by the sound of the
tone; second, to bid the student to "feel that the tone is supported," to "feel that the throat
is open," etc. Under these circumstances the little advantage derived from empirical knowledge
in modern Voice Culture is readily understood.

CHAPTER VI

SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE OF THE VOICE

So far as any definite record can be made, the knowledge of the voice obtained by attentive
listening to voices has now been set down. The next step in the scientific study of tone-production
is the consideration of all knowledge of the voice obtained from sources other than empirical.
In other words, the knowledge of the voice usually classed as scientific is now to be examined.

Three sciences are generally held to contribute all that can possibly be known about the vocal
action. These are anatomy, acoustics, and mechanics. Of these anatomy has received by far the
most attention from vocal scientists. The laws of acoustics, bearing on the voice, have also
been carefully considered. Beyond the theory of breath-control, little attempt has been made
to apply the principles of mechanics in Vocal Science. Psychology, the science most intimately
concerned with the management of the voice, has received almost no attention in this connection.

A complete record of the teachings of the established sciences with regard to the voice demands
the separate consideration of the four sciences mentioned. Each will therefore be treated in
turn. In the case of each of these sciences it is seen that the most essential facts of the
vocal action have been definitely established. Many questions still remain to be satisfactorily
answered which are of great interest to the theoretical student of the voice. Yet in spite
of the lack of exact knowledge on these points, enough is now known to furnish the basis for
a practical science of Voice Culture.

The Anatomy of the Vocal Mechanism

This subject has been so exhaustively studied that nothing new can well be discovered regarding
the muscular structure of the vocal organs. In all probability the reader is sufficiently acquainted
with the anatomy of the larynx and its connections. Only a very brief outline of the subject
is therefore demanded. The muscles concerned with breathing call for no special notice in this
connection.

The special organ of voice is the larynx. This consists of four cartilages, with their connecting
ligaments,--the thyroid, the cricoid, and the two arytenoids, and of nine so-called intrinsic
muscles,--two crico-thyroid, right and left, two thyro-arytenoid, two posterior crico-arytenoid,
two lateral crico-arytenoid, and one arytenoideus. The inner edges of the thyro-arytenoid muscles
form the vocal cords. The hyoid bone, serving as a medium of attachment for the tongue, may
also be considered a portion of the larynx. By means of the extrinsic muscles the larynx is
connected with the bones of the chest, neck, and head.

While the muscular structure of the vocal organs is thoroughly known, the actions of the laryngeal
muscles in tone-production have never been absolutely determined. This much is definitely established:
Vocal tone is produced when the vocal cords are brought together and held on tension, and the
air in the lungs is expired with sufficient force to set the vocal cords in motion. The tension
of the vocal cords can be increased by the contraction of their muscular tissues, the two thyro-arytenoid
muscles; further, increased tension of the cords can also result from the tilting of the thyroid
cartilage on the cricoid, by the contraction of the crico-thyroid muscles.

It is also definitely proved that the pitch of the vocal tone varies with the state of tension
of the vocal cords; increasing the degree of tension raises the pitch, decreasing the tension
lowers it. As to the relative importance of the different groups of muscles in varying the
tension of the vocal cords, nothing has been definitely proved.

In addition to the variations in pitch resulting from variations in the tension of the vocal
cords, there is also much ground for believing that the pitch may be raised by shortening the
effective length of the vocal cords. This is apparently accomplished by the rotation of the
arytenoid cartilages; but the specific muscular contractions concerned in the rotation of the
arytenoids have not been located. 

Whether the celebrated Purple Codex of Rossano ever formed part of the library of Patirion
has not yet been determined. This wonderful parchment--now preserved at Rossano--is mentioned
for the first time by Cesare Malpica, who wrote some interesting things about the Albanian
and Greek colonies in Calabria, but it was only discovered, in the right sense of that word, in March
1879 by Gebhardt and Harnack. They illustrated it in their Evangeliorum Codex Graecus. Haseloff also
described it in 1898 (Codex Purpureus Rossanensis), and pointed out that its iconographical
value consists in the fact that it is the only Greek Testament MS. containing pictures of the life
of Christ before the eighth-ninth century. These pictures are indeed marvellous--more marvellous
than beautiful, like so many Byzantine productions; their value is such that the parchment
has now been declared a "national monument." It is sternly guarded, and if it is moved out of Rossano--as
happened lately when it was exhibited at Grottaferrata--it travels in the company of armed
carbineers.

Still pursued by the flock of women, I took to examining the floor of this church, which contains
tesselated marble pavements depicting centaurs, unicorns, lions, stags, and other beasts. But my contemplation
of these choice relics was disturbed by irrelevant remarks on the part of the worldly females,
who discovered in the head of the stag some subtle peculiarity that stirred their sense of
humour.

"Look!" said one of them to her neighbour.

"He has horns. Just like your Pasquale."

"Pasquale indeed! And how about Antonio?"

I enquired whether they knew what kind of animals these were.

"Beasts of the ancients. Beasts that nobody knows. Beasts that have horns--like certain Christians.
. . ."

From the terrace of green sward that fronts this ruined monastery you can see the little town
of Corigliano, whose coquettish white houses lie in a fold of the
hills.

Corigliano--[Greek: xorion hellaion] (land of olives): the derivation,
if not correct, is at least appropriate, for it lies embowered in
a forest of these trees.

A gay place it was, in Bourbon times, with a ducal ruler of its own. Here, they say, the remnants
of the Sybarites took refuge after the destruction of their city whose desolate plain lies
at our feet, backed by the noble range of Dolcedorme. Swinburne, like a sensible man, takes the
Sybarites under his protection; he defends their artificially shaded streets and those other
signs of voluptuousness which, to judge by certain modern researches, seem to have been chiefly
contrived for combating the demon of malaria. Earthly welfare, the cult of material health
and ease--such was their ideal.

In sharpest contrast to these strivings stands the aim of those old monks who scorned the body
as a mere encumbrance, seeking spiritual enlightenment and things not of this earth.

And now, Sybarites and Basileans--alike in ruins!

A man of to-day, asked which of the two civilizations he would wish restored, would not hesitate
long in deciding for the Hellenic one. Readers of Lenormant will call to mind his glowing pages on the
wonders that might be found buried on the site of Sybaris. His plan of excavation sounds feasible
enough.

But how remote it becomes, when one remembers the case of Herculaneum! Here, to our certain knowledge,
many miracles of antique art and literature lie within a few feet
of our reach; yet nothing is done. These hidden monuments, which are
the heritage of all humanity, are withheld from our eyes by the dog-in-the-manger
policy of a country which, even without foreign assistance, could
easily accomplish the work, were it to employ thereon only half the
sum now spent in feeding, clothing and supervising a horde of criminals,
every one of whom ought to be hanged ten times over. Meanwhile other
nations are forbidden to co-operate; the fair-minded German proposals
were scornfully rejected; later on, those of Sir Charles Waldstein.

"What!"
says the Giornale d' Italia, "are we to have international excavation-committees
thrust upon us? Are we to be treated like the Turks?"

That, gentle
sirs, is precisely the state of the case.

The object of such committees
is to do for the good of mankind what a single nation is powerless
or unwilling to do. Your behaviour at Herculaneum is identical with
that of the Turks at Nineveh. The system adopted should likewise be
the same.

I shall never see that consummation. A flesh-lined cavity is capable of reinforcing tones
covering a range of several notes. Further, the vowel sound, and presumably also the tone quality,
are determined more by the action of the vocal cords than by the adjustment of the resonance
cavities. "The glottal lips vibrate differently for the different vowels." This adjustment
of the glottal lips "presumably occurs by nervously aroused contractions of the fibers of the
muscles in the glottal lips." Continuing, Prof. Scripture says:

"Physiologically stated, the action for a vowel is as follows: Each glottal lip consists mainly
of a mass of muscles supported at the ends and along the lateral side. It bears no resemblance
to a membrane or a string. The two lips come together at their front ends, but diverge to the
rear. The rear ends are attached to the arytenoid cartilages. When the ends are brought together
by rotation of these arytenoid cartilages, the medial surfaces touch. At the same time they
are stretched by the action of the crico-thyroid muscles, which pull apart the points of support
at the ends.

"In this way the two masses of muscle close the air passage. To produce a vowel such a relation
of air pressure and glottal tension is arranged that the air from the trachea bursts the muscles
apart for a moment, after which they close again; the release of the puff of air reduces the
pressure in the trachea and they remain closed until the pressure is again sufficient to burst
them apart. With appropriate adjustments of the laryngeal muscles and air pressure this is
kept up indefinitely, and a series of puffs from the larynx is produced. The glottal lips open
partly by yielding sidewise,--that is, they are compressed,--and partly by being shoved upward
and outward. The form of the puff, sharp or smooth, is determined by the way in which the glottal
lips yield; the mode of yielding depends on the way in which the separate fibers of the muscles
are contracted.

"These puffs act on the vocal cavity, that is, on a complicated system of cavities (trachea,
larynx, pharynx, mouth, nose) with variable shapes, sizes, and openings. The effect of the
puffs on each element of the vocal cavity is double: first, to arouse in it a vibration with
a period depending on the cavity; second, to force on it a vibration of the same period as
that of the set of puffs. The prevalence of one of the factors over the other depends on the
form of the puff, the walls of the cavities, etc."

Prof. Scripture does not undertake to point out a difference between the correct vocal action
in tone-production, and any incorrect action. This difference in action does not seem capable
of definition by any analysis of the acoustic principles involved.

Mechanical Principles of the Vocal Action

In Part II, Chapter II, it was seen that the outflow of the breath in tone-production is checked
by the vocal cords, in accordance with Pascal's law of fluid pressures. Another law of mechanics
bearing on this operation is now to be considered, viz., the law of the transformation and
conservation of energy.

The application of the law of the transformation and conservation of energy to the operations
of the voice is nicely illustrated by the well-known candle-flame test of (supposedly) breath-control.
To perform this test the singer is instructed to practise the exercises for breath-control
while holding a lighted candle with the flame an inch or two in front of the lips. According
to the idea of the breath-control advocates, the expired breath should escape so slowly, and
with so little force, that no current of air can be detected at the lips, the expiration therefore
does not cause the candle flame to flicker.

Describing the toneless breathing exercises to be practised with the candle flame, Browne and
Behnke say, "Let it be observed that the above exercise is quite distinct from the well-known
practice of singing before a lighted candle, which is, comparatively speaking, an easy matter."
(Voice, Song, and Speech.) A very striking fact is stated correctly by Browne and Behnke,--there
is no current of air created at the lips during tone-production. Of the truth of this statement
the reader may readily convince himself by trying this same experiment with a candle flame,
or even with a lighted match. Hold a lighted match just in front of the lips and sing a powerful
tone. The quality of the tone is of no consequence so long as it be powerful. Just sing, shout,
yell, the louder the better. You will find that the flame is less affected under these circumstances
than by the quiet expiration of ordinary breathing.

Considerable practice and close attention are required in order to hold back the breath in
toneless breathing exercises. Whereas in producing any kind of powerful tone the breath normally
creates no current of air at the lips.

There is no reason for considering this experiment a test of correct tone-production. It is
impossible to produce a powerful tone of any kind, good, bad, or indifferent, and at the same
time to create an appreciable current of air at the lips.

Needless to say, the breath-control theorists have entirely failed to grasp the significance
of the candle-flame experiment. Yet we have here a demonstration of the mechanical law of tone-production.

Considered as a mechanical process, tone-production occurs when the energy exerted by the expiratory
muscles, in their contraction, is converted into energy of motion of the vocal cords.[8] In
other words, tone-production is an example of the transformation of energy. The law of the
transformation and conservation of energy must therefore apply to this operation. This law
is stated as follows: "Energy may be transformed from any of its forms to any other form. When
energy is thus transformed the quantity of energy in the resulting form or forms is equal to
the quantity of energy in the original form."

[Note 8: This exposition of the mechanical principle of tone-production is intended to be graphic,
rather than strictly technical. For the sake of simplicity, that portion of the expiratory
energy expended in friction against the throat walls, tongue, cheeks, etc., is disregarded,
as well as that expended in propelling the air out of the mouth, in displacing the same quantity
of external air, etc.]

The mechanical operation of tone-production comprises the following transformations of energy:
First, the energy exerted in the contraction of the expiratory muscles is converted into energy
of condensation or elasticity of the air in the lungs and trachea. Second, this energy of condensation
of the air is converted into energy of motion of the vocal cords. In other words, the expiratory
energy is transformed into energy of motion.

One objection, at first sight very serious, may be offered against this statement: the amount
of strength exerted in the contractions of the breath muscles seems many times greater than
is accounted for in the motion of the vocal cords. The movements of the vocal cords are so
slight as to be observable only with the aid of a specially devised apparatus, the stroboscope.
Can all the expiratory force expended in tone-production show such a small result? This apparent
objection is found to be groundless in view of the application in this operation of Pascal's
law. As this topic was fully treated in Chapter II of Part II, no further explanation is required
here.

The erroneous idea of vocal mechanics involved in the doctrine of breath-control is now fully
exposed. Tone can be produced only when the expired air exerts a pressure on the vocal cords.
There is no necessity for any conscious or voluntary check on the expiration. The energy of
the expiration is expended in setting the vocal cords in motion. No energy of condensation
is left in the expired air the instant it has passed the vocal cords. Beyond that point there
is no expiratory pressure.

In one sense it is true that the expiration is "controlled" in tone-production. But this control
is strictly an automatic action. The vocal cords are adjusted, by the appropriate muscular
contractions, to move in response to the air pressure exerted against them. This action involves,
as a necessary consequence, the holding back by the vocal cords of the out-rushing air. So
long as the vocal cords remain in the position for producing tone, they also control the expiration.
In this sense breath-control is an inseparable feature of tone-production.

All that need be known of the mechanics of the voice is therefore perfectly plain. The vocal
cords are set in motion by the pressure against them of the expired breath. This operation
is in accordance with Pascal's law and the law of the conservation of energy.

But this analysis throws no light on the nature of the correct vocal action. It is impossible
for the voice to produce a sound in any way other than that just described. In speaking or
in singing, in laughing or in crying, in every sound produced by the action of the vocal cords,
the mechanical principle is always the same. Nor is the bearing of this law limited to the
human voice. Every singing bird, every animal whose vocal mechanism consists of lungs and larynx,
illustrates the same mechanical principle of vocal action.

Only passing mention is required of the fallacy of the breath-band theory. The idea of any
necessity of relieving the vocal cords of the expiratory pressure is purely fanciful. How any
one with even a slight understanding of mechanics could imagine the checking of the breath
by the inflation of the ventricles of Morgagni, is hard to conceive.

The Psychology of Tone-Production

This subject was treated, in some detail, in Chapter V of Part II. In that chapter however
we were concerned more with a destructive criticism of the idea of mechanical tone-production
than with the positive features of vocal psychology. At the risk of some repetition it is therefore
advisable here to sum up the laws of psychology bearing on the vocal action.

Considered as a psychological process, tone-production in singing involves three distinct operations.
First, the mental ear conceives a tone of definite pitch, quality, vowel sound, and power.
Second, the vocal organs prepare to adjust themselves, by the appropriate muscular contractions,
for the production of the tone mentally conceived. Third, the fiat of will is issued, causing
the muscular contractions to be performed. These three operations are executed as one conscious,
voluntary act. Let us inquire to what extent consciousness is concerned with each operation.

As conscious volitional impulses, the mental conception of the tone, and the fiat of will to
produce the tone, are well enough understood. These two operations call for no extended consideration.
We are at present concerned only with the psychological laws bearing on the muscular adjustments
of the vocal organs.

Muscular contractions result from the transmission to the muscular fibers of motor nerve impulses.
These nerve impulses originate in the motor nerve centers. They can never, under any circumstances,
rise into consciousness. Contractions of the voluntary muscles occur either as reflex or as
voluntary actions. In both cases the motor nerve impulses originate in the same nerve centers.
In the case of reflex actions these lower muscular centers alone are involved; in voluntary
actions the originating of the motor impulses is "controlled" by consciousness. In deciding
that an action shall be performed, and in what way it is to be performed, consciousness directs
that each motor center involved shall send out the appropriate discharges of nerve impulse.

Complex muscular activities require the sending out of nerve impulses from various motor centers.
Such activities are usually not performed instantaneously, but require a longer or shorter
time. Thus we may consider it as one action for the writer to rise from his chair, to lower
the window and adjust the shade, and then to return to his seat. In this case a large number
of motor centers are successively involved; at the proper instant each center discharges its
impulse. To this end the motor centers must be instructed when to come into activity.

This distribution of nerve impulse is effected by the power of coördination. In voluntary actions
coördination is accompanied by conscious control.[9] But coördination is not a function of
the higher cerebral centers, that is, of consciousness. How the connection is made between
the higher cerebral centers and the lower motor centers is a complete mystery. All that can
be said is that the ideas of movements are transmitted to the motor centers, and that these
send out the appropriate motor impulses.

[Note 9: In this connection it is advisable to point out a difference between the meanings
attached to the word "control" in psychology and in Vocal Science. The psychologist classes
habitual movements as either automatic or controlled. Automatic movements are purely reflex;
the individual does not consciously decide whether they shall be performed or not. Psychologically
considered, the control of a movement is simply the conscious volitional decision whether the
movement shall be performed. To adopt the language of Psychology, we should speak of voice
management, and of breath regulation, instead of vocal control, breath control, etc. In the
following chapters the accepted psychological usage of the word "control" will so far as possible
be adopted.]

Turning now to the muscular adjustments of the vocal organs, these adjustments are seen to
be independent of conscious guidance. When a tone is mentally conceived the vocal organs adjust
themselves, in response to some mysterious guidance, for the production of the tone. The vocal
cords assume the appropriate degree of tension according to the pitch of the tone to be sung.
Both the quality of the tone and the vowel are determined by the combined adjustments of the
laryngeal muscles and of the muscles which fix the shape and size of the resonance cavities.
The power of the tone is regulated by the force of the breath blast; for each degree of power
some special adjustment of the vocal cords is required.

All these adjustments are executed as one concrete and individual act in response to the volitional
impulse contained in the mental conception of the tone. The tone is conceived as a concrete
whole. It is not normally broken up mentally into its four aspects of pitch, quality, vowel,
and power. True, each one of these four characteristics of the tone may be separately considered
by the singer. So also, to a certain extent, may the adjustments of the vocal organs be performed
with special reference to one or the other characteristic of the tone. But in every case the
muscular contractions are performed without direct conscious guidance. Whatever be the character
of the tone mentally demanded, the vocal organs instantly adjust themselves to produce the tone.

What is meant by saying that the muscular contractions are performed without conscious guidance?
Does this mean that the singer is unconscious of the muscular contractions? Not at all. Muscular
sense informs the singer, more or less distinctly, of the state of contraction or relaxation
of the various muscles of the vocal organs. The singer always knows fairly well the condition
of the various parts of the vocal mechanism. What is meant is this: The singer does not consciously
direct the vocal organs to assume certain positions and conditions, and does not instruct the
various muscles to contract in certain ways. The singer does not need to know, and in fact
cannot know, what muscular contractions are required to produce any desired tone.

Some connection exists between the organs of hearing and the vocal mechanism. That this connection
has a physical basis in the nervous structure is fairly well established. "The centers for
sight and for arm movements, for instance, or those of hearing and of vocal movements, have
connecting pathways between them." (Feeling and Will, Jas. M. Baldwin, 1894.) The psychological
law of tone-production is that the vocal organs adjust themselves, without conscious guidance,
to produce the tones mentally conceived. In actual singing the practical application of this
law is that the voice is guided by the ear.

This guidance of the voice by the ear is incessant. It must not be understood that the mental
ear simply conceives a single tone, and that the vocal machinery then operates without further
guidance. All the characteristics of the vocal tones,--pitch, quality, and power,--are constantly
changing. These changes require corresponding changes in the muscular adjustments. The muscular
contractions in turn are guided by the demands of the mental ear. As a psychological process,
singing may therefore be analyzed as follows: The singer mentally sings the composition. In
response to the ever varying demands of the ear the vocal organs adjust themselves to produce
actually the sounds thus mentally conceived. The singer listens to these sounds and at every
instant compares them to the mental conception. If the tones actually produced fail to correspond
exactly to those mentally conceived, the singer instantly notes this variation and bids the
vocal organs to correct it. The ear has therefore a dual function in singing. First, the mental
ear directs the voice in its operations. Second, the physical ear acts as a check or corrective
on the voice.

To sum up the psychology of tone-production, the singer guides or manages the voice by attentively
listening to the tones of the voice. This is the only possible means of vocal guidance. The
voice and the ear together form one complete organ.

But we are still apparently as far as ever from the specific meaning of the correct vocal action.
That the voice instinctively obeys the commands of the ear may be true theoretically. In actual
practice we know that this does not by any means always occur. Singers are often unable to
get the desired results from their voices, even when they believe themselves to rely on the
sense of hearing. There must therefore be some influence which under certain conditions interferes
with the operations of the vocal organs. The problem of tone-production is thus seen to be
one of psychology. It narrows down to this: What can interfere with the normal action of the
voice and prevent the vocal organs from instinctively responding to the demands of the ear?
A satisfactory answer to this problem will be found only by a consideration of all available
knowledge of the voice, both empirical and scientific. This forms the material of the final
division of the present work. First, the manner of investigation usually accepted as scientific.
This is, to study the vocal mechanism; to determine, as far as possible, the laws of its operation,
in accordance with the principles of anatomy, acoustics, mechanics, and psychology. Second,
the manner of investigation generally called empirical. This begins with the observing of the
tones of the voice, considered simply as sounds. From the tones we work back to the vocal organs
and apply to them the information obtained by attentive listening. Both of these means of investigation
have been utilized; we are now in possession of the most salient facts obtainable regarding
the vocal action.

Separately considered, neither the scientific nor the empirical study of the voice is alone
sufficient to inform us of the exact nature of the correct vocal action. The next step is therefore
to combine the information obtained from the two sources, scientific analysis and empirical
observation. Let us begin by summing up all the facts so far ascertained.

Tone-production in singing is a conscious and voluntary muscular operation. The vocal organs
consist of a number of sets of voluntary muscles, of the bones and cartilages to which these
muscles are attached, and of the nerves and nerve centers governing their actions. The precise
nature of the muscular contractions of tone-production, whether correct or incorrect, is not
known. These contractions occur in accordance with established laws of acoustics and mechanics.
Under normal conditions the vocal organs instinctively respond to the demands of the singer,
through the guidance of the sense of hearing. The ability of the vocal organs to adjust themselves
properly may be upset by some influence apparently outside the singer's voluntary control.
Study of the vocal mechanism does not inform us of the meaning of the correct vocal action,
nor of the difference between this action and any other mode of operation of the voice.

Empirically considered, there is a striking difference between the correct vocal action and
any other manner of tone-production. A perfect vocal tone awakens in the hearer a distinct
set of auditory and muscular sensations. Attentively observed, the muscular sensations of the
hearer indicate that the perfect vocal tone is produced by the balanced and harmonious action
of all the muscles of the singer's vocal mechanism. In listening to perfect singing the hearer
feels that every muscle of the singer's vocal organs is contracted with exactly the appropriate
degree of strength. Any vocal tone of unsatisfactory sound awakens in the hearer a set of muscular
sensations, the direct opposite of those indicating the correct vocal action. An incorrectly
produced tone imparts to the hearer a sensation of stiffness and undue muscular tension, located
more or less definitely in the throat. This sensation indicates that the singer's throat is
stiffened by excessive muscular contraction. Further, this feeling of throat stiffness indicates
to the hearer that the singer's vocal action would become correct if the undue muscular tension
were relaxed.

Combining now the results of empirical and scientific investigation of the voice, throat stiffness
is seen to be the interfering influence which disturbs the instinctive connection between voice
and ear. Let us now consider the meaning of throat stiffness as a feature of incorrect tone-production.
First, what is muscular stiffness?

All the voluntary muscles of the body are arranged in opposed pairs, sets, or groups. A typical
pair of opposed muscles are the biceps and triceps of the upper arm. Contraction of the biceps
flexes the forearm at the elbow; the contrary movement, extending the forearm, results from
the contraction of the triceps. This principle of opposition applies to the entire muscular
system. One set of muscles raises the ribs in inspiration, another set lowers them in expiration;
one group flexes the fingers and clenches the fist, an opposed set extends the fingers and
opens the hand. Muscular opposition does not imply that the entire structure is made up of
parallel pairs of muscles, like the biceps and triceps, located on opposite sides of the same
bone. It means only that the opposed sets pull in contrary directions.

Each opposed set consists of muscles of about equal strength. Under normal conditions of relaxation
the entire muscular system exerts a slight degree of contraction. To this normal state of oppositional
contraction the name "muscular tonicity" is given. The present purpose does not call for a
discussion of the subject of muscular tonicity. This form of contraction has no direct bearing
on the performance of voluntary movements.

What effect has the voluntary contraction of all the muscles of any member, each opposed set
exerting the same degree of strength? No motion of the member results, but the member is brought
on tension and stiffened. This is well illustrated in the case of the arm. Extend the arm and
clench the fist; then contract all the muscles of the arm, about as the athlete does to display
his muscular development. You will notice that the arm becomes stiff and tense.

This state of tension is commonly called "muscular stiffness," but the term is open to objection.
It is really the joints which are stiffened, not the muscles. We are, however, so accustomed
to speak of muscular stiffness, and particularly of throat stiffness, that little is to be
gained by substituting a more accurate expression.

A condition of muscular stiffness results from the contraction of all the muscles of a member,
whether this contraction be voluntary or involuntary. This condition does not prevent the normal
movements of the member; it only renders the movements more difficult and fatiguing and less
effective. It is readily seen why this is the case. More than the necessary strength is exerted
by the muscles. Suppose the biceps and triceps, for example, each to be contracted with five
units of strength; then let some work be performed by the flexing of the forearm, requiring
the exertion of two units of strength. In this case the biceps must exert two units of strength
more than the triceps, that is, seven units. In all, the two muscles together exert twelve
units of strength to accomplish the effective result of two units. Six times the needed strength
is exerted. Activity of this kind is naturally fatiguing.

Muscular stiffness increases the difficulty of complex movements. Not only is unnecessary strength
exerted; the stiffness of the joints also interferes with the freedom and facility of motion.
But this unfavorable condition does not upset the power of coördination. The instinctive connection
between the nerve centers of consciousness and the motor centers is not broken. Although hampered
in their efforts, the muscles are still able to execute the demands of consciousness.

As an illustration of this analysis of muscular stiffness let us consider the actions of writing,
when performed under the conditions just described. It is possible to write with the hand and
arm in a state of muscular stiffness. But one does not write so easily, so rapidly, nor so
well with the arm stiff as with the arm normally relaxed. Closer attention must be paid to
the forming of the letters, and more effort must be put forth to write with the muscles stiffened;
yet the result is not equal to that obtained with less care and labor under normal muscular
conditions.

All that has been said of muscular stiffness applies with especial force to the vocal organs.
Like the rest of the muscular system, the muscles of the vocal organs are arranged in opposed
pairs and sets. The contraction of all the muscles of the throat, each opposed set or pair
exerting about the same degree of strength, causes a condition of throat stiffness. Singing
is possible in this condition. But the singer's command of the voice is not so complete and
satisfactory as under normal conditions.

Throat stiffness does not altogether deprive the vocal organs of their faculty of instinctive
adjustment in obedience to the demands of the ear. To a fair extent the voice is under the
command of the singer. The vocal cords adjust themselves readily enough for the desired pitch;
tones of the various degrees of loudness and softness can be sung in a fairly satisfactory
manner. But the muscles are somewhat hampered in their contractions, and the response to the
demands of the ear is not quite perfect. This lack of perfect command is evidenced specially
in the quality of the tones. Some form of throaty quality always mars the voice when the throat
is in a stiffened condition. In this regard the voice refuses to fulfill the demands of the
ear. Even though the singer hears, and indeed feels, the effects of the muscular tension, and
strives to remedy the fault of production, the voice still refuses to respond.

This incomplete command of the voice is frequently observed, even among singers of very high
standing. At first sight the condition here described seems to disprove the statement that
the voice normally obeys the ear. But there is no real contradiction of the psychological law
of vocal command in the case of a stiff-throated singer. For one thing, whatever degree of
command the singer possesses is obtained in accordance with the law of guidance by the ear.
Moreover, the failure to secure perfect response is due solely to the interference with the
normal workings of the voice, occasioned by the state of throat stiffness. Far from this form
of muscular contraction being a contradiction of psychological principles, it will be found
on examination to be in perfect accord with well-established laws of physiological psychology.

It is hardly to be supposed that the singer consciously and voluntarily contracts the muscles
of the entire vocal mechanism and so deliberately brings about the stiffening of the throat.
True, this can readily be done. We can at will sing throaty and nasal tones. But this form
of voluntary throat tension is not, properly speaking, an incorrect vocal action. So long as
the vocal organs respond to the demands of the ear, the vocal action is correct. Only when
the voice refuses to obey can the action be described as incorrect.

A satisfactory definition of the various modes of vocal action can now be given. The correct
vocal action is the natural operation of the vocal organs; the voice normally obeys the commands
of the ear. An incorrect vocal action occurs when the throat is stiffened by the involuntary
contraction of the muscles of the vocal mechanism.

This definition of the vocal action does not solve the problem of tone-production. It is still
to be determined how the involuntary contraction of the throat muscles is caused.

CHAPTER II

THE CAUSES OF THROAT STIFFNESS AND OF INCORRECT VOCAL ACTION

Involuntary contractions of the voluntary muscles can occur only as reflex actions. If the
muscles of the vocal organs are subject to involuntary contractions, the causes of these contractions
must be sought through an investigation of the subject of reflex actions.

Reflex actions are of several kinds; of these the simplest type, and the one most easily studied,
is the muscular contraction due to the excitation of the sensory nerve endings located in the
skin. Thus when the sole of the foot of a sleeping person is tickled, the leg is at first drawn
up and then violently kicked out. An exhaustive discussion of the physiological and psychological
features of reflex action is not called for here; a sufficient understanding of the subject
may safely be assumed to be possessed by the reader.

Involuntary muscular contractions often occur as reflex actions without any direct or tactual
irritation of the sensory nerve endings. Several examples of this form of reflex action are
now to be considered. These actions will be seen to be matters of such common experience as
to call for no special proof. They are the following:

(a) Reflex actions performed under the influence of sensory impressions other than those of
touch or muscular sense.

(b) Involuntary muscular contractions due to nervousness.

(c) Contractions of the muscles of certain members, caused by the turning of the attention
specially to the members.

(d) Involuntary contractions of muscles, accompanying the exertion of other associated and
antagonist muscles, and due to the radiation of nerve impulse.

(a) Reflex Actions due to Sensory Impressions other than those of Touch or Muscular Sense

A wide range of movements is included under this heading. Of these it is necessary to mention
only a few, such as the sudden start on the hearing of an unexpected noise, the instinctive
movement of dodging to escape an approaching missile, and the raising of the arm to ward off
an expected blow.

Actions of a somewhat similar character normally occur in which it is not easy to point to
the excitation of any sense or senses. These include the instinctive cowering attitude of fear,
the play of facial expression caused by sentiment and emotion, etc.

(b) Involuntary Actions due to Nervousness

A condition of marked nervousness generally causes the involuntary contraction of muscles.
Who does not recall his earliest attempts at "speaking a piece" in school? The trembling of
the lips, the twitching of the arms and hands, and the vain attempts to govern the bodily movements,
are an experience painful even in the recollection.

Movements and contractions due to nervousness are entirely purposeless; they even defy the
most earnest efforts at inhibition. A marked feature of this type of involuntary action is
the contraction of antagonist groups of muscles, productive of muscular stiffness of the members.

An extreme example of this form of nervousness is offered by the unfortunate sufferer from
stage fright. In this condition the entire body often stiffens, and purposeful movement of
any kind becomes for a time impossible.

(c) Contractions caused by Special Attention to Certain Members

Suppose a small boy of sensitive nature to enter a room suddenly, and to be at once chided
for his awkwardness. His body will probably stiffen, and his awkwardness become more pronounced.
Now call his attention to his hands and tell him he is holding them badly. His arms and hands
will immediately become painfully stiff. Speak of his feet and his legs come on tension. Whatever
member his attention is turned to, the muscles of that part contract involuntarily.

Photographers sometimes have to contend with this form of involuntary action on the part of
their sitters. When the hands are to be posed the arms stiffen; so also do the legs, the shoulders,
and the neck, each when its turn comes to receive attention.

Under normal conditions this form of awkwardness is easily overcome. Sitting for a photograph
soon becomes a simple matter. The boy outgrows the awkward stage and gradually acquires a natural
and easy bearing. Muscular stiffening due to attention to special members is usually the result
of an uncomfortable feeling of being out of one's element, and ill at ease in one's surroundings.
So soon as this feeling wears off the tendency to this form of stiffness disappears.

(d) Contractions of Muscles due to the Radiation of Nerve Impulse

A voluntary exertion of some of the muscles of a member sometimes causes the involuntary contraction
of all the other muscles of the part. As will readily be seen, the exercise then takes place
under conditions of muscular stiffness. This is commonly a feature of the unskilful and unaccustomed
performance of muscular activities. A few examples will serve to illustrate this type of involuntary
contraction better than a lengthy discussion of the physio-psychological principles involved.

When a novice takes his first lesson in riding a bicycle he clutches the handle bars in a vise-like
grip. His knees are so stiff as to bend only with a great exertion of strength. To steer the
wheel the learner must put forth his most powerful muscular efforts. A half-hour lesson in
bicycle riding often tires the beginner more than an afternoon's ride does the experienced cyclist.

This condition of muscular stiffness is due to the contraction of antagonist groups of muscles,
involving practically the entire body. In one sense the excessive muscular contractions are
involuntary; yet it would not be easy to define where the voluntary element of the contractions
leaves off.

A similar excessive expenditure of strength may be seen in the attempt of an illiterate laborer
to sign his name. He grips the pen as though it were a crowbar, and puts forth enough strength
to handle a twenty-pound weight. Learning to dance, or to skate, or to row a boat, is usually
accompanied in the beginning by this form of muscular stiffness.

As skill is acquired by practice in the performance of complex activities, the undue muscular
tension of the initial stage is gradually relaxed.

There is another way in which the radiation of nerve impulse may be caused, entirely distinct
from the lack of use or skill. Muscular stiffness may be induced in the case of activities
so thoroughly habitual as to be normally performed automatically. The cause of muscular stiffness
now to be considered is the attempt to perform complex activities mechanically, that is, by
consciously directing the individual component movements and muscular contractions involved
in the actions. Involuntary contractions of associated and antagonist muscles take place under
these conditions, in addition to the voluntary exercise of the muscles normally exerted in
the movements.

This fact may be illustrated by attempting to write a few lines, and forming every stroke of
each letter by a distinct exercise of the will. If you keep up this attempt for ten minutes
you will find that you press upon the paper with many times your accustomed weight. The hand
stiffens in consequence of the close attention paid to its movements. This stiffness will extend
to the arm, and even to the shoulder, if the exercise be continued long enough and with sufficient
intensity of attention to the hand.

Another good illustration of this form of muscular stiffening may be found by walking upstairs,
and paying the same kind of attention to the muscular actions. Try to ascend a single flight
of stairs, performing each elementary movement by a distinct volitional impulse. Pause on the
first step to secure perfect balance on one foot; raise the other foot, bending the leg at
the knee, then place this foot carefully on the next higher step. Now gradually shift the weight
of the body from the lower to the higher foot; as the body inclines forward, exert the muscles
of the back and sides to preserve your balance; then contract the leg muscles so as to raise
the body to the higher step, with the weight supported on that foot. Repeat this operation
for each step. To mount one flight of stairs in this way will tire you more than ascending
a half dozen flights in the ordinary automatic way.

All four of the types of involuntary muscular contraction just described may be combined in
a single instance. An inexperienced violin soloist, such as a student playing at a conservatory
recital, often exemplifies this. Nervousness and awkwardness cause him to tremble; the scratchy
sound of his tones makes him twitch and start; meanwhile, the close attention paid to his fingering
and bowing stiffens his arms and completes his difficulty.

The vocal organs are peculiarly subject to the forms of involuntary muscular contraction under
consideration. Each of the causes of muscular tension may exert its special influence on the
voice. Let us go over the ground once more, this time with special reference to the actions
of the throat muscles.

(a) Reflex Actions of the Muscles of the Vocal Organs, Independent of Direct Sensory Excitation

Involuntary actions of the vocal organs normally occur in response to stimuli furnished by
the emotions and feelings. Every one is familiar with the shout of triumph, the sigh of relief,
and the ejaculation of surprise. Some emotions cause a convulsive stiffening of the muscles
of the vocal organs so complete as to render tone-production for a time absolutely impossible.
"Speechless with terror," "breathless with apprehension," are expressions which accurately
describe psychological processes. A crowd of people watching a difficult rescue of a drowning
man is silent so long as the uncertainty lasts. A shout instantly goes up when the rescue is
seen to be safely effected. Both the silence of the nervous strain and the shout of relief
are normal involuntary responses to the emotional states.

(b) The Influence of Nervousness on the Vocal Action

Nervous conditions exert a striking influence on the operations of the voice. Even when our
self-control under trying conditions is complete in all other respects we are often unable
to prevent our voices betraying our nervous state. Stage fright, an extreme form of nervousness,
sometimes deprives the sufferer entirely of the power of speech. This temporary loss of vocal
command is not due to an inability to innervate the muscles of the vocal organs; on the contrary,
it is caused by extreme muscular stiffness due to the violent, though involuntary, contraction
of all the muscles of the vocal organs.

Under normal conditions, entirely aside from nervousness, the voice instinctively reflects
every phase of sentiment and emotion. Love and hate, sorrow and joy, anger, fear, and rage,
each is clearly expressed by the quality of the tones, independent of the meaning of the spoken
words. All these fine shades of tone quality result from muscular adjustments of the vocal
mechanism. In some mysterious manner the outflow of motor impulses to the throat muscles is
governed by the nervous and emotional states.

This form of muscular contraction is in one sense not involuntary. As the voice is voluntarily
used, all the muscular contractions involved are voluntary. Yet the minute contractions producing
tone qualities expressive of emotion are distinctly involuntary. More than this, these contractions
cannot usually be inhibited. An angry man cannot make his voice sound other than angry. Our
voices often betray our feelings in spite of the most earnest efforts at concealment.

While the voice always normally and involuntarily adopts the tone quality indicative of the
emotional state, this action of the vocal organs may be voluntarily and purposely performed.
A perfect command of these fine shades of tone quality renders the voice a very potent instrument
of expression. For the purposes of dramatic singing this form of vocal expression might be
of great value. It is to be regretted that dramatic singers of this day pay so little attention
to purely tonal expressiveness. This is probably due in great measure to the prevalence of
throat stiffness, which robs the voice of much of its expressive power.

(c) Contractions of the Throat Muscles, caused by Attention to the Throat

When a physician attempts to examine a child's throat, the tendency of the throat muscles to
this form of involuntary contractions is apt to be evidenced. The jaw stiffens and the tongue
rises; for a time the rebellious little throat refuses to remain quiet and relaxed.

People usually have some such difficulty the first time they submit to examination with the
laryngoscope. This is very apt to occur, even in the case of experienced singers. Needless
to say, this form of muscular contraction is entirely involuntary; it even defies the most
earnest attempts at prevention. Comparatively little experience is required for normal people
to overcome this tendency. The throat usually becomes tractable after one or two trials with
the laryngoscope.

Vocalists are well aware of the proneness of one part of the vocal mechanism, the tongue, to
stiffen in consequence of direct attention being paid to this member. This led to the growth or institution
of customs divisible into two main categories. One of these was concerned with the correction
of refractory or immoral persons dwelling within the gates; and the
other with the regulation of commerce. (The Singing of the Future,
London, 1906.) Leo Kofler speaks of the same tendency: "Tell a pupil to let his tongue lie
flat in his mouth; he draws it back till it dams up his throat." (Werner's Magazine, Oct., 1899.)

(d) Throat Stiffness due to the Radiation of Nerve Impulse

Two types of muscular tension due to the radiation of motor impulses were noted; first, the
stiffness incident to the early stages of practice in complex activities; second, the stiffness
caused by the attempt to perform complex activities in a mechanical manner by paying attention
to the individual component movements and contractions. To both these types of muscular stiffness
the voice is especially subject.

It is not easy to find a perfect illustration of throat stiffness incident to the early stages
of instruction in singing. For this the chief reason is that the later form of stiffness, due
to the attempt directly to manage the vocal organs, is much more pronounced than the temporary
early tension. As good an example as possible would be the following: Let some one possessed
of a fine natural untrained voice sing a steady tone and then attempt to trill on the same
note. The attempted trill will invariably indicate a much higher degree of stiffness than the
single tone.

Several investigators of the voice have noticed the tendency of the throat to stiffen when
the singer tries to manage the voice by paying direct attention to the mechanical action. We conversed
awhile, and he extracted a carnation out of his waistcoat pocket--unusual receptacle for flowers--which
he presented to me. I touched upon the all-absorbing topic of mules.
"Mules are very busy animals in Morano," he explained. It is a superfluous and misdirected mental activity which is fruitful of a corresponding
obstruction on the part of the body. In the body this obstruction takes the form of superfluous
or unnatural tension." (The Philosophy of Singing, N. Y., 1893.) Prof. Scripture describes
in scientific language the results of any attempt directly to manage the vocal organs. Speaking
of the use of the voice under unfavorable conditions, he says: "The attempt is instinctively
made by the speaker or singer to correct such a fault by voluntary innervation of the muscles;
this cannot succeed perfectly because an increase of innervation brings about contractions
of associated and antagonist muscles with the result of changed conditions and changed sounds.
Such extra muscular effort is, moreover, very fatiguing." (The Elements of Experimental Phonetics,
1902.)

For the purposes of scientific voice culture this is one of the most important facts which
have been determined. The attempt to manage the voice, by paying attention to the mechanical
operations of the vocal organs, causes an involuntary contraction of all the throat muscles,
and so interferes with the normal instinctive vocal action. Even the mere thinking of the throat
in singing, and especially in practising, is enough to induce throat stiffness.

CHAPTER III

THROAT STIFFNESS AND INCORRECT SINGING

It is a lamentable fact that most of the singing heard nowadays gives evidence of throat stiffness.
Perfect singing becomes more rare with each succeeding year. The younger generation of artists
in particular evince a marked tendency to this fault of production.

Considered as a cause of faulty tone-production in singing, throat stiffness is due to only
one influence, viz., the attempt to manage the voice by thinking of the vocal organs and their
mechanical operations. Muscular tension due to nervousness, or to the unskilful nature of first
attempts at singing, cannot be looked upon as causing a wrong vocal action. In the case of
nervousness the lack of vocal command faithfully reflects the psychological condition of the
singer; the imperfect response of the voice is normal to this condition. The stiffness due
to first attempts is also perfectly normal. Moreover, both these forms of throat stiffness
are temporary; they disappear when the cause, nervousness or lack of skill, is removed.

Throat stiffness does not necessarily destroy the musical character of the voice. Very many
degrees and varieties of excessive throat tension are possible. The undue muscular exertion
may be so slight in degree that the throat stiffness can be detected in the sound of the tones
only by a highly sensitive and observant hearer. Or on the other hand, the muscles of the entire
throat may be so powerfully contracted that the singer has only a very imperfect command of
the voice. Between the two extremes, perfect tone-production and exaggerated stiffness, every
conceivable shade of difference in degree of undue tension might be illustrated in the case
of some prominent singer.

Faulty tone-production manifests itself in two ways; first, in its effects on the tones of
the voice; second, in its effects on the singer's throat. Let us consider each of these topics
separately. 

My own children are all cropped close, and I have reason to think
they are grateful for it.

Why not yours? Boys may differ in strength or complexion, in moral character and mental attainments,
but they are remarkably unanimous as to what constitutes personal comfort. And it is obviously
the duty of parents to consult the personal comfort of their offspring--within certain reasonable
limits, of course----"
"But----"

"Lastly, we come to the much-debated point: I mean the
aesthetic side of the matter. These effects are always bad; the same voice is less beautiful when
used in a stiffened condition than when perfectly produced. Throaty and nasal tones are always
more or less harsh and offensive to the sensitive hearer. Further, the more pronounced the
state of throat stiffness the more marked does the throaty or nasal quality become.

Under conditions of throat tension the range of the voice is almost always curtailed. The highest
and lowest notes possible to any voice can be reached only when the throat is entirely free
from stiffness. So also with regard to the varying degrees of power, undue tension prevents
the singer from obtaining the extreme effects. A throaty singer's soft tones generally lack
the carrying quality. Louder tones can be produced with a normally relaxed than with a stiffened
throat.

Real flexibility of voice is impossible to a stiff-throated singer. Extreme rapidity and accuracy
of muscular adjustments, the physical basis of coloratura singing, cannot be attained when
the muscles are hampered by undue tension.

A distinct fault of production, the tremolo, is directly due to throat stiffness. A simple
experiment illustrates the nature of the muscular action from which the tremolo results. "Set"
the muscles of the arm by contracting the biceps and triceps with the utmost possible strength.
With the arm in this stiffened condition flex and extend the forearm slowly several times.
You will notice a pronounced trembling of the arm. Why a condition of muscular stiffness should
cause the affected member to tremble is not well understood. But the fact admits of no question.
It is highly probable that the tremolo is caused by a trembling of the vocal organs, due to
muscular stiffness. The tones of a voice afflicted with tremolo always give evidence of extreme
throat tension.

Another bad result of throat stiffness in tone-production is seen in the matter of intonation.
Tones produced with a stiff throat are seldom in perfect tune. This subject will be more fully
treated in a later chapter.

Effects of Muscular Stiffness on the Throat

Many of the muscles of the vocal organs, particularly the laryngeal muscles, are extremely
small and delicate. Under normal conditions these muscles are fully capable of exerting the
relatively small amount of strength required of them without strain or injury. But when the
voice is used in a stiffened condition the delicate muscles of the larynx are obliged to contract
with much more than their normal strength. To borrow an expression of the engineers, the throat
muscles are then forced to carry an excessive load.

A balanced contraction of antagonist groups of muscles is the muscular basis of throat stiffness.
When the voice is used in this condition each muscle of the vocal organs must put forth the
amount of effort necessary to produce the desired effect under normal conditions, in addition
to an effort equal to the counterbalancing pull of its antagonist muscle. An increase in the
degree of throat stiffness demands a corresponding increase in the effort exerted by every
muscle of the throat.

Over-exertion of muscles always results in strain and injury. The extent of the injury to the
muscular tissues varies with the degree of excessive exertion and with the duration of the
injurious exercise. An advanced stage of muscular strain is distinctly a pathological condition.

Tone-production in a state of throat stiffness is of necessity injurious to the muscles of
the vocal organs. The delicate laryngeal muscles are specially subject to the injurious effects
of strain. These effects vary in extent and character, according to the degree of throat stiffness,
to the extent and duration of the faulty use of the voice, and to the individual characteristics
of the singer. A very slight degree of undue tension may not sensibly injure the voice. Even
a fairly marked condition of tension, such as is evidenced by the uniformly throaty quality
of many baritones and mezzo-sopranos, may be persisted in for years without perceptibly straining
the throat or destroying the musical value of the voice. But a misuse of the voice is bound,
in the course of time, to show its injurious results on the throat. How many promising young
singers are forced to abandon their careers in early life, at the time when their artistic
and dramatic powers are just ripening to fruition! A misused voice "wears out" years before
its time. 

Hee also promisd to send mee fuller Instructions in writing, for my directions when I should
bee on the place.

Wee arrived at Accadia the 26th of november, 1682,
and there winter'd. In the Spring I repair'd unto hallow Island. "All the author's experience as a laryngologist
tended to convince him that most of those evils from which speakers and singers suffer, whatever
the part of the vocal mechanism affected, arise from faulty methods of voice production, or
excess in the use of methods in themselves correct." (Voice Production in Singing and Speaking,
Phila., 1906.)

For the purposes of artistic singing, a voice loses all its value when the injurious effects
of throat stiffness become very pronounced. On this account singers are obliged to give up
appearing in public before the condition reaches the extreme. It follows therefore that only
in the case of public speakers do we see the extreme results of persistence in the wrong use
of the voice. "Clergyman's sore throat" is the name usually applied to this condition. The
sustained use of the voice, under conditions of extreme strain, is exceedingly painful both
to the speaker and to the hearer.

Singers are usually unconscious of throat stiffness unless the condition be very pronounced.
Neither the sense of hearing nor the muscular sense informs the singer of the state of tension.
Accustomed to the sound of his own voice, the singer may be unaware of a throaty or nasal quality
which he would instantly detect in another voice. This is also true of the muscular sensations
of tone-production; habit makes the singer inattentive to the sensations caused by throat tension.

Throat stiffness always tends to become greater in degree; it is a self-aggravating condition.
Even though very slight in its beginnings, the state of stiffness obliges the singer to put
forth more than the normal effort in order to secure the desired effects. This increase of
innervation is not confined to the muscles which need to be more strongly contracted. As Prof.
Scripture points out, it also extends to the associated and antagonist muscles, that is, to
all the muscles of the throat. Thus the stiffness is increased in degree. Still greater exertion
is then required, resulting in still greater stiffness. This may go on for years, the voice
gradually becoming less responsive to the demands of the singer.

Individual personal characteristics are an important factor in determining a singer's experience
with throat stiffness. Some singers are so fortunately constituted as to be almost entirely
free from the tendency to stiffen the throat. Others detect the tendency in its beginning and
find no difficulty in correcting it. Still others habituate themselves to some manner of tone-production,
and neither increase nor diminish the degree of stiffness. Even under modern methods of instruction,
many artists are correctly trained from the start and so never stiffen their throats in any way.

Several traits of character are concerned in determining the individual tendency to throat
stiffness. Nervous temperament, keenness of ear, artistic and musical endowment, each has its
influence in this connection.

The great prevalence of throat stiffness among present-day singers is due primarily to the
idea of mechanical vocal management as the basis of instruction in singing. Not only are modern
methods intrinsically worthless, in that a correct use of the voice cannot be attained by the
application of mechanical rules. Worse than this, the means used for training the voice are
such as to defeat their own purpose. At every instant of instruction the student's attention
is expressly turned to the vocal organs and to the mechanical operations of the voice. The
only possible result of this kind of vocal instruction is to stiffen the throat and so to render
the correct vocal action an impossibility.

A peculiar contradiction is presented by the modern vocal teacher; his artistic conception
of singing is utterly at variance with his ideas of mechanical tone-production. It may safely
be said that the vast majority of vocal teachers are thoroughly conversant with the highest
standards of artistic singing. At midnight one of our Doggs alarm'd our sentinell, who told me
hee heard a noise on board the shipp. I caus'd my People to handle their armes, & shut up the
English in the cabins under the Gard of 2 of my men. I with 4 others
went out to goe to the shipp. Attempting
to correct a tremolo by "holding the throat steady" causes the throat to tremble all the more.

