So long as our dogs were employed in the labor or the organized recreations of man, the tendency
of the association with the superior being was in a high measure educative. They were constantly
submitted to a more or less critical but always effective selection which tended ever to develop
a higher grade of intelligence. With the advance in the organization of society the dog is
losing something of his utility, even in the way of sport. He is fast becoming a mere idle
favorite, prized for unimportant peculiarities of form. The effort in the main is not now to
make creatures which can help in the employments of man, but to breed for show alone, demanding
no more intelligence than is necessary to make the animal a well-behaved denizen of a house.
The result is the institution of a wonderful variety in the size, shape, and special peculiarities
of different breeds with what appears to be a concomitant loss in their intelligence. We often
hear it remarked by those who are familiar with dogs that the ordinary mongrels are more intelligent
and more susceptible of high training than the carefully inbred varieties, which are more highly
prized because they conform to some thoroughly artificial standard of form or coloring. This
is what we should expect from all we know concerning the breeding. Where for generations the
dog-fancier has selected for reproduction with reference to the trifling and often injurious
features of shape he seeks to attain, he naturally and almost necessarily neglects to choose
the creatures in regard to their mental peculiarities. The result is that the breed tends to
fall back in these regards to below the level of the ordinary cur, who makes his place in the
affections of his owner because he has attractive or useful qualities of mind. It appears to
me, in a word, that our treatment of this noble animal, where he is bred for ornament, is in
effect degrading.

Although the formation of our fancy breeds does not serve to advance the development of those
intellectual features which are the most interesting part of our dogs, the experiments have
served to show the amazing physical plasticity of this species under the conditions of long
domestication. The range in size between a tiny spaniel, such as those which are bred in Chihuahua,
in northern Mexico, and the great Danes or mastiffs of northern Europe, is, perhaps, the greatest
which has ever been attained in any mammal. In some cases the larger individuals belonging
to the mastiff breed probably weigh nearly thirty times as much as their smaller kinsmen. Great
as are these variations, they are only in form and bulk. They involve none of those curious
changes in the number of bones of the skeleton which we may trace among the domesticated pigeons.
We therefore turn from these results of breeders' fancy to consider certain of the mental qualities
of dogs which have not come in our way in our review of the history of its relations to man.

First of all, we may note the fact that the friendly relations which dogs have become accustomed
to form with men vary exceedingly in their range and activity. Perhaps in no other regard does
the dog exhibit such distinctly human characteristics as in the way in which he meets the individuals
of the mastering species. The gamut of their social relations with men is almost exactly parallel
with our own. With from one to a dozen persons a dog may maintain an attitude of almost equally
complete sympathy and mutual understanding. He may be on terms of acquaintanceship in varied
degrees of familiarity with a few score others with whom he comes in frequent contact. Toward
the rest of mankind he maintains a position of more or less complete distrust, which with experience
may attain the indifference which men commonly show toward perfect strangers. If we observe
a dog going along a much-frequented street, we may note that his relations to the people are
substantially those which the folk have to each other. He shows as they do a certain consideration
for the individuals he encounters, gives them their due place, and yet holds to his own. It
is particularly noticeable that he avoids all contact with the other passers--in fact a dog
has to be much beside himself with rage or fear, or insane from disease, before he will break
those bounds of personality which civilization has set up to guide the conduct of life.

The social culture of dogs appears to have gone to the point where they recognize the meaning
of an introduction--at least as far as the sympathetic relations of that understanding are
concerned. Almost any well-bred dog will submit to be presented by his master, or even by persons
whom he knows but is not accustomed to obey, to a stranger to whom he has already exhibited
some dislike. During the introduction he will submit to those formal exchanges of courtesy
which he is accustomed to recognize as the indices of friendship. The impression of this understanding
seems to be so permanent that on subsequent meetings the dog, though he may maintain his original
dislike of the man who has been forced upon his acquaintance, will continue to treat him with
a certain consideration, though it is often easy to see that it is a difficult matter for him
to conform to the requirements of society. When we compare the conduct of dogs in these regards
with the behavior of other animals, even highly domesticated forms, we perceive how marvellously
successful has been man's unconscious effort to mould this creature on his own nature.

Another extremely human characteristic of our canine friends is shown in their susceptibility
to ridicule. Faint traces of this quality are to be found in monkeys and perhaps even in the
more intelligent horses, but nowhere else save in man, and hardly there, except in the more
sensitive natures, do we find contempt, expressed in laughter of the kind which conveys that
emotion, so keenly and painfully appreciated. With those dogs which are endowed with a large
human quality, such as our various breeds of hounds, it is possible by laughing in their faces
not only to quell their rage, but to drive them to a distance. They seem in a way to be put
to shame and at the same time hopelessly puzzled as to the nature of their predicament. In
this connection we may note the very human feature that after you have cowed a dog by insistent
laughter you can never hope to make friends with him. A case of this kind is fresh in my experience.
A year or two ago I was imprudent enough to laugh at a very intelligent dog in my neighborhood,
he having unreasonably assailed me at my house-door, where he had been left for a long time
to wait while his owner was within and had thereby been brought into an unhappy state of mind.
Sympathizing with his situation, I preferred to laugh him out of his humor rather than to beat
him with my stick. I regret I did not take the other alternative, for I made the poor brute
my implacable enemy by my pretence of contempt for him. I am inclined to think that if I had
beaten him the matter could have been arranged afterward in a friendly way.

Another very remarkable and I believe hitherto unnoticed likeness between the mind of dogs
and that of man is found in the fact that these dumb beasts, unlike all other inferior animals,
except, perhaps, some of the more intelligent species of monkeys, will learn lessons from isolated
experiences. In this regard they are indeed quite as apt as the lower kinds of men. Thus a
dog who has had an unsavory or painful experience with a skunk or a porcupine is apt to keep
away from these creatures for a long time thereafter. Where, as is not infrequently the case,
a cur takes to eating eggs, a single dose of tartar emetic concealed in an egg which is placed
where he can readily find it, is apt to effect an immediate and complete reform. This ready
learning from experience is almost the gist of our human quality--at least on the intellectual
side of it.

Perhaps the greatest success to which man has attained in his education of the dog is to be
found in the measure in which he has overcome the fierce rage which clearly characterized the
ancestors of this creature when they first felt the mastering hand. The reader cannot understand
the intensity of the rage motive in the carnivora unless he has studied some of these brutes
in their wild state, where from the time in the remote ages when they first began to take on
the qualities of their species they have survived and won success by the fury of their assault.
In almost all our breeds of dogs this primal ferocity has been overlaid by the various motives
of rationality, sympathy, and conventional demeanor, until one may live half a lifetime with
well-bred dogs without a chance to see the demon which we have buried in their breasts, as
we have in our own, beneath a host of civilizing influences. It is rare indeed in our day that
a dog, unless insane, will bite a human being. The most of their assaults are pure bluster,
mere pretence of fury, as is shown by the fact that if, carried away by their pretence, they
are led to use their teeth, it is usually a mere sham assault, having no semblance of the effectiveness
of true combat.

Something of the pristine fury of the primitive dogs may still be noted in a certain brutal
variety of watch-dogs which are still to be found in parts of continental Europe. The best
types of this breed which I have ever seen are to be found among the dogs which are kept to
guard the quarries of Solenhofen, in Bavaria, whence come all the fine lithographic stones
which are so extensively used in printing. These quarries are scattered over several square
miles of untilled country, and the separate pits are to be numbered by the score. As much valuable
stone is necessarily left over night in the quarries, their care is confined to packs of watch-dogs
which are turned loose at night and appear as if by instinct to spend the hours of darkness
in prowling over the territory. Such is their size and ferocity that it takes a sturdy beggar
to face them. I remember inadvertently disturbing one of these brutes from sleep, in the strong
cage where he was confined, and I have never beheld such a picture of blind fury as he exhibited.
I had not come within twenty feet of him, and was merely moving past his place of confinement;
yet he sprang to the grating and strove with his teeth to break his way through the bars. I
thought the animal must be mad, but his keeper assured me that such was his ordinary state
of mind and that the humor was common to all the breed; even the masters dwelt in fear of them.
Ordinarily the only exhibitions of the innate ferocity of our dogs are to be seen in their
combats with each other, when for a time the creatures return to their primitive state of mind.
Even these occasional exhibitions of fury are not found among all breeds of dogs, and among
many individuals even of the combative strains of blood the motive of battle appears to have
quite passed away.

In antithesis to the old Ishmaelitic humor of our primitive dogs, man has developed a singular,
sympathetic, and kindly motive in these creatures. From the point of view of the dog's education
we must not set too much store by his affection for his master. This kind of devotion of one
being to another is displayed elsewhere in the animal kingdom, though it is more common among
birds than among mammals. We find traces of it in the greater part of our domesticated creatures
or in those which we have individually adopted from the wilderness. It is a part of the great
sympathetic motive, which, originating far down in the series of animals, increases as they
gain in the scale of being, until it reaches the highest level it has yet attained in spiritually
minded men. The eminent peculiarity in the case of a dog is that the very centre of his life
is formed of the affections, which are evidently the same as those which rule the days of the
most cultivated men. To him these elements of friendliness are absolutely necessary to a comfortable
existence. If by chance he becomes separated from his master and the other people with whom
he is familiar, his bereavement is intense; but in most cases, at the end of a day or two,
he is compelled to form new bonds, and he sets about the task in an exceedingly human way.
I dwell in a town where dogs abound and where the frequent coming and going of the people puts
many of the creatures astray. Perhaps as often as once a week, almost always late in the evening,
one of these unhappy lost ones seeks to make friends with me. His advances toward this end
always begin by his dogging my footsteps at a little distance. If I do not repulse him he will
come nearer until he has made sure of my attention. A friendly word will bring him to my hand;
but his behavior is never effusive, as it would be if he had found his rightful owner, but
mildly propitiative and with a touch of sadness. There is, it seems to me, no other feature
in the life of the dog which tells so much as to his moral nature as his conduct under these
unhappy circumstances.

In the long catalogue of human qualities which characterize our thoroughly domesticated dogs,
we must not fail to take account of their sense of property. In this the creature differs from
all other of our domesticated animals. It is a common characteristic of mammals, both in their
wild and tame state, that they feel a motive of ownership in the food which they have captured
or in the den which they have made their lair; but beyond these narrow personal limits we see
no evidence of any sense of ownership in land or effects. We readily observe, however, that
our household dogs not only know the chattels of their master and distinguish them from those
of other people, but they also learn to recognize the bounds of their house-lot or even of
a considerable farm. When a dog, even of a militant quality, enters on territory which he does
not feel to belong to him, he is at once a very different creature as compared to his condition
when he is on his own land. He treads warily and will accept without dispute an order to take
himself off. A perception of this sort indicates an extraordinary amount of sympathy and discernment.
It requires us to assume that the creature has a good sense of topography and that he observes
closely the various acts, none of them perhaps very indicative, which go to show the limits
of his master's claims.

Although the mental qualities of our highly domesticated dogs are singularly like those of
their masters, the likeness going to the point that the household pet is apt to have acquired
something of the general character of the people with whom he dwells, there are many suggestive
differences arising from failures of development which are in the highest measure interesting
to those who study the species. We note, in the first place, that although for ages in contact
with the constructive work which occupies his masters, the dog shows no tendency whatever to
essay any undertakings of this nature. He is quite alive to considerations of personal comfort
and is particularly fond of a warm bed; yet, except for a few unverified stories, we may say
that there is no evidence whatever to show that they ever try to improve their conditions by
deliberately providing themselves with warm bedding. In no well-attested case has a dog shown
any sense as to the nature of any mechanical contrivance. They will learn which way a door
opens, and rarely if ever do they undiscerningly close it when it is slightly ajar and they
wish to pass through the opening; but I have never been able to observe or obtain evidence
to show that they would without teaching pull down a latch in the way in which a cat readily
learns to do. Much as dogs have had to do with guns, they display no kind of interest in the
arms except so far as they are tokens of sport to come. They connect the explosion with the
capture of game, and will search for it in the direction toward which the barrel was pointed.
I have not, however, been able to find that they know, as they might readily do, and as a crow
would surely do, when the weapon was loaded and when empty. They show no interest in it, such
as monkeys readily display toward any mechanical contrivance to which their attention has been
directed. All these negative features indicate that the mechanical side of the canine mind
is entirely undeveloped.

Although there is some evidence that the sense of number attains a measure of development in
dogs, the ability to form mathematical conceptions of any kind appears to be very weak in this
species. The fact that shepherd-dogs, in a way, keep an account of considerable flocks so that
they will know when one is gone astray, can readily be explained on the supposition that they
know their charges individually and not in sum. The absence of arithmetical capacity is, however,
less important than the lack of mechanical sense, for the reason that such incapacity is also
common in the lowest races of men. Although dogs, as before noted, quickly and clearly acquire
a notion of property rights in all which pertains to their owner's holdings, they appear never
to extend their sense of their own personal possessions beyond the original limit to which
they had attained when the species was domesticated. The creature feels a sense of personal
property in his food and in his sleeping-place, but appears not to extend his conception of
individual rights beyond these primitively established limits.

All our well-bred household dogs quickly learn certain bodily habits which are necessary to
make them acceptable members of a household. These habits are not well affirmed by inherited
instinct, but the ease with which the instruction is acquired shows that they have become prone
to submit to such regulations. Culture on this line rests upon a primal instinct, originating
we know not how, which leads a number of wild animals to conceal their excrement. On the other
hand, these creatures exhibit no sense of modesty, though that, in a more or less complete
measure, is characteristic of all human tribes whatsoever.

As regards the memory, dogs appear to have a considerably greater measure of capacity than
is observable in any other group of domesticated animals. There is no question that they can
recall their associations with people from whom they have been separated for a year or more.
Some trustworthy anecdotes appear to establish the fact that the recollections may endure for
two or three years. I have observed an instance in which the memory seems perfectly clear after
an interval of eighteen months, and this concerned a person who had been with the dog for a
period of not more than four days. It is interesting to note the behavior of a dog when he
has failed to recognize a person whom he has known well, but from whom he has been long separated.
I have a shepherd-dog that has known me well, but the friendship is often interrupted by partings
of some months' duration. When, after one of these absences, I appear to him in the distance,
he comes furiously towards me, quite possessed by his enmity. At a certain point in his charge
a doubt begins to beset him; he moderates his pace; his roaring bark passes into a whine; and
as the full measure of his blunder is borne in upon him by my voice, he becomes the picture
of shame. In his perplexity, he always finds relief in endeavoring with his paw to scrape a
supposititious fly from the side of his nose. He then deals with what I suppose to be an equally
imaginary flea; after he has thus gained a few seconds for readjustment, he welcomes me joyously.
All this is so thoroughly human-like, that even the naturalist, the professional doubter, is
forced to believe that the dog's mind works substantially as his own, and that the feelings
connected with the action are essentially the same.

While in the case of the elephant and the pig, and in a less measure in several other of the
lower animals, we have indices of as high or even higher intelligence than the dog, no other
brute shows anything like the same measure of what we may term human quality. So far as the
field of the emotions is concerned, we are driven to believe that it has been bred into the
kind by the ages of intimate associations, supported by the selective process which has led
people to preserve the individual of the species with which they found themselves the most
in sympathy. I repeat the suggestion, and shall repeat it yet again, for the reason that just
here--how effectively the reader's imagination will suggest--we find a basis for the hope that,
with time and care, man may bring his subjects of the lower realm into a more intimate, affectionate,
and helpful relation than is dreamed of by those who look upon them as mere brutes.

The most curious limitation which we find in dogs is as to the measure of expression to which
they have attained. No one who has well considered the facts can doubt that our civilized varieties
of this species have something like a hundred times as much which deserves utterance as their
savage forefathers possessed. Yet the capacity for giving note to these thoughts or emotions
has not gained anything like the proportion to the needs. It seems, however, that some gain
in this direction has been made, and that much may be won hereafter in the way of further advance.
Never having known the species whence our dogs came in its wild state, we are uncertain as
to its modes of expression; but, observing the varieties of dogs which are kept by savages,
it seems probable that the primitive canines used their voice only in howling or yelping; that
is, as a continuous sound akin to the bellowings or other cries of the various wild mammals.
It is characteristic of all these primitive forms of utterance that they are, to a great extent,
involuntary, and that when the outcry is begun it continues in a mechanical manner, with no
trace of modulation arising from the conditions of the moment. In other words, these actions
resemble, in a way, sneezing or hiccoughing in human kind; actions which are stimulated by
certain states of the body, but which are not at all under the control of the will. Howling
or bellowing doubtless represents, in a measure, a state of mind as well as of body, but the
action is of a general and uncontrolled kind.

The effect of advancing culture upon a dog has been gradually to decrease this ancient undifferentiated
mode of expression afforded by howling and yelping, and to replace it by the much more speech-like
bark. There is some doubt whether the dogs possessed by savages have the power of uttering
the sharp, specialized note which is so characteristic of the civilized forms of their species.
It is clear, however, that if they have the capacity of thus expressing themselves, they use
it but rarely. On the other hand, our high-bred dogs have, to a great extent, lost the habit
of expressing themselves in the ancient way. Many of our breeds appear to have become incapable
of ululating. There is no doubt but this change in the mode of expression greatly increases
the capacity of our dogs to set forth their states of mind. If we watch a high-bred dog, one
with a wide range of sensibilities, which we may find in breeds which have long been closely
associated with man, we may readily note five or six varieties of sound in the bark, each of
which is clearly related to a certain state of mind. The bark of welcome, of fear, of rage,
of doubt, and of pure fun, are almost always perfectly distinct to the educated ear, and this
although the observer may not be acquainted with the creature; if he knows him well, he may
be able to distinguish various other intonations--those which express impatience and even an
element of sorrow. This last note verges toward the howl.

It does not seem to me that we should regard barking as a new and useful invention; there are,
indeed, few such in the organic world. The sound appears to me to have been derived from the
primitive habit of howling. If we hearken to this utterance we perceive that it is not an unbroken
sound, but is somewhat intermittent. At either end of the prolonged sound we can often notice
that it is divided into rather distinct yelps more or less completely separated from the other
notes. The cries of a dog when beaten often exhibit the same peculiarity; so, too, the puppy,
before he has attained skill in barking, will often prolong each utterance in a way which makes
its relation to the ancient mode of expression tolerably clear. At the risk of being deemed
fanciful, I venture to suggest that the bark is in effect a division of the howl into clearly
separated notes, the change having come about as a similar alteration is effected in our own
speech, by the increase in the intelligence which the creature is called upon to express. I
conceive that while the primitive and massive emotions found satisfying utterance in the long-drawn
notes, the more divided state of mind of the humanized successor has led to a change in its
utterances. Although these modifications of speech, if such we may term them, have probably
been developed on the basis of the dog's human relations, there is, it seems to me, good reason
to believe that the diversities in note have come to have a distinct conventional value between
the individuals of all the different breeds. Any one who closely observes these animals must
have noticed the fact that the degree of attention they give to the utterances of their kindred
varies in a way which indicates that they have great varieties of denotations. Some of the
shades of the meaning which a dog's bark has to others of his species probably escape our less
fine ears.

The creation of something like a language among our civilized dogs has naturally been accompanied
by the development of an understanding of human speech. Although we cannot attach much importance
to the mass of anecdote on this point, there is enough which is well attested--sufficient,
indeed, which has come within the limits of my own observation--to make it clear that dogs,
even without deliberate teaching, frequently acquire a tolerably clear understanding of a number
of words and even of short phrases. They will catch these not only when given in distinct command,
but when uttered in an ordinary tone, without any sign that they relate to their affairs. It
is true that these understood words generally relate to some action which the dog is accustomed
to perform, yet there are instances so well attested that they deserve credit, which seem to
show that the creatures can get some sense of the drift of conversation even when it is carried
on by persons with whom they are not familiar and does not clearly relate to their own affairs.

It should be observed that within the narrow limits of this essay little or no effort has been
made to interpret the state of mind of dogs from the vast but rather untrustworthy mass of
anecdote with which our books are filled. So large a part of this evidence is contaminated
by prepossessions, and a yet larger part is so unverified in any scientific sense, that for
purposes of sound inquiry it is worthless. It therefore seems best to limit ourselves, as has
been done in this paper, to those general actions of the creatures which are matters of common
knowledge and safely beyond question. From these indices we are able to determine a basis for
some important conclusions. These are in effect as follows, viz.: Our domestic dog is derived
from a species, one or more, akin to the wolf, the jackal, and the fox; to a group of animals
not characterized by great native intelligence, but distinguished for their ferocity and their
general untamableness. There is no reason to believe that the primitive dog had any more foundation
for his great attainments than his obstinately savage kindred, except that he may have had
a greater disposition to form an attachment to a master. We can hardly believe that he had
any share of that marvellous sympathy with man and understanding of his motives which characterize
the high-bred varieties of his species. All this vast transformation, which from a psychological
point of view has carried the dog relatively as far up above his origin as civilization has
lifted man above his lowest estate, has been due to human intercourse and the long and effective
concomitant selection of good from bad. It is hardly too much to say that a large part of our
human nature has been transferred into the descendants of this ancient wild beast. The sense
of property, a great part of human affections, many of the attributes which constitute the
gentleman, have been passed over to him.

In considering the effects arising from the intercourse of man with the dog, we should not
overlook the development of human sympathy which has come about through this relation. The
fact that the dog has been made by far the most sympathetic of the lower animals, is due to
the affection which men for thousands of years have given to him. In his intercourse with this
creature, man first learned to develop his altruistic motives beyond the limits of his own
kind. With this extension of his affection must have begun the growth of that large motive,
which is the most distinguishing feature of our modern life, which leads us to go forth in
a loving manner to the living beings about us, not only to our flocks and herds but to the
life of the unsubjugated realm as well. Thus, in a way, we may look upon the dog as affording
the first steps on the path of culture which was to lift man from his primitive selfishness
to the altruistic state to which he has attained.

Great as has been the work of man upon the dog--it deserves, indeed, to be ranked high among
all the accomplishments of his culture--there is reason to believe that if he but go forward
with understanding in the ways which have hitherto led him blindly to his success, the final
result may be very much more perfect than that which has been attained. It is on this account
that I feel it fit to make a strong protest against the system our breeders pursue. Except
in the case of dogs used in sport and for herding sheep, the sole effort appears to be to create
breeds which shall exhibit peculiarities of form which are mere extravagances, and move the
real lover of this noble animal to indignation. In these preposterous and unseemly tasks no
care is taken to continue the mental development on lines which have been established by long
use. Still less is there any effort to essay the development of the intelligence in ways which
are clearly open to us, and which afford possibilities of lifting this species to a yet nobler
companionship with our own kind.

It seems worth while for our associations of dog fanciers to undertake to develop varieties
of dogs solely with reference to the intellectual qualities of the animal. I venture to suggest
that those who seek this end should select some of the primitive types of form, such as are
found among the undifferentiated mass of the species, those which are improperly termed mongrels,
and this for the reason that among these unselected creatures the intelligence is quicker and
more varied than it is in the highly developed varieties. Under skilful trainers the successive
generations bred in the experimental station should be subjected to tests which will indicate
the measure of intellectual ability. The results already attained by the unconscious selection
which man has applied serve to indicate that at the end of a century, and perhaps in much less
time, we might develop an animal which in various ways would come to a closer intellectual
relation with man than any other lower species has attained.

Cats deserve some mention for the reason, that, while they are the least essential, and on
the whole the least interesting, of domesticated animals, they have had a certain place in
civilization. They afford, moreover, a capital foil by which to set off the virtues of the
dog. Nowhere else, indeed, among the creatures which are intimately associated with men, do
we find two related forms which afford, along with a certain likeness, such great diversities
of quality.

We know nothing as to the time when the cat first found its way to the associations of man.
Presumably this period was much later than the advent of the dog into the human family. The
presumption rests upon the fact that while the dog does not demand fixed residence as a condition
of its fealty, but is at home wherever his master is, the cat is the creature of the domicile,
caring more indeed for its dwelling-place than it ever does for the inmates thereof. In a word,
the creature must have come to us after our forefathers gave up the nomadic life. Nevertheless,
the association is very ancient; it has endured in Egypt at least for a term of several thousand
years. It is, in a small way, serviceable in keeping down the excessive development of small
rodents, which from the beginning have been the self-invited guests of man. As it is in a certain
indifferent way sympathetic, and by its caresses appears to indicate affection, it has awakened
a measure of sympathy which it hardly deserves. I have been unable to find any authentic instances
which go to show the existence in cats of any real love for their masters.

In the matter of intelligence cats appear to rank almost as high as dogs. They are even quicker
than their canine relatives in discerning the nature of man's artful contrivances; they readily
acquire the habit of opening doors which are closed by means of a latch, even where it is necessary
to combine the strong pull on the handle with the push that completes the operation. Feats
of this sort are rarely if ever performed by dogs.

The most peculiar quality in the mind of cats is the intense way in which they cling to a well-known
locality. Their memory of places, and affection for them, if we may so term it, is evidently
far greater than that which they feel for people. Some years ago I had an interesting exhibition
of this singular humor. A well-grown and thoroughly domesticated cat, one that seemed more
than usually attached to people, was brought from my house in town to a place on the shore.
When released, the creature seemed for some days to be nearly insane. It did not recognize
any of its friends, it betook itself to the fields, and was with difficulty captured at the
end of a week of roaming, during which it appeared to have had no food. Confined within one
room, it gradually recovered its powers of mind, and began to take account of its friends.
In the course of a month it seemed to be reconciled to its surroundings. Nine months after
its first sojourn in the wilderness it was again brought from the town to the same place. On
the second visit the creature was somewhat uneasy, but this passed away in a day or two. On
a third visit, after a like interval, it seemed at once and entirely at home. Nevertheless,
its habits while in the country differ very much from those it has in town. In its original
domicile it insists on being about the table at meal-times. While in the country it does not
care to be present; in fact, it appears to avoid associations with the household. It seems
to me that this cat, after the manner of some men whose brains are diseased, now lives in two
distinct states of consciousness, each relating to one of its places of abode.

The differences as regards affection for localities which is shown by cats and dogs are perhaps
to be accounted for by an original and essential variation in the habits of life in their wild
ancestors. Judging by the kindred of the species which are known to us in their wild state,
we may fairly suppose that the dogs were of old accustomed to range over a wide field, having
no fixed place of abode; the pack ranging, if the occasion served, for hundreds of miles in
any direction. On the other hand, with the cats, it is characteristic of the species that they
have lairs to which they resort, and a definite hunting ground in which they seek their food.
They are, in a word, animals of very determined routine. As there has been no effort by breeding
to change this feature, it has remained in all its old ingrained intensity.

As a consequence of the affection which cats have for particular places, they often return
to the wilderness when by chance the homes in which they have been reared are abandoned. Thus
in New England, in those sections of the district where many farmsteads have of late years
been deserted, the cats have remained about their ancient haunts and have become entirely wild.
In this State they are bred in such numbers that their presence is now a serious menace to
the birds and other weaker creatures of the country. The behavior of these feralized animals
differs somewhat from that of creatures which have never been tamed. They have not the same
immediate fear of a man, but the least effort to approach them leads to their hasty flight.

While considering the inelastic quality which is exhibited by cats as compared with the dog,
the naturalist notes with interest the fact that the former creature belongs to a family which
has never been accustomed to any social life beyond the limits of the family. Moreover, all
the cats have the habit of hunting in a solitary way, each for itself, in the achievement and
in the result. It is otherwise with dogs. They belong to a group which hunts in packs. For
ages they have been used to a communal life. Their minds have thus become accustomed to social
intercourse; they are used to having their excitements of the chase in comradeship, and generally
they are accustomed to the rough-and-tumble fraternity which we behold in a pack of wolves.
It was long ago remarked that the really social animals are those which afford the only good
material for subjugation. The difference between the cat and dog seems, in a way, to warrant
this statement.

Although it is likely that many efforts have been made to domesticate the other larger felines,
no distinct success has attended these experiments. A large Asiatic cat known as the chetah
is somewhat used in hunting for sport, but the species has never been adopted in any definite
way. In fact, with all the larger cats, including the lion, which is structurally a little
apart from the other members of the group, the size and furious nature of the animal have made
it impossible to begin the process of selection which has been the means whereby the wilderness
motive has been replaced by that of the household in the case of all other domesticated beasts.

