She puzzled a good bit over this, especially the first part of it; but when they told her the
next day, she understood.  Probably she grieved for him more than had any one else; even more
than the members of his own family or profession.  For, whereas there are many people in the
world who can give life to others, there are but few who can help others to possess it.

What childhood she had had she left behind her soon after this, along with her aching back,
her helpless limbs, and the little iron crib in Ward C.

On the first Trustee Day following her complete recovery she appeared, at her own request,
before the meeting of the board.  In a small, frightened voice she asked them to please send
her away to school.  She wanted to learn enough to come back to Saint Margaret's and be a nurse.

The trustees consented.  Having assumed the responsibility of her well-being for over fifteen
years, they could not very easily shirk it now.  Furthermore, was it not a praise-worthy tribute
to Saint Margaret's as a charitable institution, and to themselves as trustees, that this child
whom they had sheltered and helped to cure should choose this way of showing her gratitude?
Verily, the board pruned and plumed itself well that day. 

BARRYANA.

The inquiries of "DRAMATICUS," and others in your number for Nov. 10., prompt me to say that
should any of your correspondents happen to possess information answering the following queries,
or any of them, I shall be thankful to share it.

1. What became
of the natural child of Elizabeth Barry, the actress, who died 1713;
and whether the Earl of Rochester, its father, was really Wilmot (as
Galt assumes) or Hyde, on whom that title was conferred at Wilmot's
death?  For the thousandth time she blessed that memory.

It had been no disloyalty on her part that she had closed her lips and said nothing when the
House Surgeon had questioned her about her fancy-making.  She could never get away from the
feeling that some of the sweetness and sacredness might be lost with the telling of the memory.
One is so apt to cheapen a thing when one tries hastily to put it into words, and ever afterward
it is never quite the same.

On the second floor she stopped; and by chance she looked over, between spiral banisters, to
the patch of hallway below.  It just happened that the House Surgeon was standing there, talking
with one of the internes.

Margaret MacLean smiled whimsically.  "If there is a soul in the wide world I could share it
with, it is the House Surgeon."  And then she added, aloud, softly apostrophizing the top of
his head, "I think some day you might grow to be very--very like the Old Senior Surgeon; that
is, if you would only stop trying to be like the present one."

III

WARD C

A welcoming shout went up from Ward C as Margaret MacLean entered.  It was lusty enough to
have come from the throats of healthy children, and it would have sounded happily to the most
impartial ears; to the nurse in charge it was a very pagan of gladness.

"Wish you good morning, good meals, and good manners," laughed Margaret MacLean; and then she
went from crib to crib with a special greeting for each one.  Oh, she firmly believed that
a great deal depended on how the day began.

In the first crib lay Pancho, of South American parentage, partially paralyzed and wholly captivating.
He had been in Saint Margaret's since babyhood--he was six now--and had never worn anything
but a little hospital shirt.

"Good morning, Brown Baby," she said, kissing his forehead.  "It's just the day for you out
on the sun-porch; and you'll hear birds--lots of them."

"Wobins?"

"Yes, and bluebirds, too.  I've heard them already."

