Reply Obj. 3: The desire for natural riches is not infinite: because they suffice for nature
in a certain measure. But the desire for artificial wealth is infinite, for it is the servant
of disordered concupiscence, which is not curbed, as the Philosopher makes clear (Polit. i,
3). Yet this desire for wealth is infinite otherwise than the desire for the sovereign good.
For the more perfectly the sovereign good is possessed, the more it is loved, and other things
despised: because the more we possess it, the more we know it. Hence it is written (Ecclus.
24:29): "They that eat me shall yet hunger." Whereas in the desire for wealth and for whatsoever
temporal goods, the contrary is the case: for when we already possess them, we despise them,
and seek others: which is the sense of Our Lord's words (John 4:13): "Whosoever drinketh of
this water," by which temporal goods are signified, "shall thirst again." The reason of this
is that we realize more their insufficiency when we possess them: and this very fact shows
that they are imperfect, and the sovereign good does not consist therein.

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 2, Art. 2]

Whether Man's Happiness Consists in Honors?

Objection 1: It would seem that man's happiness consists in honors. For happiness or bliss
is "the reward of virtue," as the Philosopher says (Ethic. i, 9). But honor more than anything
else seems to be that by which virtue is rewarded, as the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 3).
Therefore happiness consists especially in honor.

Obj. 2: Further, that which belongs to God and to persons of great excellence seems especially
to be happiness, which is the perfect good. But that is honor, as the Philosopher says (Ethic.
iv, 3). Moreover, the Apostle says (1 Tim. 1:17): "To . . . the only God be honor and glory."
Therefore happiness consists in honor.

Obj. 3: Further, that which man desires above all is happiness. But nothing seems more desirable
to man than honor: since man suffers loss in all other things, lest he should suffer loss of
honor. Therefore happiness consists in honor.

On the contrary, Happiness is in the happy. But honor is not in the honored, but rather in
him who honors, and who offers deference to the person honored, as the Philosopher says (Ethic.
i, 5). Therefore happiness does not consist in honor.

I answer that, It is impossible for happiness to consist in honor. For honor is given to a
man on account of some excellence in him; and consequently it is a sign and attestation of
the excellence that is in the person honored. Now a man's excellence is in proportion, especially
to his happiness, which is man's perfect good; and to its parts, i.e. those goods by which
he has a certain share of happiness. And therefore honor can result from happiness, but happiness
cannot principally consist therein.

Reply Obj. 1: As the Philosopher says (Ethic. i, 5), honor is not that reward of virtue, for
which the virtuous work: but they receive honor from men by way of reward, "as from those who
have nothing greater to offer." But virtue's true reward is happiness itself, for which the
virtuous work: whereas if they worked for honor, it would no longer be a virtue, but ambition.

Reply Obj. 2: Honor is due to God and to persons of great excellence as a sign of attestation
of excellence already existing: not that honor makes them excellent.

Reply Obj. 3: That man desires honor above all else, arises from his natural desire for happiness,
from which honor results, as stated above. Wherefore man seeks to be honored especially by
the wise, on whose judgment he believes himself to be excellent or happy.

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 2, Art. 3]

Whether Man's Happiness Consists in Fame or Glory?

Objection 1: It would seem that man's happiness consists in glory. For happiness seems to consist
in that which is paid to the saints for the trials they have undergone in the world. But this
is glory: for the Apostle says (Rom. 8:18): "The sufferings of this time are not worthy to
be compared with the glory to come, that shall be revealed in us." Therefore happiness consists
in glory.

Obj. 2: Further, good is diffusive of itself, as stated by Dionysius (Div. Nom. iv). But man's
good is spread abroad in the knowledge of others by glory more than by anything else: since,
according to Ambrose [*Augustine, Contra Maxim. Arian. ii. 13], glory consists "in being well
known and praised." Therefore man's happiness consists in glory.

Obj. 3: Further, happiness is the most enduring good. Now this seems to be fame or glory; because
by this men attain to eternity after a fashion. Hence Boethius says (De Consol. ii): "You seem
to beget unto yourselves eternity, when you think of your fame in future time." Therefore man's
happiness consists in fame or glory.

On the contrary, Happiness is man's true good. But it happens that fame or glory is false:
for as Boethius says (De Consol. iii), "many owe their renown to the lying reports spread among
the people. Can anything be more shameful? For those who receive false fame, must needs blush
at their own praise." Therefore man's happiness does not consist in fame or glory.

I answer that, Man's happiness cannot consist in human fame or glory. For glory consists "in
being well known and praised," as Ambrose [*Augustine, Contra Maxim. Arian. ii, 13] says. Now
the thing known is related to human knowledge otherwise than to God's knowledge: for human
knowledge is caused by the things known, whereas God's knowledge is the cause of the things
known. Wherefore the perfection of human good, which is called happiness, cannot be caused
by human knowledge: but rather human knowledge of another's happiness proceeds from, and, in
a fashion, is caused by, human happiness itself, inchoate or perfect. Consequently man's happiness
cannot consist in fame or glory. On the other hand, man's good depends on God's knowledge as
its cause. And therefore man's beatitude depends, as on its cause, on the glory which man has
with God; according to Ps. 90:15, 16: "I will deliver him, and I will glorify him; I will fill
him with length of days, and I will show him my salvation."

Furthermore, we must observe that human knowledge often fails, especially in contingent singulars,
such as are human acts. For this reason human glory is frequently deceptive. But since God
cannot be deceived, His glory is always true; hence it is written (2 Cor. 10:18): "He . . .
is approved . . . whom God commendeth."

Reply Obj. 1: The Apostle speaks, then, not of the glory which is with men, but of the glory
which is from God, with His Angels. Hence it is written (Mk. 8:38): "The Son of Man shall confess
him in the glory of His Father, before His angels" [*St. Thomas joins Mk. 8:38 with Luke 12:8
owing to a possible variant in his text, or to the fact that he was quoting from memory].

Reply Obj. 2: A man's good which, through fame or glory, is in the knowledge of many, if this
knowledge be true, must needs be derived from good existing in the man himself: and hence it
presupposes perfect or inchoate happiness. But if the knowledge be false, it does not harmonize
with the thing: and thus good does not exist in him who is looked upon as famous. Hence it
follows that fame can nowise make man happy.

Reply Obj. 3: Fame has no stability; in fact, it is easily ruined by false report. And if sometimes
it endures, this is by accident. But happiness endures of itself, and for ever.

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 2, Art. 4]

Whether Man's Happiness Consists in Power?

Objection 1: It would seem that happiness consists in power. For all things desire to become
like to God, as to their last end and first beginning. But men who are in power, seem, on account
of the similarity of power, to be most like to God: hence also in Scripture they are called
"gods" (Ex. 22:28), "Thou shalt not speak ill of the gods." Therefore happiness consists in power.

Obj. 2: Further, happiness is the perfect good. But the highest perfection for man is to be
able to rule others; which belongs to those who are in power. Therefore happiness consists
in power.

Obj. 3: Further, since happiness is supremely desirable, it is contrary to that which is before
all to be shunned. But, more than aught else, men shun servitude, which is contrary to power.
Therefore happiness consists in power.

On the contrary, Happiness is the perfect good. But power is most imperfect. For as Boethius
says (De Consol. iii), "the power of man cannot relieve the gnawings of care, nor can it avoid
the thorny path of anxiety": and further on: "Think you a man is powerful who is surrounded
by attendants, whom he inspires with fear indeed, but whom he fears still more?"

I answer that, It is impossible for happiness to consist in power; and this for two reasons.
First because power has the nature of principle, as is stated in Metaph. v, 12, whereas happiness
has the nature of last end. Secondly, because power has relation to good and evil: whereas
happiness is man's proper and perfect good. Wherefore some happiness might consist in the good
use of power, which is by virtue, rather than in power itself.

Now four general reasons may be given to prove that happiness consists in none of the foregoing
external goods. First, because, since happiness is man's supreme good, it is incompatible with
any evil. Now all the foregoing can be found both in good and in evil men. Secondly, because,
since it is the nature of happiness to "satisfy of itself," as stated in Ethic. i, 7, having
gained happiness, man cannot lack any needful good. But after acquiring any one of the foregoing,
man may still lack many goods that are necessary to him; for instance, wisdom, bodily health,
and such like. Thirdly, because, since happiness is the perfect good, no evil can accrue to
anyone therefrom. This cannot be said of the foregoing: for it is written (Eccles. 5:12) that
"riches" are sometimes "kept to the hurt of the owner"; and the same may be said of the other
three. Fourthly, because man is ordained to happiness through principles that are in him; since
he is ordained thereto naturally. Now the four goods mentioned above are due rather to external
causes, and in most cases to fortune; for which reason they are called goods of fortune. Therefore
it is evident that happiness nowise consists in the foregoing.

Reply Obj. 1: God's power is His goodness: hence He cannot use His power otherwise than well.
But it is not so with men. Consequently it is not enough for man's happiness, that he become
like God in power, unless he become like Him in goodness also.

Reply Obj. 2: Just as it is a very good thing for a man to make good use of power in ruling
many, so is it a very bad thing if he makes a bad use of it. And so it is that power is towards
good and evil.

Reply Obj. 3: Servitude is a hindrance to the good use of power: therefore is it that men naturally
shun it; not because man's supreme good consists in power.

FIFTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 2, Art. 5]

Whether Man's Happiness Consists in Any Bodily Good?

Objection 1: It would seem that man's happiness consists in bodily goods. For it is written
(Ecclus. 30:16): "There is no riches above the riches of the health of the body." But happiness
consists in that which is best. Therefore it consists in the health of the body.

Obj. 2: Further, Dionysius says (Div. Nom. v), that "to be" is better than "to live," and "to
live" is better than all that follows. But for man's being and living, the health of the body
is necessary. Since, therefore, happiness is man's supreme good, it seems that health of the
body belongs more than anything else to happiness.

Obj. 3: Further, the more universal a thing is, the higher the principle from which it depends;
because the higher a cause is, the greater the scope of its power. Now just as the causality
of the efficient cause consists in its flowing into something, so the causality of the end
consists in its drawing the appetite. Therefore, just as the First Cause is that which flows
into all things, so the last end is that which attracts the desire of all. But being itself
is that which is most desired by all. Therefore man's happiness consists most of all in things
pertaining to his being, such as the health of the body.

On the contrary, Man surpasses all other animals in regard to happiness. But in bodily goods
he is surpassed by many animals; for instance, by the elephant in longevity, by the lion in
strength, by the stag in fleetness. Therefore man's happiness does not consist in goods of
the body.

I answer that, It is impossible for man's happiness to consist in the goods of the body; and
this for two reasons. First, because, if a thing be ordained to another as to its end, its
last end cannot consist in the preservation of its being. Hence a captain does not intend as
a last end, the preservation of the ship entrusted to him, since a ship is ordained to something
else as its end, viz. to navigation. Now it is evident that man is ordained to something as
his end: since man is not the supreme good. Therefore the last end of man's reason and will
cannot be the preservation of man's being.

Secondly, because, granted that the end of man's will and reason be the preservation of man's
being, it could not be said that the end of man is some good of the body. For man's being consists
in soul and body; and though the being of the body depends on the soul, yet the being of the
human soul depends not on the body, as shown above (I, Q. 75, A. 2); and the very body is for
the soul, as matter for its form, and the instruments for the man that puts them into motion,
that by their means he may do his work. Wherefore all goods of the body are ordained to the
goods of the soul, as to their end. Consequently happiness, which is man's last end, cannot
consist in goods of the body.

Reply Obj. 1: Just as the body is ordained to the soul, as its end, so are external goods ordained
to the body itself. And therefore it is with reason that the good of the body is preferred
to external goods, which are signified by "riches," just as the good of the soul is preferred
to all bodily goods.

Reply Obj. 2: Being taken simply, as including all perfection of being, surpasses life and
all that follows it; for thus being itself includes all these. And in this sense Dionysius
speaks. But if we consider being itself as participated in this or that thing, which does not
possess the whole perfection of being, but has imperfect being, such as the being of any creature;
then it is evident that being itself together with an additional perfection is more excellent.
Hence in the same passage Dionysius says that things that live are better than things that
exist, and intelligent better than living things.

Reply Obj. 3: Since the end corresponds to the beginning; this argument proves that the last
end is the first beginning of being, in Whom every perfection of being is: Whose likeness,
according to their proportion, some desire as to being only, some as to living being, some
as to being which is living, intelligent and happy. And this belongs to few.

Objection 1: It would seem that man's happiness consists in pleasure. For since happiness is
the last end, it is not desired for something else, but other things for it. But this answers
to pleasure more than to anything else: "for it is absurd to ask anyone what is his motive
in wishing to be pleased" (Ethic. x, 2). Therefore happiness consists principally in pleasure
and delight.

Obj. 2: Further, "the first cause goes more deeply into the effect than the second cause" (De
Causis i). Now the causality of the end consists in its attracting the appetite. Therefore,
seemingly that which moves most the appetite, answers to the notion of the last end. Now this
is pleasure: and a sign of this is that delight so far absorbs man's will and reason, that
it causes him to despise other goods. Therefore it seems that man's last end, which is happiness,
consists principally in pleasure.

Obj. 3: Further, since desire is for good, it seems that what all desire is best. But all desire
delight; both wise and foolish, and even irrational creatures. Therefore delight is the best
of all. Therefore happiness, which is the supreme good, consists in pleasure.

On the contrary, Boethius says (De Consol. iii): "Any one that chooses to look back on his
past excesses, will perceive that pleasures had a sad ending: and if they can render a man
happy, there is no reason why we should not say that the very beasts are happy too."

I answer that, Because bodily delights are more generally known, "the name of pleasure has
been appropriated to them" (Ethic. vii, 13), although other delights excel them: and yet happiness
does not consist in them. Because in every thing, that which pertains to its essence is distinct
from its proper accident: thus in man it is one thing that he is a mortal rational animal,
and another that he is a risible animal. We must therefore consider that every delight is a
proper accident resulting from happiness, or from some part of happiness; since the reason
that a man is delighted is that he has some fitting good, either in reality, or in hope, or
at least in memory. Now a fitting good, if indeed it be the perfect good, is precisely man's
happiness: and if it is imperfect, it is a share of happiness, either proximate, or remote,
or at least apparent. Therefore it is evident that neither is delight, which results from the
perfect good, the very essence of happiness, but something resulting therefrom as its proper
accident.

But bodily pleasure cannot result from the perfect good even in that way. For it results from
a good apprehended by sense, which is a power of the soul, which power makes use of the body.
Now good pertaining to the body, and apprehended by sense, cannot be man's perfect good. For
since the rational soul excels the capacity of corporeal matter, that part of the soul which
is independent of a corporeal organ, has a certain infinity in regard to the body and those
parts of the soul which are tied down to the body: just as immaterial things are in a way infinite
as compared to material things, since a form is, after a fashion, contracted and bounded by
matter, so that a form which is independent of matter is, in a way, infinite. Therefore sense,
which is a power of the body, knows the singular, which is determinate through matter: whereas
the intellect, which is a power independent of matter, knows the universal, which is abstracted
from matter, and contains an infinite number of singulars. Consequently it is evident that
good which is fitting to the body, and which causes bodily delight through being apprehended
by sense, is not man's perfect good, but is quite a trifle as compared with the good of the
soul. Hence it is written (Wis. 7:9) that "all gold in comparison of her, is as a little sand."
And therefore bodily pleasure is neither happiness itself, nor a proper accident of happiness.

Reply Obj. 1: It comes to the same whether we desire good, or desire delight, which is nothing
else than the appetite's rest in good: thus it is owing to the same natural force that a weighty
body is borne downwards and that it rests there. Consequently just as good is desired for itself,
so delight is desired for itself and not for anything else, if the preposition "for" denote
the final cause. But if it denote the formal or rather the motive cause, thus delight is desirable
for something else, i.e. for the good, which is the object of that delight, and consequently
is its principle, and gives it its form: for the reason that delight is desired is that it
is rest in the thing desired.

Reply Obj. 2: The vehemence of desire for sensible delight arises from the fact that operations
of the senses, through being the principles of our knowledge, are more perceptible. And so
it is that sensible pleasures are desired by the majority.

Reply Obj. 3: All desire delight in the same way as they desire good: and yet they desire delight
by reason of the good and not conversely, as stated above (ad 1). Consequently it does not
follow that delight is the supreme and essential good, but that every delight results from
some good, and that some delight results from that which is the essential and supreme good.

SEVENTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 2, Art. 7]

Whether Some Good of the Soul Constitutes Man's Happiness?

Objection 1: It would seem that some good of the soul constitutes man's happiness. For happiness
is man's good. Now this is threefold: external goods, goods of the body, and goods of the soul.
But happiness does not consist in external goods, nor in goods of the body, as shown above
(AA. 4, 5). Therefore it consists in goods of the soul.

Obj. 2: Further, we love that for which we desire good, more than the good that we desire for
it: thus we love a friend for whom we desire money, more than we love money. But whatever good
a man desires, he desires it for himself. Therefore he loves himself more than all other goods.
Now happiness is what is loved above all: which is evident from the fact that for its sake
all else is loved and desired. Therefore happiness consists in some good of man himself: not,
however, in goods of the body; therefore, in goods of the soul.

Obj. 3: Further, perfection is something belonging to that which is perfected. But happiness
is a perfection of man. Therefore happiness is something belonging to man. But it is not something
belonging to the body, as shown above (A. 5). Therefore it is something belonging to the soul;
and thus it consists in goods of the soul.

On the contrary, As Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. i, 22), "that which constitutes the life
of happiness is to be loved for its own sake." But man is not to be loved for his own sake,
but whatever is in man is to be loved for God's sake. Therefore happiness consists in no good
of the soul.

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 1, A. 8), the end is twofold: namely, the thing itself,
which we desire to attain, and the use, namely, the attainment or possession of that thing.
If, then, we speak of man's last end, it is impossible for man's last end to be the soul itself
or something belonging to it. Because the soul, considered in itself, is as something existing
in potentiality: for it becomes knowing actually, from being potentially knowing; and actually
virtuous, from being potentially virtuous. Now since potentiality is for the sake of act as
for its fulfilment, that which in itself is in potentiality cannot be the last end. Therefore
the soul itself cannot be its own last end.

In like manner neither can anything belonging to it, whether power, habit, or act. For that
good which is the last end, is the perfect good fulfilling the desire. Now man's appetite,
otherwise the will, is for the universal good. And any good inherent to the soul is a participated
good, and consequently a portioned good. Therefore none of them can be man's last end.

But if we speak of man's last end, as to the attainment or possession thereof, or as to any
use whatever of the thing itself desired as an end, thus does something of man, in respect
of his soul, belong to his last end: since man attains happiness through his soul. Therefore
the thing itself which is desired as end, is that which constitutes happiness, and makes man
happy; but the attainment of this thing is called happiness. Consequently we must say that
happiness is something belonging to the soul; but that which constitutes happiness is something
outside the soul.

Reply Obj. 1: Inasmuch as this division includes all goods that man can desire, thus the good
of the soul is not only power, habit, or act, but also the object of these, which is something
outside. And in this way nothing hinders us from saying that what constitutes happiness is
a good of the soul.

Reply Obj. 2: As far as the proposed objection is concerned, happiness is loved above all,
as the good desired; whereas a friend is loved as that for which good is desired; and thus,
too, man loves himself. Consequently it is not the same kind of love in both cases. As to whether
man loves anything more than himself with the love of friendship there will be occasion to
inquire when we treat of Charity.

Reply Obj. 3: Happiness, itself, since it is a perfection of the soul, is an inherent good
of the soul; but that which constitutes happiness, viz. which makes man happy, is something
outside his soul, as stated above.

EIGHTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 2, Art. 8]

Whether Any Created Good Constitutes Man's Happiness?

Objection 1: It would seem that some created good constitutes man's happiness. For Dionysius
says (Div. Nom. vii) that Divine wisdom "unites the ends of first things to the beginnings
of second things," from which we may gather that the summit of a lower nature touches the base
of the higher nature. But man's highest good is happiness. Since then the angel is above man
in the order of nature, as stated in the First Part (Q. 111, A. 1), it seems that man's happiness
consists in man somehow reaching the angel.

Obj. 2: Further, the last end of each thing is that which, in relation to it, is perfect: hence
the part is for the whole, as for its end. But the universe of creatures which is called the
macrocosm, is compared to man who is called the microcosm (Phys. viii, 2), as perfect to imperfect.
Therefore man's happiness consists in the whole universe of creatures.

Obj. 3: Further, man is made happy by that which lulls his natural desire. But man's natural
desire does not reach out to a good surpassing his capacity. Since then man's capacity does
not include that good which surpasses the limits of all creation, it seems that man can be
made happy by some created good. Consequently some created good constitutes man's happiness.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xix, 26): "As the soul is the life of the body,
so God is man's life of happiness: of Whom it is written: 'Happy is that people whose God is
the Lord' (Ps. 143:15)."

I answer that, It is impossible for any created good to constitute man's happiness. For happiness
is the perfect good, which lulls the appetite altogether; else it would not be the last end,
if something yet remained to be desired. Now the object of the will, i.e. of man's appetite,
is the universal good; just as the object of the intellect is the universal true. Hence it
is evident that naught can lull man's will, save the universal good. This is to be found, not
in any creature, but in God alone; because every creature has goodness by participation. Therefore
God alone constitutes man's happiness.

Reply Obj. 1: The summit of man does indeed touch the base of the angelic nature, by a kind
of likeness; but man does not rest there as in his last end, but reaches out to the universal
fount itself of good, which is the common object of happiness of all the blessed, as being
the infinite and perfect good.

Reply Obj. 2: If a whole be not the last end, but ordained to a further end, then the last
end of a part thereof is not the whole itself, but something else. Now the universe of creatures,
to which man is compared as part to whole, is not the last end, but is ordained to God, as
to its last end. Therefore the last end of man is not the good of the universe, but God himself.

Reply Obj. 3: Created good is not less than that good of which man is capable, as of something
intrinsic and inherent to him: but it is less than the good of which he is capable, as of an
object, and which is infinite. And the participated good which is in an angel, and in the whole
universe, is a finite and restricted good.

QUESTION 3

WHAT IS HAPPINESS (In Eight Articles)

We have now to consider (1) what happiness is, and (2) what things are required for it.

Concerning the first there are eight points of inquiry:

(1) Whether happiness is something uncreated?

(2) If it be something created, whether it is an operation?

(3) Whether it is an operation of the sensitive, or only of the intellectual part?

(4) If it be an operation of the intellectual part, whether it is an operation of the intellect,
or of the will?

(5) If it be an operation of the intellect, whether it is an operation of the speculative or
of the practical intellect?

(6) If it be an operation of the speculative intellect, whether it consists in the consideration
of speculative sciences?

(7) Whether it consists in the consideration of separate substances viz. angels?

(8) Whether it consists in the sole contemplation of God seen in His Essence?

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 3, Art. 1]

Whether Happiness Is Something Uncreated?

Objection 1: It would seem that happiness is something uncreated. For Boethius says (De Consol.
iii): "We must needs confess that God is happiness itself."

Obj. 2: Further, happiness is the supreme good. But it belongs to God to be the supreme good.
Since, then, there are not several supreme goods, it seems that happiness is the same as God.

Obj. 3: Further, happiness is the last end, to which man's will tends naturally. But man's
will should tend to nothing else as an end, but to God, Who alone is to be enjoyed, as Augustine
says (De Doctr. Christ. i, 5, 22). Therefore happiness is the same as God.

On the contrary, Nothing made is uncreated. But man's happiness is something made; because
according to Augustine (De Doctr. Christ. i, 3): "Those things are to be enjoyed which make
us happy." Therefore happiness is not something uncreated.

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 1, A. 8; Q. 2, A. 7), our end is twofold. First, there is
the thing itself which we desire to attain: thus for the miser, the end is money. Secondly
there is the attainment or possession, the use or enjoyment of the thing desired; thus we may
say that the end of the miser is the possession of money; and the end of the intemperate man
is to enjoy something pleasurable. In the first sense, then, man's last end is the uncreated
good, namely, God, Who alone by His infinite goodness can perfectly satisfy man's will. But
in the second way, man's last end is something created, existing in him, and this is nothing
else than the attainment or enjoyment of the last end. Now the last end is called happiness.
If, therefore, we consider man's happiness in its cause or object, then it is something uncreated;
but if we consider it as to the very essence of happiness, then it is something created.

Reply Obj. 1: God is happiness by His Essence: for He is happy not by acquisition or participation
of something else, but by His Essence. On the other hand, men are happy, as Boethius says (De
Consol. iii), by participation; just as they are called "gods," by participation. And this
participation of happiness, in respect of which man is said to be happy, is something created.

Reply Obj. 2: Happiness is called man's supreme good, because it is the attainment or enjoyment
of the supreme good.

Reply Obj. 3: Happiness is said to be the last end, in the same way as the attainment of the
end is called the end.

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 3, Art. 2]

Whether Happiness Is an Operation?

Objection 1: It would seem that happiness is not an operation. For the Apostle says (Rom. 6:22):
"You have your fruit unto sanctification, and the end, life everlasting." But life is not an
operation, but the very being of living things. Therefore the last end, which is happiness,
is not an operation. But state does not indicate operation. Therefore happiness is not an operation.

Obj. 3: Further, happiness signifies something existing in the happy one: since it is man's
final perfection. But the meaning of operation does not imply anything existing in the operator,
but rather something proceeding therefrom. Therefore happiness is not an operation.

Obj. 4: Further, happiness remains in the happy one. Now operation does not remain, but passes.
Therefore happiness is not an operation.

Obj. 5: Further, to one man there is one happiness. But operations are many. Therefore happiness
is not an operation.

Obj. 6: Further, happiness is in the happy one uninterruptedly. But human operation is often
interrupted; for instance, by sleep, or some other occupation, or by cessation. Therefore happiness
is not an operation.

On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. i, 13) that "happiness is an operation according
to perfect virtue."

I answer that, In so far as man's happiness is something created, existing in him, we must
needs say that it is an operation. For happiness is man's supreme perfection. Now each thing
is perfect in so far as it is actual; since potentiality without act is imperfect. Consequently
happiness must consist in man's last act. But it is evident that operation is the last act
of the operator, wherefore the Philosopher calls it "second act" (De Anima ii, 1): because
that which has a form can be potentially operating, just as he who knows is potentially considering.
And hence it is that in other things, too, each one is said to be "for its operation" (De Coel
ii, 3). Therefore man's happiness must of necessity consist in an operation.

Reply Obj. 1: Life is taken in two senses. First for the very being of the living. And thus
happiness is not life: since it has been shown (Q. 2, A. 5) that the being of a man, no matter
in what it may consist, is not that man's happiness; for of God alone is it true that His Being
is His Happiness. Secondly, life means the operation of the living, by which operation the
principle of life is made actual: thus we speak of active and contemplative life, or of a life
of pleasure.

Reply Obj. 2: Boethius, in defining happiness, considered happiness in general: for considered
thus it is the perfect common good; and he signified this by saying that happiness is "a state
made perfect by the aggregate of all good things," thus implying that the state of a happy
man consists in possessing the perfect good. But Aristotle expressed the very essence of happiness,
showing by what man is established in this state, and that it is by some kind of operation.
And so it is that he proves happiness to be "the perfect good" (Ethic. i, 7).

Reply Obj. 3: As stated in Metaph. ix, 7 action is twofold. One proceeds from the agent into
outward matter, such as "to burn" and "to cut." And such an operation cannot be happiness:
for such an operation is an action and a perfection, not of the agent, but rather of the patient,
as is stated in the same passage. The other is an action that remains in the agent, such as
to feel, to understand, and to will: and such an action is a perfection and an act of the agent.
And such an operation can be happiness.

Reply Obj. 4: Since happiness signifies some final perfection; according as various things
capable of happiness can attain to various degrees of perfection, so must there be various
meanings applied to happiness. For in God there is happiness essentially; since His very Being
is His operation, whereby He enjoys no other than Himself. In the happy angels, the final perfection
is in respect of some operation, by which they are united to the Uncreated Good: and this operation
of theirs is one only and everlasting. But in men, according to their present state of life,
the final perfection is in respect of an operation whereby man is united to God: but this operation
neither can be continual, nor, consequently, is it one only, because operation is multiplied
by being discontinued. And for this reason in the present state of life, perfect happiness
cannot be attained by man. Wherefore the Philosopher, in placing man's happiness in this life
(Ethic. i, 10), says that it is imperfect, and after a long discussion, concludes: "We call
men happy, but only as men." But God has promised us perfect happiness, when we shall be "as
the angels . . . in heaven" (Matt. 22:30).

Consequently in regard to this perfect happiness, the objection fails: because in that state
of happiness, man's mind will be united to God by one, continual, everlasting operation. But
in the present life, in as far as we fall short of the unity and continuity of that operation
so do we fall short of perfect happiness. Nevertheless it is a participation of happiness:
and so much the greater, as the operation can be more continuous and more one. Consequently
the active life, which is busy with many things, has less of happiness than the contemplative
life, which is busied with one thing, i.e. the contemplation of truth. And if at any time man
is not actually engaged in this operation, yet since he can always easily turn to it, and since
he ordains the very cessation, by sleeping or occupying himself otherwise, to the aforesaid
occupation, the latter seems, as it were, continuous. From these remarks the replies to Objections
5 and 6 are evident.

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 3, Art. 3]

Whether Happiness Is an Operation of the Sensitive Part, or of the Intellective Part Only?

Objection 1: It would seem that happiness consists in an operation of the senses also. For
there is no more excellent operation in man than that of the senses, except the intellective
operation. But in us the intellective operation depends on the sensitive: since "we cannot
understand without a phantasm" (De Anima iii, 7). Therefore happiness consists in an operation
of the senses also. But some goods are sensible, which we attain by the operation of the senses.
Therefore it seems that the operation of the senses is needed for happiness.

Obj. 3: Further, happiness is the perfect good, as we find proved in Ethic. i, 7: which would
not be true, were not man perfected thereby in all his parts. But some parts of the soul are
perfected by sensitive operations. Therefore sensitive operation is required for happiness.

On the contrary, Irrational animals have the sensitive operation in common with us: but they
have not happiness in common with us. Therefore happiness does not consist in a sensitive operation.

I answer that, A thing may belong to happiness in three ways: (1) essentially, (2) antecedently,
(3) consequently. Now the operation of sense cannot belong to happiness essentially. For man's
happiness consists essentially in his being united to the Uncreated Good, Which is his last
end, as shown above (A. 1): to Which man cannot be united by an operation of his senses. Again,
in like manner, because, as shown above (Q. 2, A. 5), man's happiness does not consist in goods
of the body, which goods alone, however, we attain through the operation of the senses.

Nevertheless the operations of the senses can belong to happiness, both antecedently and consequently:
antecedently, in respect of imperfect happiness, such as can be had in this life, since the
operation of the intellect demands a previous operation of the sense; consequently, in that
perfect happiness which we await in heaven; because at the resurrection, "from the very happiness
of the soul," as Augustine says (Ep. ad Dioscor.) "the body and the bodily senses will receive
a certain overflow, so as to be perfected in their operations"; a point which will be explained
further on when we treat of the resurrection (Suppl. QQ. 82-85). But then the operation whereby
man's mind is united to God will not depend on the senses.

Reply Obj. 1: This objection proves that the operation of the senses is required antecedently
for imperfect happiness, such as can be had in this life.

Reply Obj. 2: Perfect happiness, such as the angels have, includes the aggregate of all good
things, by being united to the universal source of all good; not that it requires each individual
good. But in this imperfect happiness, we need the aggregate of those goods that suffice for
the most perfect operation of this life.

Reply Obj. 3: In perfect happiness the entire man is perfected, in the lower part of his nature,
by an overflow from the higher. But in the imperfect happiness of this life, it is otherwise;
we advance from the perfection of the lower part to the perfection of the higher part.

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 3, Art. 4]

Whether, If Happiness Is in the Intellective Part, It Is an Operation of the Intellect or of
the Will?

Objection 1: It would seem that happiness consists in an act of the will. For Augustine says
(De Civ. Dei xix, 10, 11), that man's happiness consists in peace; wherefore it is written
(Ps. 147:3): "Who hath placed peace in thy end [Douay: 'borders']". But peace pertains to the
will. Therefore man's happiness is in the will.

Obj. 2: Further, happiness is the supreme good. But good is the object of the will. Therefore
happiness consists in an operation of the will.

Obj. 3: Further, the last end corresponds to the first mover: thus the last end of the whole
army is victory, which is the end of the general, who moves all the men. But the first mover
in regard to operations is the will: because it moves the other powers, as we shall state further
on (Q. 9, AA. 1, 3). Therefore happiness regards the will.

Obj. 4: Further, if happiness be an operation, it must needs be man's most excellent operation.
But the love of God, which is an act of the will, is a more excellent operation than knowledge,
which is an operation of the intellect, as the Apostle declares (1 Cor. 13). Therefore it seems
that happiness consists in an act of the will.

Obj. And a little further on (6) he adds: "He is most happy who desires well, whatever he desires:
for good things make a man happy, and such a man already possesses some good--i.e. a good will."
Therefore happiness consists in an act of the will. Now eternal life is the last end, as stated
above (A. 2, ad 1). Therefore man's happiness consists in the knowledge of God, which is an
act of the intellect.

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 2, A. 6) two things are needed for happiness: one, which
is the essence of happiness: the other, that is, as it were, its proper accident, i.e. the
delight connected with it. I say, then, that as to the very essence of happiness, it is impossible
for it to consist in an act of the will. For it is evident from what has been said (AA. 1,
2; Q. 2, A. 7) that happiness is the attainment of the last end. But the attainment of the
end does not consist in the very act of the will. For the will is directed to the end, both
absent, when it desires it; and present, when it is delighted by resting therein. Now it is
evident that the desire itself of the end is not the attainment of the end, but is a movement
towards the end: while delight comes to the will from the end being present; and not conversely,
is a thing made present, by the fact that the will delights in it. Therefore, that the end
be present to him who desires it, must be due to something else than an act of the will.

This is evidently the case in regard to sensible ends. For if the acquisition of money were
through an act of the will, the covetous man would have it from the very moment that he wished
for it. But at the moment it is far from him; and he attains it, by grasping it in his hand,
or in some like manner; and then he delights in the money got. And so it is with an intelligible
end. For at first we desire to attain an intelligible end; we attain it, through its being
made present to us by an act of the intellect; and then the delighted will rests in the end
when attained.

So, therefore, the essence of happiness consists in an act of the intellect: but the delight
that results from happiness pertains to the will. In this sense Augustine says (Confess. x,
23) that happiness is "joy in truth," because, to wit, joy itself is the consummation of happiness.

Reply Obj. 1: Peace pertains to man's last end, not as though it were the very essence of happiness;
but because it is antecedent and consequent thereto: antecedent, in so far as all those things
are removed which disturb and hinder man in attaining the last end: consequent inasmuch as
when man has attained his last end, he remains at peace, his desire being at rest.

Reply Obj. 2: The will's first object is not its act: just as neither is the first object of
the sight, vision, but a visible thing. Wherefore, from the very fact that happiness belongs
to the will, as the will's first object, it follows that it does not belong to it as its act.

Reply Obj. 3: The intellect apprehends the end before the will does: yet motion towards the
end begins in the will. And therefore to the will belongs that which last of all follows the
attainment of the end, viz. delight or enjoyment.

Reply Obj. 4: Love ranks above knowledge in moving, but knowledge precedes love in attaining:
for "naught is loved save what is known," as Augustine says (De Trin. x, 1). Consequently we
first attain an intelligible end by an act of the intellect; just as we first attain a sensible
end by an act of sense.

Reply Obj. 5: He who has whatever he desires, is happy, because he has what he desires: and
this indeed is by something other than the act of his will. But to desire nothing amiss is
needed for happiness, as a necessary disposition thereto. And a good will is reckoned among
the good things which make a man happy, forasmuch as it is an inclination of the will: just
as a movement is reduced to the genus of its terminus, for instance, "alteration" to the genus
"quality."

FIFTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 3, Art. 5]

Whether Happiness Is an Operation of the Speculative, or of the Practical Intellect?

Objection 1: It would seem that happiness is an operation of the practical intellect. For the
end of every creature consists in becoming like God. But man is like God, by his practical
intellect, which is the cause of things understood, rather than by his speculative intellect,
which derives its knowledge from things. Therefore man's happiness consists in an operation
of the practical intellect rather than of the speculative.

Obj. 2: Further, happiness is man's perfect good. But the practical intellect is ordained to
the good rather than the speculative intellect, which is ordained to the true. Hence we are
said to be good, in reference to the perfection of the practical intellect, but not in reference
to the perfection of the speculative intellect, according to which we are said to be knowing
or understanding. Therefore man's happiness consists in an act of the practical intellect rather
than of the speculative.

Obj. 3: Further, happiness is a good of man himself. But the speculative intellect is more
concerned with things outside man; whereas the practical intellect is concerned with things
belonging to man himself, viz. his operations and passions. Therefore man's happiness consists
in an operation of the practical intellect rather than of the speculative.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. i, 8) that "contemplation is promised us, as being
the goal of all our actions, and the everlasting perfection of our joys."

I answer that, Happiness consists in an operation of the speculative rather than of the practical
intellect. This is evident for three reasons. First because if man's happiness is an operation,
it must needs be man's highest operation. Now man's highest operation is that of his highest
power in respect of its highest object: and his highest power is the intellect, whose highest
object is the Divine Good, which is the object, not of the practical but of the speculative
intellect. Consequently happiness consists principally in such an operation, viz. in the contemplation
of Divine things. And since that "seems to be each man's self, which is best in him," according
to Ethic. ix, 8, and x, 7, therefore such an operation is most proper to man and most delightful
to him.

Secondly, it is evident from the fact that contemplation is sought principally for its own
sake. But the act of the practical intellect is not sought for its own sake but for the sake
of action: and these very actions are ordained to some end. Consequently it is evident that
the last end cannot consist in the active life, which pertains to the practical intellect.

Thirdly, it is again evident, from the fact that in the contemplative life man has something
in common with things above him, viz. with God and the angels, to whom he is made like by happiness.
But in things pertaining to the active life, other animals also have something in common with
man, although imperfectly.

Therefore the last and perfect happiness, which we await in the life to come, consists entirely
in contemplation. But imperfect happiness, such as can be had here, consists first and principally,
in an operation of the practical intellect directing human actions and passions, as stated
in Ethic. x, 7, 8.

Reply Obj. 1: The asserted likeness of the practical intellect to God is one of proportion;
that is to say, by reason of its standing in relation to what it knows, as God does to what
He knows. But the likeness of the speculative intellect to God is one of union and "information";
which is a much greater likeness. And yet it may be answered that, in regard to the principal
thing known, which is His Essence, God has not practical but merely speculative knowledge.

Reply Obj. 2: The practical intellect is ordained to good which is outside of it: but the speculative
intellect has good within it, viz. the contemplation of truth. And if this good be perfect,
the whole man is perfected and made good thereby: such a good the practical intellect has not;
but it directs man thereto.

Reply Obj. 3: This argument would hold, if man himself were his own last end; for then the
consideration and direction of his actions and passions would be his happiness. But since man's
last end is something outside of him, to wit, God, to Whom we reach out by an operation of
the speculative intellect; therefore, man's happiness consists in an operation of the speculative
intellect rather than of the practical intellect.

SIXTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 3, Art. 6]

Whether Happiness Consists in the Consideration of Speculative Sciences?

Objection 1: It would seem that man's happiness consists in the consideration of speculative
sciences. For the Philosopher says (Ethic. i, 13) that "happiness is an operation according
to perfect virtue." And in distinguishing the virtues, he gives no more than three speculative
virtues--"knowledge," "wisdom" and "understanding," which all belong to the consideration of
speculative sciences. Therefore man's final happiness consists in the consideration of speculative
sciences.

Obj. 2: Further, that which all desire for its own sake, seems to be man's final happiness.
Now such is the consideration of speculative sciences; because, as stated in Metaph. i, 1,
"all men naturally desire to know"; and, a little farther on (2), it is stated that speculative
sciences are sought for their own sakes. Therefore happiness consists in the consideration
of speculative sciences.

Obj. 3: Further, happiness is man's final perfection. Now everything is perfected, according
as it is reduced from potentiality to act. But the human intellect is reduced to act by the
consideration of speculative sciences. Therefore it seems that in the consideration of these
sciences, man's final happiness consists.

On the contrary, It is written (Jer. 9:23): "Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom": and
this is said in reference to speculative sciences. Therefore man's final happiness does not
consist in the consideration of these.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 2, ad 4), man's happiness is twofold, one perfect, the other
imperfect. And by perfect happiness we are to understand that which attains to the true notion
of happiness; and by imperfect happiness that which does not attain thereto, but partakes of
some particular likeness of happiness. Thus perfect prudence is in man, with whom is the idea
of things to be done; while imperfect prudence is in certain irrational animals, who are possessed
of certain particular instincts in respect of works similar to works of prudence.

Accordingly perfect happiness cannot consist essentially in the consideration of speculative
sciences. To prove this, we must observe that the consideration of a speculative science does
not extend beyond the scope of the principles of that science: since the entire science is
virtually contained in its principles. Now the first principles of speculative sciences are
received through the senses, as the Philosopher clearly states at the beginning of the Metaphysics
(i, 1), and at the end of the Posterior Analytics (ii, 15). Wherefore the entire consideration
of speculative sciences cannot extend farther than knowledge of sensibles can lead. Now man's
final happiness, which is his final perfection cannot consist in the knowledge of sensibles.
For a thing is not perfected by something lower, except in so far as the lower partakes of
something higher. Now it is evident that the form of a stone or of any sensible, is lower than
man. Consequently the intellect is not perfected by the form of a stone, as such, but inasmuch
as it partakes of a certain likeness to that which is above the human intellect, viz. the intelligible
light, or something of the kind. Now whatever is by something else is reduced to that which
is of itself. Therefore man's final perfection must needs be through knowledge of something
above the human intellect. But it has been shown (I, Q. 88, A. 2), that man cannot acquire
through sensibles, the knowledge of separate substances, which are above the human intellect.
Consequently it follows that man's happiness cannot consist in the consideration of speculative
sciences. However, just as in sensible forms there is a participation of the higher substances,
so the consideration of speculative sciences is a certain participation of true and perfect
happiness.

Reply Obj. 1: In his book on Ethics the Philosopher treats of imperfect happiness, such as
can be had in this life, as stated above (A. 2, ad 4).

Reply Obj. 2: Not only is perfect happiness naturally desired, but also any likeness or participation
thereof.

Reply Obj. 3: Our intellect is reduced to act, in a fashion, by the consideration of speculative
sciences, but not to its final and perfect act.

SEVENTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 3, Art. 7]

Whether Happiness Consists in the Knowledge of Separate Substances, Namely, Angels?

Objection 1: It would seem that man's happiness consists in the knowledge of separate substances,
namely, angels. For Gregory says in a homily (xxvi in Evang.): "It avails nothing to take part
in the feasts of men, if we fail to take part in the feasts of angels"; by which he means final
happiness. But we can take part in the feasts of the angels by contemplating them. Therefore
it seems that man's final happiness consists in contemplating the angels.

Obj. 2: Further, the final perfection of each thing is for it to be united to its principle:
wherefore a circle is said to be a perfect figure, because its beginning and end coincide.
But the beginning of human knowledge is from the angels, by whom men are enlightened, as Dionysius
says (Coel. Hier. iv). Therefore the perfection of the human intellect consists in contemplating
the angels.

Obj. 3: Further, each nature is perfect, when united to a higher nature; just as the final
perfection of a body is to be united to the spiritual nature. But above the human intellect,
in the natural order, are the angels. Therefore the final perfection of the human intellect
is to be united to the angels by contemplation.

On the contrary, It is written (Jer. 9:24): "Let him that glorieth, glory in this, that he
understandeth and knoweth Me." Therefore man's final glory or happiness consists only in the
knowledge of God.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 6), man's perfect happiness consists not in that which perfects
the intellect by some participation, but in that which is so by its essence. Now it is evident
that whatever is the perfection of a power is so in so far as the proper formal object of that
power belongs to it. Now the proper object of the intellect is the true. Therefore the contemplation
of whatever has participated truth, does not perfect the intellect with its final perfection.
Since, therefore, the order of things is the same in being and in truth (Metaph. ii, 1); whatever
are beings by participation, are true by participation. Now angels have being by participation:
because in God alone is His Being His Essence, as shown in the First Part (Q. 44, A. 1). It
follows that contemplation of Him makes man perfectly happy. However, there is no reason why
we should not admit a certain imperfect happiness in the contemplation of the angels; and higher
indeed than in the consideration of speculative science.

Reply Obj. 1: We shall take part in the feasts of the angels, by contemplating not only the
angels, but, together with them, also God Himself.

Reply Obj. 2: According to those that hold human souls to be created by the angels, it seems
fitting enough, that man's happiness should consist in the contemplation of the angels, in
the union, as it were, of man with his beginning. But this is erroneous, as stated in the First
Part (Q. 90, A. 3). Wherefore the final perfection of the human intellect is by union with
God, Who is the first principle both of the creation of the soul and of its enlightenment.
Whereas the angel enlightens as a minister, as stated in the First Part (Q. 111, A. 2, ad 2).
Consequently, by his ministration he helps man to attain to happiness; but he is not the object
of man's happiness.

Reply Obj. 3: The lower nature may reach the higher in two ways. First, according to a degree
of the participating power: and thus man's final perfection will consist in his attaining to
a contemplation such as that of the angels. Secondly, as the object is attained by the power:
and thus the final perfection of each power is to attain that in which is found the fulness
of its formal object.

EIGHTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 3, Art. 8]

Whether Man's Happiness Consists in the Vision of the Divine Essence?

Objection 1: It would seem that man's happiness does not consist in the vision of the Divine
Essence. For Dionysius says (Myst. Theol. i) that by that which is highest in his intellect,
man is united to God as to something altogether unknown. But that which is seen in its essence
is not altogether unknown. Therefore the final perfection of the intellect, namely, happiness,
does not consist in God being seen in His Essence.

Obj. 2: Further, the higher the perfection belongs to the higher nature. But to see His own
Essence is the perfection proper to the Divine intellect. Therefore the final perfection of
the human intellect does not reach to this, but consists in something less.

On the contrary, It is written (1 John 3:2): "When He shall appear, we shall be like to Him;
and [Vulg.: 'because'] we shall see Him as He is."

I answer that, Final and perfect happiness can consist in nothing else than the vision of the
Divine Essence. To make this clear, two points must be observed. Wherefore the intellect attains
perfection, in so far as it knows the essence of a thing. If therefore an intellect knows the
essence of some effect, whereby it is not possible to know the essence of the cause, i.e. to
know of the cause "what it is"; that intellect cannot be said to reach that cause simply, although
it may be able to gather from the effect the knowledge that the cause is. Consequently, when
man knows an effect, and knows that it has a cause, there naturally remains in the man the
desire to know about the cause, "what it is." And this desire is one of wonder, and causes
inquiry, as is stated in the beginning of the Metaphysics (i, 2). For instance, if a man, knowing
the eclipse of the sun, consider that it must be due to some cause, and know not what that
cause is, he wonders about it, and from wondering proceeds to inquire. Nor does this inquiry
cease until he arrive at a knowledge of the essence of the cause.

If therefore the human intellect, knowing the essence of some created effect, knows no more
of God than "that He is"; the perfection of that intellect does not yet reach simply the First
Cause, but there remains in it the natural desire to seek the cause. Wherefore it is not yet
perfectly happy. Consequently, for perfect happiness the intellect needs to reach the very
Essence of the First Cause. And thus it will have its perfection through union with God as
with that object, in which alone man's happiness consists, as stated above (AA. 1, 7; Q. 2, A. 8).

Reply Obj. 1: Dionysius speaks of the knowledge of wayfarers journeying towards happiness.

Reply Obj. 2: As stated above (Q. 1, A. 8), the end has a twofold acceptation. First, as to
the thing itself which is desired: and in this way, the same thing is the end of the higher
and of the lower nature, and indeed of all things, as stated above (Q. 1, A. 8). Secondly,
as to the attainment of this thing; and thus the end of the higher nature is different from
that of the lower, according to their respective habitudes to that thing. So then in the happiness
of God, Who, in understanding his Essence, comprehends It, is higher than that of a man or
angel who sees It indeed, but comprehends It not.

QUESTION 4

OF THOSE THINGS THAT ARE REQUIRED FOR HAPPINESS (In Eight Articles)

We have now to consider those things that are required for happiness: and concerning this there
are eight points of inquiry:

(1) Whether delight is required for happiness?

(2) Which is of greater account in happiness, delight or vision?

(3) Whether comprehension is required?

(4) Whether rectitude of the will is required?

(5) Whether the body is necessary for man's happiness?

(6) Whether any perfection of the body is necessary?

(7) Whether any external goods are necessary?

(8) Whether the fellowship of friends is necessary?

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 4, Art. 1]

Whether Delight Is Required for Happiness?

Objection 1: It would seem that delight is not required for happiness. For Augustine says (De
Trin. i, 8) that "vision is the entire reward of faith." But the prize or reward of virtue
is happiness, as the Philosopher clearly states (Ethic. i, 9). Therefore nothing besides vision
is required for happiness.

Obj. 2: Further, happiness is "the most self-sufficient of all goods," as the Philosopher declares
(Ethic. i, 7). But that which needs something else is not self-sufficient. Since then the essence
of happiness consists in seeing God, as stated above (Q. 3, A. 8); it seems that delight is
not necessary for happiness.

Obj. 3: Further, the "operation of bliss or happiness should be unhindered" (Ethic. vii, 13).
But delight hinders the operation of the intellect: since it destroys the estimate of prudence
(Ethic. vi, 5). Therefore delight is not necessary for happiness.

On the contrary, Augustine says (Confess. x, 23) that happiness is "joy in truth."

I answer that, One thing may be necessary for another in four ways. First, as a preamble and
preparation to it: thus instruction is necessary for science. Secondly, as perfecting it: thus
the soul is necessary for the life of the body. Thirdly, as helping it from without: thus friends
are necessary for some undertaking. Fourthly, as something attendant on it: thus we might say
that heat is necessary for fire. And in this way delight is necessary for happiness. For it
is caused by the appetite being at rest in the good attained. Wherefore, since happiness is
nothing else but the attainment of the Sovereign Good, it cannot be without concomitant delight.

Reply Obj. 1: From the very fact that a reward is given to anyone, the will of him who deserves
it is at rest, and in this consists delight. Consequently, delight is included in the very
notion of reward.

Reply Obj. 2: The very sight of God causes delight. Consequently, he who sees God cannot need
delight.

Reply Obj. 3: Delight that is attendant upon the operation of the intellect does not hinder
it, rather does it perfect it, as stated in Ethic. x, 4: since what we do with delight, we
do with greater care and perseverance. On the other hand, delight which is extraneous to the
operation is a hindrance thereto: sometimes by distracting the attention because, as already
observed, we are more attentive to those things that delight us; and when we are very attentive
to one thing, we must needs be less attentive to another: sometimes on account of opposition;
thus a sensual delight that is contrary to reason, hinders the estimate of prudence more than
it hinders the estimate of the speculative intellect.

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 4, Art. 2]

Whether in Happiness Vision Ranks Before Delight?

Objection 1: It would seem that in happiness, delight ranks before vision. For "delight is
the perfection of operation" (Ethic. x, 4). But perfection ranks before the thing perfected.
Therefore delight ranks before the operation of the intellect, i.e. vision.

Obj. 2: Further, that by reason of which a thing is desirable, is yet more desirable. But operations
are desired on account of the delight they afford: hence, too, nature has adjusted delight
to those operations which are necessary for the preservation of the individual and of the species,
lest animals should disregard such operations. Therefore, in happiness, delight ranks before
the operation of the intellect, which is vision.

Obj. 3: Further, vision corresponds to faith; while delight or enjoyment corresponds to charity.
But charity ranks before faith, as the Apostle says (1 Cor. 13:13). Therefore delight or enjoyment
ranks before vision.

On the contrary, The cause is greater than its effect. But vision is the cause of delight.
Therefore vision ranks before delight.

I answer that, The Philosopher discusses this question (Ethic. x, 4), and leaves it unsolved.
But if one consider the matter carefully, the operation of the intellect which is vision, must
needs rank before delight. For delight consists in a certain repose of the will. Now that the
will finds rest in anything, can only be on account of the goodness of that thing in which
it reposes. If therefore the will reposes in an operation, the will's repose is caused by the
goodness of the operation. Nor does the will seek good for the sake of repose; for thus the
very act of the will would be the end, which has been disproved above (Q. 1, A. 1, ad 2;Q.
3, A. 4): but it seeks to be at rest in the operation, because that operation is its good.
Consequently it is evident that the operation in which the will reposes ranks before the resting
of the will therein.

Reply Obj. 1: As the Philosopher says (Ethic. x, 4) "delight perfects operation as vigor perfects
youth," because it is a result of youth. Consequently delight is a perfection attendant upon
vision; but not a perfection whereby vision is made perfect in its own species.

Reply Obj. 2: The apprehension of the senses does not attain to the universal good, but to
some particular good which is delightful. And consequently, according to the sensitive appetite
which is in animals, operations are sought for the sake of delight. But the intellect apprehends
the universal good, the attainment of which results in delight: wherefore its purpose is directed
to good rather than to delight. Hence it is that the Divine intellect, which is the Author
of nature, adjusted delights to operations on account of the operations. And we should form
our estimate of things not simply according to the order of the sensitive appetite, but rather
according to the order of the intellectual appetite.

Reply Obj. 3: Charity does not seek the beloved good for the sake of delight: it is for charity
a consequence that it delights in the good gained which it loves. Thus delight does not answer
to charity as its end, but vision does, whereby the end is first made present to charity.

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 4, Art. 3]

Whether Comprehension Is Necessary for Happiness?

Objection 1: It would seem that comprehension is not necessary for happiness. For Augustine
says (Ad Paulinam de Videndo Deum; [*Cf. Serm. xxxciii De Verb. Dom.]): "To reach God with
the mind is happiness, to comprehend Him is impossible." Therefore happiness is without comprehension.

Obj. 2: Further, happiness is the perfection of man as to his intellective part, wherein there
are no other powers than the intellect and will, as stated in the First Part (QQ. 79 and following).
But the intellect is sufficiently perfected by seeing God, and the will by enjoying Him. Therefore
there is no need for comprehension as a third.

Obj. 3: Further, happiness consists in an operation. But operations are determined by their
objects: and there are two universal objects, the true and the good: of which the true corresponds
to vision, and good to delight. Therefore there is no need for comprehension as a third.

On the contrary, The Apostle says (1 Cor. 9:24): "So run that you may comprehend [Douay: 'obtain']."
But happiness is the goal of the spiritual race: hence he says (2 Tim. 4:7, 8): "I have fought
a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith; as to the rest there is laid
up for me a crown of justice." Therefore comprehension is necessary for Happiness.

I answer that, Since Happiness consists in gaining the last end, those things that are required
for Happiness must be gathered from the way in which man is ordered to an end. Now man is ordered
to an intelligible end partly through his intellect, and partly through his will: through his
intellect, in so far as a certain imperfect knowledge of the end pre-exists in the intellect:
through the will, first by love which is the will's first movement towards anything; secondly,
by a real relation of the lover to the thing beloved, which relation may be threefold. For
sometimes the thing beloved is present to the lover: and then it is no longer sought for. Sometimes
it is not present, and it is impossible to attain it: and then, too, it is not sought for.
But sometimes it is possible to attain it, yet it is raised above the capability of the attainer,
so that he cannot have it forthwith; and this is the relation of one that hopes, to that which
he hopes for, and this relation alone causes a search for the end. To these three, there are
a corresponding three in Happiness itself. For perfect knowledge of the end corresponds to
imperfect knowledge; presence of the end corresponds to the relation of hope; but delight in
the end now present results from love, as already stated (A. 2, ad 3). And therefore these
three must concur with Happiness; to wit, vision, which is perfect knowledge of the intelligible
end; comprehension, which implies presence of the end; and delight or enjoyment, which implies
repose of the lover in the object beloved.

Reply Obj. 1: Comprehension is twofold. First, inclusion of the comprehended in the comprehensor;
and thus whatever is comprehended by the finite, is itself finite. Wherefore God cannot be
thus comprehended by a created intellect. Secondly, comprehension means nothing but the holding
of something already present and possessed: thus one who runs after another is said to comprehend
[*In English we should say 'catch.'] him when he lays hold on him. And in this sense comprehension
is necessary for Happiness.

Reply Obj. 2: Just as hope and love pertain to the will, because it is the same one that loves
a thing, and that tends towards it while not possessed, so, too, comprehension and delight
belong to the will, since it is the same that possesses a thing and reposes therein.

Reply Obj. 3: Comprehension is not a distinct operation from vision; but a certain relation
to the end already gained. Wherefore even vision itself, or the thing seen, inasmuch as it
is present, is the object of comprehension.

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 4, Art. 4]

Whether Rectitude of the Will Is Necessary for Happiness?

Objection 1: It would seem that rectitude of the will is not necessary for Happiness. For Happiness
consists essentially in an operation of the intellect, as stated above (Q. 3, A. 4). But rectitude
of the will, by reason of which men are said to be clean of heart, is not necessary for the
perfect operation of the intellect: for Augustine says (Retract. i, 4) "I do not approve of
what I said in a prayer: O God, Who didst will none but the clean of heart to know the truth.
For it can be answered that many who are not clean of heart, know many truths." Therefore rectitude
of the will is not necessary for Happiness.

Obj. 2: Further, what precedes does not depend on what follows. But the operation of the intellect
precedes the operation of the will. Therefore Happiness, which is the perfect operation of
the intellect, does not depend on rectitude of the will.

Obj. 3: Further, that which is ordained to another as its end, is not necessary, when the end
is already gained; as a ship, for instance, after arrival in port. But rectitude of will, which
is by reason of virtue, is ordained to Happiness as to its end. Therefore, Happiness once obtained,
rectitude of the will is no longer necessary.

I answer that, Rectitude of will is necessary for Happiness both antecedently and concomitantly.
Antecedently, because rectitude of the will consists in being duly ordered to the last end.
Now the end in comparison to what is ordained to the end is as form compared to matter. Wherefore,
just as matter cannot receive a form, unless it be duly disposed thereto, so nothing gains
an end, except it be duly ordained thereto. And therefore none can obtain Happiness, without
rectitude of the will. Concomitantly, because as stated above (Q. 3, A. 8), final Happiness
consists in the vision of the Divine Essence, Which is the very essence of goodness. So that
the will of him who sees the Essence of God, of necessity, loves, whatever he loves, in subordination
to God; just as the will of him who sees not God's Essence, of necessity, loves whatever he
loves, under the common notion of good which he knows. And this is precisely what makes the
will right. Wherefore it is evident that Happiness cannot be without a right will.

[Reply Obj. 1: Augustine is speaking of knowledge of truth that is not the essence of goodness
itself.]

Reply Obj. 2: Every act of the will is preceded by an act of the intellect: but a certain act
of the will precedes a certain act of the intellect. For the will tends to the final act of
the intellect which is happiness. And consequently right inclination of the will is required
antecedently for happiness, just as the arrow must take a right course in order to strike the
target.

Reply Obj. 3: Not everything that is ordained to the end, ceases with the getting of the end:
but only that which involves imperfection, such as movement. Hence the instruments of movement
are no longer necessary when the end has been gained: but the due order to the end is necessary.

FIFTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 4, Art. 5]

Whether the Body Is Necessary for Man's Happiness?

Objection 1: It would seem that the body is necessary for Happiness. For the perfection of
virtue and grace presupposes the perfection of nature. But Happiness is the perfection of virtue
and grace. Now the soul, without the body, has not the perfection of nature; since it is naturally
a part of human nature, and every part is imperfect while separated from its whole. Therefore
the soul cannot be happy without the body.

Obj. 2: Further, Happiness is a perfect operation, as stated above (Q. 3, AA. 2, 5). But perfect
operation follows perfect being: since nothing operates except in so far as it is an actual
being. Since, therefore, the soul has not perfect being, while it is separated from the body,
just as neither has a part, while separate from its whole; it seems that the soul cannot be
happy without the body.

Obj. 3: Further, Happiness is the perfection of man. But the soul, without the body, is not
man. Therefore Happiness cannot be in the soul separated from the body.

Obj. 4: Further, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. vii, 13) "the operation of bliss," in
which operation happiness consists, is "not hindered." But the operation of the separate soul
is hindered; because, as Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xii, 35), the soul "has a natural desire
to rule the body, the result of which is that it is held back, so to speak, from tending with
all its might to the heavenward journey," i.e. to the vision of the Divine Essence. Therefore
the soul cannot be happy without the body.

Obj. 5: Further, Happiness is the sufficient good and lulls desire. But this cannot be said
of the separated soul; for it yet desires to be united to the body, as Augustine says (Gen.
ad lit. xii, 35). Therefore the soul is not happy while separated from the body.

Obj. 6: Further, in Happiness man is equal to the angels. But the soul without the body is
not equal to the angels, as Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xii, 35). Therefore it is not happy.

On the contrary, It is written (Apoc. 14:13): "Happy [Douay: 'blessed'] are the dead who die
in the Lord."

I answer that, Happiness is twofold; the one is imperfect and is had in this life; the other
is perfect, consisting in the vision of God. Now it is evident that the body is necessary for
the happiness of this life. For the happiness of this life consists in an operation of the
intellect, either speculative or practical. And the operation of the intellect in this life
cannot be without a phantasm, which is only in a bodily organ, as was shown in the First Part
(Q. 84, AA. 6, 7). Consequently that happiness which can be had in this life, depends, in a
way, on the body. But as to perfect Happiness, which consists in the vision of God, some have
maintained that it is not possible to the soul separated from the body; and have said that
the souls of saints, when separated from their bodies, do not attain to that Happiness until
the Day of Judgment, when they will receive their bodies back again. And this is shown to be
false, both by authority and by reason. By authority, since the Apostle says (2 Cor. 5:6):
"While we are in the body, we are absent from the Lord"; and he points out the reason of this
absence, saying: "For we walk by faith and not by sight." Now from this it is clear that so
long as we walk by faith and not by sight, bereft of the vision of the Divine Essence, we are
not present to the Lord. But the souls of the saints, separated from their bodies, are in God's
presence; wherefore the text continues: "But we are confident and have a good will to be absent
. . . from the body, and to be present with the Lord." Whence it is evident that the souls
of the saints, separated from their bodies, "walk by sight," seeing the Essence of God, wherein
is true Happiness.

Again this is made clear by reason. For the intellect needs not the body, for its operation,
save on account of the phantasms, wherein it looks on the intelligible truth, as stated in
the First Part (Q. 84, A. 7). Now it is evident that the Divine Essence cannot be seen by means
of phantasms, as stated in the First Part (Q. 12, A. 3). Wherefore, since man's perfect Happiness
consists in the vision of the Divine Essence, it does not depend on the body. Consequently,
without the body the soul can be happy.

We must, however, notice that something may belong to a thing's perfection in two ways. First,
as constituting the essence thereof; thus the soul is necessary for man's perfection. Secondly,
as necessary for its well-being: thus, beauty of body and keenness of perfection belong to
man's perfection. Wherefore though the body does not belong in the first way to the perfection
of human Happiness, yet it does in the second way. For since operation depends on a thing's
nature, the more perfect is the soul in its nature, the more perfectly it has its proper operation,
wherein its happiness consists. Hence, Augustine, after inquiring (Gen. ad lit. xii, 35) "whether
that perfect Happiness can be ascribed to the souls of the dead separated from their bodies,"
answers "that they cannot see the Unchangeable Substance, as the blessed angels see It; either
for some other more hidden reason, or because they have a natural desire to rule the body."

Reply Obj. 1: Happiness is the perfection of the soul on the part of the intellect, in respect
of which the soul transcends the organs of the body; but not according as the soul is the natural
form of the body. Wherefore the soul retains that natural perfection in respect of which happiness
is due to it, though it does not retain that natural perfection in respect of which it is the
form of the body.

Reply Obj. 2: The relation of the soul to being is not the same as that of other parts: for
the being of the whole is not that of any individual part: wherefore, either the part ceases
altogether to be, when the whole is destroyed, just as the parts of an animal, when the animal
is destroyed; or, if they remain, they have another actual being, just as a part of a line
has another being from that of the whole line. But the human soul retains the being of the
composite after the destruction of the body: and this because the being of the form is the
same as that of its matter, and this is the being of the composite. Now the soul subsists in
its own being, as stated in the First Part (Q. 75, A. 2). It follows, therefore, that after
being separated from the body it has perfect being and that consequently it can have a perfect
operation; although it has not the perfect specific nature.

Reply Obj. 3: Happiness belongs to man in respect of his intellect: and, therefore, since the
intellect remains, it can have Happiness. Thus the teeth of an Ethiopian, in respect of which
he is said to be white, can retain their whiteness, even after extraction.

Reply Obj. 4: One thing is hindered by another in two ways. First, by way of opposition; thus
cold hinders the action of heat: and such a hindrance to operation is repugnant to Happiness.
Secondly, by way of some kind of defect, because, to wit, that which is hindered has not all
that is necessary to make it perfect in every way: and such a hindrance to operation is not
incompatible with Happiness, but prevents it from being perfect in every way. And thus it is
that separation from the body is said to hold the soul back from tending with all its might
to the vision of the Divine Essence. For the soul desires to enjoy God in such a way that the
enjoyment also may overflow into the body, as far as possible. And therefore, as long as it
enjoys God, without the fellowship of the body, its appetite is at rest in that which it has,
in such a way, that it would still wish the body to attain to its share.

Reply Obj. 5: The desire of the separated soul is entirely at rest, as regards the thing desired;
since, to wit, it has that which suffices its appetite. But it is not wholly at rest, as regards
the desirer, since it does not possess that good in every way that it would wish to possess
it. Consequently, after the body has been resumed, Happiness increases not in intensity, but
in extent.

Reply Obj. 6: The statement made (Gen. ad lit. xii, 35) to the effect that "the souls of the
departed see not God as the angels do," is not to be understood as referring to inequality
of quantity; because even now some souls of the Blessed are raised to the higher orders of
the angels, thus seeing God more clearly than the lower angels. But it refers to inequality
of proportion: because the angels, even the lowest, have every perfection of Happiness that
they ever will have, whereas the separated souls of the saints have not.

SIXTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 4, Art. 6]

Whether Perfection of the Body Is Necessary for Happiness?

Objection 1: It would seem that perfection of the body is not necessary for man's perfect Happiness.
For perfection of the body is a bodily good. But it has been shown above (Q. 2) that Happiness
does not consist in bodily goods. Therefore no perfect disposition of the body is necessary
for man's Happiness.

Obj. 2: Further, man's Happiness consists in the vision of the Divine Essence, as shown above
(Q. 3, A. 8). But the body has no part in this operation, as shown above (A. 5). Therefore
no disposition of the body is necessary for Happiness.

Obj. 3: Further, the more the intellect is abstracted from the body, the more perfectly it
understands. But Happiness consists in the most perfect operation of the intellect. Therefore
the soul should be abstracted from the body in every way. Therefore, in no way is a disposition
of the body necessary for Happiness.

On the contrary, Happiness is the reward of virtue; wherefore it is written (John 13:17): "You
shall be blessed, if you do them." But the reward promised to the saints is not only that they
shall see and enjoy God, but also that their bodies shall be well-disposed; for it is written
(Isa. 66:14): "You shall see and your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall flourish like
a herb." Therefore good disposition of the body is necessary for Happiness.

I answer that, If we speak of that happiness which man can acquire in this life, it is evident
that a well-disposed body is of necessity required for it. For this happiness consists, according
to the Philosopher (Ethic. i, 13) in "an operation according to perfect virtue"; and it is
clear that man can be hindered, by indisposition of the body, from every operation of virtue.

But speaking of perfect Happiness, some have maintained that no disposition of body is necessary
for Happiness; indeed, that it is necessary for the soul to be entirely separated from the
body. Hence Augustine (De Civ. Dei xxii, 26) quotes the words of Porphyry who said that "for
the soul to be happy, it must be severed from everything corporeal." But this is unreasonable.
For since it is natural to the soul to be united to the body; it is not possible for the perfection
of the soul to exclude its natural perfection.

Consequently, we must say that perfect disposition of the body is necessary, both antecedently
and consequently, for that Happiness which is in all ways perfect. Antecedently, because, as
Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xii, 35), "if the body be such, that the governance thereof is
difficult and burdensome, like unto flesh which is corruptible and weighs upon the soul, the
mind is turned away from that vision of the highest heaven." Whence he concludes that, "when
this body will no longer be 'natural,' but 'spiritual,' then will it be equalled to the angels,
and that will be its glory, which erstwhile was its burden." Consequently, because from the
Happiness of the soul there will be an overflow on to the body, so that this too will obtain
its perfection. Hence Augustine says (Ep. ad Dioscor.) that "God gave the soul such a powerful
nature that from its exceeding fulness of happiness the vigor of incorruption overflows into
the lower nature."

Reply Obj. 1: Happiness does not consist in bodily good as its object: but bodily good can
add a certain charm and perfection to Happiness.

Reply Obj. 2: Although the body has no part in that operation of the intellect whereby the
Essence of God is seen, yet it might prove a hindrance thereto. Consequently, perfection of
the body is necessary, lest it hinder the mind from being lifted up.

Reply Obj. 3: The perfect operation of the intellect requires indeed that the intellect be
abstracted from this corruptible body which weighs upon the soul; but not from the spiritual
body, which will be wholly subject to the spirit. "Mr. Utterson, sir, asking to see you," he
called; and, even as he did so, once more violently signed to the
lawyer to give ear.

A voice answered from within: "Tell him I cannot see any one," it said complainingly.

"Thank you, sir," said Poole, with a note of something like triumph in his voice; and taking up
his candle, he led Mr. Utterson back across the yard and into the great kitchen, where the fire was
out and the beetles were leaping on the floor.

"Sir," he said, looking Mr. Utterson in the eyes, "was that my master's voice?"

"It seems much changed," replied the lawyer, very pale, but giving look for look.

"Changed? Well, yes, I think so," said the butler. "Have I been twenty years in this man's house,
to be deceived about his voice? No, sir; master's made away with; he was made away with eight
days ago, when we heard him cry out upon the name of God; and who's
in there instead of him, and why it stays there, is a thing that cries
to Heaven, Mr. Utterson!"

"This is a very strange tale, Poole; this is rather a wild tale, my man," said Mr. Utterson,
biting his finger. "Suppose it were as you suppose, supposing Dr. Jekyll to have been--well,
murdered, what could induce the murderer to stay? That won't hold water; it doesn't commend
itself to reason."

"Well, Mr. Utterson, you are a hard man to satisfy, but I'll do it yet," said Poole. "All this
last week (you must know) him, or it, or whatever it is that lives in that cabinet, has been crying
night and day for some sort of medicine and cannot get it to his mind. It was sometimes his way--the
master's, that is--to write his orders on a sheet of paper and throw it on the stair. We've
had nothing else this week back; nothing but papers, and a closed door, and the very meals
left there to be smuggled in when nobody was looking. Well, sir, every day, ay, and twice and
thrice in the same day, there have been orders and complaints, and I have been sent flying
to all the wholesale chemists in town. Every time I brought the stuff back, there would be
another paper telling me to return it, because it was not pure, and
another order to a different firm.

This drug is wanted bitter bad, sir, whatever for."

"Have you any of these papers?" asked Mr. Utterson.

Poole felt in his pocket and handed out a crumpled note, which the
lawyer, bending nearer to the candle, carefully examined.

Its contents ran thus: "Dr. Jekyll presents his compliments to Messrs. Maw. He assures them that
their last sample is impure, and quite useless for his present purpose. In the year 18--, Dr. J. purchased
a somewhat large quantity from Messrs. M. He now begs them to search with the most sedulous
care, and should any of the same quality be left, to forward it to him at once. Expense is no
consideration. The importance of this to Dr. J. can hardly be exaggerated." So far the letter
had run composedly enough, but here, with a sudden splutter of the
pen, the writer's emotion had broken loose.

"For God's sake," he had added, "find me some of the old."

"This is a strange note," said Mr. Utterson; and then sharply, "How do you come to have it open?"

"The
man at Maw's was main angry, sir, and he threw it back to me like so much dirt," returned Poole.

"This is unquestionably the doctor's hand, do you know?" resumed the lawyer.

"I thought it looked like it," said the servant rather sulkily; and then, with another voice,
"But what matters hand-of-write?" he said. "I've seen him!"

"Seen him?" repeated Mr. Utterson. "Well?"

"That's it!" said Poole. "It was this way. I came suddenly into the theatre from the garden. It
seems he had slipped out to look for this drug, or whatever it is; for the cabinet door was open,
and there he was at the far end of the room digging among the crates. He looked up when I
came in, gave a kind of cry, and whipped upstairs into the cabinet. It was but for one minute
that I saw him, but the hair stood up on my head like quills. Sir, if that was my master, why
had he a mask upon his face? If it was my master, why did he cry out like a rat, and run from me?
I have served him long enough.

And then ..." the man paused and passed his hand over his face.

"These are all very strange circumstances," said Mr. Utterson, "but I think I begin to see daylight.
Your master, Poole, is plainly seized with one of those maladies that both torture and deform
the sufferer; hence, for aught I know, the alteration of his voice; hence the mask and his
avoidance of his friends; hence his eagerness to find this drug, by means of which the poor
soul retains some hope of ultimate recovery--God grant that he be
not deceived.

There is my explanation; it is sad enough, Poole, ay, and appalling to consider; but it is plain
and natural, hangs well together, and delivers us from all exorbitant
alarms."

"Sir," said the butler, turning to a sort of mottled pallor, "that
thing was not my master, and there's the truth.

My master"--here he looked round him and began to whisper--"is a tall, fine build of a man, and
this was more of a dwarf." Utterson attempted to protest. "O sir," cried Poole, "do you think
I do not know my master after twenty years? do you think I do not know where his head comes
to in the cabinet door, where I saw him every morning of my life? No, sir, that thing in the
mask was never Dr. Jekyll--God knows what it was, but it was never
Dr. Jekyll; and it is the belief of my heart that there was murder
done."

"Poole," replied the lawyer, "if you say that, it will become my duty to make certain. Much
as I desire to spare your master's feelings, much as I am puzzled
by this note which seems to prove him to be still alive, I shall consider
it my duty to break in that door."

"Ah, Mr. Utterson, that's talking!" cried the butler.

"And now comes the second question," resumed Utterson: "Who is going
to do it?"

"Why, you and me, sir," was the undaunted reply.

"That is very well said," returned the lawyer; "and whatever comes of it, I shall make it my
business to see you are no loser."

"There is an axe in the theatre," continued Poole; "and you might
take the kitchen poker for yourself."

The lawyer took that rude but weighty instrument into his hand, and
balanced it.

"Do you know, Poole," he said, looking up, "that you and I are about to place ourselves in a
position of some peril?"

"You may say so, sir, indeed," returned the butler.

"It is well, then, that we should be frank," said the other. "We both think more than we have
said; let us make a clean breast. This masked figure that you saw, did you recognise it?"

"Well, sir, it went so quick, and the creature was so doubled up, that I could hardly swear to that,"
was the answer. "But if you mean, was it Mr. Hyde?--why, yes, I think
it was!

You see, it was much of the same bigness; and it had the same quick light way with it; and then who
else could have got in by the laboratory door? You have not forgot, sir, that at the time of
the murder he had still the key with him? But that's not all. I don't know, Mr. Utterson, if
ever you met this Mr. Hyde?"

"Yes," said the lawyer, "I once spoke with him."

"Then you must know as well as the rest of us that there was something queer about that gentleman--something
that gave a man a turn--I don't know rightly how to say it, sir, beyond this: that you felt it in your
marrow kind of cold and thin."

"I own I felt something of what you describe," said Mr. Utterson.

"Quite so, sir," returned Poole.

"Well, when that masked thing like a monkey jumped from among the chemicals and whipped into
the cabinet, it went down my spine like ice. Oh, I know it's not evidence, Mr. Utterson; I'm
book-learned enough for that; but a man has his feelings, and I give you my Bible-word it was
Mr. Hyde!"

"Ay, ay," said the lawyer.

"My fears incline to the same point. Evil, I fear, founded--evil was sure to come--of that connection.
Ay, truly, I believe you; I believe poor Harry is killed; and I believe his murderer (for what
purpose, God alone can tell) is still lurking in his victim's room. Well, let our name be vengeance.
Call Bradshaw."

The footman came at the summons, very white and nervous.

"Pull yourself together, Bradshaw," said the lawyer. "This suspense, I know, is telling upon all
of you; but it is now our intention to make an end of it. Poole, here, and I are going to
force our way into the cabinet. If all is well, my shoulders are broad enough to bear the
blame.

Meanwhile, lest anything should really be amiss, or any malefactor seek to escape by the back,
you and the boy must go round the corner with a pair of good sticks, and take your post at the
laboratory door. We give you ten minutes to get to your stations."

As Bradshaw left, the lawyer looked at his watch.

"And now, Poole, let us get to ours," he said; and taking the poker under his arm, he led the
way into the yard. The scud had banked over the moon, and it was now quite dark. The wind,
which only broke in puffs and draughts into that deep well of building, tossed the light of the
candle to and fro about their steps, until they came into the shelter of the theatre, where they
sat down silently to wait. London hummed solemnly all around; but nearer at hand, the stillness
was only broken by the sound of a footfall moving to and fro along the cabinet floor.

"So it will walk all day, sir," whispered Poole; "ay, and the better
part of the night.

Only when a new sample comes from the chemist, there's a bit of a break. Ah, it's an ill-conscience
that's such an enemy to rest! Ah, sir, there's blood foully shed
in every step of it!

But hark again, a little closer--put your heart in your ears, Mr. Utterson, and tell me, is that
the doctor's foot?"

The steps fell lightly and oddly, with a certain swing, for all they went so slowly; it was
different indeed from the heavy creaking tread of Henry Jekyll. Utterson sighed. "Is there never
anything else?" he asked.

Poole nodded.

"Once," he said. "Once I heard it weeping!"

"Weeping? how that?" said the lawyer, conscious of a sudden chill of horror.

"Weeping like a woman or a lost soul," said the butler. "I came away with that upon my heart
that I could have wept too."

But now the ten minutes drew to an end.

Poole disinterred the axe from under a stack of packing straw; the candle was set upon the nearest
table to light them to the attack; and they drew near with bated breath to where that patient
foot was still going up and down, up and down, in the quiet of the night.

"Jekyll," cried Utterson, with a loud voice, "I demand to see you." He paused a moment, but there
came no reply. "I give you fair warning, our suspicions are aroused, and I must and shall see
you," he resumed; "if not by fair means, then by foul--if not of
your consent, then by brute force!"

"Utterson," said the voice, "for God's sake have mercy!"

"Ah, that's not Jekyll's voice--it's Hyde's!" cried Utterson. "Down with the door, Poole."

Poole swung the axe over his shoulder; the blow shook the building, and the red baize door leaped
against the lock and hinges. A dismal screech, as of mere animal terror, rang from the cabinet.
Up went the axe again, and again the panels crashed and the frame bounded; four times the blow
fell; but the wood was tough and the fittings were of excellent workmanship; and it was not until
the fifth, that the lock burst in sunder and the wreck of the door
fell inwards on the carpet.

The besiegers, appalled by their own riot and the stillness that had
succeeded, stood back a little and peered in.

There lay the cabinet before their eyes in the quiet lamplight, a good fire glowing and chattering
on the hearth, the kettle singing its thin strain, a drawer or two open, papers neatly set forth
on the business-table, and, nearer the fire, the things laid out
for tea: the quietest room, you would have said, and, but for the
glazed presses full of chemicals, the most commonplace that night
in London.

Right in the midst there lay the body of a man sorely contorted, and still twitching. They drew
near on tiptoe, turned it on its back, and beheld the face of Edward Hyde. He was dressed in clothes
far too large for him, clothes of the doctor's bigness; the cords of his face still moved with
a semblance of life, but life was quite gone; and by the crushed phial in the hand and the strong
smell of kernels that hung upon the air, Utterson knew that he was looking on the body of a self-destroyer.

"We
have come too late," he said sternly, "whether to save or punish.

Hyde is gone to his account; and it only remains for us to find the body of your master."

The far greater proportion of the building was occupied by the theatre,
which filled almost the whole ground story and was lighted from above,
and by the cabinet, which formed an upper story at one end and looked
upon the court.

A corridor joined the theatre to the door on the by-street; and with
this, the cabinet communicated separately by a second flight of stairs.

There were besides a few dark closets and a spacious cellar. All these they now thoroughly examined.
Each closet needed but a glance, for all were empty, and all, by the dust that fell from their
doors, had stood long unopened. The cellar, indeed, was filled with crazy lumber, mostly dating from
the times of the surgeon who was Jekyll's predecessor; but even as
they opened the door, they were advertised of the uselessness of further
search, by the fall of a perfect mat of cobweb which had for years
sealed up the entrance.

Nowhere was there any trace of Henry Jekyll, dead or alive.

Poole stamped on the flags of the corridor. "He must be buried here,"
he said, hearkening to the sound.

"Or he may have fled," said Utterson, and he turned to examine the door in the by-street. It
was locked; and lying near by on the flags, they found the key, already stained with rust.

"This
does not look like use," observed the lawyer.

"Use!" echoed Poole. "Do you not see, sir, it is broken? much as if a man had stamped on it."

"Ay," continued Utterson, "and the fractures, too, are rusty."

The two men looked at each other with a scare. "This is beyond me, Poole," said the lawyer. "Let
us go back to the cabinet."

They mounted the stair in silence, and, still with an occasional awe-struck glance at the dead body,
proceeded more thoroughly to examine the contents of the cabinet. At one table there were traces of
chemical work, various measured heaps of some white salt being laid on glass saucers, as though
for an experiment in which the unhappy man had been prevented.

"That is the same drug that I was always bringing him," said Poole; and even as he spoke, the
kettle with a startling noise boiled over.

This brought them to the fireside, where the easy-chair was drawn cosily up, and the tea-things stood
ready to the sitter's elbow, the very sugar in the cup. There were several books on a shelf;
one lay beside the tea-things open, and Utterson was amazed to find it a copy of a pious work,
for which Jekyll had several times expressed a great esteem, annotated, in his own hand, with startling
blasphemies.

Next, in the course of their review of the chamber, the searchers came to the cheval-glass,
into whose depths they looked with an involuntary horror. But it was so turned as to show
them nothing but the rosy glow playing on the roof, the fire sparkling
in a hundred repetitions along the glazed front of the presses, and
their own pale and fearful countenances stooping to look in.

"This
glass have seen some strange things, sir," whispered Poole.

"And
surely none stranger than itself," echoed the lawyer in the same tones.
"For what did Jekyll"--he caught himself up at the word with a start,
and then conquering the weakness: "what could Jekyll want with it?"
he said.

"You may say that!" said Poole.

Next they turned to the
business-table. On the desk, among the neat array of papers, a large
envelope was uppermost, and bore, in the doctor's hand, the name of
Mr. Utterson. The lawyer unsealed it, and several enclosures fell
to the floor. The first was a will, drawn in the same eccentric terms
as the one which he had returned six months before, to serve as a
testament in case of death and as a deed of gift in case of disappearance;
but, in place of the name of Edward Hyde, the lawyer, with indescribable
amazement, read the name of Gabriel John Utterson. He looked at Poole,
and then back at the paper, and last of all at the dead malefactor
stretched upon the carpet.

"My head goes round," he said. "He has
been all these days in possession; he had no cause to like me; he
must have raged to see himself displaced; and he has not destroyed
this document."

He caught up the next paper; it was a brief note
in the doctor's hand, and dated at the top. "O Poole!" the lawyer
cried, "he was alive and here this day. He cannot have been disposed
of in so short a space, he must be still alive, he must have fled!
And then, why fled? and how? and in that case, can we venture to declare
this suicide? Oh, we must be careful. I foresee that we may yet involve
your master in some dire catastrophe."

"Why don't you read it, sir?"
asked Poole.

"Because I fear," replied the lawyer solemnly. "God
grant I have no cause for it!" and with that he brought the paper
to his eyes and read as follows:

"My dear Utterson,--When this shall
fall into your hands, I shall have disappeared, under what circumstances
I have not the penetration to foresee, but my instinct and all the
circumstances of my nameless situation tell me that the end is sure,
and must be early. Go then, and first read the narrative which Lanyon
warned me he was to place in your hands; and if you care to hear more,
turn to the confession of Your unworthy and unhappy friend,

"HENRY
JEKYLL."

"There was a third enclosure?" asked Utterson.

"Here sir,"
said Poole, and gave into his hands a considerable packet sealed in
several places.

The lawyer put it in his pocket. "I would say nothing
of this paper. If your master has fled or is dead, we may at least
save his credit. It is now ten; I must go home and read these documents
in quiet; but I shall be back before midnight, when we shall send
for the police."

They went out, locking the door of the theatre behind
them; and Utterson, once more leaving the servants gathered about
the fire in the hall, trudged back to his office to read the two narratives
in which this mystery was now to be explained.

DR. LANYON'S NARRATIVE

On
the ninth of January, now four days ago, I received by the evening
delivery a registered envelope, addressed in the hand of my colleague
and old school-companion, Henry Jekyll. I was a good deal surprised
by this; for we were by no means in the habit of correspondence; I
had seen the man, dined with him, indeed, the night before; and I
could imagine nothing in our intercourse that should justify the formality
of registration. The contents increased my wonder; for this is how
the letter ran:--

"10th December, 18--

"Dear Lanyon,--You are one
of my oldest friends; and although we may have differed at times on
scientific questions, I cannot remember, at least on my side, any
break in our affection. There was never a day when, if you had said
to me, 'Jekyll, my life, my honour, my reason, depend upon you,' I
would not have sacrificed my fortune or my left hand to help you.
Lanyon, my life, my honour, my reason, are all at your mercy; if you
fail me to-night, I am lost. You might suppose, after this preface,
that I am going to ask you for something dishonourable to grant. Judge
for yourself. Consequently he will
no longer be truly happy, if evil be in him.

Secondly, it is again evident if we consider the specific nature of Happiness. For it has been
shown above (Q. 3, A. 8) that man's perfect Happiness consists in the vision of the Divine
Essence. Now it is impossible for anyone seeing the Divine Essence, to wish not to see It.
Because every good that one possesses and yet wishes to be without, is either insufficient,
something more sufficing being desired in its stead; or else has some inconvenience attached
to it, by reason of which it becomes wearisome. But the vision of the Divine Essence fills
the soul with all good things, since it unites it to the source of all goodness; hence it is
written (Ps. 16:15): "I shall be satisfied when Thy glory shall appear"; and (Wis. 7:11): "All
good things came to me together with her," i.e. with the contemplation of wisdom. It is thus
evident that the happy man cannot forsake Happiness of his own accord. Moreover, neither can
he lose Happiness, through God taking it away from him. Because, since the withdrawal of Happiness
is a punishment, it cannot be enforced by God, the just Judge, except for some fault; and he
that sees God cannot fall into a fault, since rectitude of the will, of necessity, results
from that vision as was shown above (Q. 4, A. 4). Nor again can it be withdrawn by any other
agent. Because the mind that is united to God is raised above all other things: and consequently
no other agent can sever the mind from that union. Therefore it seems unreasonable that as
time goes on, man should pass from happiness to misery, and vice versa; because such like vicissitudes
of time can only be for such things as are subject to time and movement.

Reply Obj. 1: Happiness is consummate perfection, which excludes every defect from the happy.
And therefore whoever has happiness has it altogether unchangeably: this is done by the Divine
power, which raises man to the participation of eternity which transcends all change.

Reply Obj. 2: The will can be directed to opposites, in things which are ordained to the end;
but it is ordained, of natural necessity, to the last end. This is evident from the fact that
man is unable not to wish to be happy.

Reply Obj. 3: Happiness has a beginning owing to the condition of the participator: but it
has no end by reason of the condition of the good, the participation of which makes man happy.
Hence the beginning of happiness is from one cause, its endlessness is from another.

FIFTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 5, Art. 5]

Whether Man Can Attain Happiness by His Natural Powers?

Objection 1: It would seem that man can attain Happiness by his natural powers. For nature
does not fail in necessary things. But nothing is so necessary to man as that by which he attains
the last end. Therefore this is not lacking to human nature. Therefore man can attain Happiness
by his natural powers.

Obj. 2: Further, since man is more noble than irrational creatures, it seems that he must be
better equipped than they. But irrational creatures can attain their end by their natural powers.
Much more therefore can man attain Happiness by his natural powers.

Obj. 3: Further, Happiness is a "perfect operation," according to the Philosopher (Ethic. vii,
13). Now the beginning of a thing belongs to the same principle as the perfecting thereof.
Since, therefore, the imperfect operation, which is as the beginning in human operations, is
subject to man's natural power, whereby he is master of his own actions; it seems that he can
attain to perfect operation, i.e. Happiness, by his natural powers.

On the contrary, Man is naturally the principle of his action, by his intellect and will. Therefore
man cannot attain Happiness by his natural powers.

I answer that, Imperfect happiness that can be had in this life, can be acquired by man by
his natural powers, in the same way as virtue, in whose operation it consists: on this point
we shall speak further on (Q. 63). But man's perfect Happiness, as stated above (Q. 3, A. 8),
consists in the vision of the Divine Essence. Now the vision of God's Essence surpasses the
nature not only of man, but also of every creature, as was shown in the First Part (Q. 12,
A. 4). For the natural knowledge of every creature is in keeping with the mode of his substance:
thus it is said of the intelligence (De Causis; Prop. viii) that "it knows things that are
above it, and things that are below it, according to the mode of its substance." But every
knowledge that is according to the mode of created substance, falls short of the vision of
the Divine Essence, which infinitely surpasses all created substance. Consequently neither
man, nor any creature, can attain final Happiness by his natural powers.

Reply Obj. 1: Just as nature does not fail man in necessaries, although it has not provided
him with weapons and clothing, as it provided other animals, because it gave him reason and
hands, with which he is able to get these things for himself; so neither did it fail man in
things necessary, although it gave him not the wherewithal to attain Happiness: since this
it could not do. But it did give him free-will, with which he can turn to God, that He may
make him happy. "For what we do by means of our friends, is done, in a sense, by ourselves"
(Ethic. iii, 3).

Reply Obj. 2: The nature that can attain perfect good, although it needs help from without
in order to attain it, is of more noble condition than a nature which cannot attain perfect
good, but attains some imperfect good, although it need no help from without in order to attain
it, as the Philosopher says (De Coel. ii, 12). Thus he is better disposed to health who can
attain perfect health, albeit by means of medicine, than he who can attain but imperfect health,
without the help of medicine. And therefore the rational creature, which can attain the perfect
good of happiness, but needs the Divine assistance for the purpose, is more perfect than the
irrational creature, which is not capable of attaining this good, but attains some imperfect
good by its natural powers.

Reply Obj. 3: When imperfect and perfect are of the same species, they can be caused by the
same power. But this does not follow of necessity, if they be of different species: for not
everything, that can cause the disposition of matter, can produce the final perfection. Now
the imperfect operation, which is subject to man's natural power, is not of the same species
as that perfect operation which is man's happiness: since operation takes its species from
its object. Consequently the argument does not prove.

SIXTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 5, Art. 6]

Whether Man Attains Happiness Through the Action of Some Higher Creature?

Objection 1: It would seem that man can be made happy through the action of some higher creature,
viz. an angel. For since we observe a twofold order in things--one, of the parts of the universe
to one another, the other, of the whole universe to a good which is outside the universe; the
former order is ordained to the second as to its end (Metaph. xii, 10). Thus the mutual order
of the parts of an army is dependent on the order of the parts of an army is dependent on the
order of the whole army to the general. But the mutual order of the parts of the universe consists
in the higher creatures acting on the lower, as stated in the First Part (Q. 109, A. 2): while
happiness consists in the order of man to a good which is outside the universe, i.e. God. Therefore
man is made happy, through a higher creature, viz. an angel, acting on him.

Obj. 2: Further, that which is such in potentiality, can be reduced to act, by that which is
such actually: thus what is potentially hot, is made actually hot, by something that is actually
hot. But man is potentially happy. Therefore he can be made actually happy by an angel who
is actually happy.

Obj. 3: Further, Happiness consists in an operation of the intellect as stated above (Q. 3,
A. 4). But an angel can enlighten man's intellect as shown in the First Part (Q. 111, A. 1).
Therefore an angel can make a man happy.

On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 83:12): "The Lord will give grace and glory."

I answer that, Since every creature is subject to the laws of nature, from the very fact that
its power and action are limited: that which surpasses created nature, cannot be done by the
power of any creature. Consequently if anything need to be done that is above nature, it is
done by God immediately; such as raising the dead to life, restoring sight to the blind, and
such like. Now it has been shown above (A. 5) that Happiness is a good surpassing created nature.
Therefore it is impossible that it be bestowed through the action of any creature: but by God
alone is man made happy, if we speak of perfect Happiness. If, however, we speak of imperfect
happiness, the same is to be said of it as of the virtue, in whose act it consists.

Reply Obj. 1: It often happens in the case of active powers ordained to one another, that it
belongs to the highest power to reach the last end, while the lower powers contribute to the
attainment of that last end, by causing a disposition thereto: thus to the art of sailing,
which commands the art of shipbuilding, it belongs to use a ship for the end for which it was
made. Thus, too, in the order of the universe, man is indeed helped by the angels in the attainment
of his last end, in respect of certain preliminary dispositions thereto: whereas he attains
the last end itself through the First Agent, which is God.

Reply Obj. 2: When a form exists perfectly and naturally in something, it can be the principle
of action on something else: for instance a hot thing heats through heat. But if a form exist
in something imperfectly, and not naturally, it cannot be the principle whereby it is communicated
to something else: thus the intention of color which is in the pupil, cannot make a thing white;
nor indeed can everything enlightened or heated give heat or light to something else; for if
they could, enlightening and heating would go on to infinity. But the light of glory, whereby
God is seen, is in God perfectly and naturally; whereas in any creature, it is imperfectly
and by likeness or participation. Consequently no creature can communicate its Happiness to
another.

Reply Obj. 3: A happy angel enlightens the intellect of a man or of a lower angel, as to certain
notions of the Divine works: but not as to the vision of the Divine Essence, as was stated
in the First Part (Q. 106, A. 1): since in order to see this, all are immediately enlightened
by God.

SEVENTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 5, Art. 7]

Whether Any Good Works Are Necessary That Man May Receive Happiness from God?

Objection 1: It would seem that no works of man are necessary that he may obtain Happiness
from God. For since God is an agent of infinite power, He requires before acting, neither matter,
nor disposition of matter, but can forthwith produce the whole effect. But man's works, since
they are not required for Happiness, as the efficient cause thereof, as stated above (A. 6),
can be required only as dispositions thereto. Therefore God who does not require dispositions
before acting, bestows Happiness without any previous works.

Obj. 2: Further, just as God is the immediate cause of Happiness, so is He the immediate cause
of nature. But when God first established nature, He produced creatures without any previous
disposition or action on the part of the creature, but made each one perfect forthwith in its
species. Therefore it seems that He bestows Happiness on man without any previous works.

Obj. 3: Further, the Apostle says (Rom. 4:6) that Happiness is of the man "to whom God reputeth
justice without works." Therefore no works of man are necessary for attaining Happiness.

On the contrary, It is written (John 13:17): "If you know these things, you shall be blessed
if you do them." Therefore Happiness is obtained through works.

I answer that, Rectitude of the will, as stated above (Q. 4, A. 4), is necessary for Happiness;
since it is nothing else than the right order of the will to the last end; and it is therefore
necessary for obtaining the end, just as the right disposition of matter, in order to receive
the form. But this does not prove that any work of man need precede his Happiness: for God
could make a will having a right tendency to the end, and at the same time attaining the end;
just as sometimes He disposes matter and at the same time introduces the form. But the order
of Divine wisdom demands that it should not be thus; for as is stated in De Coelo ii, 12, "of
those things that have a natural capacity for the perfect good, one has it without movement,
some by one movement, some by several." Now to possess the perfect good without movement, belongs
to that which has it naturally: and to have Happiness naturally belongs to God alone. Therefore
it belongs to God alone not to be moved towards Happiness by any previous operation. Now since
Happiness surpasses every created nature, no pure creature can becomingly gain Happiness, without
the movement of operation, whereby it tends thereto. But the angel, who is above man in the
natural order, obtained it, according to the order of Divine wisdom, by one movement of a meritorious
work, as was explained in the First Part (Q. 62, A. 5); whereas man obtains it by many movements
of works which are called merits. Wherefore also according to the Philosopher (Ethic. i, 9),
happiness is the reward of works of virtue.

Reply Obj. 1: Works are necessary to man in order to gain Happiness; not on account of the
insufficiency of the Divine power which bestows Happiness, but that the order in things be
observed.

Reply Obj. 2: God produced the first creatures so that they are perfect forthwith, without
any previous disposition or operation of the creature; because He instituted the first individuals
of the various species, that through them nature might be propagated to their progeny. In like
manner, because Happiness was to be bestowed on others through Christ, who is God and Man,
"Who," according to Heb. 2:10, "had brought many children into glory"; therefore, from the
very beginning of His conception, His soul was happy, without any previous meritorious operation.
But this is peculiar to Him: for Christ's merit avails baptized children for the gaining of
Happiness, though they have no merits of their own; because by Baptism they are made members
of Christ.

Reply Obj. 3: The Apostle is speaking of the Happiness of Hope, which is bestowed on us by
sanctifying grace, which is not given on account of previous works. For grace is not a term
of movement, as Happiness is; rather is it the principle of the movement that tends towards
Happiness.

EIGHTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 5, Art. 8]

Whether Every Man Desires Happiness?

Objection 1: It would seem that not all desire Happiness. For no man can desire what he knows
not; since the apprehended good is the object of the appetite (De Anima iii, 10). But many
know not what Happiness is. This is evident from the fact that, as Augustine says (De Trin.
xiii, 4), "some thought that Happiness consists in pleasures of the body; some, in a virtue
of the soul; some in other things." Therefore not all desire Happiness.

Obj. 2: Further, the essence of Happiness is the vision of the Divine Essence, as stated above
(Q. 3, A. 8). But some consider it impossible for man to see the Divine Essence; wherefore
they desire it not. Therefore all men do not desire Happiness.

Obj. But all do not desire this; for some desire certain things amiss, and yet they wish to
desire such things. Therefore all do not desire Happiness.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. xiii, 3): "If that actor had said: 'You all wish
to be happy; you do not wish to be unhappy,' he would have said that which none would have
failed to acknowledge in his will." Therefore everyone desires to be happy.

I answer that, Happiness can be considered in two ways. First according to the general notion
of happiness: and thus, of necessity, every man desires happiness. For the general notion of
happiness consists in the perfect good, as stated above (AA. 3, 4). But since good is the object
of the will, the perfect good of a man is that which entirely satisfies his will. Consequently
to desire happiness is nothing else than to desire that one's will be satisfied. And this everyone
desires. Secondly we may speak of Happiness according to its specific notion, as to that in
which it consists. And thus all do not know Happiness; because they know not in what thing
the general notion of happiness is found. And consequently, in this respect, not all desire
it. Wherefore the reply to the first Objection is clear.

Reply Obj. 2: Since the will follows the apprehension of the intellect or reason; just as it
happens that where there is no real distinction, there may be a distinction according to the
consideration of reason; so does it happen that one and the same thing is desired in one way,
and not desired in another. So that happiness may be considered as the final and perfect good,
which is the general notion of happiness: and thus the will naturally and of necessity tends
thereto, as stated above. Again it can be considered under other special aspects, either on
the part of the operation itself, or on the part of the operating power, or on the part of
the object; and thus the will does not tend thereto of necessity.

Reply Obj. 3: This definition of Happiness given by some--"Happy is the man that has all he
desires," or, "whose every wish is fulfilled," is a good and adequate definition, if it be
understood in a certain way; but an inadequate definition if understood in another. For if
we understand it simply of all that man desires by his natural appetite, thus it is true that
he who has all that he desires, is happy: since nothing satisfies man's natural desire, except
the perfect good which is Happiness. But if we understand it of those things that man desires
according to the apprehension of the reason, thus it does not belong to Happiness, to have
certain things that man desires; rather does it belong to unhappiness, in so far as the possession
of such things hinders man from having all that he desires naturally; thus it is that reason
sometimes accepts as true things that are a hindrance to the knowledge of truth. And it was
through taking this into consideration that Augustine added so as to include perfect Happiness--that
he "desires nothing amiss": although the first part suffices if rightly understood, to wit,
that "happy is he who has all he desires."

TREATISE ON HUMAN ACTS: ACTS PECULIAR TO MAN (QQ. 6-21)

QUESTION 6

OF THE VOLUNTARY AND THE INVOLUNTARY (In Eight Articles)

Since therefore Happiness is to be gained by means of certain acts, we must in due sequence
consider human acts, in order to know by what acts we may obtain Happiness, and by what acts
we are prevented from obtaining it. But because operations and acts are concerned with things
singular, consequently all practical knowledge is incomplete unless it take account of things
in detail. The study of Morals, therefore, since it treats of human acts, should consider first
the general principles; and secondly matters of detail.

In treating of the general principles, the points that offer themselves for our consideration
are (1) human acts themselves; (2) their principles. Now of human acts some are proper to man;
others are common to man and animals. And since Happiness is man's proper good, those acts
which are proper to man have a closer connection with Happiness than have those which are common
to man and the other animals. First, then, we must consider those acts which are proper to
man; secondly, those acts which are common to man and the other animals, and are called Passions.
The first of these points offers a twofold consideration: (1) What makes a human act? (2) What
distinguishes human acts?

And since those acts are properly called human which are voluntary, because the will is the
rational appetite, which is proper to man; we must consider acts in so far as they are voluntary.

First, then, we must consider the voluntary and involuntary in general; secondly, those acts
which are voluntary, as being elicited by the will, and as issuing from the will immediately;
thirdly, those acts which are voluntary, as being commanded by the will, which issue from the
will through the medium of the other powers.

And because voluntary acts have certain circumstances, according to which we form our judgment
concerning them, we must first consider the voluntary and the involuntary, and afterwards,
the circumstances of those acts which are found to be voluntary or involuntary. Under the first
head there are eight points of inquiry:

(1) Whether there is anything voluntary in human acts?

(2) Whether in irrational animals?

(3) Whether there can be voluntariness without any action?

(4) Whether violence can be done to the will?

(5) Whether violence causes involuntariness?

(6) Whether fear causes involuntariness?

(7) Whether concupiscence causes involuntariness?

(8) Whether ignorance causes involuntariness?

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 6, Art. 1]

Whether There Is Anything Voluntary in Human Acts?

Objection 1: It would seem that there is nothing voluntary in human acts. For that is voluntary
"which has its principle within itself." as Gregory of Nyssa [*Nemesius, De Natura Hom. xxxii.],
Damascene (De Fide Orth. ii, 24), and Aristotle (Ethic. iii, 1) declare. But the principle
of human acts is not in man himself, but outside him: since man's appetite is moved to act,
by the appetible object which is outside him, and is as a "mover unmoved" (De Anima iii, 10).
Therefore there is nothing voluntary in human acts.

Obj. 2: Further, the Philosopher (Phys. viii, 2) proves that in animals no new movement arises
that is not preceded by a motion from without. But all human acts are new, since none is eternal.
Consequently, the principle of all human acts is from without: and therefore there is nothing
voluntary in them.

Obj. 3: Further, he that acts voluntarily, can act of himself. But this is not true of man;
for it is written (John 15:5): "Without Me you can do nothing." Therefore there is nothing
voluntary in human acts.

On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii) that "the voluntary is an act consisting
in a rational operation." Now such are human acts. Therefore there is something voluntary in
human acts.

I answer that, There must needs be something voluntary in human acts. In order to make this
clear, we must take note that the principle of some acts or movements is within the agent,
or that which is moved; whereas the principle of some movements or acts is outside. For when
a stone is moved upwards, the principle of this movement is outside the stone: whereas when
it is moved downwards, the principle of this movement is in the stone. Now of those things
that are moved by an intrinsic principle, some move themselves, some not. For since every agent
or thing moved, acts or is moved for an end, as stated above (Q. 1, A. 2); those are perfectly
moved by an intrinsic principle, whose intrinsic principle is one not only of movement but
of movement for an end. Now in order for a thing to be done for an end, some knowledge of the
end is necessary. Therefore, whatever so acts or is moved by an intrinsic principle, that it
has some knowledge of the end, has within itself the principle of its act, so that it not only
acts, but acts for an end. On the other hand, if a thing has no knowledge of the end, even
though it have an intrinsic principle of action or movement, nevertheless the principle of
acting or being moved for an end is not in that thing, but in something else, by which the
principle of its action towards an end is not in that thing, but in something else, by which
the principle of its action towards an end is imprinted on it. Wherefore such like things are
not said to move themselves, but to be moved by others. But those things which have a knowledge
of the end are said to move themselves because there is in them a principle by which they not
only act but also act for an end. And consequently, since both are from an intrinsic principle,
to wit, that they act and that they act for an end, the movements of such things are said to
be voluntary: for the word "voluntary" implies that their movements and acts are from their
own inclination. Hence it is that, according to the definitions of Aristotle, Gregory of Nyssa,
and Damascene [*See Objection 1], the voluntary is defined not only as having "a principle
within" the agent, but also as implying "knowledge." Therefore, since man especially knows
the end of his work, and moves himself, in his acts especially is the voluntary to be found.

Reply Obj. 1: Not every principle is a first principle. Therefore, although it is essential
to the voluntary act that its principle be within the agent, nevertheless it is not contrary
to the nature of the voluntary act that this intrinsic principle be caused or moved by an extrinsic
principle: because it is not essential to the voluntary act that its intrinsic principle be
a first principle. Yet again it must be observed that a principle of movement may happen to
be first in a genus, but not first simply: thus in the genus of things subject to alteration,
the first principle of alteration is a heavenly body, which nevertheless is not the first mover
simply, but is moved locally by a higher mover. And so the intrinsic principle of the voluntary
act, i.e. the cognitive and appetitive power, is the first principle in the genus of appetitive
movement, although it is moved by an extrinsic principle according to other species of movement.

Reply Obj. 2: New movements in animals are indeed preceded by a motion from without; and this
in two respects. First, in so far as by means of an extrinsic motion an animal's senses are
confronted with something sensible, which, on being apprehended, moves the appetite. Thus a
lion, on seeing a stag in movement and coming towards him, begins to be moved towards the stag.
Secondly, in so far as some extrinsic motion produces a physical change in an animal's body,
as in the case of cold or heat; and through the body being affected by the motion of an outward
body, the sensitive appetite which is the power of a bodily organ, is also moved indirectly;
thus it happens that through some alteration in the body the appetite is roused to the desire
of something. But this is not contrary to the nature of voluntariness, as stated above (ad
1), for such movements caused by an extrinsic principle are of another genus of movement.

Reply Obj. 3: God moves man to act, not only by proposing the appetible to the senses, or by
effecting a change in his body, but also by moving the will itself; because every movement
either of the will or of nature, proceeds from God as the First Mover. And just as it is not
incompatible with nature that the natural movement be from God as the First Mover, inasmuch
as nature is an instrument of God moving it: so it is not contrary to the essence of a voluntary
act, that it proceed from God, inasmuch as the will is moved by God. Nevertheless both natural
and voluntary movements have this in common, that it is essential that they should proceed
from a principle within the agent.

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 6, Art. 2]

Whether There Is Anything Voluntary in Irrational Animals?

Objection 1: It would seem that there is nothing voluntary in irrational animals. For a thing
is called "voluntary" from voluntas (will). Now since the will is in the reason (De Anima iii,
9), it cannot be in irrational animals. Therefore neither is there anything voluntary in them.

Obj. 2: Further, according as human acts are voluntary, man is said to be master of his actions.
But irrational animals are not masters of their actions; for "they act not; rather are they
acted upon," as Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii, 27). Therefore there is no such thing as
a voluntary act in irrational animals.

Obj. 3: Further, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. 24) that "voluntary acts lead to praise and
blame." But neither praise nor blame is due to the acts of irrational minds. Therefore such
acts are not voluntary.

On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. iii, 2) that "both children and irrational animals
participate in the voluntary." The same is said by Damascene (De Fide Orth. 24) and Gregory
of Nyssa [*Nemesius, De Nat. Hom. xxxii.].

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), it is essential to the voluntary act that its principle
be within the agent, together with some knowledge of the end. Now knowledge of the end is twofold;
perfect and imperfect. Perfect knowledge of the end consists in not only apprehending the thing
which is the end, but also in knowing it under the aspect of end, and the relationship of the
means to that end. And such knowledge belongs to none but the rational nature. But imperfect
knowledge of the end consists in mere apprehension of the end, without knowing it under the
aspect of end, or the relationship of an act to the end. Such knowledge of the end is exercised
by irrational animals, through their senses and their natural estimative power.

Consequently perfect knowledge of the end leads to the perfect voluntary; inasmuch as, having
apprehended the end, a man can, from deliberating about the end and the means thereto, be moved,
or not, to gain that end. But imperfect knowledge of the end leads to the imperfect voluntary;
inasmuch as the agent apprehends the end, but does not deliberate, and is moved to the end
at once. Wherefore the voluntary in its perfection belongs to none but the rational nature:
whereas the imperfect voluntary is within the competency of even irrational animals.

Reply Obj. 1: The will is the name of the rational appetite; and consequently it cannot be
in things devoid of reason. But the word "voluntary" is derived from "voluntas" (will), and
can be extended to those things in which there is some participation of will, by way of likeness
thereto. It is thus that voluntary action is attributed to irrational animals, in so far as
they are moved to an end, through some kind of knowledge.

Reply Obj. 2: The fact that man is master of his actions, is due to his being able to deliberate
about them: for since the deliberating reason is indifferently disposed to opposite things,
the will can be inclined to either. But it is not thus that voluntariness is in irrational
animals, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 3: Praise and blame are the result of the voluntary act, wherein is the perfect
voluntary; such as is not to be found in irrational animals.

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 6, Art. 3]

Whether There Can Be Voluntariness Without Any Act?

Objection 1: It would seem that voluntariness cannot be without any act. For that is voluntary
which proceeds from the will. But nothing can proceed from the will, except through some act,
at least an act of the will. Therefore there cannot be voluntariness without act.

Obj. 2: Further, just as one is said to wish by an act of the will, so when the act of the
will ceases, one is said not to wish. But not to wish implies involuntariness, which is contrary
to voluntariness. Therefore there can be nothing voluntary when the act of the will ceases.

Obj. 3: Further, knowledge is essential to the voluntary, as stated above (AA. 1, 2). But knowledge
involves an act. Therefore voluntariness cannot be without some act.

On the contrary, The word "voluntary" is applied to that of which we are masters. Now we are
masters in respect of to act and not to act, to will and not to will. Therefore just as to
act and to will are voluntary, so also are not to act and not to will.

I answer that, Voluntary is what proceeds from the will. Now one thing proceeds from another
in two ways. First, directly; in which sense something proceeds from another inasmuch as this
other acts; for instance, heating from heat. Secondly, indirectly; in which sense something
proceeds from another through this other not acting; thus the sinking of a ship is set down
to the helmsman, from his having ceased to steer. But we must take note that the cause of what
follows from want of action is not always the agent as not acting; but only then when the agent
can and ought to act. For if the helmsman were unable to steer the ship or if the ship's helm
be not entrusted to him, the sinking of the ship would not be set down to him, although it
might be due to his absence from the helm.

Since, then, the will by willing and acting, is able, and sometimes ought, to hinder not-willing
and not-acting; this not-willing and not-acting is imputed to, as though proceeding from, the
will. And thus it is that we can have the voluntary without an act; sometimes without outward
act, but with an interior act; for instance, when one wills not to act; and sometimes without
even an interior act, as when one does not will to act.

Reply Obj. 1: We apply the word "voluntary" not only to that which proceeds from the will directly,
as from its action; but also to that which proceeds from it indirectly as from its inaction.

Reply Obj. 2: "Not to wish" is said in two senses. First, as though it were one word, and the
infinitive of "I-do-not-wish." Consequently just as when I say "I do not wish to read," the
sense is, "I wish not to read"; so "not to wish to read" is the same as "to wish not to read,"
and in this sense "not to wish" implies involuntariness. Secondly it is taken as a sentence:
and then no act of the will is affirmed. And in this sense "not to wish" does not imply involuntariness.

Reply Obj. 3: Voluntariness requires an act of knowledge in the same way as it requires an
act of will; namely, in order that it be in one's power to consider, to wish and to act. And
then, just as not to wish, and not to act, when it is time to wish and to act, is voluntary,
so is it voluntary not to consider.

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 6, Art. 4]

Whether Violence Can Be Done to the Will?

Objection 1: It would seem that violence can be done to the will. For everything can be compelled
by that which is more powerful. But there is something, namely, God, that is more powerful
than the human will. Therefore it can be compelled, at least by Him.

Obj. 2: Further, every passive subject is compelled by its active principle, when it is changed
by it. But the will is a passive force: for it is a "mover moved" (De Anima iii, 10). Therefore,
since it is sometimes moved by its active principle, it seems that sometimes it is compelled.

Obj. 3: Further, violent movement is that which is contrary to nature. But the movement of
the will is sometimes contrary to nature; as is clear of the will's movement to sin, which
is contrary to nature, as Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iv, 20). Therefore the movement of
the will can be compelled.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei v, 10) that what is done by the will is not done
of necessity. Now, whatever is done under compulsion is done of necessity: consequently what
is done by the will, cannot be compelled. Therefore the will cannot be compelled to act.

I answer that, The act of the will is twofold: one is its immediate act, as it were, elicited
by it, namely, "to wish"; the other is an act of the will commanded by it, and put into execution
by means of some other power, such as "to walk" and "to speak," which are commanded by the
will to be executed by means of the motive power.

As regards the commanded acts of the will, then, the will can suffer violence, in so far as
violence can prevent the exterior members from executing the will's command. But as to the
will's own proper act, violence cannot be done to the will.

The reason of this is that the act of the will is nothing else than an inclination proceeding
from the interior principle of knowledge: just as the natural appetite is an inclination proceeding
from an interior principle without knowledge. Now what is compelled or violent is from an exterior
principle. Consequently it is contrary to the nature of the will's own act, that it should
be subject to compulsion and violence: just as it is also contrary to the nature of a natural
inclination or movement. For a stone may have an upward movement from violence, but that this
violent movement be from its natural inclination is impossible. In like manner a man may be
dragged by force: but it is contrary to the very notion of violence, that he be dragged of
his own will.

Reply Obj. 1: God Who is more powerful than the human will, can move the will of man, according
to Prov. 21:1: "The heart of the king is in the hand of the Lord; whithersoever He will He
shall turn it." But if this were by compulsion, it would no longer be by an act of the will,
nor would the will itself be moved, but something else against the will.

Reply Obj. 2: It is not always a violent movement, when a passive subject is moved by its active
principle; but only when this is done against the interior inclination of the passive subject.
Otherwise every alteration and generation of simple bodies would be unnatural and violent:
whereas they are natural by reason of the natural interior aptitude of the matter or subject
to such a disposition. In like manner when the will is moved, according to its own inclination,
by the appetible object, this movement is not violent but voluntary.

Reply Obj. 3: That to which the will tends by sinning, although in reality it is evil and contrary
to the rational nature, nevertheless is apprehended as something good and suitable to nature,
in so far as it is suitable to man by reason of some pleasurable sensation or some vicious habit.

FIFTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 6, Art. 5]

Whether Violence Causes Involuntariness?

Objection 1: It would seem that violence does not cause involuntariness. For we speak of voluntariness
and involuntariness in respect of the will. But violence cannot be done to the will, as shown
above (A. 4). Therefore violence cannot cause involuntariness.

Obj. 2: Further, that which is done involuntarily is done with grief, as Damascene (De Fide
Orth. ii, 24) and the Philosopher (Ethic. iii, 5) say. But sometimes a man suffers compulsion
without being grieved thereby. Therefore violence does not cause involuntariness.

Obj. 3: Further, what is from the will cannot be involuntary. But some violent actions proceed
from the will: for instance, when a man with a heavy body goes upwards; or when a man contorts
his limbs in a way contrary to their natural flexibility. Therefore violence does not cause
involuntariness.

On the contrary, The Philosopher (Ethic. iii, 1) and Damascene (De Fide Orth. ii, 24) say that
"things done under compulsion are involuntary."

I answer that, Violence is directly opposed to the voluntary, as likewise to the natural. For
the voluntary and the natural have this in common, that both are from an intrinsic principle;
whereas violence is from an extrinsic principle. And for this reason, just as in things devoid
of knowledge, violence effects something against nature: so in things endowed with knowledge,
it effects something against the will. Now that which is against nature is said to be "unnatural";
and in like manner that which is against the will is said to be "involuntary." Therefore violence
causes involuntariness.

Reply Obj. 1: The involuntary is opposed to the voluntary. Now it has been said (A. 4) that
not only the act, which proceeds immediately from the will, is called voluntary, but also the
act commanded by the will. Consequently, as to the act which proceeds immediately from the
will, violence cannot be done to the will, as stated above (A. 4): wherefore violence cannot
make that act involuntary. But as to the commanded act, the will can suffer violence: and consequently
in this respect violence causes involuntariness.

Reply Obj. 2: As that is said to be natural, which is according to the inclination of nature;
so that is said to be voluntary, which is according to the inclination of the will. Now a thing
is said to be natural in two ways. First, because it is from nature as from an active principle:
thus it is natural for fire to produce heat. Secondly, according to a passive principle; because,
to wit, there is in nature an inclination to receive an action from an extrinsic principle:
thus the movement of the heavens is said to be natural, by reason of the natural aptitude in
a heavenly body to receive such movement; although the cause of that movement is a voluntary
agent. In like manner an act is said to be voluntary in two ways. First, in regard to action,
for instance, when one wishes to be passive to another. Hence when action is brought to bear
on something, by an extrinsic agent, as long as the will to suffer that action remains in the
passive subject, there is not violence simply: for although the patient does nothing by way
of action, he does something by being willing to suffer. Consequently this cannot be called
involuntary.

Reply Obj. 3: As the Philosopher says (Phys. viii, 4) the movement of an animal, whereby at
times an animal is moved against the natural inclination of the body, although it is not natural
to the body, is nevertheless somewhat natural to the animal, to which it is natural to be moved
according to its appetite. Accordingly this is violent, not simply but in a certain respect.
The same remark applies in the case of one who contorts his limbs in a way that is contrary
to their natural disposition. For this is violent in a certain respect, i.e. as to that particular
limb; but not simply, i.e. as to the man himself.

SIXTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 6, Art. 6]

Whether Fear Causes Involuntariness Simply?

Objection 1: It would seem that fear causes involuntariness simply. For just as violence regards
that which is contrary to the will at the time, so fear regards a future evil which is repugnant
to the will. But violence causes involuntariness simply. Therefore fear too causes involuntariness
simply.

Obj. 2: Further, that which is such of itself, remains such, whatever be added to it: thus
what is hot of itself, as long as it remains, is still hot, whatever be added to it. But that
which is done through fear, is involuntary in itself. Therefore, even with the addition of
fear, it is involuntary.

Obj. 3: Further, that which is such, subject to a condition, is such in a certain respect;
whereas what is such, without any condition, is such simply: thus what is necessary, subject
to a condition, is necessary in some respect: but what is necessary absolutely, is necessary
simply. But that which is done through fear, is absolutely involuntary; and is not voluntary,
save under a condition, namely, in order that the evil feared may be avoided. Therefore that
which is done through fear, is involuntary simply.

On the contrary, Gregory of Nyssa [*Nemesius, De Nat. Hom. xxx.] and the Philosopher (Ethic.
iii, 1) say that such things as are done through fear are "voluntary rather than involuntary."

I answer that, As the Philosopher says (Ethic. iii) and likewise Gregory of Nyssa in his book
on Man (Nemesius, De Nat. Hom. xxx), such things are done through fear "are of a mixed character,"
being partly voluntary and partly involuntary. For that which is done through fear, considered
in itself, is not voluntary; but it becomes voluntary in this particular case, in order, namely,
to avoid the evil feared.

But if the matter be considered aright, such things are voluntary rather than involuntary;
for they are voluntary simply, but involuntary in a certain respect. For a thing is said to
be simply, according as it is in act; but according as it is only in apprehension, it is not
simply, but in a certain respect. Now that which is done through fear, is in act in so far
as it is done. For, since acts are concerned with singulars; and the singular, as such, is
here and now; that which is done is in act, in so far as it is here and now and under other
individuating circumstances. And that which is done through fear is voluntary, inasmuch as
it is here and now, that is to say, in so far as, under the circumstances, it hinders a greater
evil which was feared; thus the throwing of the cargo into the sea becomes voluntary during
the storm, through fear of the danger: wherefore it is clear that it is voluntary simply. And
hence it is that what is done out of fear is essentially voluntary, because its principle is
within. But if we consider what is done through fear, as outside this particular case, and
inasmuch as it is repugnant to the will, this is merely a consideration of the mind. And consequently
what is done through fear is involuntary, considered in that respect, that is to say, outside
the actual circumstances of the case.

Reply Obj. 1: Things done through fear and compulsion differ not only according to present
and future time, but also in this, that the will does not consent, but is moved entirely counter
to that which is done through compulsion: whereas what is done through fear, becomes voluntary,
because the will is moved towards it, albeit not for its own sake, but on account of something
else, that is, in order to avoid an evil which is feared. For the conditions of a voluntary
act are satisfied, if it be done on account of something else voluntary: since the voluntary
is not only what we wish, for its own sake, as an end, but also what we wish for the sake of
something else, as an end. It is clear therefore that in what is done from compulsion, the
will does nothing inwardly; whereas in what is done through fear, the will does something.
Accordingly, as Gregory of Nyssa [*Nemesius, De Nat. Hom. xxx.] says, in order to exclude things
done through fear, a violent action is defined as not only one, "the princip[le] whereof is
from without," but with the addition, "in which he that suffers violence concurs not at all";
because the will of him that is in fear, does concur somewhat in that which he does through fear.

Reply Obj. 2: Things that are such absolutely, remain such, whatever be added to them; for
instance, a cold thing, or a white thing: but things that are such relatively, vary according
as they are compared with different things. For what is big in comparison with one thing, is
small in comparison with another. Now a thing is said to be voluntary, not only for its own
sake, as it were absolutely; but also for the sake of something else, as it were relatively.
Accordingly, nothing prevents a thing which was not voluntary in comparison with one thing,
from becoming voluntary when compared with another.

Reply Obj. 3: That which is done through fear, is voluntary without any condition, that is
to say, according as it is actually done: but it is involuntary, under a certain condition,
that is to say, if such a fear were not threatening. Consequently, this argument proves rather
the opposite.

SEVENTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 6, Art. 7]

Whether Concupiscence Causes Involuntariness?

Objection 1: It would seem that concupiscence causes involuntariness. For just as fear is a
passion, so is concupiscence. But fear causes involuntariness to a certain extent. Therefore
concupiscence does so too.

Obj. 2: Further, just as the timid man through fear acts counter to that which he proposed,
so does the incontinent, through concupiscence. But fear causes involuntariness to a certain
extent. Therefore concupiscence does so also.

Obj. 3: Further, knowledge is necessary for voluntariness. But concupiscence impairs knowledge;
for the Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 5) that "delight," or the lust of pleasure, "destroys
the judgment of prudence." Therefore concupiscence causes involuntariness.

On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii, 24): "The involuntary act deserves mercy
or indulgence, and is done with regret." But neither of these can be said of that which is
done out of concupiscence. Therefore concupiscence does not cause involuntariness.

I answer that, Concupiscence does not cause involuntariness, but on the contrary makes something
to be voluntary. For a thing is said to be voluntary, from the fact that the will is moved
to it. Now concupiscence inclines the will to desire the object of concupiscence. Therefore
the effect of concupiscence is to make something to be voluntary rather than involuntary.

Reply Obj. 1: Fear regards evil, but concupiscence regards good. Now evil of itself is counter
to the will, whereas good harmonizes with the will. Therefore fear has a greater tendency than
concupiscence to cause involuntariness.

Reply Obj. 2: He who acts from fear retains the repugnance of the will to that which he does,
considered in itself. But he that acts from concupiscence, e.g. an incontinent man, does not
retain his former will whereby he repudiated the object of his concupiscence; for his will
is changed so that he desires that which previously he repudiated. Accordingly, that which
is done out of fear is involuntary, to a certain extent, but that which is done from concupiscence
is nowise involuntary. For the man who yields to concupiscence acts counter to that which he
purposed at first, but not counter to that which he desires now; whereas the timid man acts
counter to that which in itself he desires now.

Reply Obj. 3: If concupiscence were to destroy knowledge altogether, as happens with those
whom concupiscence has rendered mad, it would follow that concupiscence would take away voluntariness.
And yet properly speaking it would not result in the act being involuntary, because in things
bereft of reason, there is neither voluntary nor involuntary. But sometimes in those actions
which are done from concupiscence, knowledge is not completely destroyed, because the power
of knowing is not taken away entirely, but only the actual consideration in some particular
possible act. "You should be out, whipping up the circulation like Mr. Enfield and me. (This is
my cousin--Mr. Enfield--Dr. Jekyll.) Come now; get your hat and take a quick turn with us."

"You are very good," sighed the other.

"I should like to very much; but no, no, no, it is quite impossible;
I dare not.

But indeed, Utterson, I am very glad to see you; this is really a
great pleasure; I would ask you and Mr. Enfield up, but the place
is really not fit."

"Why then," said the lawyer good-naturedly, "the best thing we can do is to stay down here and
speak with you from where we are."

"That is just what I was about to venture to propose," returned the doctor, with a smile. But the words
were hardly uttered, before the smile was struck out of his face
and succeeded by an expression of such abject terror and despair as
froze the very blood of the two gentleman below.

They saw it but for a glimpse, for the window was instantly thrust down; but that glimpse had
been sufficient, and they turned and left the court without a word. In silence, too, the by-street;
and it was not until they had come into a neighbouring thoroughfare,
where even upon a Sunday there were still some stirrings of life,
that Mr. Utterson at last turned and looked at his companion.

They were both pale; and there was an answering horror in their eyes.

"God forgive us, God forgive us!" said Mr. Utterson.

But Mr. Enfield only nodded his head very seriously, and walked on once more in silence.

THE LAST NIGHT

Mr. Utterson was sitting by his fireside one evening after dinner, when he was surprised to receive a
visit from Poole.

"Bless me, Poole, what brings you here?" he cried; and then, taking a second look at him, "What ails
you?" he added, "is the doctor ill?"

"Mr. Utterson," said the man, "there is something wrong."

"Take a seat, and here is a glass of wine for you," said the lawyer. "Now, take your time, and
tell me plainly what you want."

"You know the doctor's ways, sir," replied Poole, "and how he shuts himself up. Well, he's shut
up again in the cabinet; and I don't like it, sir--I wish I may die if I like it. Mr. Utterson,
sir, I'm afraid."
"Now, my good man," said the lawyer, "be explicit. What are you afraid
of?"

"I've been afraid for about a week," returned Poole, doggedly
disregarding the question, "and I can bear it no more."

The man's
appearance amply bore out his words; his manner was altered for the
worse; and except for the moment when he had first announced his terror,
he had not once looked the lawyer in the face. Even now, he sat with
the glass of wine untasted on his knee, and his eyes directed to a
corner of the floor. "I can bear it no more," he repeated.

"Come,"
said the lawyer, "I see you have some good reason, Poole; I see there
is something seriously amiss. Try to tell me what it is."

"I think
there's been foul play," said Poole hoarsely.

"Foul play!" cried
the lawyer, a good deal frightened, and rather inclined to be irritated
in consequence. "What foul play? What does the man mean?"

"I daren't
say, sir," was the answer; "but will you come along with me and see
for yourself?"

Mr. Utterson's only answer was to rise and get his
hat and greatcoat; but he observed with wonder the greatness of the
relief that appeared upon the butler's face, and perhaps with no less,
that the wine was still untasted when he set it down to follow.

It
was a wild, cold, seasonable night of March, with a pale moon, lying
on her back as though the wind had tilted her, and a flying wrack
of the most diaphanous and lawny texture. Accordingly,
if in either of these ways, ignorance is voluntary, it cannot cause involuntariness simply.
Nevertheless it causes involuntariness in a certain respect, inasmuch as it precedes the movement
of the will towards the act, which movement would not be, if there were knowledge. Ignorance
is "antecedent" to the act of the will, when it is not voluntary, and yet is the cause of man's
willing what he would not will otherwise. Thus a man may be ignorant of some circumstance of
his act, which he was not bound to know, the result being that he does that which he would
not do, if he knew of that circumstance; for instance, a man, after taking proper precaution,
may not know that someone is coming along the road, so that he shoots an arrow and slays a
passer-by. Such ignorance causes involuntariness simply.

From this may be gathered the solution of the objections. For the first objection deals with
ignorance of what a man is bound to know. The second, with ignorance of choice, which is voluntary
to a certain extent, as stated above. The third, with that ignorance which is concomitant with
the act of the will.

QUESTION 7

OF THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF HUMAN ACTS (In Four Articles)

We must now consider the circumstances of human acts: under which head there are four points
of inquiry:

(1) What is a circumstance?

(2) Whether a theologian should take note of the circumstances of human acts?

(3) How many circumstances are there?

(4) Which are the most important of them?

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 7, Art. 1]

Whether a Circumstance Is an Accident of a Human Act?

Objection 1: It would seem that a circumstance is not an accident of a human act. For Tully
says (De Invent. Rhetor. i) that a circumstance is that from "which an orator adds authority
and strength to his argument." But oratorical arguments are derived principally from things
pertaining to the essence of a thing, such as the definition, the genus, the species, and the
like, from which also Tully declares that an orator should draw his arguments. Therefore a
circumstance is not an accident of a human act.

Obj. 2: Further, "to be in" is proper to an accident. But that which surrounds (circumstat)
is rather out than in. Therefore the circumstances are not accidents of human acts.

Obj. 3: Further, an accident has no accident. But human acts themselves are accidents. Therefore
the circumstances are not accidents of acts.

On the contrary, The particular conditions of any singular thing are called its individuating
accidents. But the Philosopher (Ethic. iii, 1) calls the circumstances particular things [*ta
kath' ekasta], i.e. the particular conditions of each act. Therefore the circumstances are
individual accidents of human acts.

I answer that, Since, according to the Philosopher (Peri Herm. i), "words are the signs of
what we understand," it must needs be that in naming things we follow the process of intellectual
knowledge. Now our intellectual knowledge proceeds from the better known to the less known.
Accordingly with us, names of more obvious things are transferred so as to signify things less
obvious: and hence it is that, as stated in Metaph. x, 4, "the notion of distance has been
transferred from things that are apart locally, to all kinds of opposition": and in like manner
words that signify local movement are employed to designate all other movements, because bodies
which are circumscribed by place, are best known to us. And hence it is that the word "circumstance"
has passed from located things to human acts.

Now in things located, that is said to surround something, which is outside it, but touches
it, or is placed near it. Accordingly, whatever conditions are outside the substance of an
act, and yet in some way touch the human act, are called circumstances. Now what is outside
a thing's substance, while it belongs to that thing, is called its accident. Wherefore the
circumstances of human acts should be called their accidents.

Reply Obj. 1: The orator gives strength to his argument, in the first place, from the substance
of the act; and secondly, from the circumstances of the act. Thus a man becomes indictable,
first, through being guilty of murder; secondly, through having done it fraudulently, or from
motives of greed or at a holy time or place, and so forth. And so in the passage quoted, it
is said pointedly that the orator "adds strength to his argument," as though this were something
secondary.

Reply Obj. 2: A thing is said to be an accident of something in two ways. First, from being
in that thing: thus, whiteness is said to be an accident of Socrates. Secondly, because it
is together with that thing in the same subject: thus, whiteness is an accident of the art
of music, inasmuch as they meet in the same subject, so as to touch one another, as it were.
And in this sense circumstances are said to be the accidents of human acts.

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (ad 2), an accident is said to be the accident of an accident,
from the fact that they meet in the same subject. But this happens in two ways. First, in so
far as two accidents are both related to the same subject, without any relation to one another;
as whiteness and the art of music in Socrates. Secondly, when such accidents are related to
one another; as when the subject receives one accident by means of the other; for instance,
a body receives color by means of its surface. And thus also is one accident said to be in
another; for we speak of color as being in the surface.

Accordingly, circumstances are related to acts in both these ways. For some circumstances that
have a relation to acts, belong to the agent otherwise than through the act; as place and condition
of person; whereas others belong to the agent by reason of the act, as the manner in which
the act is done.

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 7, Art. 2]

Whether Theologians Should Take Note of the Circumstances of Human Acts?

Objection 1: It would seem that theologians should not take note of the circumstances of human
acts. Because theologians do not consider human acts otherwise than according to their quality
of good or evil. But it seems that circumstances cannot give quality to human acts; for a thing
is never qualified, formally speaking, by that which is outside it; but by that which is in
it. Therefore theologians should not take note of the circumstances of acts.

Obj. 2: Further, circumstances are the accidents of acts. But one thing may be subject to an
infinity of accidents; hence the Philosopher says (Metaph. vi, 2) that "no art or science considers
accidental being, except only the art of sophistry." Therefore the theologian has not to consider
circumstances.

Obj. 3: Further, the consideration of circumstances belongs to the orator. But oratory is not
a part of theology. Therefore it is not a theologian's business to consider circumstances.

On the contrary, Ignorance of circumstances causes an act to be involuntary, according to Damascene
(De Fide Orth. ii, 24) and Gregory of Nyssa [*Nemesius, De Nat. Hom. xxxi.]. But involuntariness
excuses from sin, the consideration of which belongs to the theologian. Therefore circumstances
also should be considered by the theologian.

I answer that, Circumstances come under the consideration of the theologian, for a threefold
reason. First, because the theologian considers human acts, inasmuch as man is thereby directed
to Happiness. Now, everything that is directed to an end should be proportionate to that end.
But acts are made proportionate to an end by means of a certain commensurateness, which results
from the due circumstances. Hence the theologian has to consider the circumstances. Secondly,
because the theologian considers human acts according as they are found to be good or evil,
better or worse: and this diversity depends on circumstances, as we shall see further on (Q.
18, AA. 10, 11; Q. 73, A. 7). Thirdly, because the theologian considers human acts under the
aspect of merit and demerit, which is proper to human acts; and for this it is requisite that
they be voluntary. Now a human act is deemed to be voluntary or involuntary, according to knowledge
or ignorance of circumstances, as stated above (Q. 6, A. 8). Therefore the theologian has to
consider circumstances.

Reply Obj. 1: Good directed to the end is said to be useful; and this implies some kind of
relation: wherefore the Philosopher says (Ethic. i, 6) that "the good in the genus 'relation'
is the useful." Now, in the genus "relation" a thing is denominated not only according to that
which is inherent in the thing, but also according to that which is extrinsic to it: as may
be seen in the expressions "right" and "left," "equal" and "unequal," and such like. Accordingly,
since the goodness of acts consists in their utility to the end, nothing hinders their being
called good or bad according to their proportion to extrinsic things that are adjacent to them.

Reply Obj. 2: Accidents which are altogether accidental are neglected by every art, by reason
of their uncertainty and infinity. But such like accidents are not what we call circumstances;
because circumstances although, as stated above (A. 1), they are extrinsic to the act, nevertheless
are in a kind of contact with it, by being related to it. Proper accidents, however, come under
the consideration of art.

Reply Obj. 3: The consideration of circumstances belongs to the moralist, the politician, and
the orator. To the moralist, in so far as with respect to circumstances we find or lose the
mean of virtue in human acts and passions. To the politician and to the orator, in so far as
circumstances make acts to be worthy of praise or blame, of excuse or indictment. In different
ways, however: because where the orator persuades, the politician judges. To the theologian
this consideration belongs, in all the aforesaid ways: since to him all the other arts are
subservient: for he has to consider virtuous and vicious acts, just as the moralist does; and
with the orator and politician he considers acts according as they are deserving of reward
or punishment.

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 7, Art. 3]

Whether the Circumstances Are Properly Set Forth in the Third Book of Ethics?

Objection 1: It would seem that the circumstances are not properly set forth in Ethic. iii,
1. For a circumstance of an act is described as something outside the act. Now time and place
answer to this description. Therefore there are only two circumstances, to wit, "when" and "where."

Obj. 2: Further, we judge from the circumstances whether a thing is well or ill done. But this
belongs to the mode of an act. Therefore all the circumstances are included under one, which
is the "mode of acting."

Obj. 3: Further, circumstances are not part of the substance of an act. But the causes of an
act seem to belong to its substance. Therefore no circumstance should be taken from the cause
of the act itself. Accordingly, neither "who," nor "why," nor "about what," are circumstances:
since "who" refers to the efficient cause, "why" to the final cause, and "about what" to the
material cause.

On the contrary is the authority of the Philosopher in Ethic. iii, 1.

I answer that, Tully, in his Rhetoric (De Invent. Rhetor. i), gives seven circumstances, which
are contained in this verse:

"Quis, quid, ubi, quibus auxiliis, cur, quomodo, quando--

"Who, what, where, by what aids, why, how, and when."

For in acts we must take note of "who" did it, "by what aids" or "instruments" he did it, "what"
he did, "where" he did it, "why" he did it, "how" and "when" he did it. But Aristotle in Ethic.
iii, 1 adds yet another, to wit, "about what," which Tully includes in the circumstance "what."

The reason of this enumeration may be set down as follows. For a circumstance is described
as something outside the substance of the act, and yet in a way touching it. Now this happens
in three ways: first, inasmuch as it touches the act itself; secondly, inasmuch as it touches
the cause of the act; thirdly, inasmuch as it touches the effect. It touches the act itself,
either by way of measure, as "time" and "place"; or by qualifying the act as the "mode of acting."
It touches the effect when we consider "what" is done. It touches the cause of the act, as
to the final cause, by the circumstance "why"; as to the material cause, or object, in the
circumstance "about what"; as to the principal efficient cause, in the circumstance "who";
and as to the instrumental efficient cause, in the circumstance "by what aids."

Reply Obj. 1: Time and place surround (circumstant) the act by way of measure; but the others
surround the act by touching it in any other way, while they are extrinsic to the substance
of the act.

Reply Obj. 2: This mode "well" or "ill" is not a circumstance, but results from all the circumstances.
But the mode which refers to a quality of the act is a special circumstance; for instance,
that a man walk fast or slowly; that he strike hard or gently, and so forth.

Reply Obj. 3: A condition of the cause, on which the substance of the act depends, is not a
circumstance; it must be an additional condition. Thus, in regard to the object, it is not
a circumstance of theft that the object is another's property, for this belongs to the substance
of the act; but that it be great or small. And the same applies to the other circumstances
which are considered in reference to the other causes. For the end that specifies the act is
not a circumstance, but some additional end. Thus, that a valiant man act valiantly for the
sake of the good of the virtue o[f] fortitude, is not a circumstance; but if he act valiantly
for the sake of the delivery of the state, or of Christendom, or some such purpose. And then he
begged Mr. Utterson to follow him, and led the way to the back-garden.

"Now, sir," said he, "you come as gently as you can. I want you to
hear, and I don't want you to be heard. And see here, sir, if by any
chance he was to ask you in, don't go."

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 7, Art. 4]

Whether the Most Important Circumstances Are "Why" and "In What the Act Consists"?

Objection 1: It would seem that these are not the most important circumstances, namely, "why"
and those "in which the act is, [*hen ois e praxis]" as stated in Ethic. iii, 1. For those
in which the act is seem to be place and time: and these do not seem to be the most important
of the circumstances, since, of them all, they are the most extrinsic to the act. Therefore
those things in which the act is are not the most important circumstances.

Obj. 2: Further, the end of a thing is extrinsic to it. Therefore it is not the most important
circumstance.

Obj. 3: Further, that which holds the foremost place in regard to each thing, is its cause
and its form. But the cause of an act is the person that does it; while the form of an act
is the manner in which it is done. Therefore these two circumstances seem to be of the greatest
importance.

On the contrary, Gregory of Nyssa [*Nemesius, De Nat. Hom. xxxi.] says that "the most important
circumstances" are "why it is done" and "what is done."

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 1, A. 1), acts are properly called human, inasmuch as they
are voluntary. Now, the motive and object of the will is the end. Therefore that circumstance
is the most important of all which touches the act on the part of the end, viz. the circumstance
"why": and the second in importance, is that which touches the very substance of the act, viz.
the circumstance "what he did." As to the other circumstances, they are more or less important,
according as they more or less approach to these.

Reply Obj. 1: By those things "in which the act is" the Philosopher does not mean time and
place, but those circumstances that are affixed to the act itself. Wherefore Gregory of Nyssa
[*Nemesius, De Nat. Hom. xxxi], as though he were explaining the dictum of the Philosopher,
instead of the latter's term--"in which the act is"--said, "what is done."

Reply Obj. 2: Although the end is not part of the substance of the act, yet it is the most
important cause of the act, inasmuch as it moves the agent to act. Wherefore the moral act
is specified chiefly by the end.

Reply Obj. 3: The person that does the act is the cause of that act, inasmuch as he is moved
thereto by the end; and it is chiefly in this respect that he is directed to the act; while
other conditions of the person have not such an important relation to the act. As to the mode,
it is not the substantial form of the act, for in an act the substantial form depends on the
object and term or end; but it is, as it were, a certain accidental quality of the act.

QUESTION 8

OF THE WILL, IN REGARD TO WHAT IT WILLS (In Three Articles)

We must now consider the different acts of the will; and in the first place, those acts which
belong to the will itself immediately, as being elicited by the will; secondly, those acts
which are commanded by the will. 

"PRIVATE: for the hands of G. J. Utterson ALONE, and in case of his predecease to be destroyed
unread," so it was emphatically superscribed; and the lawyer dreaded to behold the contents.
"I have buried one friend to-day," he thought: "what if this should cost me another?" And
then he condemned the fear as a disloyalty, and broke the seal. Within there was another enclosure,
likewise sealed, and marked upon the cover as "not to be opened till
the death or disappearance of Dr. Henry Jekyll."



(3) How is it moved?

Under the first head there are three points of inquiry:

(1) Whether the will is of good only?

(2) Whether it is of the end only, or also of the means?

(3) If in any way it be of the means, whether it be moved to the end and to the means, by the
same movement?

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 8, Art. 1]

Whether the Will Is of Good Only?

Objection 1: It would seem that the will is not of good only. For the same power regards opposites;
for instance, sight regards white and black. But good and evil are opposites. Therefore the
will is not only of good, but also of evil.

Obj. 2: Further, rational powers can be directed to opposite purposes, according to the Philosopher
(Metaph. ix, 2). But the will is a rational power, since it is "in the reason," as is stated
in De Anima iii, 9. Therefore the will can be directed to opposites; and consequently its volition
is not confined to good, but extends to evil.

Obj. 3: Further, good and being are convertible. But volition is directed not only to beings,
but also to non-beings. For sometimes we wish "not to walk," or "not to speak"; and again at
times we wish for future things, which are not actual beings. Therefore the will is not of
good only.

On the contrary, Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv) that "evil is outside the scope of the will,"
and that "all things desire good."

I answer that, The will is a rational appetite. Now every appetite is only of something good.
The reason of this is that the appetite is nothing else than an inclination of a person desirous
of a thing towards that thing. Now every inclination is to something like and suitable to the
thing inclined. Since, therefore, everything, inasmuch as it is being and substance, is a good,
it must needs be that every inclination is to something good. And hence it is that the Philosopher
says (Ethic. i, 1) that "the good is that which all desire."

But it must be noted that, since every inclination results from a form, the natural appetite
results from a form existing in the nature of things: while the sensitive appetite, as also
the intellective or rational appetite, which we call the will, follows from an apprehended
form. Therefore, just as the natural appetite tends to good existing in a thing; so the animal
or voluntary appetite tends to a good which is apprehended. Consequently, in order that the
will tend to anything, it is requisite, not that this be good in very truth, but that it be
apprehended as good. Wherefore the Philosopher says (Phys. ii, 3) that "the end is a good,
or an apparent good."

Reply Obj. 1: The same power regards opposites, but it is not referred to them in the same
way. Accordingly, the will is referred both to good and evil: but to good by desiring it: to
evil, by shunning it. Wherefore the actual desire of good is called "volition" [*In Latin,
'voluntas'. To avoid confusion with "voluntas" (the will) St. Thomas adds a word of explanation,
which in the translation may appear superfluous.], meaning thereby the act of the will; for
it is in this sense that we are now speaking of the will. On the other hand, the shunning of
evil is better described as "nolition": wherefore, just as volition is of good, so nolition
is of evil.

Reply Obj. 2: A rational power is not to be directed to all opposite purposes, but to those
which are contained under its proper object; for no power seeks other than its proper object.
Now, the object of the will is good. Wherefore the will can be directed to such opposite purposes
as are contained under good, such as to be moved or to be at rest, to speak or to be silent,
and such like: for the will can be directed to either under the aspect of good.

Reply Obj. 3: That which is not a being in nature, is considered as a being in the reason,
wherefore negations and privations are said to be "beings of reason." In this way, too, future
things, in so far as they are apprehended, are beings. Accordingly, in so far as such like
are beings, they are apprehended under the aspect of good; and it is thus that the will is
directed to them. He thought of him kindly; but his thoughts were disquieted and fearful. He went
to call indeed; but he was perhaps relieved to be denied admittance;
perhaps, in his heart, he preferred to speak with Poole upon the doorstep
and surrounded by the air and sounds of the open city, rather than
to be admitted into that house of voluntary bondage, and to sit and
speak with its inscrutable recluse.

Poole had, indeed, no very pleasant news to communicate.

 Now, the end and the means are in different genera of good: because
the end, which is a good either of rectitude or of pleasure, is in the genus "quality," or
"action," or "passion"; whereas the good which is useful, and is directed to and end, is in
the genus "relation" (Ethic. i, 6). Therefore, if volition is of the end, it is not of the means.

Obj. 3: Further, habits are proportionate to powers, since they are perfections thereof. But
in those habits which are called practical arts, the end belongs to one, and the means to another
art; thus the use of a ship, which is its end, belongs to the (art of the) helmsman; whereas
the building of the ship, which is directed to the end, belongs to the art of the shipwright.
Therefore, since volition is of the end, it is not of the means.

On the contrary, In natural things, it is by the same power that a thing passes through the
middle space, and arrives at the terminus. But the means are a kind of middle space, through
which one arrives at the end or terminus. Therefore, if volition is of the end, it is also
of the means.

I answer that, The word "voluntas" sometimes designates the power of the will, sometimes its
act [*See note to A. 1, Reply Obj. 1]. Accordingly, if we speak of the will as a power, thus
it extends both to the end and to the means. For every power extends to those things in which
may be considered the aspect of the object of that power in any way whatever: thus the sight
extends to all things whatsoever that are in any way colored. Now the aspect of good, which
is the object of the power of the will, may be found not only in the end, but also in the means.

If, however, we speak of the will in regard to its act, then, properly speaking, volition is
of the end only. At the sight of Mr. Utterson, the housemaid broke into hysterical whimpering; and
the cook, crying out "Bless God! it's Mr. Utterson," ran forward as if to take him in her
arms.

"What, what? Are you all here?" said the lawyer peevishly. But that which
is good and willed in itself is the end. Wherefore volition, properly speaking, is of the end
itself. On the other hand, the means are good and willed, not in themselves, but as referred
to the end. Wherefore the will is directed to them, only in so far as it is directed to the
end: so that what it wills in them, is the end. Thus, to understand, is properly directed to
things that are known in themselves, i.e. first principles: but we do not speak of understanding
with regard to things known through first principles, except in so far as we see the principles
in those things. For in morals the end is what principles are in speculative science (Ethic.
viii, 8).

Reply Obj. 1: The Philosopher is speaking of the will in reference to the simple act of the
will; not in reference to the power of the will.

