  His waistcoat was of coloured
silk--very pretty to look at; and ornamented with a small sash, through which gold threads
were worked.  All the buttons of his breeches also were of gold; and there were gold tags to
all the button-holes.  His stockings were of the finest silk, and clocked with gold from the
knee to the ankle.

Dress any Englishman in such a garb and he will at once give you the idea of a hog in armour.
In the first place he will lack the proper spirit to carry it off, and in the next place the
motion of his limbs will disgrace the ornaments they bear.  "And so best," most Englishmen
will say.  Very likely; and, therefore, let no Englishman try it.  But my Spaniard did not
look at like a hog in armour.  He walked slowly down the plank into the boat, whistling lowly
but very clearly a few bars from a opera tune.  It was plain to see that he was master of himself,
of his ornaments, and of his limbs.  He had no appearance of thinking that men were looking
at him, or of feeling that he was beauteous in his attire;--nothing could be more natural than
his foot-fall, or the quiet glance of his cheery gray eye.  He walked up to the captain, who
held the helm, and lightly raised his hand to his cap.  The captain, taking one hand from the
wheel, did the same, and then the stranger, turning his back to the stern of the vessel, and
fronting down the river with his face, continued to whistle slowly, clearly, and in excellent
time.  Grand as were his clothes they were no burden on his mind.

"What is he?" said I, going up to my friend Johnson with a whisper.

"Well, I've been looking at him," said Johnson--which was true enough; "he's a -- an uncommonly
good-looking fellow, isn't he?"

"Particularly so," said I; "and got up quite irrespective of expense. Is he a--a--a gentleman,
now, do you think?"

"Well, those things are so different in Spain that it's almost impossible to make an Englishman
understand them.  One learns to know all this sort of people by being with them in the country,
but one can't explain."

"No; exactly.  Are they real gold?"

"Yes, yes; I dare say they are.  They sometimes have them silver gilt."

"It is quite a common thing, then, isn't it?" asked I.

"Well, not exactly; that--Ah! yes; I see! of course.  He is a torero."

"A what?"

"A mayo.  I will explain it all to you.  You will see them about in all places, and you will
get used to them."

"But I haven't seen one other as yet."

"No, and they are not all so gay as this, nor so new in their finery, you know."

"And what is a torero?"

"Well, a torero is a man engaged in bull-fighting."

"Oh! he is a matador, is he?" said I, looking at him with more than all my eyes.

"No, not exactly that;--not of necessity.  He is probably a mayo.  A fellow that dresses himself
smart for fairs, and will be seen hanging about with the bull-fighters.  What would be a sporting
fellow in England--only he won't drink and curse like a low man on the turf there.  Come, shall
we go and speak to him?"

"I can't talk to him," said I, diffident of my Spanish.  I had received lessons in England
from Maria Daguilar; but six weeks is little enough for making love, let alone the learning
of a foreign language.

"Oh!  I'll do the talking.  You'll find the language easy enough before long.  It soon becomes
the same as English to you, when you live among them."  And then Johnson, walking up to the
stranger, accosted him with that good-natured familiarity with which a thoroughly nice fellow
always opens a conversation with his inferior. Of course I could not understand the words which
were exchanged; but it was clear enough that the "mayo" took the address in good part, and
was inclined to be communicative and social.

"They are all of pure gold," said Johnson, turning to me after a minute, making as he spoke
a motion with his head to show the importance of the information.

"Are they indeed?" said I.  "Where on earth did a fellow like that get them?"  Whereupon Johnson
again returned to his conversation with the man.  After another minute he raised his hand,
and began to finger the button on the shoulder; and to aid him in doing so, the man of the
bull-ring turned a little on one side.

"They are wonderfully well made," said Johnson, talking to me, and still fingering the button.
"They are manufactured, he says, at Osuna, and he tells me that they make them better there
than anywhere else."

"I wonder what the whole set would cost?" said I.  "An enormous deal of money for a fellow
like him, I should think!"

"Over twelve ounces," said Johnson, having asked the question; "and that will be more than
forty pounds." 

She, as mother of the Duchess of Ferrara, was still able to exert
some influence; she was living a respectable life, in comfortable
circumstances, as a woman of position, and was described as la magnifica
e nobile Madanna Vannozza.

 Nothing could have been more good-humoured than he was--so much so
that I was emboldened to hold up his arm that I might see the cut of his coat, to take off
his cap and examine the make, to stuff my finger in beneath his sash, and at last to kneel
down while I persuaded him to hold up his legs that I might look to the clocking. The fellow
was thorough good-natured, and why should I not indulge my curiosity?

"You'll upset him if you don't take care," said Johnson; for I had got fast hold of him by
one ankle, and was determined to finish the survey completely.

"Oh, no, I shan't," said I; "a bull-fighting chap can surely stand on one leg.  But what I
wonder at is, how on earth he can afford it!" Whereupon Johnson again began to interrogate
him in Spanish.

"He says he has got no children," said Johnson, having received a reply, "and that as he has
nobody but himself to look after, he is able to allow himself such little luxuries."

"Tell him that I say he would be better with a wife and couple of babies," said I--and Johnson
interpreted.

"He says that he'll think of it some of these days, when he finds that the supply of fools
in the world is becoming short," said Johnson.

We had nearly done with him now; but after regaining my feet, I addressed myself once more
to the heavy pendules, which hung down almost under his arm.  I lifted one of these, meaning
to feel its weight between my fingers; but unfortunately I gave a lurch, probably through the
motion of the boat, and still holding by the button, tore it almost off from our friend's coat.

"Oh, I am so sorry," I said, in broad English.

"It do not matter at all," he said, bowing, and speaking with equal plainness.  And then, taking
a knife from his pocket, he cut the pendule off, leaving a bit of torn cloth on the side of
his jacket.

"Upon my word, I am quite unhappy," said I; "but I always am so awkward."  Whereupon he bowed low.

"Couldn't I make it right?" said I, bringing out my purse.

He lifted his hand, and I saw that it was small and white; he lifted it and gently put it upon
my purse, smiling sweetly as he did so. "Thank you, no, senor; thank you, no."  And then, bowing
to us both, he walked away down into the cabin.

"Upon my word he is a deuced well-mannered fellow," said I.

"You shouldn't have offered him money," said Johnson; "a Spaniard does not like it."

"Why, I thought you could do nothing without money in this country. Doesn't every one take bribes?"

"Ah! yes; that is a different thing; but not the price of a button. By Jove! he understood
English, too.  Did you see that?"

"Yes; and I called him an ass!  I hope he doesn't mind it."

"Oh! no; he won't think anything about it," said Johnson.  "That sort of fellows don't.  I
dare say we shall see him in the bull-ring next Sunday, and then we'll make all right with
a glass of lemonade."

And so our adventure ended with the man of the gold ornaments.  I was sorry that I had spoken
English before him so heedlessly, and resolved that I would never be guilty of such gaucherie
again.  But, then, who would think that a Spanish bull-fighter would talk a foreign language?
I was sorry, also, that I had torn his coat; it had looked so awkward; and sorry again that
I had offered the man money.  Altogether I was a little ashamed of myself; but I had too much
to look forward to at Seville to allow any heaviness to remain long at my heart; and before
I had arrived at the marvellous city I had forgotten both him and his buttons.

Nothing could be nicer than the way in which I was welcomed at Mr. Daguilar's house, or more
kind--I may almost say affectionate--than Maria's manner to me.  But it was too affectionate;
and I am not sure that I should not have liked my reception better had she been more diffident
in her tone, and less inclined to greet me with open warmth.  As it was, she again gave me
her cheek to kiss, in her father's presence, and called me dear John, and asked me specially
after some rabbits which I had kept at home merely for a younger sister; and then it seemed
as though she were in no way embarrassed by the peculiar circumstances of our position.  Twelve
months since I had asked her to be my wife, and now she was to give me an answer; and yet she
was as assured in her gait, and as serenely joyous in her tone, as though I were a brother
just returned from college.  It could not be that she meant to refuse me, or she would not
smile on me and be so loving; but I could almost have found it in my heart to wish that she
would.  "It is quite possible," said I to myself, "that I may not be found so ready for this
family bargain.  A love that is to be had like a bale of goods is not exactly the love to suit
my taste."  But then, when I met her again in the morning I could no more have quarrelled with
her than I could have flown.

I was inexpressibly charmed with the whole city, and especially with the house in which Mr.
Daguilar lived.  It opened from the corner of a narrow, unfrequented street--a corner like
an elbow--and, as seen from the exterior, there was nothing prepossessing to recommend it;
but the outer door led by a short hall or passage to an inner door or grille, made of open
ornamental iron-work, and through that we entered a court, or patio, as they I called it. 
Nothing could be more lovely or deliciously cool than was this small court.  The building on
each side was covered by trellis-work; and beautiful creepers, vines, and parasite flowers,
now in the full magnificence of the early summer, grew up and clustered round the windows.
Every inch of wall was covered, so that none of the glaring whitewash wounded the eye.  In
the four corners of the patio were four large orange-trees, covered with fruit.  I would not
say a word in special praise of these, remembering that childish promise she had made on my
behalf.  In the middle of the court there was a fountain, and round about on the marble floor
there were chairs, and here and there a small table, as though the space were really a portion
of the house. It was here that we used to take our cup of coffee and smoke our cigarettes,
I and old Mr. Daguilar, while Maria sat by, not only approving, but occasionally rolling for
me the thin paper round the fragrant weed with her taper fingers.  Beyond the patio was an
open passage or gallery, filled also with flowers in pots; and then, beyond this, one entered
the drawing-room of the house.  It was by no means a princely palace or mansion, fit for the
owner of untold wealth.  The rooms were not over large nor very numerous; but the most had
been made of a small space, and everything had been done to relieve the heat of an almost tropical
sun.

"It is pretty, is it not?" she said, as she took me through it.

"Very pretty," I said.  "I wish we could live in such houses."

"Oh, they would not do at all for dear old fat, cold, cozy England. You are quite different,
you know, in everything from us in the south; more phlegmatic, but then so much steadier. 
The men and the houses are all the same."

I can hardly tell why, but even this wounded me.  It seemed to me as though she were inclined
to put into one and the same category things English, dull, useful, and solid; and that she
was disposed to show a sufficient appreciation for such necessaries of life, though she herself
had another and inner sense--a sense keenly alive to the poetry of her own southern chime;
and that I, as being English, was to have no participation in this latter charm. Ludovico and
Ascanio suggested their kinsman, Giovanni Sforza. The Pope accepted him as son-in-law, for, although
he was only Count of Cotognola and vicar of Pesaro, he was an independent sovereign, and he belonged
to the illustrious house of Sforza.
  She had spoken to me of oranges,
and having finished the survey of the house, she offered me some sweet little cakes.  It could
not be that of such things were the thoughts which lay undivulged beneath the clear waters
of those deep black eyes-- undivulged to me, though no one else could have so good a right
to read those thoughts!  It could not be that that noble brow gave index of a mind intent on
the trade of which she spoke so often!  Words of other sort than any that had been vouchsafed
to me must fall at times from the rich curves of that perfect month.

So felt I then, pining for something to make me unhappy.  Ah, me!  I know all about it now,
and am content.  But I wish that some learned pundit would give us a good definition of romance,
would describe in words that feeling with which our hearts are so pestered when we are young,
which makes us sigh for we know not what, and forbids us to be contented with what God sends
us.  We invest female beauty with impossible attributes, and are angry because our women have
not the spiritualised souls of angels, anxious as we are that they should also be human in
the flesh.  A man looks at her he would love as at a distant landscape in a mountainous land.
The peaks are glorious with more than the beauty of earth and rock and vegetation.  He dreams
of some mysterious grandeur of design which tempts him on under the hot sun, and over the sharp
rock, till he has reached the mountain goal which he had set before him.  But when there, he
finds that the beauty is well-nigh gone, and as for that delicious mystery on which his soul
had fed, it has vanished for ever.

I know all about it now, and am, as I said, content.  Beneath those deep black eyes there lay
a well of love, good, honest, homely love, love of father and husband and children that were
to come--of that love which loves to see the loved ones prospering in honesty.  That noble
brow--for it is noble; I am unchanged in that opinion, and will go unchanged to my grave--covers
thoughts as to the welfare of many, and an intellect fitted to the management of a household,
of servants, namely, and children, and perchance a husband.  That mouth can speak words of
wisdom, of very useful wisdom--though of poetry it has latterly uttered little that was original.
Poetry and romance! They are splendid mountain views seen in the distance.  So let men be content
to see them, and not attempt to tread upon the fallacious heather of the mystic hills.

