Of what this incomparable mountain really is, with all these lines of projections converging
towards it and with all these prominent points of relief protruding within its crater, photography
has, so far, been able to give us only a very unsatisfactory idea. The reason too is very simple:
it is only at Full Moon that Tycho reveals himself in all his splendor. The shadows therefore
vanishing, the perspective foreshortenings disappear and the views become little better than
a dead blank. This is the more to be regretted as this wonderful region is well worthy of being
represented with the greatest possible photographic accuracy. It is a vast agglomeration of
holes, craters, ring formations, a complicated intersection of crests--in short, a distracting
volcanic network flung over the blistered soil. The ebullitions of the central eruption still
evidently preserve their original form. As they first appeared, so they lie. Crystallizing
as they cooled, they have stereotyped in imperishable characters the aspect formerly presented
by the whole Moon's surface under the influences of recent plutonic upheaval.

Our travellers were far more fortunate than the photographers. The distance separating them
from the peaks of Tycho's concentric terraces was not so considerable as to conceal the principal
details from a very satisfactory view. For half a century there was scarcely anything to remind
us of it, and we were fast verging into that hopeless national condition, when

'Wealth accumulates and men decay.'

This act brings duty home to
the conscience of the nation. They could even detect a difference of a few hundred feet in altitude in favor
of the western or right hand side over the eastern. They could also see that these dividing
ridges were actually inaccessible and completely unsurmountable, at least by ordinary terrestrian
efforts. No system of castrametation ever devised by Polybius or Vauban could bear the slightest
comparison with such vast fortifications, A city built on the floor of the circular cavity
could be no more reached by the outside Lunarians than if it had been built in the planet Mars.

This idea set Ardan off again. "Yes," said he, "such a city would be at once completely inaccessible,
and still not inconveniently situated in a plateau full of aspects decidedly picturesque. Even
in the depths of this immense crater, Nature, as you can see, has left no flat and empty void.
You can easily trace its special oreography, its various mountain systems which turn it into
a regular world on a small scale. Notice its cones, its central hills, its valleys, its substructures
already cut and dry and therefore quietly prepared to receive the masterpieces of Selenite
architecture. Down there to the left is a lovely spot for a Saint Peter's; to the right, a
magnificent site for a Forum; here a Louvre could be built capable of entrancing Michael Angelo
himself; there a citadel could be raised to which even Gibraltar would be a molehill! In the
middle rises a sharp peak which can hardly be less than a mile in height--a grand pedestal
for the statue of some Selenite Vincent de Paul or George Washington. And around them all is
a mighty mountain-ring at least 3 miles high, but which, to an eye looking from the centre
of our vast city, could not appear to be more than five or six hundred feet. Enormous circus,
where mighty Rome herself in her palmiest days, though increased tenfold, would have no reason
to complain for want of room!"

He stopped for a few seconds, perhaps to take breath, and then resumed:

