Perhaps my imagination gilds too strongly this distant prospect; yet it appears founded on
so few, and simple principles, that there is not the same probability of adverse incidents
as in more complex schemes. These vague rambling contemplations which I here faithfully retrace,
carry me sometimes to a great distance; I am lost in the anticipation of the various circumstances
attending this proposed metamorphosis! Many unforeseen accidents may doubtless arise. Alas!
it is easier for me in all the glow of paternal anxiety, reclined on my bed, to form the theory
of my future conduct, than to reduce my schemes into practice. But when once secluded from
the great society to which we now belong, we shall unite closer together; and there will be
less room for jealousies or contentions. As I intend my children neither for the law nor the
church, but for the cultivation of the land, I wish them no literary accomplishments; I pray
heaven that they may be one day nothing more than expert scholars in husbandry: this is the
science which made our continent to flourish more rapidly than any other. Were they to grow
up where I am now situated, even admitting that we were in safety; two of them are verging
toward that period in their lives, when they must necessarily take up the musket, and learn,
in that new school, all the vices which are so common in armies. Great God! close my eyes for
ever, rather than I should live to see this calamity! May they rather become inhabitants of
the woods.

Thus then in the village of---, in the bosom of that peace it has enjoyed ever since I have
known it, connected with mild hospitable people, strangers to OUR political disputes, and having
none among themselves; on the shores of a fine river, surrounded with woods, abounding with
game; our little society united in perfect harmony with the new adoptive one, in which we shall
be incorporated, shall rest I hope from all fatigues, from all apprehensions, from our perfect
terrors, and from our long watchings. Not a word of politics shall cloud our simple conversation;
tired either with the chase or the labour of the field, we shall sleep on our mats without
any distressing want, having learnt to retrench every superfluous one: we shall have but two
prayers to make to the Supreme Being, that he may shed his fertilising dew on our little crops,
and that he will be pleased to restore peace to our unhappy country. These shall be the only
subject of our nightly prayers, and of our daily ejaculations: and if the labour, the industry,
the frugality, the union of men, can be an agreeable offering to him, we shall not fail to
receive his paternal blessings. There I shall contemplate nature in her most wild and ample
extent; I shall carefully study a species of society, of which I have at present but very imperfect
ideas; I will endeavour to occupy with propriety that place which will enable me to enjoy the
few and sufficient benefits it confers. The solitary and unconnected mode of life I have lived
in my youth must fit me for this trial, I am not the first who has attempted it; Europeans
did not, it is true, carry to the wilderness numerous families; they went there as mere speculators;
I, as a man seeking a refuge from the desolation of war. They went there to study the manner
of the aborigines; I to conform to them, whatever they are; some went as visitors, as travellers;
I as a sojourner, as a fellow hunter and labourer, go determined industriously to work up among
them such a system of happiness as may be adequate to my future situation, and may be a sufficient
compensation for all my fatigues and for the misfortunes I have borne: I have always found
it at home, I may hope likewise to find it under the humble roof of my wigwam.

O Supreme Being! if among the immense variety of planets, inhabited by thy creative power,
thy paternal and omnipotent care deigns to extend to all the individuals they contain; if it
be not beneath thy infinite dignity to cast thy eye on us wretched mortals; if my future felicity
is not contrary to the necessary effects of those secret causes which thou hast appointed,
receive the supplications of a man, to whom in thy kindness thou hast given a wife and an offspring:
View us all with benignity, sanctify this strong conflict of regrets, wishes, and other natural
passions; guide our steps through these unknown paths, and bless our future mode of life. If
it is good and well meant, it must proceed from thee; thou knowest, O Lord, our enterprise
contains neither fraud, nor malice, nor revenge. Bestow on me that energy of conduct now become
so necessary, that it may be in my power to carry the young family thou hast given me through
this great trial with safety and in thy peace. Inspire me with such intentions and such rules
of conduct as may be most acceptable to thee. Preserve, O God, preserve the companion of my
bosom, the best gift thou hast given me: endue her with courage and strength sufficient to
accomplish this perilous journey. Bless the children of our love, those portions of our hearts;
I implore thy divine assistance, speak to their tender minds, and inspire them with the love
of that virtue which alone can serve as the basis of their conduct in this world, and of their
happiness with thee. Restore peace and concord to our poor afflicted country; assuage the fierce
storm which has so long ravaged it. Permit, I beseech thee, O Father of nature, that our ancient
virtues, and our industry, may not be totally lost: and that as a reward for the great toils
we have made on this new land, we may be restored to our ancient tranquillity, and enabled
to fill it with successive generations, that will constantly thank thee for the ample subsistence
thou hast given them.

The unreserved manner in which I have written must give you a convincing proof of that friendship
and esteem, of which I am sure you never yet doubted. As members of the same society, as mutually
bound by the ties of affection and old acquaintance, you certainly cannot avoid feeling for
my distresses; you cannot avoid mourning with me over that load of physical and moral evil
with which we are all oppressed. My own share of it I often overlook when I minutely contemplate
all that hath befallen our native country.

The End