My companion and I had traversed woods and heaths without saying a single word; we had made
a long detour to avoid Gazeau Tower, which I felt I could not bear to look upon again. The
sun was sinking in shrouds of gray when we passed the portcullis at Roche-Mauprat. This portcullis
was broken; the drawbridge was never raised, and the only things that crossed it now were peaceful
flocks and their careless shepherds. The fosses were half-filled, and the bluish osiers were
already spreading out their flexible branches over the shallow waters; nettles were growing
at the foot of the crumbling towers, and the traces of the fire seemed still fresh upon the
walls. The farm buildings had all been repaired; and the court, full of cattle and poultry
and sheep-dogs and agricultural implements, contrasted strangely with the gloomy inclosure
in which I still seemed to see the red flames of the besiegers shooting up, and the black blood
of the Mauprats flowing.

I was received with the quiet and somewhat chilly hospitality of the peasants of Berry. They
did not lay themselves out to please me, but they let me want for nothing. Quarters were found
for me in the only one of the old wings which had not been damaged in the siege, or subsequently
abandoned to the ravages of time. The massive architecture of the body of the building dated
from the tenth century; the door was smaller than the windows, and the windows themselves gave
so little light that we had to take candles to find our way, although the sun had hardly set.
The building had been restored provisionally to serve as an occasional lodging for the new
seigneur or his stewards. My Uncle Hubert had often been there to see to my interests so long
as his strength had allowed him; and they showed me to the room which he had reserved for himself,
and which had therefore been known as the master's room. The best things that had been saved
from the old furniture had been placed there; and, as it was cold and damp, in spite of all
the trouble they had taken to make it habitable, the tenant's servant preceded me with a firebrand
in one hand and a fagot in the other.

Blinded by the smoke which she scattered round me in clouds, and deceived by the new entrance
which they had made in another part of the courtyard, and by certain corridors which they had
walled up to save the trouble of looking after them, I reached the room without recognising
anything; indeed, I could not have said in what part of the old buildings I was, to such an
extent had the new appearance of the courtyard upset my recollections, and so little had my
mind in its gloom and agitation been impressed by surrounding objects.

While the servant was lighting the fire, I threw myself into a chair, and, burying my head
in my hands, fell into a melancholy train of thought. My position, however, was not without
a certain charm; for the past naturally appears in an embellished or softened form to the minds
of young men, those presumptuous masters of the future. When, by dint of blowing the brand,
the servant had filled the room with dense smoke, she went off to fetch some embers and left
me alone. Marcasse had remained in the stable to attend to our horses. Blaireau had followed
me; lying down by the hearth, he glanced at me from time to time with a dissatisfied air, as
if to ask me the reason of such wretched lodging and such a poor fire.

Suddenly, as I cast my eyes round the room, old memories seemed to awaken in me. The fire,
after making the green wood hiss, sent a flame up the chimney, and the whole room was illumined
with a bright though unsteady light, which gave all the objects a weird, ambiguous appearance.
Blaireau rose, turned his back to the fire and sat down between my legs, as if he thought that
something strange and unexpected was going to happen.

I then realized that this place was none other than my grandfather Tristan's bed-room, afterward
occupied for several years by his eldest son, the detestable John, my cruelest oppressor, the
most crafty and cowardly of the Hamstringers. I was filled with a sense of terror and disgust
on recognising the furniture, even the very bed with twisted posts on which my grandfather
had given up his blackened soul to God, amid all the torments of a lingering death agony. The
arm-chair which I was sitting in was the one in which John the Crooked (as he was pleased to
call himself in his facetious days) used to sit and think out his villainies or issue his odious
orders. At this moment I thought I saw the ghosts of all the Mauprats passing before me, with
their bloody hands and their eyes dulled with wine. I got up and was about to yield to the
horror I felt by taking to flight, when suddenly I saw a figure rise up in front of me, so
distinct, so recognisable, so different in its vivid reality from the chimeras that had just
besieged me, that I fell back in my chair, all bathed in a cold sweat. Standing by the bed
was John Mauprat. He had just got out, for he was holding the half-opened curtain in his hand.
He seemed to me the same as formerly, only he was still thinner, and paler and more hideous.
His head was shaved, and his body wrapped in a dark winding-sheet. He gave me a hellish glance;
a smile full of hate and contempt played on his thin, shrivelled lips. He stood motionless
with his gleaming eyes fixed on me, and seemed as if about to speak. In that instant I was
convinced that what I was looking on was a living being, a man of flesh and blood; it seems
incredible, therefore, that I should have felt paralyzed by such childish fear. But it would
be idle for me to deny it, nor have I ever yet been able to find an explanation; I was riveted
to the ground with fear. The man's glance petrified me; I could not utter a sound. Blaireau
rushed at him; then he waved the folds of his funeral garment, like a shroud all foul with
the dampness of the tomb, and I fainted.

When I recovered consciousness Marcasse was by my side, anxiously endeavouring to lift me.
I was lying on the ground rigid as a corpse. It was with a great difficulty that I collected
my thoughts; but, as soon as I could stand upright, I seized Marcasse and hurriedly dragged
him out of the accursed room. I had several narrow escapes of falling as I hastened down the
winding stairs, and it was only on breathing the evening air in the courtyard, and smelling
the healthy odour of the stables, that I recovered the use of my reason.

I did not hesitate to look upon what had just happened as an hallucination. I had given proof
of my courage in war in the presence of my worthy sergeant; I did not blush, therefore, to
confess the truth to him. I answered his questions frankly, and I described my horrible vision
with such minute details that he, too, was impressed with the reality of it, and, as he walked
about with me in the courtyard, kept repeating with a thoughtful air:

"Singular, singular! Astonishing!"

"No, it is not astonishing," I said, when I felt that I had quite recovered. "I experienced
a most painful sensation on my way here; for several days I had struggled to overcome my aversion
to seeing Roche-Mauprat again. Last night I had a nightmare, and I felt so exhausted and depressed
this morning that, if I had not been afraid of offending my uncle, I should have postponed
this disagreeable visit. As we entered the place, I felt a chill come over me; there seemed
to be a weight on my chest, and I could not breathe. Probably, too, the pungent smoke that
filled the room disturbed my brain. Again, after all the hardships and dangers of our terrible
voyage, from which we have hardly recovered, either of us, is it astonishing that my nerves
gave way at the first painful emotion?"

"Tell me," replied Marcasse, who was still pondering the matter, "did you notice Blaireau at
the moment? The leaves of the corn plant are blown about by the wind carrying
75-1/2 per cent of nitrogen, but cannot utilize an ounce of this supply.

Many

people know that clover and other legumes have power, through the bacteria which inhabit their
root tubercles, to feed upon the inexhaustible supply of atmospheric
nitrogen which freely enters the pores of the soil; but who knows
how much nitrogen is taken from the air by a given crop of clover?

Not one in a thousand can answer this question; and meanwhile our continued agricultural and national
prosperity depends in large part upon the possibility of wide dissemination and practical application
of a quantitative knowledge of the nitrogen problem.

As a rule the so-called "practical" farmer is a theorist. He first believes that the virgin soil
is inexhaustible, even though cropped continuously. Later he clings to the popular theory that the rotation
of crops will maintain the productive capacity of the land; and it
is safe to say that a large majority of the farmers of the United
States gladly hold to the erroneous theory that clover grown once
every three to five years will increase and permanently maintain the
fertility of the soil.

The fact that clover was grown for generations on the lands of the older Eastern states until the
clover crop itself finally failed on millions of acres now agriculturally abandoned is overlooked
or forgotten by present-day farmers, especially by the descendants of those who have gone West
and settled on new, rich lands.

Six Facts and a Question

The following six facts will furnish a comprehensive basis for the
solution of the nitrogen problem in practical general agriculture:

(1)
To produce 100 pounds of grain requires about 3 pounds of nitrogen,
of which 2 pounds are deposited in the grain itself and 1 pound in
the straw or stalks.

(2) In live-stock farming one-fourth of the nitrogen in the food consumed
is retained in the animal products--meat, milk, wool, and so on--and
three-fourths may be returned to the land in the excrements if saved
without loss.

(3) When grown on soils of normal productive capacity legumes secure about two-thirds of their
total nitrogen from the air and one-third from the soil.

(4) Clover and other biennial or perennial legumes have about two-thirds of their total nitrogen
in the tops and one-third in the roots, while the roots of cowpeas
and other annual legumes contain only about one-tenth of their total
nitrogen.

(5) Hay made from our common legumes contains about 40 pounds of nitrogen
per ton.

(6) Average farm manure contains 16 pounds of nitrogen per ton.

Question: How many tons of average farm manure must be applied to
a 40-acre field in order to provide as much nitrogen as would be added
to the soil by plowing under 2-1/2 tons of clover per acre? We pretended that we needed
it, not denying that it was ours. The servant unmade the bed in our presence, and then went
and asked the man what he had done with it. Nothing could be found either in the bed or in
the room; the man had not been upstairs. All the farm-folk were in a state of excitement, fearing
that some one might be accused of theft. We inquired if a stranger had not come to Roche-Mauprat,
and if he was not still there. When we ascertained that these good people had neither housed
or seen any one, we reassured them about the lost cloak by saying that Marcasse had accidentally
folded it with the two others. Then we shut ourselves in the room, in order to explore it at
our ease; for it was now almost evident that what I had seen was by no means a ghost, but John
Mauprat himself, or a man very like him, whom I had mistaken for John.

Marcasse having aroused Blaireau by voice and gesture, watched all his movements.

"Set your mind at rest," he said with pride; "the old dog has not forgotten his old trade.
If there is a hole, a hole as big as your hand, have no fear. Now, old dog! Have no fear."

Blaireau, indeed, after sniffing everywhere, persisted in scratching the wall where I had seen
the apparition; he would start back every time his pointed nose came to a certain spot in the
wainscotting; then, wagging his bushy tail with a satisfied air, he would return to his master
as if to tell him to concentrate his attention on this spot. The sergeant then began to examine
the wall and the woodwork; he tried to insinuate his sword into some crack; there was no sign
of an opening. Still, a door might have been there, for the flowers carved on the woodwork
would hide a skilfully constructed sliding panel. The essential thing was to find the spring
that made this panel work; but that was impossible in spite of all the efforts we made for
two long hours. In vain did we try to shake the panel; it gave forth the same sound as the
others. They were all sonorous, showing that the wainscot was not in immediate contact with
the masonry. Still, there might be a gap of only a few inches between them. At last Marcasse,
perspiring profusely, stopped, and said to me:

"This is very stupid; if we searched all night we should not find a spring if there is none;
and however hard we hammered, we could not break in the door if there happened to be big iron
bars behind it, as I have sometimes seen in other old country-houses."

"The axe might help us to find a passage," I said, "if there is one; but why, simply because
your dog scratches the wall, persist in believing that John Mauprat, or the man who resembles
him, could not have come in and gone out by the door?"

"Come in, if you like," replied Marcasse, "but gone out--no, on my honour! For, as the servant
came down I was on the staircase brushing my boots. As soon as I heard something fall here,
I rushed up quickly three stairs at a time, and found that it was you--like a corpse, stretched
out on the floor, very ill; no one inside nor outside, on my honour!

"In that case, then, I must have dreamt of my fiend of an uncle, and the servant must have
dreamt of the black cloak; for it is pretty certain that there is no secret door here; and
even if there were one, and all the Mauprats, living and dead, knew the secret of it, what
were that to us? Do we belong to the police that we should hunt out these wretched creatures?
And if by chance we found them hidden somewhere, should we not help them to escape, rather
than hand them over to justice? We are armed; we need not be afraid that they will assassinate
us to-night; and if they amuse themselves by frightening us, my word, woe betide them! I have
no eye for either relatives or friends when I am startled in my sleep. So come, let us attack
the omelette that these good people my tenants are preparing for us; for if we continue knocking
and scratching the walls they will think we are mad."

Marcasse yielded from a sense of duty rather than from conviction. He seemed to attach great
importance to the discovery of this mystery, and to be far from easy in his mind. He was unwilling
to let me remain alone in the haunted room, and pretended that I might fall ill again and have
a fit.

"Oh, this time," I said, "I shall not play the coward. The cloak has cured me of my fear of
ghosts; and I should not advise any one to meddle with me."

The hildago was obliged to leave me alone. I loaded my pistols and put them on the table within
reach of my hand; but these precautions were a pure waste of time; nothing disturbed the silence
of the room, and the heavy red silk curtains, with their coat of arms at the corners in tarnished
silver, were not stirred by the slightest breath. Marcasse returned and, delighted at finding
me as cheerful as he had left me, began preparing our supper with as much care as if we had
come to Roche-Mauprat for the sole purpose of making a good meal. He made jokes about the capon
which was still singing on the spit, and about the wine which was so like a brush in the throat.
His good humour increased when the tenant appeared, bringing a few bottles of excellent Madeira,
which had been left with him by the chevalier, who liked to drink a glass or two before setting
foot in the stirrup. In return we invited the worthy man to sup with us, as the least tedious
way of discussing business matters.

"Good," he said; "it will be like old times when the peasants used to eat at the table of the
seigneurs of Roche-Mauprat. You are doing the same, Monsieur Bernard, you are quite right."

"Yes, sir," I replied very coldly; "only I behave thus with those who owe me money, not those
to whom I owe it."

This reply, and the word "sir," frightened him so much that he was at great pains to excuse
himself from sitting down to table. However, I insisted, as I wished to give him the measure
of my character at once. I treated him as a man I was raising to my own level, not as one to
whom I wished to descend. I forced him to be cleanly in his jokes, but allowed him to be free
and facetious within the limits of decent mirth. He was a frank, jovial man. I questioned him
minutely to discover if he was not in league with the phantom who was in the habit of leaving
his cloak upon the bed. This, however, seemed far from probable; the man evidently had such
an aversion for the Hamstringers, that, had not a regard for my relationship held him back,
he would have been only too glad to have given them such a dressing in my presence as they
deserved. But I could not allow him any license on this point; so I requested him to give me
an account of my property, which he did with intelligence, accuracy, and honesty.

As he withdrew I noticed that the Madeira had had considerable effect on him; he seemed to
have no control over his legs, which kept catching in the furniture; and yet he had been in
sufficient possession of his faculties to reason correctly. Coal, for example, was thought to
be very rich in phlogiston. The ashes left after combustion would not burn because all the
phlogiston had escaped. If the phlogiston could be restored in any way, the substance would
then become combustible again. Although this view seems absurd to us in the light of our present
knowledge, it formerly had general acceptance.

The discovery of oxygen led Lavoisier to investigate the subject, and through his experiments
he arrived at the true explanation of combustion. The discovery of oxygen together with the part
it plays in combustion is generally regarded as the most important discovery in the history
of chemistry. It marked the dawn of a new period in the growth of the science.

~Combustion in the broad sense.~ According to the definition given above, the presence of oxygen
is necessary for combustion. The term is sometimes used, however, in a broader sense to designate
any chemical change attended by the evolution of heat and light. Thus iron and sulphur, or hydrogen
and chlorine under certain conditions, will combine so rapidly that
light is evolved, and the action is called a combustion.

Whenever combustion takes place in the air, however, the process is one of oxidation.

~Spontaneous combustion.~ The temperature reached in a given chemical action, such as oxidation,
depends upon the rate at which the reaction takes place. This rate is usually increased by raising
the temperature of the substances taking part in the action.

When a slow oxidation takes place under such conditions that the heat generated is not lost
by being conducted away, the temperature of the substance undergoing oxidation is raised,
and this in turn hastens the rate of oxidation. The rise in temperature may continue in this
way until the kindling temperature of the substance is reached, when combustion begins. Combustion
occurring in this way is called spontaneous combustion.

Certain oils, such as the linseed oil used in paints, slowly undergo
oxidation at ordinary temperatures, and not infrequently the origin
of fires has been traced to the spontaneous combustion of oily rags.

The spontaneous combustion of hay has been known to set barns on fire. Heaps of coal have been
found to be on fire when spontaneous combustion offered the only possible explanation.
~Importance of oxygen.~ 1. Nothing disturbed our repose. When the sun awakened us
the cocks were crowing merrily in the courtyard, and the labourers were cracking their rustic
jokes as they yoked the oxen under our windows.

"All the same there is something at the bottom of it."

Such was Marcasse's first remark as he opened his eyes, and took up the conversation where
he had dropped it the night before.

"Did you see or hear anything during the night?" I asked.

"Nothing at all," he replied. "All the same, Blaireau has been disturbed in his sleep; for
my sword has fallen down; and then, we found no explanation of what happened here."

"Let who will explain it," I answered. "I shall certainly not trouble myself."

"Wrong, wrong; you are wrong!"

"That may be, my good sergeant; but I do not like this room at all, and it seems to me so ugly
by daylight, that I feel that I must get far away from it, and breathe some pure air."

"Well, I will go with you; but I shall return. I do not want to leave this to chance. I know
what John Mauprat is capable of; you don't."

"I do not wish to know; and if there is any danger here for myself or my friends, I do not
wish you to return."

Marcasse shook his head and said nothing. We went round the farm once more before departing.
Marcasse was very much struck with a certain incident to which I should have paid but little
attention. The farmer wished to introduce me to his wife, but she could not be persuaded to
see me, and went and hid herself in the hemp-field. I attributed this to the shyness of youth.

"Fine youth, my word!" said Marcasse; "youth like mine fifty years old and more! There is something
beneath it, something beneath, I tell you."

"What the devil can there be?"

"Hum! She was very friendly with John Mauprat in her day. She found his crooked legs to her
liking. I know about it; yes, I know many other things, too; many things--you may take my word!"

"You shall tell me them the next time we come; and that will not be so soon; for my affairs
are going on much better than if I interfered with them; and I should not like to get into
the habit of drinking Madeira to prevent myself from being frightened at my own shadow. And
now, Marcasse, I must ask you as a favour not to tell any one what has happened. Everybody
has not your respect for your captain."

"The man who does not respect my captain is an idiot," answered the hidalgo, in a tone of authority;
"but, if you order me, I will say nothing."

He kept his word. I would not on any account have had Edmee's mind disturbed by this stupid
tale. However, I could not prevent Marcasse from carrying out his design; early the following
morning he disappeared, and I learnt from Patience that he had returned to Roche-Mauprat under
the pretence of having forgotten something.

XVIII

While Marcasse was devoting himself to serious investigations, I was spending days of delight
and agony in Edmee's presence. Her behaviour, so constant and devoted, and yet in many respects
so reserved, threw me into continual alternations of joy and grief. One day while I was taking
a walk the chevalier had a long conversation with her. I happened to return when their discussion
had reached its most animated stage. As soon as I appeared, my uncle said to me:

"Here, Bernard; come and tell Edmee that you love her; that you will make her happy; that you
have got rid of your old faults. Do something to get yourself accepted; for things cannot go
on as they are. Keeping in mind that systems of permanent profitable agriculture in America must
be founded upon an intelligent understanding of the foundation principles involved, let us pray
for strength to acknowledge the truth and cease trying to deceive ourselves. The truth is
that by soil enrichment alone the average crop yields of the United States could be doubled,
with the same seed and seasons and with but little more work than is now devoted to the fields;
and we should cease trying to deceive ourselves in the hope or belief that the fertility of our soil
will be maintained if we continue year after year to take crops from
the land and fail to make adequate return.

Nitrogen is both the most abundant agriculturally and the most expensive commercially of all
the elements of plant food; and yet there is a method by which it can be secured not only without
money but with profit in the process. The percentage of nitrogen in normal soils decreases
with depth, so that subsoils are almost devoid of nitrogen.

This would be more generally understood if it were known that the supply of soil nitrogen in
humid countries is contained only in the organic matter.

This organic or vegetable matter consists of the partly decomposed residues of plants, including
the roots and fallen leaves which may accumulate naturally, and the green manure crops, crop
residues and farm manure which may be supplied in farm practice. Thus the nitrogen of a soil is
measured approximately by its content of organic matter; and, vice versa, the percentage of
nitrogen is an approximate measure of the organic matter, because
nitrogen is a regular constituent of the organic matter normally contained
in soils. Consequently if the organic matter of a soil is reduced
the supply of nitrogen is also reduced. Is not
the question important enough to demand my most serious reflection? A contract which is to
bind me for the rest of my life, and on which depends, I do not say my happiness, for that
I would gladly sacrifice to your least wish, but the peace of my conscience and the dignity
of my conduct (since no woman can be sufficiently sure of herself to answer for a future which
has been fettered against her will), does not such a contract bid me weigh all its risks and
all its advantages for several years at least?"

"Good God!" said the chevalier. "Have you not been weighing all this for the last seven years?
You ought to have arrived at some conclusion about your cousin by now. If you are willing to
marry him, marry him; but if not, for God's sake say so, and let another man come forward."

"Father," replied Edmee, somewhat coldly, "I shall marry none but him."

"'None but him' is all very well," said the chevalier, tapping the logs with the tongs; "but
that does not necessarily mean that you will marry him."

"Yes, I will marry him, father," answered Edmee. "I could have wished to be free a few months
more; but since you are displeased at all these delays, I am ready to obey your orders, as
you know."

"Parbleu! that is a pretty way of consenting," exclaimed my uncle, "and no doubt most gratifying
to your cousin! By Jove! Bernard, I have lived many years in this world, but I must own that
I can't understand these women yet, and it is very probable that I shall die without ever having
understood them."

"Uncle," I said, "I can quite understand my cousin's aversion for me; it is only what I deserve.
I have done all I could to atone for my errors. But, is it altogether in her power to forget
a past which has doubtless caused her too much pain? However, if she does not forgive me, I
will imitate her severity: I will not forgive myself. Abandoning all hope in this world, I
will tear myself away from her and you, and chasten myself with a punishment worse than death."

"That's it! Go on! There's an end of everything!" said the chevalier, throwing the tongs into
the fire. "That is just what you have been aiming at, I suppose, Edmee?"

I had moved a few steps towards the door; I was suffering intensely. Edmee ran after me, took
me by the arm, and brought me back towards her father.

"It is cruel and most ungrateful of you to say that," she said. "Does it show a modest spirit
and generous heart, to forget a friendship, a devotion, I may even venture to say, a fidelity
of seven years, because I ask to prove you for a few months more? And even if my affection
for you should never be as deep as yours for me, is what I have hitherto shown you of so little
account that you despise it and reject it, because you are vexed at not inspiring me with precisely
as much as you think you are entitled to? You know at this rate a woman would have no right
to feel affection. However, tell me, is it your wish to punish me for having been a mother
to you by leaving me altogether, or to make some return only on condition that I become your
slave?" 

In 1895 the Maryland Experiment Station began field experiments with different forms of phosphorus;
and, as an average of six tests every year for twelve years, $1.965 invested in ground raw
rock phosphate produced increases in corn, wheat and hay that were worth $22.11, at 35 cents
a bushel for corn, 70 cents for wheat, $6 a ton for hay, and 3 cents a pound for phosphorus
in the ground natural phosphate. How would you like 1000 per cent profit as the result of mixing
brain with brawn, in connection with the improvement of your own business, thus keeping the
investment under your own control?

Mind you, this does not prove that farming is profitable, but only
that the intelligent use of phosphorus in farming is profitable.
Though you should never be her husband, always be a brother to her. Remember, my lad, that
she will soon be alone in the world, and that I shall die in sorrow if I do not carry with
me to the grave a conviction that a support and a defender still remains to her. Remember,
too, that it is on your account, on account of a vow, which her inclination, perhaps, would
reject, but which her conscience respects, that she is thus forsaken and slandered . . ."

The chevalier burst into tears, and in a moment all the sorrows of the unfortunate family were
revealed to me.

"Enough, enough!" I cried, falling at their feet. "All this is too cruel. I should be the meanest
wretch on earth if I had need to be reminded of my misdeeds and my duties. Let me weep at your
knees; let me atone for the wrong I have done you by eternal grief, by eternal renunciation.
Why not have driven me away when I did the wrong? Why not, uncle, have blown out my brains
with your pistol, as if I had been a wild beast? What have I done to be spared, I who repaid
your kindness with the ruin of your honour? No, no; I can see that Edmee ought not to marry
me; that would be accepting the shame of the insult I have drawn upon her. All I ask is to
be allowed to remain here; I will never see her face, if she makes this a condition; but I
will lie at her door like a faithful dog and tear to pieces the first man who dares to present
himself otherwise than on his knees; and if some day an honest man, more fortunate than myself,
shows himself worthy of her love, far from opposing him, I will intrust to him the dear and
sacred task of protecting and vindicating her. I will be but a friend, a brother to her, and
when I see that they are happy together, I will go far away from them and die in peace."

My sobs choked me; the chevalier pressed his daughter and myself to his heart, and we mingled
our tears, swearing to him that we would never leave each other, either during his life or
after his death.

"Still, do not give up all hope of marrying her," whispered the chevalier to me a few moments
later, when we were somewhat calmer. "She has strange whims; but nothing will persuade me to
believe that she does not love you. She does not want to explain matters yet. Woman's will
is God's will."

"And Edmee's will is my will," I replied.

A few days after this scene, which brought the calmness of death into my soul in place of the
tumult of life, I was strolling in the park with the abbe.

"I must tell you," he said, "of an adventure which befell me yesterday. There is a touch of
romance in it. I had been for a walk in the woods of Briantes, and had made my way down to
the spring of Fougeres. It was as warm, you remember, as in the middle of summer; and our beautiful
plants, in their autumn red, seemed more beautiful than ever as they stretched their delicate
tracery over the stream. The trees have very little foliage left; but the carpet of dried leaves
one walks upon gives forth a sound which to me is full of charm. The satiny trunks of the birches
and young oaks are covered with moss and creepers of all shades of brown, and tender green,
and red and fawn, which spread out into delicate stars and rosettes, and maps of all countries,
wherein the imagination can behold new worlds in miniature. I kept gazing lovingly on these
marvels of grace and delicacy, these arabesques in which infinite variety is combined with
unfailing regularity, and as I remembered with pleasure that you are not, like the vulgar,
blind to these adorable coquetries of nature, I gathered a few with the greatest care, even
bringing away the bark of the tree on which they had taken root, in order not to destroy the
perfection of their designs. He finally buys such a farm, and by the methods carefully explained restores
it to fertility and profit. This requires dialogs and letters on scientific husbandry, even
in the love-making, and one who reads and digests it will make a better farmer.--The Independent,
New York.

"The Story of the Soil" has proven an inspiration to many of our California farmers. We wish for the
book a widespread circulation.--California Cultivator.

I doubt if a dozen people in the country would believe that it is possible to write a novel about
the soil--these big soil problems handled so ably, so plainly that
any person can understand. Here is a book that certainly every man
in the land should read.--Editor CHARLES W. BURKETT, of American Agriculturist
and of Ginn & Company's Country Life Education Series.

"'Oh, holy priest,' he said to me in the humblest tone, 'why are you not the prophet whose
rod could smite the founts of grace? and why cannot my soul, like this rock, give forth a stream
of tears?'

"Struck by the manner in which this monk expressed himself, by his sad air, by his thoughtful
attitude in this poetic spot, which has often made me dream of the meeting of the Saviour and
the woman of Samaria, I allowed myself to be drawn into a more intimate conversation. I learnt
from the monk that he was a Trappist, and that he was making a penitential tour.

"'Ask neither my name nor whence I come,' he said. 'I belong to an illustrious family who would
blush to know that I am still alive. The name iodine comes from a word meaning violet, alluding
to the beautiful color of iodine vapor. (3) Some names indicate prominent chemical properties
of the elements. Thus, nitrogen means the producer of niter, nitrogen
being a constituent of niter or saltpeter. But of this be sure: you behold in me one of the most striking
examples of the miraculous power of grace; and if I could make known to you the tale of my
religious life, of my terrors, my remorse, and my expiations, you would certainly be touched
by it. But of what avail the indulgence and compassion of man, if the pity of God will not
deign to absolve me?'

