Swift, however, had his weakness also, and it lay, as weaknesses generally lie, very close
to his strength. Swift's fault as a thinker was the outcome of his intellectuality--he was
too purely intellectual. He set little store on the emotional side of human nature; his appeal
was always to the reason. He hated cant, and any expression of emotion appealed to him as cant.
He could not bear to be seen saying his prayers; his acts of charity were surreptitious and
given in secret with an affectation of cynicism, so that they might veil the motive which impelled
them. It may have been pride or a dislike to be considered sentimental; but his attitude owed
its spring to a genuine faith in his own thought. If Swift had one pride more than another,
it lay in a consciousness of his own superiority over his fellow-mortals. It was the pride
of intellect and a belief that man showed himself best by following the judgements of the reason.
His disgust with people was born of their unreasonable selfishness, their instinctive greed
and rapacity, their blind stupidity, all which resulted for them in so much injustice. Had
they been reasonable, he would have argued, they would have been better and happier. The sentiments
and the passions were impulsive, and therefore unreasonable. Swift seemed to have no faith
in their elevation to a higher intellectual plane, and yet he often roused them by his very
appeals to reason. His eminently successful "Drapier's Letters" are a case in point. Yet we
question if Swift were not himself surprised at their effect. He knew his power later when
he threatened the Archbishop of Armagh, but he, no doubt, credited the result to his own arguments,
and not to the passions he had aroused. His sense of justice was the strongest, and it was
through that sense that the condition of the people of Ireland appealed to him. He forgot,
or he did not see that the very passion in himself was of prime importance, since it was really
to it that his own efforts were due. The fine flower of imagination never blossomed in Swift.
He was neither prophet nor poet; but he was a great leader, a splendid captain, a logical statesman.
It is to this lack of imagination that we must look for the real root of his cynical humour
and satirical temper. A more imaginative man than Swift with much less power would have better
appreciated the weaknesses of humanity and made allowances for them. He would never have held
them up to ridicule and contempt, but would rather have laid stress on those instincts of honour
and nobility which the most ignorant and least reasoning possess in some degree.

Looking back on the work Swift did, and comparing its effect at the time with the current esteem
in which he is held in the present day, we shall find that his reputation has altogether changed.
In his own day, and especially during his life in Ireland, his work was special, and brought
him a special repute. He was a party's advocate and the people's friend. His literary output,
distinguished though it was, was of secondary importance compared with the purpose for which
it was accomplished. He was the friend of Harley, the champion of the Protestant Church, the
Irish patriot, the enemy of Whiggism, the opponent of Nonconformity. To-day all these phrases
mean little or nothing to those who know of Swift as the author of "A Tale of a Tub," and "Gulliver's
Travels." Swift is now accepted as a great satirist, and admired for the wonderful knowledge
he shows of the failings and weaknesses of human nature. He is admired but never loved. The
particular occasions in his life-time which urged him to rouse passions mean nothing to us;
they have lost the aroma of his just indignation and are become historical events. What is
left of him for us is the result of cold analysis and almost heartless contempt. How different
would it have been had Swift allied his great gift as a writer to such a spirit as breathes
in the Sermon on the Mount! But to wish this is perhaps as foolish as to expect dates to grow
on thistles. We must accept what is given us, and see that we, at any rate, steer clear of
the dangers mapped out for us by the travellers of the past.

       *       *       *       *       *

The editor takes this opportunity to thank Mr. G. Ravenscroft Dennis and Mr. W. Spencer Jackson
for much valuable assistance in the reading of proofs and the collation of texts.

TEMPLE SCOTT.

NEW YORK,

May 18, 1905.

CONTENTS
                                                                     PAGE

  A LETTER TO A MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT, IN IRELAND, UPON
  THE CHOOSING A NEW SPEAKER THERE                                     1

  A PROPOSAL FOR THE UNIVERSAL USE OF IRISH MANUFACTURE               11

  AN ESSAY ON ENGLISH BUBBLES. BY THOMAS HOPE, ESQ.                   31

  THE SWEARER'S BANK                                                  37

  A LETTER TO THE KING AT ARMS                                        47

  THE LAST SPEECH AND DYING WORDS OF EBENEZER ELLISTON                55

  THE TRUTH OF SOME MAXIMS IN STATE AND GOVERNMENT,
  EXAMINED WITH REFERENCE TO IRELAND                                  63

  THE BLUNDERS, DEFICIENCIES, DISTRESSES, AND MISFORTUNES
  OF QUILCA                                                           73

  A SHORT VIEW OF THE STATE OF IRELAND                                79

  THE STORY OF THE INJURED LADY. WRITTEN BY HERSELF                   93

  THE ANSWER TO THE INJURED LADY                                     104

  AN ANSWER TO A PAPER CALLED "A MEMORIAL OF THE POOR
  INHABITANTS, TRADESMEN, AND LABOURERS OF THE KINGDOM
  OF IRELAND"

WRITTEN IN THE YEAR 1708.

     NOTE.

     In the note prefixed to the reprint of Swift's "Letter concerning
     the Sacramental Test," the circumstances under which this "Letter
     to a Member of Parliament in Ireland" was written, are explained
     (see vol. iv., pp. 3-4, of present edition). The Godolphin ministry
     was anxious to repeal the Test Act in Ireland, as a concession to
     the Presbyterians who had made themselves prominent by their
     expressions of loyalty to William and the Protestant succession. In
     this particular year also (1708), rumours of an invasion gave them
     another opportunity to send in loyal addresses. In reality,
     however, the endeavour to try the repeal in Ireland, was in the
     nature of a test, and Swift ridiculed the attempt as being like to
     "that of a discreet physician, who first gives a new medicine to a
     dog, before he prescribes it to a human creature." It seems that
     Swift had been consulted by Somers on the question of the repeal,
     and had given his opinion very frankly. The letter to Archbishop
     King, revealing this, contains some bitter remarks about "a certain
     lawyer of Ireland." The lawyer was Speaker Brodrick, afterwards
     Lord Midleton, who was enthusiastic for the repeal. The present
     letter gives a very clear idea of what Swift thought should be a
     Speaker's duties both as the chairman of the House and as related
     to this particular measure of the Test.

       *       *       *       *       *

     The text of the present reprint is based on the original manuscript
     in Swift's handwriting; but as this was found to be somewhat
     illegible, it has been collated with the text given in vol. viii.
     of the quarto edition of Swift's collected works, published in
     1765.

     [T. S.]

A LETTER TO A MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT, IN IRELAND, UPON THE CHOOSING A NEW SPEAKER THERE.

SIR,

You may easily believe I am not at all surprised at what you tell me, since it is but a confirmation
of my own conjecture that I sent you last week, and made you my reproaches upon it at a venture.
It looks exceeding strange, yet, I believe it to be a great truth, that, in order to carry
a point in your house, the two following circumstances are of great advantage; first, to have
an ill cause; and, secondly, to be a minority. For both these circumstances are extremely apt
to unite men, to make them assiduous in their attendance, watchful of opportunities, zealous
for gaining over proselytes, and often successful; which is not to be wondered at, when favour
and interest are on the side of their opinion. Whereas, on the contrary, a majority with a
good cause are negligent and supine. They think it sufficient to declare themselves upon occasion
in favour of their party, but, sailing against the tide of favour and preferment, they are
easily scattered and driven back. In short, they want a common principle to cement, and motive
to spirit them; For the bare acting upon a principle from the dictates of a good conscience,
or prospect of serving the public, will not go very far under the present dispositions of mankind.
This was amply verified last sessions of Parliament, upon occasion of the money bill, the merits
of which I shall not pretend to examine. 'Tis enough that, upon the first news of its transmission
hither, in the form it afterwards appeared, the members, upon discourse with their friends,
seemed unanimous against it, I mean those of both parties, except a few, who were looked upon
as persons ready to go any lengths prescribed them by the court. Yet with only a week's canvassing
among a very few hands, the bill passed after a full debate, by a very great majority; yet,
I believe, you will hardly attempt persuading me, or anybody else, that one man in ten, of
those who changed their language, were moved by reasons any way affecting the merits of the
cause, but merely through hope, fear, indolence, or good manners. Nay, I have been assured
from good hands, that there was still a number sufficient to make a majority against the bill,
if they had not apprehended the other side to be secure, and therefore thought it imprudence,
by declaring themselves, to disoblige the government to no purpose.

Reflecting upon this and forty other passages, in the several Houses of Commons since the Revolution,
makes me apt to think there is nothing a chief governor can be commanded to attempt here wherein
he may not succeed, with a very competent share of address, and with such assistance as he
will always find ready at his devotion. And therefore I repeat what I said at first, that I
am not at all surprised at what you tell me. For, if there had been the least spark of public
spirit left, those who wished well to their country and its constitution in church and state,
should, upon the first news of the late Speaker's promotion, (and you and I know it might have
been done a great deal sooner) have immediately gone together, and consulted about the fittest
person to succeed him. But, by all I can comprehend, you have been so far from proceeding thus,
that it hardly ever came into any of your heads. And the reason you give is the worst in the
world: That none offered themselves, and you knew not whom to pitch upon. It seems, however,
the other party was more resolved, or at least not so modest: For you say your vote is engaged
against your opinion, and several gentlemen in my neighbourhood tell me the same story of themselves;
this, I confess, is of an unusual strain, and a good many steps below any condescensions a
court will, I hope, ever require from you. I shall not trouble myself to inquire who is the
person for whom you and others are engaged, or whether there be more candidates from that side,
than one. You tell me nothing of either, and I never thought it worth the question to anybody
else. But, in so weighty an affair, and against your judgment, I cannot look upon you as irrevocably
determined. Therefore I desire you will give me leave to reason with you a little upon the
subject, lest your compliance, or inadvertency, should put you upon what you may have cause
to repent as long as you live.

You know very well, the great business of the high-flying Whigs, at this juncture, is to endeavour
a repeal of the test clause. But why does it not burn in that way now, when it is lying in a
mass? [emptying the contents of the tube in a heap on to a plate of iron]. Simply because
the air cannot get to it. Though it can produce a great heat, the great heat which we want in
our furnaces and under our boilers, still that which is produced cannot get away from the portion
which remains unburned underneath, and that portion, therefore, is prevented from coming in
contact with the atmosphere, and cannot be consumed. How different is that from carbon. Carbon
burns just in the same way as this lead does, and so gives an intense fire in the furnace,
or wherever you choose to burn it; but then the body produced by its combustion passes away, and
the remaining carbon is left clear. I shewed you how carbon went on dissolving in the oxygen, leaving
no ash; whereas here [pointing to the heap of pyrophorus] we have actually more ash than fuel,
for it is heavier by the amount of the oxygen which has united with it. Thus you see the difference
between carbon and lead or iron: if we choose iron, which gives so wonderful a result in our
application of this fuel, either as light or heat. If, when the carbon burnt, the product went
off as a solid body, you would have had the room filled with an opaque substance, as in the
case of the phosphorus; but when carbon burns, everything passes
up into the atmosphere.

It is in a fixed, almost unchangeable condition before the combustion; but afterwards it is
in the form of gas, which it is very difficult (though we have succeeded) to produce in a solid
or a liquid state.

Now, I must take you to a very interesting part of our subject--to the relation between the combustion
of a candle and that living kind of combustion which goes on within us. In every one of us there
is a living process of combustion going on very similar to that of a candle; and I must try
to make that plain to you. For it is not merely true in a poetical sense--the relation of the
life of man to a taper; and if you will follow, I think I can make this clear. In order to
make the relation very plain, I have devised a little apparatus which we can soon build up
before you. Here is a board and a groove cut in it, and I can close the groove at the top part
by a little cover. I can then continue the groove as a channel by a glass tube at each end,
there being a free passage through the whole. Suppose I take a taper or candle (we can now be liberal
in our use of the word "candle," since we understand what it means), and place it in one of
the tubes; it will go on, you see, burning very well. You observe that the air which feeds
the flame passes down the tube at one end, then goes along the horizontal tube, and ascends the
tube at the other end in which the taper is placed.

If I stop the aperture through which the air enters, I stop combustion, as you perceive. I stop
the supply of air, and consequently the candle goes out. But, now, what will you think of this
fact? In a former experiment I shewed you the air going from one burning candle to a second
candle. If I took the air proceeding from another candle, and sent it down by a complicated
arrangement into this tube, I should put this burning candle out.

But what will you say when I tell you that my breath will put out that candle? I do not mean by
blowing at all, but simply that the nature of my breath is such that a candle cannot burn
in it. I will now hold my mouth over the aperture, and without blowing the flame in any way,
let no air enter the tube but what comes from my mouth. You see the result. I did not blow the
candle out. I merely let the air which I expired pass into the aperture, and the result was
that the light went out for want of oxygen, and for no other reason. Something or other--namely,
my lungs--had taken away the oxygen from the air, and there was no more to supply the combustion
of the candle. It is, I think, very pretty to see the time it takes before the bad air which I
throw into this part of the apparatus has reached the candle. The candle at first goes on burning,
but so soon as the air has had time to reach it, it goes out. And, now, I will shew you another
experiment, because this is an important part of our philosophy.

Here is a jar which contains fresh air, as you can see by the circumstance of a candle or gas-light
burning it. I make it close for a little time, and by means of a pipe I get my mouth over it so
that I can inhale the air. By putting it over water, in the way that you see, I am able to
draw up this air (supposing the cork to be quite tight), take it
into my lungs, and throw it back into the jar.

We can then examine
it, and see the result.

I confess, if it were a thing possible to be compassed, it would seem most reasonable to fill
the chair with some person who would be entirely devoted to neither party: But, since there
are so few of that character, and those either unqualified or unfriended, I cannot see how
a majority will answer it to their reputation, to be so ill provided of able persons, that
they must have recourse for a leader to their adversaries, a proceeding of which I never met
with above one example, and even that succeeded but ill, though it was recommended by an oracle,
which advised some city in Greece to beg a general from their enemies, who, in scorn, sent
them either a fiddler or a poet, I have forgot which; but so much I remember, that his conduct
was such, as they soon grew weary of him.

You pretend to be heartily resolved against repealing the sacramental test, yet, at the same
time, give the only great employment you have to dispose of to a person who will take that
test against his stomach (by which word I understand many a man's conscience) who earnestly
wisheth it repealed, and will endeavour it to the utmost of his power; so that the first action
after you meet, will be a sort of contravention to that test: And will anybody go further than
your practice to judge of your principles?

And now I am upon this subject, I cannot conclude without saying something to a very popular
argument against that sacramental test, which may be apt to shake many of those who would otherwise
wish well enough to it. They say it was a new hardship put upon the Dissenters, without any
provocation; and, it is plain, could be no way necessary, because we had peaceably lived together
so long without it. They add some other circumstances of the arts by which it was obtained,
and the person by whom it was inserted. Surely such people do not consider that the penal laws
against Dissenters were made wholly ineffectual by the connivance and mercy of the government,
so that all employments of the state lay as open to them as they did to the best and most legal
subjects. And what progress they would have made by the advantages of a late conjecture, is
obvious to imagine; which I take to be a full answer to that objection.

I remember, upon the transmission of that bill with the test clause inserted, the Dissenters
and their partisans, among other topics, spoke much of the good effects produced by the lenity
of the government, that the Presbyterians were grown very inconsiderable in their number and
quality, and would daily come into the church, if we did not fright them from it by new severities.
When the act was passed, they presently changed their style, and raised a clamour, through
both kingdoms, of the great numbers of considerable gentry who were laid aside, and could no
longer serve their queen and country; which hyperbolical way of reckoning, when it came to
be melted down into truth, amounted to about fifteen country justices, most of them of the
lowest size, for estate, quality, or understanding. However, this puts me in mind of a passage
told me by a great man, though I know not whether it be anywhere recorded. That a complaint
was made to the king and council in Sweden, of a prodigious swarm of Scots, who, under the
condition of pedlars, infested that kingdom to such a degree, as, if not suddenly prevented,
might in time prove dangerous to the state, by joining with any discontented party. Meanwhile
the Scots, by their agents, placed a good sum of money to engage the offices of the prime minister
in their behalf; who, in order to their defence, told the council, he was assured they were
but a few inconsiderable people, that lived honestly and poorly, and were not of any consequence.
Their enemies offered to prove the contrary, whereupon an order was made to take their number,
which was found to amount, as I remember, to about thirty thousand. The affair was again brought
before the council, and great reproaches made the first minister, for his ill computation;
who, presently took the other handle, said, he had reason to believe the number yet greater
than what was returned; and then gravely offered to the king's consideration, whether it were
safe to render desperate so great a body of able men, who had little to lose, and whom any
hard treatment would only serve to unite into a power capable of disturbing, if not destroying
the peace of the kingdom. And so they were suffered to continue.

A PROPOSAL

FOR THE

UNIVERSAL USE OF IRISH MANUFACTURE.

     NOTE.

     This pamphlet constitutes the opening of a campaign against his
     political enemies in England on whom Swift had, it must be
     presumed, determined to take revenge. When the fall of Harley's
     administration was complete and irrevocable, Swift returned to
     Ireland and, for six years, he lived the simple life of the Dean of
     St. Patrick's, unheard of except by a few of his more intimate
     friends in England. Accustomed by years of intimacy with the
     ministers of Anne's court, and by his own temperament, to act the
     part of leader and adviser, Swift's compulsory silence must have
     chafed and irritated him to a degree. His opportunities for
     advancement had passed with the passing of Harley and Bolingbroke
     from power, and he had given too ardent and enthusiastic a support
     to these friends of his for Walpole to look to him for a like
     service. Moreover, however strong may have been these personal
     motives, Swift's detestation of Walpole's Irish policy must have
     been deep and bitter, even before he began to express himself on
     the matter. His sincerity cannot be doubted, even if we make an
     ample allowance for a private grudge against the great English
     minister. The condition of Ireland, at this time, was such as to
     arouse the warmest indignation from the most indifferent and
     unprejudiced--and it was a condition for which English misrule was
     mainly responsible. It cannot therefore be wondered at that Swift
     should be among the strenuous and persistent opponents of a policy
     which spelled ruin to his country, and his patriotism must be
     recognized even if we accept the existence of a personal motive.

     The crass stupidity which characterized England's dealings with
     Ireland at this time would be hardly credible, were it not on
     record in the acts passed in the reigns of Charles II. and William
     III., and embodied in the resolutions of the English parliament
     during Walpole's term of power. An impartial historian is forced to
     the conclusion that England had determined to ruin the sister
     nation. Already its social life was disreputable; the people taxed
     in various ways far beyond their means; the agriculture at the
     lowest state by the neglect and indifference of the landed
     proprietors; and the manufactures crippled by a series of
     pernicious restrictions imposed by a selfish rival.

     Swift, in writing this "Proposal," did not take advantage of any
     special occasion, as he did later in the matter of Wood's
     halfpence. His occasion must be found in the condition of the
     country, in the injustice to which she was subjected, and in the
     fact that the time had come when it would be wise and safe for him
     to come out once more into the open.

     He began in his characteristic way. All the evils that the laws
     against the manufactures and agriculture of Ireland brought into
     existence are summarized in this "Proposal." His business is not to
     attack the laws directly, but to attempt a method by which these
     shall be nullified. Since the manufactures of Ireland might not be
     exported for sale, let the people of Ireland wear them themselves,
     and let them resolve and determine to wear them in preference to
     those imported from England. If England had the right to prevent
     the importation to it of Irish woollen goods, it was surely only
     just that the Irish should exercise then right to wear their own
     home-made clothes! The tract was a reasonable and mild statement.
     Yet, such was the temper of the governing officials, that a cry was
     raised against it and the writer accused of attempting to disunite
     the two kingdoms. With consistent foolishness, the printer was
     brought to trial, and although the jury acquitted him, yet the Lord
     Chief Justice Whitshed, zealous for his employer more than for his
     office, refused to accept the verdict and attempted to force the
     jury to a conviction. In his letter to Pope, dated January 10th,
     1720-21, Swift gives an account of this matter:

     "I have written in this kingdom, a discourse, to persuade the
     wretched people to wear their own manufactures, instead of those
     from England. This treatise soon spread very fast, being agreeable
     to the sentiments of the whole nation, except those gentlemen who
     had employments, or were expectants. Upon which a person in great
     office here immediately took the alarm; he sent in haste for the
     chief-justice, and informed him of a seditious, factious, and
     virulent pamphlet, lately published, with a design of setting the
     two kingdoms at variance; directing, at the same time, that the
     printer should be prosecuted with the utmost rigour of the law. The
     chief-justice has so quick an understanding, that he resolved, if
     possible, to outdo his orders. The grand juries of the county and
     city were effectually practised with, to represent the said
     pamphlet with all aggravating epithets, for which they had thanks
     sent them from England, and their presentments published, for
     several weeks, in all the newspapers. The printer was seized, and
     forced to give great bail. After his trial, the jury brought him in
     not guilty, although they had been culled with the utmost industry.
     The chief-justice sent them back nine times, and kept them eleven
     hours, until, being perfectly tired out, they were forced to leave
     the matter to the mercy of the judge, by what they call a special
     verdict. During the trial, the chief-justice, among other
     singularities, laid his hand on his breast, and protested solemnly
     that the author's design was to bring in the Pretender, although
     there was not a single syllable of party in the whole treatise; and
     although it was known that the most eminent of those who professed
     his own principles, publicly disallowed his proceedings. But the
     cause being so very odious and unpopular, the trial of the verdict
     was deferred from one term to another, until, upon the Duke of
     Grafton's, the lord lieutenant's arrival, his grace, after mature
     advice, and permission from England, was pleased to grant a noli
     prosequi."

     This Chief Justice Whitshed was the same who acted as judge on
     Harding's trial for printing the fourth Drapier letter. Swift never
     forgot him, and took several occasions to satirize him bitterly.

       *       *       *       *       *

     The text of the present edition is based on the Dublin edition of
     1720 and collated with the texts of Faulkner, 1735, and
     Miscellanies of same date.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dublin: Printed and Sold by E. Waters, in Essex-street, at the Corner of Sycamore-Alley, 1720.

It is the peculiar felicity and prudence of the people in this kingdom, that whatever commodities
or productions lie under the greatest discouragements from England, those are what we are sure
to be most industrious in cultivating and spreading. Agriculture, which hath been the principal
care of all wise nations, and for the encouragement whereof there are so many statute laws
in England, we countenance so well, that the landlords are everywhere by penal clauses absolutely
prohibiting their tenants from ploughing; not satisfied to confine them within certain limitations,
as it is the practice of the English; one effect of which is already seen in the prodigious
dearness of corn, and the importation of it from London, as the cheaper market:[6] And because
people are the riches of a country, and that our neighbours have done, and are doing all that
in them lie, to make our wool a drug to us, and a monopoly to them; therefore the politic gentlemen
of Ireland have depopulated vast tracts of the best land, for the feeding of sheep.[7]

I could fill a volume as large as the history of the Wise Men of Gotham with a catalogue only
of some wonderful laws and customs we have observed within thirty years past.[8] 'Tis true
indeed, our beneficial traffic of wool with France, hath been our only support for several
years past, furnishing us all the little money we have to pay our rents and go to market. But
our merchants assure me, "This trade hath received a great damp by the present fluctuating
condition of the coin in France; and that most of their wine is paid for in specie, without
carrying thither any commodity from hence."

However, since we are so universally bent upon enlarging our flocks, it may be worth enquiring
what we shall do with our wool, in case Barnstaple[9] should be overstocked, and our French
commerce should fail?

I could wish the Parliament had thought fit to have suspended their regulation of church matters,
and enlargements of the prerogative till a more convenient time, because they did not appear
very pressing (at least to the persons principally concerned) and instead of these great refinements
in politics and divinity, had amused themselves and their committees a little with the state
of the nation. For example: What if the House of Commons had thought fit to make a resolution
nemine contradicente against wearing any cloth or stuff in their families, which were not of
the growth and manufacture of this kingdom? What if they had extended it so far as utterly
to exclude all silks, velvets, calicoes, and the whole lexicon of female fopperies; and declared,
that whoever acted otherwise, should be deemed and reputed an enemy to the nation?[10] What
if they had sent up such a resolution to be agreed to by the House of Lords, and by their own
practice and encouragement spread the execution of it in their several countries? What if we
should agree to make burying in woollen a fashion, as our neighbours have made it a law? What
if the ladies would be content with Irish stuffs for the furniture of their houses, for gowns
and petticoats to themselves and their daughters? Upon the whole, and to crown all the rest:
Let a firm resolution be taken by male and female, never to appear with one single shred that
comes from England; "And let all the people say, AMEN."

I hope and believe nothing could please His Majesty better than to hear that his loyal subjects
of both sexes in this kingdom celebrated his birthday (now approaching) universally clad in
their own manufacture. Is there virtue enough left in this deluded people to save them from
the brink of ruin? If the men's opinions may be taken, the ladies will look as handsome in
stuffs as brocades; and since all will be equal, there may be room enough to employ their wit
and fancy in choosing and matching of patterns and colours.

If the unthinking shopkeepers in this town had not been utterly destitute of common sense,
they would have made some proposal to the Parliament, with a petition to the purpose I have
mentioned; promising to improve the "cloths and stuffs of the nation into all possible degrees
of fineness and colours, and engaging not to play the knave according to their custom, by exacting
and imposing upon the nobility and gentry either as to the prices or the goodness." For I remember
in London upon a general mourning, the rascally mercers and woollen-drapers, would in four-and-twenty
hours raise their cloths and silks to above a double price; and if the mourning continued long,
then come whining with petitions to the court, that they were ready to starve, and their fineries
lay upon their hands.

I could wish our shopkeepers would immediately think on this proposal, addressing it to all
persons of quality and others; but first be sure to get somebody who can write sense, to put
it into form.

I think it needless to exhort the clergy to follow this good example, because in a little time,
those among them who are so unfortunate to have had their birth and education in this country,
will think themselves abundantly happy when they can afford Irish crape, and an Athlone hat;
and as to the others I shall not presume to direct them. I have indeed seen the present Archbishop
of Dublin clad from head to foot in our own manufacture; and yet, under the rose be it spoken,
his Grace deserves as good a gown as any prelate in Christendom.[12]

I have not courage enough to offer one syllable on this subject to their honours of the army:
Neither have I sufficiently considered the great importance of scarlet and gold lace.

The fable in Ovid of Arachne and Pallas, is to this purpose. The goddess had heard of one Arachne
a young virgin, very famous for spinning and weaving. They both met upon a trial of skill;
and Pallas finding herself almost equalled in her own art, stung with rage and envy, knocked
her rival down, turned her into a spider, enjoining her to spin and weave for ever, out of
her own bowels, and in a very narrow compass. I confess, that from a boy, I always pitied poor
Arachne, and could never heartily love the goddess on account of so cruel and unjust a sentence;
which however is fully executed upon us by England, with further additions of rigour and severity.
For the greatest part of our bowels and vitals are extracted, without allowing us the liberty
of spinning and weaving them.

The Scripture tells us, that "oppression makes a wise man mad." Therefore, consequently speaking,
the reason why some men are not mad, is because they are not wise: However, it were to be wished
that oppression would in time teach a little wisdom to fools.

I was much delighted with a person who hath a great estate in this kingdom, upon his complaints
to me, "how grievously poor England suffers by impositions from Ireland. That we convey our
own wool to France in spite of all the harpies at the custom-house. That Mr. Shuttleworth,
and others on the Cheshire coasts are such fools to sell us their bark at a good price for
tanning our own hides into leather; with other enormities of the like weight and kind." To
which I will venture to add some more: "That the mayoralty of this city is always executed
by an inhabitant, and often by a native, which might as well be done by a deputy, with a moderate
salary, whereby poor England lose at least one thousand pounds a year upon the balance. That
the governing of this kingdom costs the lord lieutenant two thousand four hundred pounds a
year,[13] so much net loss to poor England. That the people of Ireland presume to dig for coals
in their own grounds, and the farmers in the county of Wicklow send their turf to the very
market of Dublin, to the great discouragement of the coal trade at Mostyn and Whitehaven. That
the revenues of the post-office here, so righteously belonging to the English treasury, as
arising chiefly from our own commerce with each other, should be remitted to London, clogged
with that grievous burthen of exchange, and the pensions paid out of the Irish revenues to
English favourites, should lie under the same disadvantage, to the great loss of the grantees.
When a divine is sent over to a bishopric here, with the hopes of five-and-twenty hundred pounds
a year; upon his arrival, he finds, alas! a dreadful discount of ten or twelve per cent. A
judge or a commissioner of the revenue has the same cause of complaint."--Lastly,

"The ballad upon Cotter is vehemently suspected to be Irish manufacture; and yet is allowed
to be sung in our open streets, under the very nose of the government."[14] These are a few
among the many hardships we put upon that poor kingdom of England; for which I am confident
every honest man wishes a remedy: And I hear there is a project on foot for transporting our
best wheaten straw by sea and land carriage to Dunstable; and obliging us by a law to take
off yearly so many ton of straw hats for the use of our women, which will be a great encouragement
to the manufacture of that industrious town.

I should be glad to learn among the divines, whether a law to bind men without their own consent,
be obligatory in foro conscientiae; because I find Scripture, Sanderson and Suarez are wholly
silent in the matter. The oracle of reason, the great law of nature, and general opinion of
civilians, wherever they treat of limited governments, are indeed decisive enough.

It is wonderful to observe the bias among our people in favour of things, persons, and wares
of all kinds that come from England. The printer tells his hawkers that he has got "an excellent
new song just brought from London." I have somewhat of a tendency that way myself; and upon
hearing a coxcomb from thence displaying himself with great volubility upon the park, the playhouse,
the opera, the gaming ordinaries, it was apt to beget in me a kind of veneration for his parts
and accomplishments. 'Tis not many years, since I remember a person who by his style and literature
seems to have been corrector of a hedge-press in some blind alley about Little Britain, proceed
gradually to be an author, at least a translator of a lower rate, though somewhat of a larger
bulk, than any that now flourishes in Grub Street; and upon the strength of this foundation,
come over here, erect himself up into an orator and politician, and lead a kingdom after him.[15]
This, I am told, was the very motive that prevailed on the author of a play, called "Love in
a hollow Tree," to do us the honour of a visit; presuming with very good reason, that he was
a writer of a superior class.[16] I know another, who for thirty years past, hath been the
common standard of stupidity in England, where he was never heard a minute in any assembly,
or by any party with common Christian treatment; yet upon his arrival hither, could put on
a face of importance and authority, talked more than six, without either gracefulness, propriety,
or meaning; and at the same time be admired and followed as the pattern of eloquence and wisdom.

Nothing hath humbled me so much, or shewn a greater disposition to a contemptuous treatment
of Ireland in some chief governors,[17] than that high style of several speeches from the throne,
delivered, as usual, after the royal assent, in some periods of the two last reigns. Such high
exaggerations of the prodigious condescensions in the prince, to pass those good laws, would
have but an odd sound at Westminster: Neither do I apprehend how any good law can pass, wherein
the king's interest is not as much concerned as that of the people. I remember after a speech
on the like occasion, delivered by my Lord Wharton, (I think it was his last) he desired Mr.
Addison to ask my opinion of it: My answer was, "That his Excellency had very honestly forfeited
his head on account of one paragraph; wherein he asserted by plain consequence, a dispensing
power in the Queen." His Lordship owned it was true, but swore the words were put into his
mouth by direct orders from Court. From whence it is clear, that some ministers in those times,
were apt, from their high elevation, to look down upon this kingdom as if it had been one of
their colonies of outcasts in America. And I observed a little of the same turn of spirit in
some great men, from whom I expected better; although to do them justice, it proved no point
of difficulty to make them correct their idea, whereof the whole nation quickly found the benefit?--But
that is forgotten. How the style hath since run, I am wholly a stranger, having never seen
a speech since the last of the Queen.

I would now expostulate a little with our country landlords, who by unmeasurable screwing and
racking their tenants all over the kingdom, have already reduced the miserable people to a
worse condition than the peasants in France, or the vassals in Germany and Poland; so that
the whole species of what we call substantial farmers, will in a very few years be utterly
at an end.[18] It was pleasant to observe these gentlemen labouring with all their might for
preventing the bishops from letting their revenues at a moderate half value, (whereby the whole
order would in an age have been reduced to manifest beggary) at the very instant when they
were everywhere canting their own lands upon short leases, and sacrificing their oldest tenants
for a penny an acre advance.[19] I know not how it comes to pass, (and yet perhaps I know well
enough) that slaves have a natural disposition to be tyrants; and that when my betters give
me a kick, I am apt to revenge it with six upon my footman; although perhaps he may be an honest
and diligent fellow. I have heard great divines affirm, that "nothing is so likely to call
down an universal judgment from Heaven upon a nation as universal oppression;" and whether
this be not already verified in part, their worships the landlords are now at full leisure
to consider. Whoever travels this country, and observes the face of nature, or the faces, and
habits, and dwellings of the natives, will hardly think himself in a land where either law,
religion, or common humanity is professed.[20]

I cannot forbear saying one word upon a thing they call a bank, which I hear is projecting
in this town.[21] I never saw the proposals, nor understand any one particular of their scheme:
What I wish for at present, is only a sufficient provision of hemp, and caps, and bells, to
distribute according to the several degrees of honesty and prudence in some persons. I hear
only of a monstrous sum already named; and if others, do not soon hear of it too, and hear
of it with a vengeance, then am I a gentleman of less sagacity, than myself and very few besides,
take me to be. And the jest will be still the better, if it be true, as judicious persons have
assured me, that one half of this money will be real, and the other half only Gasconnade.[22]
The matter will be likewise much mended, if the merchants continue to carry off our gold, and
our goldsmiths to melt down our heavy silver.

AN ESSAY

ON

ENGLISH BUBBLES.

BY THOMAS HOPE, ESQ.

     NOTE.

     The excitement and even fury which were prevalent in England and
     France during the years 1719 and 1720 over Law's South Sea schemes
     afforded Swift an opportunity for the play of his satire by way of
     criticism on projects which appeared to him to be of the same
     character. News from France on the Mississippi Scheme which, in
     1719, was at the height of its stock-jobbing success, gave glorious
     accounts of fortunes made in a night, and of thousands who had
     become rich and were living in unheard of luxury. Schemes were
     floated on every possible kind of ventures, and so plentiful was
     the "paper money" that nothing was too absurd for speculators. All
     these schemes, which soon came to nought, went, later, by the name
     of "Bubbles," and this essay of Swift's touches the matter with his
     usual satire.

     The time chosen for the proposal for the establishment of a
     National Bank in Ireland was not a happy one. It was made in 1720
     when the "Bubbles" had burst and found thousands ruined and
     pauperized. Swift, always an enemy to schemes of any kind, classed
     that of the bank with the rest of the "Bubbles," and, although the
     plan itself was a real effort to relieve Ireland, and might have
     effected its purpose, the terror of the "Bubbles" was sufficient to
     wreck it.

     It required very little from Swift to insure its rejection, and
     rejected it was by the Irish legislature, before whose
     consideration it was brought.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Some doubt seems to obtain as to the authenticity of this "Essay on
     English Bubbles," which, in the words of Sir Walter Scott, may "be
     considered as introductory to the other" tracts on the Bank
     Project. This essay, however, appears in the edition of 1720 of
     "The Swearer's Bank," and, although it is not included in the
     "Miscellanies" of 1722, it is accepted by Faulkner in his collected
     edition of Swift's works. The present text is based on that
     prefixed to the edition of "The Swearer's Bank," 1720.

     [T. S.]

AN ESSAY ON ENGLISH BUBBLES.

BY THOMAS HOPE, ESQ.

     To the Right Reverend, Right Honourable, and Right Worshipful, and
     to the Reverend, Honourable, and Worshipful, &c. Company of
     Stockjobbers; whether Honest or Dishonest, Pious or Impious, Wise
     or Otherwise, Male or Female, Young or Old, One with another, who
     have suffered Depredation by the late Bubbles: Greeting.

Having received the following scheme from Dublin, I give you the earliest notice, how you may
retrieve the DECUS ET TUTAMEN,[23] which you have sacrificed by permits in bubbles. This project
is founded on a Parliamentary security, besides, the devil is in it, if it can fail, since
a dignitary of the Church[24] is at the head on't. Therefore you, who have subscribed to the
stocking insurance, and are out at the heels, may soon appear tight about the legs. You, who
encouraged the hemp manufacture, may leave the halter to rogues, and prevent the odium of felo
de se. Medicinal virtues are here to be had without the expense and hazard of a dispensary:
You may sleep without dreaming of bottles at your tail, and a looking-glass shall not affright
you; and since the glass bubble proved as brittle as its ware, and broke together with itself
the hopes of its proprietors, they may make themselves whole by subscribing to our new fund.

Here indeed may be made three very grave objections, by incredulous interested priests, ambitious
citizens, and scrupulous statesmen. The stocking manufactory gentlemen don't know how swearing
can bring 'em to any probability of covering their legs anew, unless it be by the means of
a pair of stocks: That the hemp-snared men apprehend, that such an encouragement for oaths
can tend to no other advancement, promotion, and exaltation of their persons, than that of
the gallows: The late old ordinary, Paul,[25] having grown grey in the habit of making this
accurate observation in every month's Session-Paper, "That swearing had as great a hand in
the suspension of every living soul under his cure, as Sabbath-breaking itself;" and that the
glass-bubble-men cannot, for their lives, with the best pair of spectacles, that is the only
thing left neat and whole, out of all their wares, see how they shall make anything out of
this his oath-project, supposing he should even confirm by one its goodness: An oath being,
as they say, as brittle as glass, and only made to be broken. 

CONTENTS.

I. HER BIOGRAPHY.

II. JOURNEY ROUND THE WORLD.

III. NORTHWARD.

IV. LAST TRAVELS.

CHAPTER I.--HER BIOGRAPHY.

Ida Pfeiffer, the celebrated traveller, was born in Vienna on the 14th of October 1797. She
was the third child of a well-to-do merchant, named Reyer; and at an early age gave indications
of an original and self-possessed character. The only girl in a family of six children, her predilections
were favoured by the circumstances which surrounded her. She was bold, enterprising, fond of sport
and exercise; loved to dress like her brothers, and to share in their escapades. Dolls she contemptuously
put aside, preferring drums; and a sword or a gun was valued at much more than a doll's house. In
some respects her father brought her up strictly; she was fed, like her brothers, on a simple
and even meagre diet, and trained to habits of prompt obedience; but he did nothing to discourage
her taste for more violent exercises than are commonly permitted to young girls.

She was only in her tenth year, however, when he died; and she then passed naturally enough under
the maternal control. Between her own inclinations and her mother's ideas of maidenly culture
a great contest immediately arose. Her mother could not understand why her daughter should prefer
the violin to the piano, and the masculine trousers to the feminine petticoat. In fact, she
did not understand Ida, and it may be assumed that Ida did not understand her.

In 1809 Vienna was captured by the French army under Napoleon; a disgrace which the brave and
spirited Ida felt most keenly. Some of the victorious troops were quartered in the house of her mother,
who thought it politic to treat them with courtesy; but her daughter neither could nor would repress
her dislike. When compelled to be present at a grand review which Napoleon held in Schonbrunn,
she turned her back as the emperor rode past. For this hazardous manoeuvre she was summarily
punished; and to prevent her from repeating it when the emperor returned, her mother held her
by the shoulders. This was of little avail, however, as Ida perseveringly persisted in keeping
her eyes shut.

At the age of thirteen she was induced to resume the garb of her sex, though it was some time
before she could accustom her wild free movements to it. She was then placed in charge of a
tutor, who seems to have behaved to her with equal skill and delicacy. "He showed," she says,
"great patience and perseverance in combating my overstrained and misdirected notions. As I
had learned to fear my parents rather than love them, and this gentleman was, so to speak,
the first human being who had displayed any sympathy and affection for me, I clung to him in
return with enthusiastic attachment, desirous of fulfilling his every wish, and never so happy
as when he appeared satisfied with my exertions. He took the entire charge of my education,
and though it cost me some tears to abandon my youthful visions, and engage in pursuits I had
hitherto regarded with contempt, to all this I submitted out of my affection for him. I even learned
many feminine avocations, such as sewing, knitting, and cookery. To him I owed the insight I obtained
into the duties and true position of my sex; and it was he who transformed me from a romp and a hoyden into
a modest quiet girl."

Already a great longing for travel had entered into her mind. She longed to see new scenes,
new peoples, new manners and customs. She read eagerly every book of travel that fell into her hands;
followed with profound interest the career of every adventurous explorer,
and blamed her sex that prevented her from following their heroic
examples.

For a while a change was effected in the current of her thoughts by a strong attachment which
sprung up between her and her teacher, who by this time had given up his former profession, and
had obtained an honourable position in the civil service. It was natural enough that in the close
intimacy which existed between them such an affection should be developed. Ida's mother, however,
regarded it with grave disapproval, and exacted from the unfortunate girl a promise that she would
neither see nor write to her humble suitor again. The result was a dangerous illness: on her
recovery from which her mother insisted on her accepting for a husband Dr. Pfeiffer, a widower,
with a grown-up son, but an opulent and distinguished advocate in
Lemberg, who was then on a visit to Vienna.

                                                 Though twenty-four years older than Ida, he was attracted by her
grace and simplicity, and offered his hand.

  Weary of home persecutions, Ida accepted
      it, and the marriage took place on May 1st, 1820.

If she did not love her husband, she respected him, and their married
life was not unhappy.

     In a few months, however, her husband's integrity led to a sad change
of fortune.

     He had fully and fearlessly exposed the corruption of the Austrian
     officials in Galicia, and had thus made many enemies. He was compelled
     to give up his office as councillor, and, deprived of his lucrative
     practice, to remove to Vienna in search of employment. Through
     the treachery of a friend, Ida's fortune was lost, and the ill-fated
     couple found themselves reduced to the most painful exigencies. Vienna,
     Lemberg, Vienna again, Switzerland, everywhere Dr. Pfeiffer sought
     work, and everywhere found himself baffled by some malignant influence.
     "Heaven only knows," says Madame Pfeiffer in her autobiography,
     "what I suffered during eighteen years of my married life;
     not, indeed, from any ill-treatment on my husband's part, but from
poverty and want.

     I came of a wealthy family, and had been accustomed from my earliest
     youth to order and comfort; and now I frequently knew
     not where I should lay my head, or find a little money to buy
     the commonest necessaries. I performed household drudgery, and endured
     cold and hunger; I worked secretly for money, and gave lessons in
drawing and music; and yet, in spite of all my exertions, there were
many days when I could hardly put anything but dry bread before my
poor children for their dinner."

     These children were two sons, whose education their mother entirely
     undertook, until, after old Madame Reyer's death in 1837, she succeeded
     to an inheritance, which lifted the little family out of the
     slough of poverty, and enabled her to provide her sons with good
     teachers.
     
     [Beirut and mountains of Lebanon: page15.jpg]
     
     As they grew up and engaged successfully in professional pursuits,
     Madame Pfeiffer, who had lost her husband in 1838, found herself
once more under the spell of her old passion for travel, and in a
position to gratify her adventurous inclinations.

     Her means were somewhat limited, it is true, for she had done much
for her husband and her children; but economy was natural to her,
and she retained the simple habits she had acquired in her childhood.

         She was strong, healthy, courageous, and accomplished; and at length,
         after maturing her plans with anxious consideration, she took up
her pilgrim's staff, and sallied forth alone.

         
         
         Her first object was to visit the Holy Land, and tread in the hallowed
footsteps of our Lord.

         For this purpose she left Vienna on the 22nd of March 1842,
         and embarked on board the steamer that was to convey her down the
Danube to the Black Sea and the city of Constantinople.

         Thence she repaired to Broussa, Beirut, Jaffa, Jerusalem, the
         Dead Sea, Nazareth, Damascus, Baalbek, the Lebanon, Alexandria, and
Cairo; and travelled across the sandy Desert to the Isthmus of Suez
and the Red Sea.

       From Egypt the adventurous lady returned home by way of Sicily and
Italy, visiting Naples, Rome, and Florence, and arriving in Vienna
in December 1842.

     In the following year she published the record of her experiences
     under the title of a "Journey of a Viennese Lady to the Holy Land."
     It met with a very favourable reception, to which the simplicity
of its style and the faithfulness of its descriptions fully entitled
it.

     

With the profits of this book to swell her funds, Madame Pfeiffer
felt emboldened to undertake a new expedition; and this time she resolved
on a northern pilgrimage, expecting in Ultima Thule to see nature
manifested on a novel and surprising scale.

She began her journey to Iceland on the 10th of April 1845, and returned
to Vienna on the 4th of October.

Her narrative of this second voyage will be found, necessarily much
abridged and condensed, in the following pages.

What should she do next?

Success had increased her courage and strengthened her resolution,
and she could think of nothing fit for her energies and sufficient
for her curiosity but a voyage round the world!

She argued that greater privations and fatigue than she had endured
in Syria and Iceland she could scarcely be called upon to encounter.

The outlay did not frighten her; for she had learned by experience
how little is required, if the traveller will but practise the strictest
economy and resolutely forego many comforts and all superfluities.

Her savings amounted to a sum insufficient, perhaps, for such travellers
as Prince Puckler-Muskau, Chateaubriand, or Lamartine for a fortnight's
excursion; but for a woman who wanted to see much, but cared for no
personal indulgence, it seemed enough to last during a journey of
two or three years.

And so it proved.

       

The heroic woman set out alone on the 1st of May 1846, and proceeded
first to Rio Janeiro.

       On the 3rd of February 1847, she sailed round Cape Horn, and on the
2nd of March landed at Valparaiso.

Thence she traversed the broad Pacific to Tahiti, where she was presented
to Queen Pomare.

       In the beginning of July we find her at Macao; afterwards she visited
Hong Kong and Canton, where the appearance of a white woman produced
a remarkable and rather disagreeable sensation.

By way of Singapore she proceeded to Ceylon, which she carefully
explored, making excursions to Colombo, Candy, and the famous temple
of Dagoba.

Towards the end of October she landed at Madras, and thence went
on to Calcutta, ascending the Ganges to the holy city of Benares,
and striking across the country to Bombay.

Late in the month of April 1848 she sailed for Persia, and from Bushire
traversed the interior as far as legend-haunted Bagdad.

       After a pilgrimage to the ruins of Ctesiphon and Babylon, this bold
lady accompanied a caravan through the dreary desert to Mosul and
the vast ruins of Nineveh, and afterwards to the salt lake of Urumiyeh
and the city of Tabreez.

It is certain that no woman ever accomplished a more daring exploit!

The mental as well as physical energy required was enormous; and only a strong mind and a strong
frame could have endured the many hardships consequent on her undertaking--the
burning heat by day, the inconveniences of every kind at night, the
perils incidental to her sex, meagre fare, a filthy couch, and constant
apprehension of attack by robber bands.

The English consul at Tabreez, when she introduced herself to him,
found it hard to believe that a woman could have accomplished such
an enterprise.

At Tabreez, Madame Pfeiffer was presented to the Viceroy, and obtained permission to visit his
harem. On August 11th, 1848, she resumed her journey, crossing Armenia, Georgia, and Mingrelia;
she touched afterwards at Anapa, Kertch, and Sebastopol, landed at Odessa, and returned home
by way of Constantinople, Greece, the Ionian Islands, and Trieste,
arriving in Vienna on the 4th of November 1848, just after the city
had been recaptured from the rebels by the troops of Prince Windischgratz.

[Constantinople:

page21.jpg]

Ida Pfeiffer was now a woman of note. Her name was known in every civilized country; and it
was not unnatural that great celebrity should attach to a female who, alone, and without the protection
of rank or official recommendation, had travelled 2800 miles by land,
and 35,000 miles by sea.

Hence, her next work, "A Woman's Journey Round the World," was most favourably received, and
translated both into French and English. A summary of it is included in our little volume.

The brave adventurer at first, on her return home, spoke of her travelling days as over, and,
at the age of fifty-four, as desirous of peace and rest. But this tranquil frame of mind was
of very brief duration. Her love of action and thirst of novelty could not long be repressed;
and as she felt herself still strong and healthy, with energies as quick and lively as ever,
she resolved on a second circuit of the globe. For a while she hesitated between a visit to the
interior of Africa and a voyage to Australia; but at last she sailed to Singapore, and determined
to explore the East Indian Archipelago.

She adventured among the Dyaks, and journeyed westward to Pontianak, and the diamond mines
of Landak. We next meet with her in Java, and afterwards in Sumatra, where she boldly trusted
herself among the cannibal Battas, who had hitherto resented the intrusion of any European.
Returning to Java, she saw almost all that it had of natural wonders
or natural beauties; and then departed on a tour through the Sunda
Islands and the Moluccas, visiting Banda, Amboyna, Ceram, Ternate,
and Celebes.

For a second time she traversed the Pacific, but on this occasion in an opposite direction.
For two months she saw no land; but on the 27th September 1853 she arrived at San Francisco.
At the close of the year she sailed for Callao. Meeting with neither courtesy nor help from the Spanish
Americans--a superstitious, ignorant, and degraded race--she gladly
set sail for Panama.

At the end of May she crossed the Isthmus, and sailed to New Orleans.

Thence she ascended the Mississippi to Napoleon, and the Arkansas to Fort Smith. After suffering
from a severe attack of fever, she made her way to St. Louis, and then directed her steps northward
to St. Paul, the Falls of St. Antony, Chicago, and thence to the
great Lakes and "mighty Niagara."

After an excursion into Canada, she visited New York, Boston, and other great cities, crossed
the Atlantic, and arrived in England on the 21st of November 1854.

Two years later she published a narrative of her adventures, entitled "My Second Journey Round
the World."

Madame Pfeiffer's last voyage was to Madagascar, and will be found
described in the closing chapter of this little volume.

In Madagascar she contracted a dangerous illness, from which she temporarily recovered; but on
her return to Europe it was evident that her constitution had received a severe blow. She gradually
grew weaker. Her disease proved to be cancer of the liver, and the physicians pronounced it incurable.
After lingering a few weeks in much pain, she passed away on the
night of the 27th of October 1858, in the sixty-third year of her age.

* * * * *

This remarkable woman is described as of short stature, thin, and
slightly bent.

Her movements were deliberate and measured. She was well- knit and of considerable physical energy,
and her career proves her to have been possessed of no ordinary powers of endurance. The reader
might probably suppose that she was what is commonly known as a strong-minded woman. The epithet
would suit her if seriously applied, for she had undoubtedly a clear, strong intellect, a
cool judgment, and a resolute purpose; but it would be thoroughly inapplicable in the satirical
sense in which it is commonly used. There was nothing masculine about
her.

On the contrary, she was so reserved and so unassuming that it required an intimate knowledge of
her to fathom the depths of her acquirements and experience. "In her whole appearance and manner,"
we are told, "was a staidness that seemed to indicate the practical
housewife, with no thought soaring beyond her domestic concerns."

This quiet, silent woman, travelled nearly 20,000 miles by land and
150,000 miles by sea; visiting regions which no European had previously
penetrated, or where the bravest men had found it difficult to make
their way; undergoing a variety of severe experiences; opening up
numerous novel and surprising scenes; and doing all this with the
scantiest means, and unassisted by powerful protection or royal patronage.

We doubt whether the entire round of human enterprise presents anything more remarkable or more
admirable. And it would be unfair to suppose that she was actuated only by a feminine curiosity.
Her leading motive was a thirst for knowledge. At all events, if she had a passion for travelling,
it must be admitted that her qualifications as a traveller were unusual.


The medicinal use of oaths is what the undertaker would by no means discourage, especially
where it is necessary to help the lungs to throw off any distilling humour. On certificate
of a course of swearing prescribed by any physician, a permit will be given to the patient
by the proper officer of the bank, paying no more but sixpence. It is expected, that a scheme
of so much advantage to the public will meet with more encouragement than their chimerical
banks; and the undertaker hopes, that as he has spent a considerable fortune in bringing this
scheme to bear, he may have the satisfaction to see it take place, for the public good, though
he should have the fate of most projectors, to be undone.

It is resolved, that no compositions shall be made, nor licences granted for swearing, under
a notion of applying the money to pious uses; a practice so scandalous as is fit only for the
see of Rome, where the money arising from whoring licences is applied ad propagandam fidem:
And to the shame of Smock-alley, and of all Protestant whores, (especially those who live under
the light of the Gospel-ministry) be it spoken, a whore in Rome never lies down, but she hopes
it will be the means of converting some poor heathen, or heretic.

The swearing revenues of the town of Cork will be given for ever, by the bank, to the support
of poor clergymen's widows; and those of Ringsend will be allowed to the maintenance of sailors'
bastards.

The undertaker designs, in a few days, to appoint time and place for taking subscriptions;
the subscribers must come prepared to pay down one fourth, on subscribing.

POSTSCRIPT.

The Jews of Rotterdam have offered to farm the revenues of Dublin at twenty thousand pounds
per ann. Several eminent Quakers are also willing to take them at that rent; but the undertaker
has rejected their proposals, being resolved to deal with none but Christians.

Application may be made to him about them, any day at Pat's coffee-house, where attendance
will be given.

A LETTER

TO THE

KING AT ARMS.

[FROM A REPUTED ESQUIRE,[27] ONE OF THE SUBSCRIBERS TO THE BANK.]

November 18, 1721.

SIR,

In a late printed paper,[28] containing some notes and queries upon that list of the subscribers'
names, which was published by order of the commissioners for receiving of subscriptions, I
find some hints and innuendoes that would seem to insinuate, as if I and some others were only
reputed esquires; and our case is referred to you, in your kingly capacity. I desire you will
please to let me know the lowest price of a real esquire's coat of arms: And, if we can agree,
I will give my bond to pay you out of the first interest I receive for my subscription; because
things are a little low with me at present, by throwing my whole fortune into the bank, having
subscribed for five hundred pounds sterling.

I hope you will not question my pretensions to this title, when I let you know that my godfather
was a justice of peace, and I myself have been often a keeper of it. My father was a leader
and commander of horse, in which post he rode before the greatest lords of the land;[29] and,
in long marches, he alone presided over the baggage, advancing directly before it. My mother
kept open house in Dublin, where several hundreds were supported with meat and drink, bought
at her own charge, or with her personal credit, until some envious brewers and butchers forced
her to retire.[30]

As to myself, I have been, for several years, a foot-officer; and it was my charge to guard
the carriages, behind which I was commanded to stick close, that they might not be attacked
in the rear. I have had the honour to be a favourite of several fine ladies; who, each of them
at different times, gave me such coloured knots and public marks of distinction, that every
one knew which of them it was to whom I paid my address. They would not go into their coach
without me, nor willingly drink unless I gave them the glass with my own hand. They allowed
me to call them my mistresses, and owned that title publicly. I have been told, that the true
ancient employment of a squire was to carry a knight's shield, painted with his colours and
coat of arms. This is what I have witnesses to produce that I have often done; not indeed in
a shield, like my predecessors, but that which is full as good, I have carried the colours
of a knight upon my coat.[31] I have likewise borne the king's arms in my hand, as a mark of
authority;[32] and hung them painted before my dwelling-house, as a mark of my calling:[33]
So that I may truly say, His Majesty's arms have been my supporters. I have been a strict and
constant follower of men of quality, I have diligently pursued the steps of several squires,
and am able to behave myself as well as the best of them, whenever there shall be occasion.

I desire it may be no disadvantage to me, that, by the new act of parliament going to pass
for preserving the game, I am not yet qualified to keep a greyhound. If this should be the
test of squirehood, it will go hard with a great number of my fraternity, as well as myself,
who must all be unsquired, because a greyhound will not be allowed to keep us company; and
it is well known I have been a companion to his betters. What has a greyhound to do with a
squireship? Might I not be a real squire, although there was no such thing as a greyhound in
the world? Pray tell me, sir, are greyhounds to be from henceforth the supporters of every
squire's coat of arms? Although I cannot keep a greyhound, may not a greyhound help to keep
me? May not I have an order from the governors of the bank to keep a greyhound, with a non
obstante to the act of parliament, as well as they have created a bank against the votes of
the two Houses? But, however, this difficulty will soon be overcome. I am promised 125l. a
year for subscribing 500l.; and, of this 500l. I am to pay in only 25l. ready money: The governors
will trust me for the rest, and pay themselves out of the interest by 25l. per cent. So that
I intend to receive only 40l. a-year, to qualify me for keeping my family and a greyhound,
and let the remaining 85l. go on till it makes 500l. then 1000l. then 10,000l. then 100,000l.
then a million, and so forwards. This, I think, is much better (betwixt you and me) than keeping
fairs, and buying and selling bullocks; by which I find, from experience, that little is to
be gotten, in these hard times. I am,

                           SIR,
                            Your friend, and
                                Servant to command,
                                         A. B. ESQUIRE.

Postscript. I hope you will favourably represent my case to the publisher of the paper above-mentioned.

Direct your letter for A. B. Esquire, at ---- in ----; and, pray, get some parliament-man to
frank it, for it will cost a groat postage to this place.

THE

LAST SPEECH AND DYING WORDS

OF

EBENEZER ELLISTON.

WHO WAS EXECUTED THE SECOND DAY OF MAY, 1722.

Published at his desire, for the common good.

     N. B. About the time that this speech was written, the Town was
     much pestered with street-robbers; who, in a barbarous manner would
     seize on gentlemen, and take them into remote corners, and after
     they had robbed them, would leave them bound and gagged. It is
     remarkable, that this speech had so good an effect, that there have
     been very few robberies of that kind committed since.[34]

     NOTE.

     Burke spoke of Swift's tracts of a public nature, relating to
     Ireland, as "those in which the Dean appears in the best light,
     because they do honour to his heart as well as his head; furnishing
     some additional proofs that, though he was very free in his abuse
     of the inhabitants of that country, as well natives as foreigners,
     he had their interest sincerely at heart, and perfectly understood
     it."

     The following tract on "The Last Words and Dying Speech of Ebenezer
     Elliston" admirably illustrates Burke's remark.

     The city of Dublin, at the time Swift wrote, was on a par with some
     of the lower districts of New York City about twenty years ago,
     which were dangerous in the extreme to traverse after dark. Robbers
     in gangs would waylay pedestrians and leave them often badly
     maltreated and maimed. These thieves and "roughs" became so
     impudent and brazen in their business that the condition of the
     city was a disgrace to the municipal government. To put down the
     nuisance Swift took a characteristic method. Ebenezer Elliston had,
     about this time, been executed for street robbery. Although given a
     good education by his parents, he forsook his trade of a silk
     weaver, and became a gambler and burglar. He was well known to the
     other gangs which infested Dublin, but his death did not act as a
     deterrent. Swift, in composing Elliston's pretended dying speech,
     gave it the flavour and character of authenticity in order to
     impose on the members of other gangs, and so successful was he in
     his intention, that the speech was accepted as the real expression
     of their late companion by the rest and had a most salutary effect.
     Scott says it was "received as genuine by the banditti who had been
     companions of his depredations, who were the more easily persuaded
     of its authenticity as it contained none of the cant usual in the
     dying speeches composed for malefactors by the Ordinary or the
     ballad-makers. The threat which it held out of a list deposited
     with a secure hand, containing their names, crimes, and place of
     rendezvous, operated for a long time in preventing a repetition of
     their villanies, which had previously been so common."

       *       *       *       *       *

     The text of the present edition is based on that given by Faulkner
     in the fourth volume of his edition of Swift printed in Dublin in
     1735.

     [T. S.]

THE LAST SPEECH AND DYING WORDS OF EBENEZER ELLISTON.

I am now going to suffer the just punishment for my crimes prescribed by the law of God and
my country. I know it is the constant custom, that those who come to this place should have
speeches made for them, and cried about in their own hearing, as they are carried to execution;
and truly they are such speeches that although our fraternity be an ignorant illiterate people,
they would make a man ashamed to have such nonsense and false English charged upon him even
when he is going to the gallows: They contain a pretended account of our birth and family;
of the fact for which we are to die; of our sincere repentance; and a declaration of our religion.[35]
I cannot expect to avoid the same treatment with my predecessors. However, having had an education
one or two degrees better than those of my rank and profession;[36] I have been considering
ever since my commitment, what it might be proper for me to deliver upon this occasion.

And first, I cannot say from the bottom of my heart, that I am truly sorry for the offence
I have given to God and the world; but I am very much so, for the bad success of my villainies
in bringing me to this untimely end. For it is plainly evident, that after having some time
ago obtained a pardon from the crown, I again took up my old trade; my evil habits were so
rooted in me, and I was grown so unfit for any other kind of employment. And therefore although
in compliance with my friends, I resolve to go to the gallows after the usual manner, kneeling,
with a book in my hand, and my eyes lift up; yet I shall feel no more devotion in my heart
than I have observed in some of my comrades, who have been drunk among common whores the very
night before their execution. I can say further from my own knowledge, that two of my fraternity
after they had been hanged, and wonderfully came to life, and made their escapes, as it sometimes
happens, proved afterwards the wickedest rogues I ever knew, and so continued until they were
hanged again for good and all; and yet they had the impudence at both times they went to the
gallows, to smite their breasts, and lift up their eyes to Heaven all the way.

Secondly, From the knowledge I have of my own wicked dispositions and that of my comrades,
I give it as my opinion, that nothing can be more unfortunate to the public, than the mercy
of the government in ever pardoning or transporting us; unless when we betray one another,
as we never fail to do, if we are sure to be well paid; and then a pardon may do good; by the
same rule, "That it is better to have but one fox in a farm than three or four." But we generally
make a shift to return after being transported, and are ten times greater rogues than before,
and much more cunning. Besides, I know it by experience, that some hopes we have of finding
mercy, when we are tried, or after we are condemned, is always a great encouragement to us.

Thirdly, Nothing is more dangerous to idle young fellows, than the company of those odious
common whores we frequent, and of which this town is full: These wretches put us upon all mischief
to feed their lusts and extravagancies: They are ten times more bloody and cruel than men;
their advice is always not to spare if we are pursued; they get drunk with us, and are common
to us all; and yet, if they can get anything by it, are sure to be our betrayers.

Now, as I am a dying man, I have done something which may be of good use to the public. I have
left with an honest man (and indeed the only honest man I was ever acquainted with) the names
of all my wicked brethren, the present places of their abode, with a short account of the chief
crimes they have committed; in many of which I have been their accomplice, and heard the rest
from their own mouths: I have likewise set down the names of those we call our setters, of
the wicked houses we frequent, and of those who receive and buy our stolen goods. I have solemnly
charged this honest man, and have received his promise upon oath, that whenever he hears of
any rogue to be tried for robbing, or house-breaking, he will look into his list, and if he
finds the name there of the thief concerned, to send the whole paper to the government. Of
this I here give my companions fair and public warning, and hope they will take it.

In the paper above mentioned, which I left with my friend, I have also set down the names of
several gentlemen who have been robbed in Dublin streets for three years past: I have told
the circumstances of those robberies; and shewn plainly that nothing but the want of common
courage was the cause of their misfortunes. I have therefore desired my friend, that whenever
any gentlemen happens to be robbed in the streets, he will get that relation printed and published
with the first letters of those gentlemen's names, who by their own want of bravery are likely
to be the cause of all the mischief of that kind, which may happen for the future.

I cannot leave the world without a short description of that kind of life, which I have led
for some years past; and is exactly the same with the rest of our wicked brethren.

Although we are generally so corrupted from our childhood, as to have no sense of goodness;
yet something heavy always hangs about us, I know not what it is, that we are never easy till
we are half drunk among our whores and companions; nor sleep sound, unless we drink longer
than we can stand. If we go abroad in the day, a wise man would easily find us to be rogues
by our faces; we have such a suspicious, fearful, and constrained countenance; often turning
back, and slinking through narrow lanes and alleys. I have never failed of knowing a brother
thief by his looks, though I never saw him before. Every man among us keeps his particular
whore, who is however common to us all, when we have a mind to change. When we have got a booty,
if it be in money, we divide it equally among our companions, and soon squander it away on
our vices in those houses that receive us; for the master and mistress, and the very tapster,
go snacks; and besides make us pay treble reckonings. If our plunder be plate, watches, rings,
snuff-boxes, and the like; we have customers in all quarters of the town to take them off.
I have seen a tankard worth fifteen pounds sold to a fellow in ---- street for twenty shillings;
and a gold watch for thirty. I have set down his name, and that of several others in the paper
already mentioned. We have setters watching in corners, and by dead walls, to give us notice
when a gentleman goes by; especially if he be anything in drink. I believe in my conscience,
that if an account were made of a thousand pounds in stolen goods; considering the low rates
we sell them at, the bribes we must give for concealment, the extortions of alehouse-reckonings,
and other necessary charges, there would not remain fifty pounds clear to be divided among
the robbers. And out of this we must find clothes for our whores, besides treating them from
morning to night; who, in requital, reward us with nothing but treachery and the pox. For when
our money is gone, they are every moment threatening to inform against us, if we will not go
out to look for more. If anything in this world be like hell, as I have heard it described
by our clergy; the truest picture of it must be in the back-room of one of our ale-houses at
midnight; where a crew of robbers and their whores are met together after a booty, and are
beginning to grow drunk, from which time, until they are past their senses, is such a continued
horrible noise of cursing, blasphemy, lewdness, scurrility, and brutish behaviour; such roaring
and confusion, such a clatter of mugs and pots at each other's heads, that Bedlam, in comparison,
is a sober and orderly place: At last they all tumble from their stools and benches, and sleep
away the rest of the night; and generally the landlord or his wife, or some other whore who
has a stronger head than the rest, picks their pockets before they wake. The misfortune is,
that we can never be easy till we are drunk; and our drunkenness constantly exposes us to be
more easily betrayed and taken.

This is a short picture of the life I have led; which is more miserable than that of the poorest
labourer who works for four pence a day; and yet custom is so strong, that I am confident,
if I could make my escape at the foot of the gallows, I should be following the same course
this very evening. So that upon the whole, we ought to be looked upon as the common enemies
of mankind; whose interest it is to root us out likes wolves, and other mischievous vermin,
against which no fair play is required.

If I have done service to men in what I have said, I shall hope I have done service to God;
and that will be better than a silly speech made for me full of whining and canting, which
I utterly despise, and have never been used to; yet such a one I expect to have my ears tormented
with, as I am passing along the streets.

Good people fare ye well; bad as I am, I leave many worse behind me. I
hope you shall see me die like a man, the death of a dog.
                                                            E. E.

THE TRUTH

OF SOME

MAXIMS IN STATE AND GOVERNMENT,

EXAMINED

WITH REFERENCE TO IRELAND.

     NOTE.

     These maxims, written in the year 1724, may be taken as Swift's
     opening of his campaign against the oppressive legislation of
     England which had brought Ireland to the degraded and
     poverty-stricken condition it existed in at the time he wrote.
     Burke characterizes these maxims as "a collection of State
     Paradoxes, abounding with great sense and penetration." The
     subjects they touch on are dealt with in greater detail in the
     tracts which follow in this volume, and the reader is referred to
     them and the notes for the causes which had brought Ireland in so
     low a state.

       *       *       *       *       *

     The text of the present edition is based on that given by Deane
     Swift in the eighth volume of the edition of 1765.

     [T. S.]

MAXIMS CONTROLLED[37] IN IRELAND.

There are certain maxims of state, founded upon long observation and experience, drawn from
the constant practice of the wisest nations, and from the very principles of government, nor
ever controlled by any writer upon politics. Yet all these maxims do necessarily presuppose
a kingdom, or commonwealth, to have the same natural rights common to the rest of mankind,
who have entered into civil society; for if we could conceive a nation where each of the inhabitants
had but one eye, one leg, and one hand, it is plain that, before you could institute them into
a republic, an allowance must be made for those material defects wherein they differed from
other mortals. Or, imagine a legislator forming a system for the government of Bedlam, and,
proceeding upon the maxim that man is a sociable animal, should draw them out of their cells,
and form them into corporations or general assemblies; the consequence might probably be, that
they would fall foul on each other, or burn the house over their own heads.

Of the like nature are innumerable errors committed by crude and short thinkers, who reason
upon general topics, without the least allowance for the most important circumstances, which
quite alter the nature of the case.

This hath been the fate of those small dealers, who are every day publishing their thoughts,
either on paper or in their assemblies, for improving the trade of Ireland, and referring us
to the practice and example of England, Holland, France, or other nations.

I shall, therefore, examine certain maxims of government, which generally pass for uncontrolled
in the world, and consider how far they will suit with the present condition of this kingdom.

First, It is affirmed by wise men, that "The dearness of things necessary for life, in a fruitful
country, is a certain sign of wealth and great commerce;" for when such necessaries are dear,
it must absolutely follow that money is cheap and plentiful.

But this is manifestly false in Ireland, for the following reason. Some years ago, the species
of money here did probably amount to six or seven hundred thousand pounds;[38] and I have good
cause to believe, that our remittances then did not much exceed the cash brought in to us.
But, the prodigious discouragements we have since received in every branch of our trade, by
the frequent enforcements and rigorous execution of the navigation-act,[39] the tyranny of
under custom-house officers, the yearly addition of absentees, the payments to regiments abroad,
to civil and military officers residing in England, the unexpected sudden demands of great
sums from the treasury, and some other drains of perhaps as great consequence,[40] we now see
ourselves reduced to a state (since we have no friends) of being pitied by our enemies; at
least, if our enemies were of such a kind, as to be capable of any regard towards us except
of hatred and contempt.

Forty years are now passed since the Revolution, when the contention of the British Empire
was, most unfortunately for us, and altogether against the usual course of such mighty changes
in government, decided in the least important nation; but with such ravages and ruin executed
on both sides, as to leave the kingdom a desert, which in some sort it still continues. Neither
did the long rebellions in 1641, make half such a destruction of houses, plantations, and personal
wealth, in both kingdoms, as two years campaigns did in ours, by fighting England's battles.

By slow degrees, and by the gentle treatment we received under two auspicious reigns,[41] we
grew able to live without running in debt. Our absentees were but few: we had great indulgence
in trade, a considerable share in employments of church and state; and while the short leases
continued, which were let some years after the war ended, tenants paid their rents with ease
and cheerfulness, to the great regret of their landlords, who had taken up a spirit of oppression
that is not easily removed. And although, in these short leases, the rent was gradually to
increase after short periods, yet, as soon as the terms elapsed, the land was let to the highest
bidder, most commonly without the least effectual clause for building or planting. Yet, by
many advantages, which this island then possessed, and hath since utterly lost, the rents of
lands still grew higher upon every lease that expired, till they have arrived at the present
exorbitance; when the frog, over-swelling himself, burst at last.

With the price of land of necessity rose that of corn and cattle, and all other commodities
that farmers deal in: hence likewise, obviously, the rates of all goods and manufactures among
shopkeepers, the wages of servants, and hire of labourers. But although our miseries came on
fast, with neither trade nor money left; yet neither will the landlord abate in his rent, nor
can the tenant abate in the price of what that rent must be paid with, nor any shopkeeper,
tradesman, or labourer live, at lower expense for food and clothing, than he did before.

I have been the larger upon this first head, because the same observations will clear up and
strengthen a good deal of what I shall affirm upon the rest.

The second maxim of those who reason upon trade and government, is, to assert that "Low interest
is a certain sign of great plenty of money in a nation," for which, as in many other articles,
they produce the examples of Holland and England. But, with relation to Ireland, this maxim
is likewise entirely false.

There are two reasons for the lowness of interest in any country. First, that which is usually
alleged, the great plenty of species; and this is obvious. The second is, the want of trade,
which seldom falls under common observation, although it be equally true: for, where trade
is altogether discouraged, there are few borrowers. In those countries where men can employ
a large stock, the young merchant, whose fortune may be four or five hundred pounds, will venture
to borrow as much more, and can afford a reasonable interest. Neither is it easy, at this day,
to find many of those, whose business reaches to employ even so inconsiderable a sum, except
among the importers of wine, who, as they have most part of the present trade in these parts
of Ireland in their hands, so they are the most exorbitant, exacting, fraudulent dealers, that
ever trafficked in any nation, and are making all possible speed to ruin both themselves and
the nation.

From this defect of gentlemen's not knowing how to dispose of their ready money, ariseth the
high purchase of lands, which in all other countries is reckoned a sign of wealth. For, the
frugal squires, who live below their incomes, have no other way to dispose of their savings
but by mortgage or purchase, by which the rates of land must naturally increase; and if this
trade continues long, under the uncertainty of rents, the landed men of ready money will find
it more for their advantage to send their cash to England, and place it in the funds; which
I myself am determined to do, the first considerable sum I shall be master of.

It hath likewise been a maxim among politicians, "That the great increase of buildings in the
metropolis, argues a flourishing state." But this, I confess, hath been controlled from the
example of London; where, by the long and annual parliamentary session, such a number of senators,
with their families, friends, adherents, and expectants, draw such prodigious numbers to that
city, that the old hospitable custom of lords and gentlemen living in their ancient seats among
their tenants, is almost lost in England; is laughed out of doors; insomuch that, in the middle
of summer, a legal House of Lords and Commons might be brought in a few hours to London, from
their country villas within twelve miles round.

The case in Ireland is yet somewhat worse: For the absentees of great estates, who, if they
lived at home, would have many rich retainers in their neighbourhoods, have learned to rack
their lands, and shorten their leases, as much as any residing squire; and the few remaining
of these latter, having some vain hope of employments for themselves, or their children, and
discouraged by the beggarliness and thievery of their own miserable farmers and cottagers,
or seduced by the vanity of their wives, on pretence of their children's education (whereof
the fruits are so apparent,) together with that most wonderful, and yet more unaccountable
zeal, for a seat in their assembly, though at some years' purchase of their whole estates:
these, and some other motives better let pass, have drawn such a concourse to this beggarly
city, that the dealers of the several branches of building have found out all the commodious
and inviting places for erecting new houses; while fifteen hundred of the old ones, which is
a seventh part of the whole city, are said to be left uninhabited, and falling to ruin. Their
method is the same with that which was first introduced by Dr. Barebone at London, who died
a bankrupt.[42] The mason, the bricklayer, the carpenter, the slater, and the glazier, take
a lot of ground, club to build one or more houses, unite their credit, their stock, and their
money; and when their work is finished, sell it to the best advantage they can. But, as it
often happens, and more every day, that their fund will not answer half their design, they
are forced to undersell it at the first story, and are all reduced to beggary. Insomuch, that
I know a certain fanatic brewer, who is reported to have some hundreds of houses in this town,
is said to have purchased the greater part of them at half value from ruined undertakers; hath
intelligence of all new houses where the finishing is at a stand, takes advantage of the builder's
distress, and, by the advantage of ready money, gets fifty per cent. at least for his bargain.

It is another undisputed maxim in government, "That people are the riches of a nation;" which
is so universally granted, that it will be hardly pardonable to bring it in doubt. And I will
grant it to be so far true, even in this island, that if we had the African custom, or privilege,
of selling our useless bodies for slaves to foreigners, it would be the most useful branch
of our trade, by ridding us of a most unsupportable burthen, and bringing us money in the stead.
But, in our present situation, at least five children in six who are born, lie a dead weight
upon us, for want of employment. And a very skilful computer assured me, that above one half
of the souls in this kingdom supported themselves by begging and thievery; whereof two thirds
would be able to get their bread in any other country upon earth.[43] Trade is the only incitement
to labour; where that fails, the poorer native must either beg, steal, or starve, or be forced
to quit his country. This hath made me often wish, for some years past, that instead of discouraging
our people from seeking foreign soil, the public would rather pay for transporting all our
unnecessary mortals, whether Papists or Protestants, to America; as drawbacks are sometimes
allowed for exporting commodities, where a nation is overstocked. I confess myself to be touched
with a very sensible pleasure, when I hear of a mortality in any country parish or village,
where the wretches are forced to pay for a filthy cabin, and two ridges of potatoes, treble
the worth; brought up to steal or beg, for want of work; to whom death would be the best thing
to be wished for on account both of themselves and the public.[44]

Among all taxes imposed by the legislature, those upon luxury are universally allowed to be
the most equitable, and beneficial to the subject; and the commonest reasoner on government
might fill a volume with arguments on the subject. Yet here again, by the singular fate of
Ireland, this maxim is utterly false; and the putting it in practice may have such pernicious
a consequence, as, I certainly believe, the thoughts of the proposers were not able to reach.

The miseries we suffer by our absentees, are of a far more extensive nature than seems to be
commonly understood. I must vindicate myself to the reader so far, as to declare solemnly,
that what I shall say of those lords and squires, doth not arise from the least regard I have
for their understandings, their virtues, or their persons: for, although I have not the honour
of the least acquaintance with any one among them, (my ambition not soaring so high) yet I
am too good a witness of the situation they have been in for thirty years past; the veneration
paid them by the people, the high esteem they are in among the prime nobility and gentry, the
particular marks of favour and distinction they receive from the Court; the weight and consequence
of their interest, added to their great zeal and application for preventing any hardships their
country might suffer from England, wisely considering that their own fortunes and honours were
embarked in the same bottom.

THE

BLUNDERS, DEFICIENCIES, DISTRESSES,

AND MISFORTUNES OF QUILCA.

PROPOSED TO CONTAIN ONE AND TWENTY VOLUMES IN QUARTO

Begun April 20, 1724. To be continued Weekly, if due Encouragement be given.

     NOTE.

     Swift's friends in Ireland were not many. He had no high opinion of
     the people with whom he was compelled to live. But among those who
     displeased him least, to use the phrase he employed in writing to
     Pope, was a kindly and warm-hearted scholar named Sheridan.
     Sheridan must have taken Swift's fancy, since they spent much time
     together and wrote each other verses and nonsense rhymes. He had
     failed in his attempt to keep up a school in Dublin, and refused
     the headmastership of the school of Armagh which Lord Primate
     Lindsay had offered him, through Swift's efforts. Swift however
     obtained for him, from Carteret, one of the chaplaincies of the
     Lord-Lieutenant and a small living near Cork. Unfortunately
     Sheridan was struck off from the list of chaplains on the
     information of one Richard Tighe who reported that Sheridan, on the
     anniversary of the accession of the House of Hanover, had preached
     from the text "Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof." Poor
     Sheridan had been totally unconscious of committing any
     indiscretion, but he could not deny the fact.

     It was at Quilca, a small county village, near Kells, that Sheridan
     was accustomed to spend his vacations with his family at a small
     house he owned there. Swift used often to use this house, at
     Sheridan's desire, and spent many days there in quiet enjoyment
     with Mrs. Dingley and Esther Johnson. The place and his life there
     he has attempted to describe in the following piece; but the
     description may also stand, as Scott observes, as "no bad
     supplement to Swift's account of Ireland."

       *       *       *       *       *

     The text here given is based on that printed in the eighth volume
     of the Edinburgh edition of 1761.

     [T. S.]

THE

BLUNDERS, DEFICIENCIES, DISTRESSES,

AND MISFORTUNES OF QUILCA.[45]

But one lock and a half in the whole house.

The key of the garden door lost.

The empty bottles all uncleanable.

The vessels for drink few and leaky.

The new house all going to ruin before it is finished.

One hinge of the street door broke off, and the people forced to go out and come in at the
back-door.

The door of the Dean's bed-chamber full of large chinks.

The beaufet letting in so much wind that it almost blows out the candles.

The Dean's bed threatening every night to fall under him.

The little table loose and broken in the joints.

The passages open over head, by which the cats pass continually into the cellar, and eat the
victuals; for which one was tried, condemned, and executed by the sword.

The large table in a very tottering condition.

But one chair in the house fit for sitting on, and that in a very ill state of health.

The kitchen perpetually crowded with savages.

Not a bit of mutton to be had in the country.

Want of beds, and a mutiny thereupon among the servants, till supplied from Kells.

An egregious want of all the most common necessary utensils.

Not a bit of turf in this cold weather; and Mrs. Johnson[46] and the Dean in person, with all
their servants, forced to assist at the bog, in gathering up the wet bottoms of old clamps.

The grate in the ladies' bed-chamber broke, and forced to be removed, by which they were compelled
to be without fire; the chimney smoking intolerably; and the Dean's great-coat was employed
to stop the wind from coming down the chimney, without which expedient they must have been
starved to death.

A messenger sent a mile to borrow an old broken tun-dish.

Bottles stopped with bits of wood and tow, instead of corks.

Not one utensil for a fire, except an old pair of tongs, which travels through the house, and
is likewise employed to take the meat out of the pot, for want of a flesh-fork.

Every servant an arrant thief as to victuals and drink, and every comer and goer as arrant
a thief of everything he or she can lay their hands on.

The spit blunted with poking into bogs for timber, and tears the meat to pieces.

Bellum atque foeminam: or, A kitchen war between nurse and a nasty crew of both sexes; she
to preserve order and cleanliness, they to destroy both; and they generally are conquerors.

April 28. This morning the great fore-door quite open, dancing backwards and forwards with
all its weight upon the lower hinge, which must have been broken if the Dean had not accidentally
come and relieved it.

A great hole in the floor of the ladies' chamber, every hour hazarding a broken leg.

Two damnable iron spikes erect on the Dean's bedstead, by which he is in danger of a broken
shin at rising and going to bed.

The ladies' and Dean's servants growing fast into the manners and thieveries of the natives;
the ladies themselves very much corrupted; the Dean perpetually storming, and in danger of
either losing all his flesh, or sinking into barbarity for the sake of peace.

Mrs. Dingley[47] full of cares for herself, and blunders and negligence for her friends. Mrs.
Johnson sick and helpless. The Dean deaf and fretting; the lady's maid awkward and clumsy;
Robert lazy and forgetful; William a pragmatical, ignorant, and conceited puppy; Robin and
nurse the two great and only supports of the family.

Bellum lacteum: or, The milky battle, fought between the Dean and the crew of Quilca; the latter
insisting on their privilege of not milking till eleven in the forenoon; whereas Mrs. Johnson
wanted milk at eight for her health. In this battle the Dean got the victory; but the crew
of Quilca begin to rebel again; for it is this day almost ten o'clock, and Mrs. Johnson hath
not got her milk.

A proverb on the laziness and lodgings of the servants: "The worse their sty--the longer they
lie."[48]

Two great holes in the wall of the ladies' bed-chamber, just at the back of the bed, and one
of them directly behind Mrs. Johnson's pillow, either of which would blow out a candle in the
calmest day.

A

Short VIEW

OF THE

STATE

OF

IRELAND.

DUBLIN:

Printed by S. HARDING, next Door to the Crown in Copper-Alley, 1727-8.

     NOTE.

     This tract, written and published towards the end of the year 1728,
     summarizes the disadvantages under which Ireland suffered at the
     time, and re-enforces the contention that these were mainly due to
     England's jealousy and stupid indifference. Swift, however, does
     not lose sight of the fact that the people of Ireland also were
     somewhat to blame, though in a much less degree.

     In Dublin, where tracts of this nature had now become almost
     commonplace and where official interference in their publication
     had been found unwise and even dangerous, the issue of the "Short
     View" was effected without any official comment. In England,
     however, where it was reprinted by Mist the journalist, it was
     otherwise. Its publication brought down a prosecution on Mist, who,
     no doubt, numbered this with the many others which were visited
     upon him. It is an important tract, to which many historians of
     Ireland have often referred.

       *       *       *       *       *

     The text of the present edition is based on that of the first
     edition and compared with that given by Sir Walter Scott.

     [T. S.]

A SHORT VIEW

OF

THE STATE OF IRELAND.

I am assured that it hath for some time been practised as a method of making men's court, when
they are asked about the rate of lands, the abilities of tenants, the state of trade and manufacture
in this Kingdom, and how their rents are paid, to answer, That in their neighbourhood all things
are in a flourishing condition, the rent and purchase of land every day increasing. And if
a gentleman happens to be a little more sincere in his representations, besides being looked
on as not well affected, he is sure to have a dozen contradictors at his elbow. I think it
is no manner of secret why these questions are so cordially asked, or so obligingly answered.

But since with regard to the affairs of this Kingdom, I have been using all endeavours to subdue
my indignation, to which indeed I am not provoked by any personal interest, being not the owner
of one spot of ground in the whole Island, I shall only enumerate by rules generally known,
and never contradicted, what are the true causes of any country's flourishing and growing rich,
and then examine what effects arise from those causes in the Kingdom of Ireland.

The first cause of a Kingdom's thriving is the fruitfulness of the soil, to produce the necessaries
and conveniences of life, not only sufficient for the inhabitants, but for exportation into
other countries.

The second, is the industry of the people in working up all their native commodities to the
last degree of manufacture.

The third, is the conveniency of safe ports and havens, to carry out their own goods, as much
manufactured, and bring in those of others, as little manufactured as the nature of mutual
commerce will allow.

The fourth, is, That the natives should as much as possible, export and import their goods
in vessels of their own timber, made in their own country.

The fifth, is the liberty of a free trade in all foreign countries, which will permit them,
except those who are in war with their own Prince or State.

The seventh, is, by improvement of land, encouragement of agriculture, and thereby increasing
the number of their people, without which any country, however blessed by Nature, must continue
poor.

The eighth, is the residence of the Princes, or chief administrators of the civil power.

The ninth, is the concourse of foreigners for education, curiosity or pleasure, or as to a
general mart of trade.

The tenth, is by disposing all offices of honour, profit or trust, only to the natives, or
at least with very few exceptions, where strangers have long inhabited the country, and are
supposed to understand, and regard the interest of it as their own.

The eleventh is, when the rents of lands, and profits of employments, are spent in the country
which produced them, and not in another, the former of which will certainly happen, where the
love of our native country prevails.

The twelfth, is by the public revenues being all spent and employed at home, except on the
occasions of a foreign war.

The thirteenth, is where the people are not obliged, unless they find it for their own interest,
or conveniency, to receive any monies, except of their own coinage by a public mint, after
the manner of all civilized nations.

The fourteenth, is a disposition of the people of a country to wear their own manufactures,
and import as few incitements to luxury, either in clothes, furniture, food or drink, as they
possibly can live conveniently without.

There are many other causes of a Nation's thriving, which I cannot at present recollect; but
without advantage from at least some of these, after turning my thoughts a long time, I am
not able to discover from whence our wealth proceeds, and therefore would gladly be better
informed. In the mean time, I will here examine what share falls to Ireland of these causes,
or of the effects and consequences.

It is not my intention to complain, but barely to relate facts, and the matter is not of small
importance. For it is allowed, that a man who lives in a solitary house far from help, is not
wise in endeavouring to acquire in the neighbourhood, the reputation of being rich, because
those who come for gold, will go off with pewter and brass, rather than return empty; and in
the common practice of the world, those who possess most wealth, make the least parade, which
they leave to others, who have nothing else to bear them out, in shewing their faces on the
Exchange.

As to the first cause of a Nation's riches, being the fertility of the soil, as well as temperature
of climate, we have no reason to complain; for although the quantity of unprofitable land in
this Kingdom, reckoning bog, and rock, and barren mountain, be double in proportion to what
it is in England, yet the native productions which both Kingdoms deal in, are very near on
equality in point of goodness, and might with the same encouragement be as well manufactured.
I except mines and minerals, in some of which however we are only defective in point of skill
and industry.

In the second, which is the industry of the people, our misfortune is not altogether owing
to our own fault, but to a million of discouragements.

The conveniency of ports and havens which Nature bestowed us so liberally is of no more use
to us, than a beautiful prospect to a man shut up in a dungeon.

As to shipping of its own, this Kingdom is so utterly unprovided, that of all the excellent
timber cut down within these fifty or sixty years, it can hardly be said that the Nation hath
received the benefit of one valuable house to dwell in, or one ship to trade with.

Ireland is the only Kingdom I ever heard or read of, either in ancient or modern story, which
was denied the liberty of exporting their native commodities and manufactures wherever they
pleased, except to countries at war with their own Prince or State, yet this by the superiority
of mere power is refused us in the most momentous parts of commerce,[49] besides an Act of
Navigation to which we never consented, pinned down upon us, and rigorously executed,[50] and
a thousand other unexampled circumstances as grievous as they are invidious to mention. To
go unto the rest.

As to improvement of land, those few who attempt that or planting, through covetousness or
want of skill, generally leave things worse than they were, neither succeeding in trees nor
hedges, and by running into the fancy of grazing after the manner of the Scythians, are every
day depopulating the country.

We are so far from having a King to reside among us, that even the Viceroy is generally absent
four-fifths of his time in the Government.

No strangers from other countries make this a part of their travels, where they can expect
to see nothing but scenes of misery and desolation.[52]

Those who have the misfortune to be born here, have the least title to any considerable employment
to which they are seldom preferred, but upon a political consideration.

One third part of the rents of Ireland is spent in England, which with the profit of employments,
pensions, appeals, journeys of pleasure or health, education at the Inns of Court, and both
Universities, remittances at pleasure, the pay of all superior officers in the army and other
incidents, will amount to a full half of the income of the whole Kingdom, all clear profit
to England.

We are denied the liberty of coining gold, silver, or even copper. In the Isle of Man, they
coin their own silver, every petty Prince, vassal to the Emperor, can coin what money he pleaseth.[53]
And in this as in most of the articles already mentioned, we are an exception to all other
States or Monarchies that were ever known in the world.

As to the last, or fourteenth article, we take special care to act diametrically contrary to
it in the whole course of our lives. Both sexes, but especially the women, despise and abhor
to wear any of their own manufactures, even those which are better made than in other countries,
particularly a sort of silk plaid, through which the workmen are forced to run a sort of gold
thread that it may pass for Indian. Even ale and potatoes in great quantity are imported from
England as well as corn, and our foreign trade is little more than importation of French wine,
for which I am told we pay ready money.

Now if all this be true, upon which I could easily enlarge, I would be glad to know by what
secret method it is that we grow a rich and flourishing people, without liberty, trade, manufactures,
inhabitants, money, or the privilege of coining; without industry, labour or improvement of
lands, and with more than half of the rent and profits of the whole Kingdom, annually exported,
for which we receive not a single farthing: And to make up all this, nothing worth mentioning,
except the linen of the North, a trade casual, corrupted, and at mercy, and some butter from
Cork. If we do flourish, it must be against every law of Nature and Reason, like the thorn
at Glastonbury, that blossoms in the midst of Winter.

Let the worthy Commissioners who come from England ride round the Kingdom, and observe the
face of Nature, or the face of the natives, the improvement of the land, the thriving numerous
plantations, the noble woods, the abundance and vicinity of country seats, the commodious farmers
houses and barns, the towns and villages, where everybody is busy and thriving with all kind
of manufactures, the shops full of goods wrought to perfection, and filled with customers,
the comfortable diet and dress, and dwellings of the people, the vast numbers of ships in our
harbours and docks, and shipwrights in our sea-port towns. The roads crowded with carriers
laden with rich manufactures, the perpetual concourse to and fro of pompous equipages.

With what envy and admiration would these gentlemen return from so delightful a progress? What
glorious reports would they make when they went back to England?

But my heart is too heavy to continue this journey[54] longer, for it is manifest that whatever
stranger took such a journey, would be apt to think himself travelling in Lapland or Ysland,[55]
rather than in a country so favoured by Nature as ours, both in fruitfulness of soil, and temperature
of climate. The miserable dress, and diet, and dwelling of the people. The general desolation
in most parts of the Kingdom. The old seats of the nobility and gentry all in ruins, and no
new ones in their stead. The families of farmers who pay great rents, living in filth and nastiness
upon butter-milk and potatoes, without a shoe or stocking to their feet, or a house so convenient
as an English hog-sty to receive them.[56] These indeed may be comfortable sights to an English
spectator, who comes for a short time only to learn the language, and returns back to his own
country, whither he finds all our wealth transmitted.

  Nostrâ miseriâ magnus es.

There is not one argument used to prove the riches of Ireland, which is not a logical demonstration
of its poverty. The rise of our rents is squeezed out of the very blood and vitals, and clothes,
and dwellings of the tenants who live worse than English beggars. The lowness of interest,
in all other countries a sign of wealth, is in us a proof of misery, there being no trade to
employ any borrower. Hence alone comes the dearness of land, since the savers have no other
way to lay out their money. Hence the dearness of necessaries for life, because the tenants
cannot afford to pay such extravagant rates for land (which they must take, or go a-begging)
without raising the price of cattle, and of corn, although they should live upon chaff. Hence
our increase of buildings in this City, because workmen have nothing to do but employ one another,
and one half of them are infallibly undone. Hence the daily increase of bankers, who may be
a necessary evil in a trading country, but so ruinous in ours, who for their private advantage
have sent away all our silver, and one third of our gold, so that within three years past the
running cash of the Nation, which was about five hundred thousand pounds, is now less than
two, and must daily diminish unless we have liberty to coin, as well as that important Kingdom
the Isle of Man, and the meanest Prince in the German Empire, as I before observed.[57]

I have sometimes thought, that this paradox of the Kingdom growing rich, is chiefly owing to
those worthy gentlemen the BANKERS, who, except some custom-house officers, birds of passage,
oppressive thrifty squires, and a few others that shall be nameless, are the only thriving
people among us: And I have often wished that a law were enacted to hang up half a dozen bankers
every year, and thereby interpose at least some short delay, to the further ruin of Ireland.

"Ye are idle, ye are idle," answered Pharaoh to the Israelites, when they complained to his
Majesty, that they were forced to make bricks without straw.

England enjoys every one of these advantages for enriching a Nation, which I have above enumerated,
and into the bargain, a good million returned to them every year without labour or hazard,
or one farthing value received on our side. But how long we shall be able to continue the payment,
I am not under the least concern. One thing I know, that when the hen is starved to death,
there will be no more golden eggs.

I think it a little unhospitable, and others may call it a subtile piece of malice, that, because
there may be a dozen families in this Town, able to entertain their English friends in a generous
manner at their tables, their guests upon their return to England, shall report that we wallow
in riches and luxury.

Yet I confess I have known an hospital, where all the household officers grew rich, while the
poor for whose sake it was built, were almost starving for want of food and raiment.

To conclude. If Ireland be a rich and flourishing Kingdom, its wealth and prosperity must be
owing to certain causes, that are yet concealed from the whole race of mankind, and the effects
are equally invisible. We need not wonder at strangers when they deliver such paradoxes, but
a native and inhabitant of this Kingdom, who gives the same verdict, must be either ignorant
to stupidity, or a man-pleaser at the expense of all honour, conscience and truth.

THE STORY

OF THE

INJURED LADY.

WRITTEN BY HERSELF.

AND

THE ANSWER TO THE

INJURED LADY.

     NOTE.

     Under the guises of a gentleman and two ladies, Swift represents
     England, Scotland, and Ireland--England being the gentleman and
     Scotland and Ireland the two mistresses for whom he is affecting an
     honourable love. The Injured Lady is Ireland, who represents her
     rival, Scotland, as unworthy of her lover's attention. She
     expatiates on her own attractions and upbraids him also on his
     treatment of her. This affords Swift an opportunity for some
     searching and telling criticism on England's conduct towards
     Ireland. The fiction is admirably maintained throughout the story.

     In "The Answer to the Injured Lady" which follows "The Story,"
     Swift takes it upon himself to give her proper advice for her
     future conduct towards her lover. In this advice he reiterates what
     he has always been saying to the people of Ireland, but formulates
     it in the language affected by the lady herself. He tells her that
     she should look to it that her "family and tenants have no
     dependence upon the said gentleman farther than by the old
     agreement [the Act of Henry VII], which obliges you to have the
     same steward, and to regulate your household by such methods as you
     should both agree to"; that she shall be free to carry her goods to
     any market she pleases; that she shall compel the servants to whom
     she pays wages to remain at home; and that if she make an agreement
     with a tenant, it shall not be in his power to break it. If she
     will only show a proper spirit, he assures her that there are
     gentlemen who would be glad of an occasion to support her in her
     resentment.

       *       *       *       *       *

     The text of both the tracts here given is based on that of the
     earliest edition I could find, namely, that of 1746, collated with
     that given by Faulkner.

     [T. S.]

THE

STORY

OF THE

INJURED LADY.

Being a true PICTURE of SCOTCH Perfidy, IRISH Poverty, and ENGLISH Partiality.

WITH

LETTERS and POEMS

Never before Printed.

       *       *       *       *       *

By the Rev. Dr. SWIFT, D. S. P. D.

       *       *       *       *       *

LONDON,

Printed for M. COOPER, at the Globe in

Pater-Noster-Row. MDCCXLVI.

[Price One Shilling.]

SIR,

Being ruined by the inconstancy and unkindness of a lover, I hope, a true and plain relation
of my misfortunes may be of use and warning to credulous maids, never to put too much trust
in deceitful men.

A gentleman[58] in the neighbourhood had two mistresses, another and myself;[59] and he pretended
honourable love to us both. Our three houses stood pretty near one another; his was parted
from mine by a river,[60] and from my rival's by an old broken wall.[61] But before I enter
into the particulars of this gentleman's hard usage of me, I will give a very just impartial
character of my rival and myself.

As to her person she is tall and lean, and very ill shaped; she hath bad features, and a worse
complexion; she hath a stinking breath, and twenty ill smells about her besides; which are
yet more insufferable by her natural sluttishness; for she is always lousy, and never without
the itch. As to other qualities, she hath no reputation either for virtue, honesty, truth,
or manners; and it is no wonder, considering what her education hath been. Scolding and cursing
are her common conversation. To sum up all; she is poor and beggarly, and gets a sorry maintenance
by pilfering wherever she comes. As for this gentleman who is now so fond of her, she still
beareth him an invincible hatred; revileth him to his face, and raileth at him in all companies.
Her house is frequented by a company of rogues and thieves, and pickpockets, whom she encourageth
to rob his hen-roosts, steal his corn and cattle, and do him all manner of mischief.[62] She
hath been known to come at the head of these rascals, and beat her lover until he was sore
from head to foot, and then force him to pay for the trouble she was at. Once, attended with
a crew of ragamuffins, she broke into his house, turned all things topsy-turvy, and then set
it on fire. At the same time she told so many lies among his servants, that it set them all
by the ears, and his poor Steward was knocked on the head;[63] for which I think, and so doth
all the Country, that she ought to be answerable. To conclude her character; she is of a different
religion, being a Presbyterian of the most rank and virulent kind, and consequently having
an inveterate hatred to the Church; yet, I am sure, I have been always told, that in marriage
there ought to be an union of minds as well as of persons.

I will now give my own character, and shall do it in few words, and with modesty and truth.

I was reckoned to be as handsome as any in our neighbourhood, until I became pale and thin
with grief and ill usage. I am still fair enough, and have, I think, no very ill feature about
me. They that see me now will hardly allow me ever to have had any great share of beauty; for
besides being so much altered, I go always mobbed and in an undress, as well out of neglect,
as indeed for want of clothes to appear in. I might add to all this, that I was born to a good
estate, although it now turneth to little account under the oppressions I endure, and hath
been the true cause of all my misfortunes.[64]

Some years ago, this gentleman taking a fancy either to my person or fortune, made his addresses
to me; which, being then young and foolish, I too readily admitted; he seemed to use me with
so much tenderness, and his conversation was so very engaging, that all my constancy and virtue
were too soon overcome; and, to dwell no longer upon a theme that causeth such bitter reflections,
I must confess with shame, that I was undone by the common arts practised upon all easy credulous
virgins, half by force, and half by consent, after solemn vows and protestations of marriage.
When he had once got possession, he soon began to play the usual part of a too fortunate lover,
affecting on all occasions to shew his authority, and to act like a conqueror. First, he found
fault with the government of my family, which I grant, was none of the best, consisting of
ignorant illiterate creatures; for at that time, I knew but little of the world. In compliance
to him, therefore, I agreed to fall into his ways and methods of living; I consented that his
steward[65] should govern my house, and have liberty to employ an under-steward,[66] who should
receive his directions. My lover proceeded further, turning away several old servants and tenants,
and supplying me with others from his own house. These grew so domineering and unreasonable,
that there was no quiet, and I heard of nothing but perpetual quarrels, which although I could
not possibly help, yet my lover laid all the blame and punishment upon me; and upon every falling
out, still turned away more of my people, and supplied me in their stead with a number of fellows
and dependents of his own, whom he had no other way to provide for.[67] Overcome by love and
to avoid noise and contention, I yielded to all his usurpations, and finding it in vain to
resist, I thought it my best policy to make my court to my new servants, and draw them to my
interests; I fed them from my own table with the best I had, put my new tenants on the choice
parts of my land, and treated them all so kindly, that they began to love me as well as their
master. In process of time, all my old servants were gone, and I had not a creature about me,
nor above one or two tenants but what were of his choosing; yet I had the good luck by gentle
usage to bring over the greatest part of them to my side. When my lover observed this, he began
to alter his language; and, to those who enquired about me, he would answer, that I was an
old dependant upon his family, whom he had placed on some concerns of his own; and he began
to use me accordingly, neglecting by degrees all common civility in his behaviour. I shall
never forget the speech he made me one morning, which he delivered with all the gravity in
the world. He put me in the mind of the vast obligations I lay under to him, in sending me
so many of his people for my own good, and to teach me manners: That it had cost him ten times
more than I was worth, to maintain me: That it had been much better for him, if I had been
damned, or burnt, or sunk to the bottom of the sea: That it was but reasonable I should strain
myself as far as I was able, to reimburse him some of his charges: That from henceforward he
expected his word should be a law to me in all things: That I must maintain a parish-watch
against thieves and robbers, and give salaries to an overseer, a constable, and others, all
of his own choosing, whom he would send from time to time to be spies upon me: That to enable
me the better in supporting these expenses, my tenants shall be obliged to carry all their
goods cross the river to his town-market, and pay toll on both sides, and then sell them at
half value.[68] But because we were a nasty sort of people, and that he could not endure to
touch anything we had a hand in, and likewise, because he wanted work to employ his own folks,
therefore we must send all our goods to his market just in their naturals;[69] the milk immediately
from the cow without making it into cheese or butter; the corn in the ear, the grass as it
is mowed; the wool as it cometh from the sheep's back, and bring the fruit upon the branch,
that he might not be obliged to eat it after our filthy hands: That if a tenant carried but
a piece of bread and cheese to eat by the way, or an inch of worsted to mend his stockings,
he should forfeit his whole parcel: And because a company of rogues usually plied on the river
between us, who often robbed my tenants of their goods and boats, he ordered a waterman of
his to guard them, whose manner was to be out of the way until the poor wretches were plundered;
then to overtake the thieves, and seize all as lawful prize to his master and himself. It would
be endless to repeat a hundred other hardships he hath put upon me; but it is a general rule,
that whenever he imagines the smallest advantage will redound to one of his footboys by any
new oppression of me and my whole family and estate, he never disputeth it a moment. All this
hath rendered me so very insignificant and contemptible at home, that some servants to whom
I pay the greatest wages, and many tenants who have the most beneficial leases, are gone over
to live with him; yet I am bound to continue their wages, and pay their rents;[70] by which
means one third part of my whole income is spent on his estate, and above another third by
his tolls and markets; and my poor tenants are so sunk and impoverished, that, instead of maintaining
me suitably to my quality, they can hardly find me clothes to keep me warm, or provide the
common necessaries of life for themselves.

Matters being in this posture between me and my lover; I received intelligence that he had
been for some time making very pressing overtures of marriage to my rival, until there happened
some misunderstandings between them; she gave him ill words, and threatened to break off all
commerce with him. He, on the other side, having either acquired courage by his triumphs over
me, or supposing her as tame a fool as I, thought at first to carry it with a high hand; but
hearing at the same time, that she had thoughts of making some private proposals to join with
me against him, and doubting, with very good reason, that I would readily accept them, he seemed
very much disconcerted.[71] This I thought was a proper occasion to shew some great example
of generosity and love, and so, without further consideration, I sent him word, that hearing
there was likely to be a quarrel between him and my rival; notwithstanding all that had passed,
and without binding him to any conditions in my own favour, I would stand by him against her
and all the world, while I had a penny in my purse, or a petticoat to pawn. This message was
subscribed by all my chief tenants; and proved so powerful, that my rival immediately grew
more tractable upon it. The result of which was, that there is now a treaty of marriage concluded
between them,[72] the wedding clothes are bought, and nothing remaineth but to perform the
ceremony, which is put off for some days, because they design it to be a public wedding. And
to reward my love, constancy, and generosity, he hath bestowed on me the office of being sempstress
to his grooms and footmen, which I am forced to accept or starve.[73] Yet, in the midst of
this my situation, I cannot but have some pity for this deluded man, to cast himself away on
an infamous creature, who, whatever she pretendeth, I can prove, would at this very minute
rather be a whore to a certain great man, that shall be nameless, if she might have her will.[74]
For my part, I think, and so doth all the country too, that the man is possessed; at least
none of us are able to imagine what he can possibly see in her, unless she hath bewitched him,
or given him some powder.

I am sure, I never sought his alliance, and you can bear me witness, that I might have had
other matches; nay, if I were lightly disposed, I could still perhaps have offers, that some,
who hold their heads higher, would be glad to accept.[75] But alas! I never had any such wicked
thought; all I now desire is, only to enjoy a little quiet, to be free from the persecutions
of this unreasonable man, and that he will let me manage my own little fortune to the best
advantage; for which I will undertake to pay him a considerable pension every year, much more
considerable than what he now gets by his oppressions; for he must needs find himself a loser
at last, when he hath drained me and my tenants so dry, that we shall not have a penny for
him or ourselves. There is one imposition of his, I had almost forgot, which I think unsufferable,
and will appeal to you or any reasonable person, whether it be so or not. I told you before,
that by an old compact we agreed to have the same steward, at which time I consented likewise
to regulate my family and estate by the same method with him, which he then shewed me writ
down in form, and I approved of.[76] Now, the turn he thinks fit to give this compact of ours
is very extraordinary; for he pretends that whatever orders he shall think fit to prescribe
for the future in his family, he may, if he will, compel mine to observe them, without asking
my advice, or hearing my reasons. So that, I must not make a lease without his consent, or
give any directions for the well-governing of my family, but what he countermands whenever
he pleaseth. This leaveth me at such confusion and uncertainty, that my servants know not when
to obey me, and my tenants, although many of them be very well inclined, seem quite at a loss.

But I am too tedious upon this melancholy subject, which however, I hope, you will forgive,
since the happiness of my whole life dependeth upon it. I desire you will think a while, and
give your best advice what measures I shall take with prudence, justice, courage, and honour,
to protect my liberty and fortune against the hardships and severities I lie under from that
unkind, inconstant man.

THE ANSWER TO THE INJURED LADY.

MADAM,

I have received your Ladyship's letter, and carefully considered every part of it, and shall
give you my opinion how you ought to proceed for your own security. But first, I must beg leave
to tell your Ladyship, that you were guilty of an unpardonable weakness t'other day in making
that offer to your lover, of standing by him in any quarrel he might have with your rival.
You know very well, that she began to apprehend he had designs of using her as he had done
you; and common prudence might have directed you rather to have entered into some measures
with her for joining against him, until he might at least be brought to some reasonable terms:
But your invincible hatred to that lady hath carried your resentments so high, as to be the
cause of your ruin; yet, if you please to consider, this aversion of yours began a good while
before she became your rival, and was taken up by you and your family in a sort of compliment
to your lover, who formerly had a great abhorrence for her. It is true, since that time you
have suffered very much by her encroachments upon your estate,[77] but she never pretended
to govern or direct you: And now you have drawn a new enemy upon yourself; for I think you
may count upon all the ill offices she can possibly do you by her credit with her husband;
whereas, if, instead of openly declaring against her without any provocation, you had but sat
still awhile, and said nothing, that gentleman would have lessened his severity to you out
of perfect fear. This weakness of yours, you call generosity; but I doubt there was more in
the matter. In short, Madam, I have good reasons to think you were betrayed to it by the pernicious
counsels of some about you: For to my certain knowledge, several of your tenants and servants,
to whom you have been very kind, are as arrant rascals as any in the Country. I cannot but
observe what a mighty difference there is in one particular between your Ladyship and your
rival. Having yielded up your person, you thought nothing else worth defending, and therefore
you will not now insist upon those very conditions for which you yielded at first. But your
Ladyship cannot be ignorant, that some years since your rival did the same thing, and upon
no conditions at all; nay, this gentleman kept her as a miss, and yet made her pay for her
diet and lodging.[78] But, it being at a time when he had no steward, and his family out of
order, she stole away, and hath now got the trick very well known among the women of the town,
to grant a man the favour over night and the next day have the impudence to deny it to his
face. But, it is too late to reproach you with any former oversights, which cannot now be rectified. The
platinum being dissolved with care in acids, to the solution the muriate of ammonia was added, as
I am about to add it here. A yellow precipitate was then thrown down, as you perceive is the
case now; and this, carefully washed and cleansed, gave us that body
[pointing to a specimen of the chloride of platinum and ammonium],
the other elements, or nearly all, being ejected.

This substance being heated, gave us what we call platinum sponge, or platinum in the metallic
state, so finely divided as to form a kind of heavy mass or sponge, which, at the time that Dr. Wollaston
first sent it forth, was not fusible for the market or in the manufacturers'
workshops, inasmuch as the temperature required was so high, and there
were no furnaces that could bring the mass into a globule, and cause
the parts to adhere together.

Most of our metals that we obtain from nature, and work in our shops, are brought at last
into a mass by fusion.

I am not aware that there is in the arts or sciences any other than
iron which is not so.

Soft iron we do not bring together by fusion, but by a process which
is analogous to the one that was followed in the case of platinum,
namely, welding; for these divided grains of spongy platinum having
been well washed and sunk in water for the purpose of excluding air,
and pressed together, and heated, and hammered, and pressed again,
until they come into a pretty close, dense, compact mass, did so cohere,
that when the mass was put into the furnace of charcoal, and raised
to a high temperature, the particles, at first infinitely divided--for
they were chemically divided--adhered the one to the other, each to
all the rest, until they made that kind of substance which you see
here, which will bear rolling and expansion of every kind.

No other process than that has hitherto been adopted for the purpose of obtaining this substance
from the particles by solution, precipitation, ignition, and welding.

It certainly is a very fine thing to see that we may so fully depend upon the properties of the
various substances we have to deal with; that we can, by carrying out our processes, obtain
a material like this, allowing of division and extension under a
rolling mill--a material of the finest possible kind, the parts being
held together, not with interstices, not with porosity, but so continuous
that no fluids can pass between them; and, as Dr. Wollaston beautifully
shewed, a globule of platinum fused by the voltaic battery and the
oxy-hydrogen blowpipe, when drawn into a wire, was not sounder or
stronger than this wire made by the curious coalescence of the particles
by the sticking power that they had at high temperatures.

This is the process adopted by Messrs. Johnson and Matthey, to whose great kindness I am indebted
for these ingots and for the valuable assistance I have received
in the illustrations.

     

     The treatment, however, that I have to bring before you is of another
     kind; and it is in the hope that we shall be able before long to have
     such a thing as the manufacture of platinum of this kind, that I am
     encouraged to come before you, and tell you how far Deville has gone
     in the matter, and to give you illustrations of the principles
     on which he proceeds.

       I think it is but fair that you should see an experiment shewing
you the way in which we get the adhesion of platinum.

     Probably you all know of the welding of iron: you go into the smith's
     shop, and you see him put the handle of a poker on to the stem, and
     by a little management and the application of heat he makes them one.
     You have no doubt seen him put the iron into the fire and sprinkle
     a little sand upon it. He does not know the philosophy he calls into
     play when he sprinkles a little sand over the oxide of iron, but he
     has a fine philosophy there, or practises it, when he gets his welding.
     I can shew you here this beautiful circumstance of the sticking together
of the particles up to the fullest possible intensity of their combination.

If you were to go into the workshops of Mr. Matthey, and see them hammering and welding away,
you would see the value of the experiment I am about to shew you. I have here some platinum-wire.
This is a metal which resists the action of acids, resists oxidation
by heat, and change of any sort; and which, therefore, I may heat
in the atmosphere without any flux.

I bend the wire so as to make the ends cross: these I make hot by means of the blowpipe, and
then, by giving them a tap with a hammer, I shall make them into
one piece.

Now that the pieces are united, I shall have great difficulty in pulling them apart, though they
are joined only at the point where the two cylindrical surfaces came together. And now I have
succeeded in pulling the wire apart, the division is not at the point of welding, but where
the force of the pincers has cut it, so that the junction we have effected is a complete one. This,
then, is the principle of the manufacture and production of platinum in the old way.

The treatment which Deville proposes to carry out, and which he has carried out to a rather
large extent in reference to the Russian supply of platinum, is one altogether by heat, having
little or no reference to the use of acids. That you may know what the problem is, look at
this table, which gives you the composition of such a piece of platinum ore as I shewed you
just now. Wherever it comes from, the composition is as complicated, though the proportions vary:--

Platinum,
. . . . . 76.4 Iridium,. . . . . . 4.3 Rhodium,. . . . . . 0.3 Palladium,. . . . . 1.4 Gold,
. . . . . . .

0.4 Copper, . . . . . . 4.1 Iron, . . . . . . . 11.7 Osmide of Iridium,. 0.5 Sand, . . . . .
. . 1.4 ----- 100.5

This refers to the Uralian ore. In that state of combination, as shewn in the table, the iridium
and osmium are found combined in crystals, sometimes to the amount of 0.5 per cent., and sometimes
3 or 4 per cent. Now, this Deville proposes to deal with in the dry
way, in the place of dealing with it by any acid.

I have here another kind of platinum; and I shew it to you for this reason. The Russian Government,
having large stores of platinum in their dominions, have obtained
it in a metallic state, and worked it into coin.

The coin I have in my hand is a twelve silver rouble piece. The rouble is worth three shillings,
and this coin is, therefore, of the value of thirty-six shillings. The smaller coin is worth half
that sum; and the other, half of that. The metal, however, is unfit for coinage. When you have
the two metals, gold and silver, used for coinage, you have a little confusion in the value
of the two in the market; but when you have three precious metals
(for you may call platinum a precious metal) worked into coin, they
will be sure to run counter to one another.

Indeed, the case did happen, that the price of platinum coin fixed by the Government was such, that
it was worth while to purchase platinum in other countries, and make coin of it, and then take
it into that country and circulate it. The result was, that the Russian Government stopped
the issue. The composition of this coin is--platinum, 97.0; iridium, 1.2; rhodium, 0.5; palladium,
0.25; a little copper, and a little iron. It is, in fact, bad platinum: it scales, and it
has an unfitness for commercial use and in the laboratory, which the other well-purified platinum
has not. It wants working over again.

Now, Deville's process depends upon three points,--upon intense heat,
blowpipe action, and the volatility of certain metals.

We know that there are plenty of metals that are volatile; but this, I think, is the first time
that it has been proposed to use the volatility of certain metals--such as gold and palladium--for
the purpose of driving them off and leaving something else behind. He counts largely upon the
volatility of metals which we have not been in the habit of considering volatile, but which
we have rather looked upon as fixed; and I must endeavour to illustrate these three points by a few
experiments. Perhaps I can best show you what is required in the process of heating platinum by
using that source of heat which we have here, and which seems to be almost illimitable--namely,
the voltaic battery; for it is only in consequence of the heat that the voltaic battery affects the platinum.
By applying the two extremities of the battery to this piece of platinum-wire,
you will see what result we shall obtain.

You perceive that we can take about this heating agent wherever we like, and deal with it as we
please, limiting it in any way. I am obliged to deal carefully with it; but even that circumstance
will have an interest for you in watching the experiment. Contact
is now made.

The electric current, when compressed into thin conducting-wires offering resistance, evolves
heat to a large extent; and this is the power by which we work. You see the intense glow immediately
imparted to the wire; and if I applied the heat continuously, the effect of the current would
be to melt the wire. As soon as the contact is broken, the wire resumes its former appearance;
and now that we make contact again, you perceive the glow as before. [The experiment was repeated
several times in rapid succession.] You can see a line of light, though you can scarcely perceive
the wire; and now that it has melted with the great heat, if you examine it, you will perceive
that it is indeed a set of irregularities from end to end--a set of little spheres, which are
strung upon an axis of platinum running through it. It is that wire which Mr. Grove described as
being produced at the moment when fusion of the whole mass is commencing. In the same manner,
if I take a tolerably thick piece of platinum, and subject it to the heat that can be produced
by this battery, you will see the brilliancy of the effect produced.

I shall put on a pair of spectacles for the experiment, as there
is an injurious effect of the voltaic spark upon the eyes, if the
action is continued; and it is neither policy nor bravery to subject
any organ to unnecessary danger; and I want, at all events, to keep
the full use of my eyes to the end of the lecture.

You now see the action of the heat upon the piece of platinum--heat so great as to break in
pieces the plate on which the drops of metal fall. You perceive, then, that we have sufficiently
powerful sources of heat in nature to deal with platinum. I have here an apparatus by which
the same thing can be shewn. Here is a piece of platinum, which is put into a crucible of carbon
made at the end of one pole of the battery, and you will see the brilliant light that will be
produced. There is our furnace, and the platinum is rapidly getting heated; and now you perceive
that it is melted, and throwing off little particles. What a magnificent philosophical instrument
this is.

When you look at the result, which is lying upon the charcoal, you will see a beautifully fused
piece of platinum.

It is now a fiery globule, with a surface so bright, and smooth, and reflecting, that I cannot
tell whether it is transparent, or opaque, or what. This, then, will give you an idea of what
has to be done by any process that pretends to deal with thirty, or forty, or fifty pounds
of platinum at once.

Let me now tell you briefly what Deville proposes to do. First of all, he takes this ore, with
its impurities, and mixes it (as he finds it essential and best) with its own weight of sulphuret
of lead--lead combined with sulphur. Both the lead and the sulphur are wanted; for the iron that
is there present, as you see by the table, is one of the most annoying substances in the treatment that
you can imagine, because it is not volatile; and while the iron remains adhering to the platinum,
the platinum will not flow readily. It cannot be sent away by a high temperature--sent into
the atmosphere so as to leave the platinum behind. Well, then, a hundred parts of ore and
a hundred parts of sulphuret of lead, with about fifty parts of metallic lead, being all mingled
together in a crucible, the sulphur of the sulphuret takes the iron, the copper, and some of
the other metals and impurities, and combines with them to form a slag; and as it goes on boiling
and oxidising, it carries off the iron, and so a great cleansing takes place.

Now, you ought to know that these metals, such as platinum, iridium, and palladium, have a
strong affinity for such metals as lead and tin, and upon this a great deal depends. Very much
depends upon the platinum throwing out its impurities of iron and
so forth, by being taken up with the lead present in it.

That you may have a notion of the great power that platinum has of combining with other metals,
I will refer you to a little of the chemist's experience--his bad experience. He knows very well
that if he takes a piece of platinum-foil, and heats a piece of lead upon it, or if he takes
a piece of platinum-foil, such as we have here, and heats things upon it that have lead in them,
his platinum is destroyed. I have here a piece of platinum, and if I apply the heat of the spirit-lamp
to it, in consequence of the presence of this little piece of lead which I will place on it,
I shall make a hole in the metal. The heat of the lamp itself would do no harm to the platinum,
nor would other chemical means; but because there is a little lead present, and there is an
affinity between the two substances, the bodies fuse together at once. You see the hole I have
made. It is large enough to put your finger in, though the platinum itself was, as you saw, almost
infusible, except by the voltaic battery.

For the purpose of shewing this fact in a more striking manner, I have taken pieces of platinum-foil,
tin-foil, and lead-foil, and rolled them together; and if I apply
the blowpipe to them, you will have, in fact, a repetition on a larger
scale of the experiment you saw just now when the lead and platinum
came together, and one spoiled the other.

When the metals are laid one upon the other, and folded together and heat applied, you will not
only see that the platinum runs to waste, but that at the time when the platinum and lead are combined
there is ignition produced--there is a power of sustaining combustion. I have taken a large piece,
that you may see the phenomenon on a large scale. You saw the ignition and the explosion which
followed, of which we have here the results--the consequence of the chemical affinity between the
platinum and the metals combined with it, which is the thing upon which Deville founds his first
result.

When he has melted these substances and stirred them well up, and
so obtained a complete mixture, he throws in air upon the surface
to burn off all the sulphur from the remaining sulphuret of lead;
and at last he gets an ingot of lead with platinum--much lead, comparatively,
and little platinum.

He gets that in the crucible with a lot of scoriæ and other things, which he treats afterwards.
It is that platiniferous lead which we have to deal with in our future process. Now, let me
tell you what he does with it. His first object is to get rid of the lead. He has thrown out
all the iron, and a number of other things, and he has got this kind of compound indicated in the
table.

He may get it as high as 78 per cent. of platinum, and 22 of lead; or 5, or 10, or 15 of platinum,
and 95, or 90, or 85 of lead (which he calls weak platinum), and he then places it in the kind
of vessel that you see before you. Suppose we had the mixture here; we should have to make
it hot, and then throw in air upon the surface. The combustible metal--that is, the lead--and
the part that will oxidise, are thoroughly oxidised; the litharge would flow out in a fused state
into a vessel placed to receive it, and the platinum remains behind.

Here is the process which Deville adopts for the purpose of casting off the lead, after he has got
out the platinum from the ore. (Having made use of your friend, you get rid of him as quickly
as you can.) He gets his heat by applying the combination of oxygen and hydrogen, or of carburetted
fuel, for the purpose of producing a fire. I have here a source of coal-gas; there I have a source
of hydrogen; and here I have a source of oxygen. I have here also one of the blowpipes used
by Deville in his process for working platinum in the way I have spoken of. There are two pipes,
and one of them goes to the source of coal-gas, and the other to the supply of oxygen.

By uniting these we obtain a flame of such a heat as to melt platinum. You will, perhaps, hardly
imagine what the heat is, unless you have some proof of it; but you will soon see that I have
actually the power of melting platinum. Here is a piece of platinum-foil
running like wax under the flame which I am bringing to bear against
it.

The question, however, is whether we shall get heat enough to melt, not this small quantity, but
large masses--many pounds of the metal. Having obtained heat like this, the next consideration is
what vessel is he to employ which could retain the platinum when so heated, or bear the effects
of the flame? Such vessels are happily well supplied at Paris, and are formed of a substance
which surrounds Paris; it is a kind of chalk (called, I believe, by geologists, calcaire grossière),
and it has the property of enduring an extreme degree of heat. I am now going to get the highest
heat that we can obtain. First, I shew you the combustion of hydrogen by itself. I have not a
large supply, because the coal-gas is sufficient for most of our purposes. If I put a piece
of lime obtained from this chalk into the gas, you see we get a pretty hot flame, which would
burn one's fingers a good deal But now let me subject a piece of it to the joint action of oxygen
and hydrogen. I do this for the purpose of shewing you the value of lime as a material for
the furnaces and chambers that are to contain the substances to be operated on, and that are
consequently to sustain the action of this extreme heat. Here we have the hydrogen and the oxygen,
which will give the most intense heat that can be obtained by chemical
action; and if I put a piece of lime into the flame, we get what is
called the lime-light.

Now, with all the beauty and intensity of action which you perceive, there is no sensible deterioration
of the lime except by the mechanical force of the current of gases rushing from the jet against
the lime, sweeping away such particles as are not strongly aggregated. "Vapour of lime" some
call it; and it may be so, but there is no other change of the lime
than that under the action of heat of this highly-exalted chemical
condition, though almost any other substance would melt at once.

Then, as to the way in which the heat is applied to the substance. It is all very well for me
to take a piece of antimony, and fuse it in the flame of a blowpipe. But if I tried this piece
in the ordinary lamp flame, I should do nothing; if I tried a smaller piece, I should do little
or nothing; and if I tried a still smaller piece, I should do little or nothing; yet I have
a condition which will represent what Deville carries to the highest possible extent, and
which we all carry to the highest extent, in the use of the blowpipe. Suppose I take this piece
of antimony: I shall not be able to melt it in that flame of the candle by merely holding it
there; yet, by taking pains, we can even melt a piece of platinum there. This is a preparation which I made
for the purpose of proving the fusibility of platinum in a common candle. There is a piece
of wire, drawn by that ingenious process of Dr. Wollaston's, not
more than the three-thousandth part of an inch in diameter.

He put the wire into the middle of a cylinder of silver, and drew both together until the whole
compound was exceedingly thin; and then he dissolved away the silver by nitric acid. There was
left in the centre a substance which I can scarcely see with an eye-glass, but which I know
is there, and which I can make visible, as you see, by putting it into the candle, where the
heat makes it glow like a spark. I have again and again tried this experiment up-stairs in my own
room, and have easily fused this platinum-wire by a common candle. You see we have, therefore, heat
enough in the candle, as in the voltaic battery, or in the highly-exalted combustion of the blowpipe,
but we do not supply a continuous source of heat. In the very act of this becoming ignited,
the heat radiates so fast that you cannot accumulate enough to cause the fusion of the wire,
except under the most careful arrangement.

                                   Thus I cannot
                                     melt that piece of antimony
                                                      by simply putting it into the candle; but if I put it upon charcoal,
and drive the fiery current against it, there will be heat enough
to melt it.

  The beauty
       of the blowpipe is, that it sends hot air (making hot air by the
combustion of the flame) against the thing to be heated.

I have only to hold the antimony in the course of that current, and
particle by particle of the current impinges upon the antimony, and
so we get it melted.

You now see it red-hot, and I have no doubt it will continue to burn
if I withdraw it from the flame and continue to force the air on it.

Now, you see it burning without any heat but that of its own combustion,
which I am keeping up by sending the air against it.

It would go out in a moment if I took away the current of air from
it; but there it is burning, and the more air I give it, by this or
any other action, the better it is.

So, then, we have here not merely a mighty source of heat, but a
means of driving the heat forcibly against substances.

Let me shew you another experiment with a piece of iron. It will serve two purposes--shewing you
what the blowpipe does as a source of heat, and what it does by sending that heat where it is
wanted. I have taken iron in contrast with silver or other metals, that you may see the difference
of action, and so be more interested in the experiment. Here is our fuel, the coal-gas; and
here our oxygen. Having thus my power of heat, I apply it to the iron, which, as you see, soon gets
red-hot. It is now flowing about like a globule of melted mercury. But observe, I cannot raise
any vapour: it is now covered with a coat of melted oxide, and unless I have a great power in
my blowpipe, it is hardly possible to break through it. Now, then, you see these beautiful sparks:
you have not only a beautiful kind of combustion, but you see the iron is being driven off,
not producing smoke, but burning in a fixed condition.

How different this is from the action of some other metals--that piece of antimony, for instance,
which we saw just now throwing off abundance of fumes. We can, of course, burn away this iron
by giving plenty of air to it; but with the bodies which Deville
wants to expose to this intense heat he has not that means: the gas
itself must have power enough to drive off the slag which forms on
the surface of the metal, and power to impinge upon the platinum so
as to get the full contact that he wants for the fusion to take place.

We see here, then, the means to which he resorts--oxygen, and either coal-gas or water-gas[19],
or pure hydrogen, for producing heat, and the blowpipe for the purpose
of impelling the heated current upon the metals.

I have two or three rough drawings here, representing the kind of
furnaces which he employs.

They are larger, however, than the actual furnaces he uses. Even the furnace in which he carries
on that most serious operation of fusing fifty pounds of platinum at once is not much more than
half the size of the drawing. It is made of a piece of lime below and a piece of lime above.
You see how beautifully lime sustains heat without altering in shape; and you may have thought
how beautifully it prevents the dissipation of the heat by its very bad conducting powers.


But, to return to my subject: I must confess to you both, that if one reason of your people's
deserting us be, the despair of things growing better in their own country, I have not one
syllable to answer; because that would be to hope for what is impossible; and so I have been
telling the public these ten years. For there are three events which must precede any such
blessing: First, a liberty of trade; secondly, a share of preferments in all kinds, to the
British natives; and thirdly, a return of those absentees, who take almost one half of the
kingdom's revenues. As to the first, there is nothing left us but despair; and for the third,
it will never happen till the kingdom hath no money to send them; for which, in my own particular,
I should not be sorry.

The exaction of landlords hath indeed been a grievance of above twenty years' standing. But
as to what you object about the severe clauses relating to improvement, the fault lies wholly
on the other side: for the landlords, either by their ignorance, or greediness of making large
rent-rolls, have performed this matter so ill, as we see by experience, that there is not one
tenant in five hundred who hath made any improvement worth mentioning. For which I appeal to
any man who rides through the kingdom, where little is to be found among the tenants but beggary
and desolation; the cabins of the Scotch themselves, in Ulster, being as dirty and miserable
as those of the wildest Irish. Whereas good firm penal clauses for improvement, with a tolerable
easy rent, and a reasonable period of time, would, in twenty years, have increased the rents
of Ireland at least a third part in the intrinsic value.

I am glad to hear you speak with some decency of the clergy, and to impute the exactions you
lament to the managers or farmers of the tithes. But you entirely mistake the fact; for I defy
the most wicked and most powerful clergymen in the kingdom to oppress the meanest farmer in
the parish; and I likewise defy the same clergyman to prevent himself from being cheated by
the same farmer, whenever that farmer shall be disposed to be knavish or peevish. For, although
the Ulster tithing-teller is more advantageous to the clergy than any other in the kingdom,
yet the minister can demand no more than his tenth; and where the corn much exceeds the small
tithes, as, except in some districts, I am told it always doth, he is at the mercy of every
stubborn farmer, especially of those whose sect as well as interest incline them to opposition.
However, I take it that your people bent for America do not shew the best part of their prudence
in making this one part of their complaint: yet they are so far wise, as not to make the payment
of tithes a scruple of conscience, which is too gross for any Protestant dissenter, except
a Quaker, to pretend. But do your people indeed think, that if tithes were abolished, or delivered
into the hands of the landlord, after the blessed manner in the Scotch spiritual economy, that
the tenant would sit easier in his rent under the same person, who must be lord of the soil
and of the tithe together?

I am ready enough to grant, that the oppression of landlords, the utter ruin of trade, with
its necessary consequence the want of money, half the revenues of the kingdom spent abroad,
the continued dearth of three years, and the strong delusion in your people by false allurement
from America, may be the chief motives of their eagerness after such an expedition. [But there
is likewise another temptation, which is not of inconsiderable weight; which is their itch
of living in a country where their sect is predominant, and where their eyes and consciences
would not be offended by the stumbling-block of ceremonies, habits, and spiritual titles.[92]]

But I was surprised to find that those calamities, whereof we are innocent, have been sufficient
to drive many families out of their country, who had no reason to complain of oppressive landlords.
For, while I was last year in the northern parts, a person of quality, whose estate was let
above 20 years ago, and then at a very reasonable rent, some for leases of lives, and some
perpetuities, did, in a few months, purchase eleven of those leases at a very inconsiderable
price, although they were, two years ago, reckoned to pay but half value. From whence it is
manifest, that our present miserable condition, and the dismal prospect of worse, with other
reasons above assigned, are sufficient to put men upon trying this desperate experiment, of
changing the scene they are in, although landlords should, by a miracle, become less inhuman.

There is hardly a scheme proposed for improving the trade of this kingdom, which doth not manifestly
shew the stupidity and ignorance of the proposer; and I laugh with contempt at those weak wise
heads, who proceed upon general maxims, or advise us to follow the examples of Holland and
England. These empirics talk by rote, without understanding the constitution of the kingdom:
as if a physician, knowing that exercise contributed much to health, should prescribe to his
patient under a severe fit of the gout, to walk ten miles every morning. The directions for
Ireland are very short and plain; to encourage agriculture and home consumption, and utterly
discard all importations which are not absolutely necessary for health or life. And how few
necessities, conveniences, or even comforts of life, are denied us by nature, or not to be
attained by labour and industry! Are those detestable extravagancies of Flanders lace, English
cloths of our own wool, and other goods, Italian or Indian silks, tea, coffee, chocolate, china-ware,
and that profusion of wines, by the knavery of merchants growing dearer every season, with
a hundred unnecessary fopperies, better known to others than me; are these, I say, fit for
us, any more than for the beggar who could not eat his veal without oranges? Is it not the
highest indignity to human nature, that men should be such poltroons as to suffer the kingdom
and themselves to be undone, by the vanity, the folly, the pride, and wantonness of their wives,[93]
who, under their present corruptions, seem to be a kind of animal, suffered, for our sins,
to be sent into the world for the destruction of families, societies, and kingdoms; and whose
whole study seems directed to be as expensive as they possibly can, in every useless article
of living; who, by long practice, can reconcile the most pernicious foreign drugs to their
health and pleasure, provided they are but expensive, as starlings grow fat with henbane; who
contract a robustness by mere practice of sloth and luxury; who can play deep several hours
after midnight, sleep beyond noon, revel upon Indian poisons, and spend the revenue of a moderate
family to adorn a nauseous, unwholesome living carcase? Let those few who are not concerned
in any part of this accusation, suppose it unsaid; let the rest take it among them. Gracious
God, in His mercy, look down upon a nation so shamefully besotted!

If I am possessed of an hundred pounds a year, and by some misfortune it sinks to fifty, without
a possibility of ever being retrieved; does it remain a question, in such an exigency, what
I am to do? Must not I retrench one-half in every article of expense, or retire to some cheap,
distant part of the country, where necessaries are at half value?

Is there any mortal who can shew me, under the circumstances we stand with our neighbours,
under their inclinations towards us, under laws never to be repealed, under the desolation
caused by absentees, under many other circumstances not to be mentioned, that this kingdom
can ever be a nation of trade, or subsist by any other method than that of a reduced family,
by the utmost parsimony, in the manner I have already prescribed?

I am tired with letters from many unreasonable, well-meaning people, who are daily pressing
me to deliver my thoughts in this deplorable juncture, which, upon many others, I have so often
done in vain. What will it import, that half a score people in a coffee-house may happen to
read this paper, and even the majority of those few differ in every sentiment from me? If the
farmer be not allowed to sow his corn; if half the little money among us be sent to pay rents
to Irish absentees, and the rest for foreign luxury and dress for the women, what will our
charitable dispositions avail, when there is nothing left to be given? When, contrary to all
custom and example, all necessaries of life are so exorbitant; when money of all kinds was
never known to be so scarce, so that gentlemen of no contemptible estates are forced to retrench
in every article, (except what relates to their wives,) without being able to shew any bounty
to the poor?

AN ANSWER

TO SEVERAL LETTERS SENT ME FROM

UNKNOWN HANDS.[94]

WRITTEN IN THE YEAR 1729.

I am very well pleased with the good opinion you express of me; and wish it were any way in
my power to answer your expectations, for the service of my country. I have carefully read
your several schemes and proposals, which you think should be offered to the Parliament. In
answer, I will assure you, that, in another place, I have known very good proposals rejected
with contempt by public assemblies, merely because they were offered from without doors; and
yours, perhaps, might have the same fate, especially if handed into the public by me, who am
not acquainted with three members, nor have the least interest with one. My printers have been
twice prosecuted, to my great expense, on account of discourses I writ for the public service,
without the least reflection on parties or persons; and the success I had in those of the Drapier,
was not owing to my abilities, but to a lucky juncture, when the fuel was ready for the first
hand that would be at the pains of kindling it. It is true, both those envenomed prosecutions
were the workmanship of a judge, who is now gone to his own place.[95] But, let that be as
it will, I am determined, henceforth, never to be the instrument of leaving an innocent man
at the mercy of that bench.

It is certain there are several particulars relating to this kingdom (I have mentioned a few
of them in one of my Drapier's letters,[96]) which it were heartily to be wished that the Parliament
would take under their consideration, such as will nowise interfere with England, otherwise
than to its advantage.

The first I shall mention, is touched at in a letter which I received from one of you, gentlemen,
about the highways; which, indeed, are almost everywhere scandalously neglected. I know a very
rich man in this city, a true lover and saver of his money, who, being possessed of some adjacent
lands, hath been at great charge in repairing effectually the roads that lead to them; and
has assured me that his lands are thereby advanced four or five shillings an acre, by which
he gets treble interest. But, generally speaking, all over the kingdom the roads are deplorable;
and, what is more particularly barbarous, there is no sort of provision made for travellers
on foot; no, not near this city, except in a very few places, and in a most wretched manner:
whereas the English are so particularly careful in this point, that you may travel there an
hundred miles with less inconvenience than one mile here. But, since this may be thought too
great a reformation, I shall only speak of roads for horses, carriages, and cattle.[97]

Ireland is, I think, computed to be one-third smaller than England; yet, by some natural disadvantages,
it would not bear quite the same proportion in value, with the same encouragement. However,
it hath so happened, for many years past, that it never arrived to above one-eleventh part
in point of riches; and of late, by the continual decrease of trade, and increase of absentees,
with other circumstances not here to be mentioned, hardly to a fifteenth part; at least, if
my calculations be right, which I doubt are a little too favourable on our side.

Now, supposing day-labour to be cheaper by one half here than in England, and our roads, by
the nature of our carriages, and the desolation of our country, to be not worn and beaten above
one-eighth part so much as those of England, which is a very moderate computation, I do not
see why the mending of them would be a greater burthen to this kingdom than to that.

There have been, I believe, twenty acts of Parliament, in six or seven years of the late King,
for mending long tracts of impassable ways in several counties of England, by erecting turnpikes,
and receiving passage-money, in a manner that everybody knows. If what I have advanced be true,
it would be hard to give a reason against the same practice here; since the necessity is as
great, the advantage, in proportion, perhaps much greater, the materials of stone and gravel
as easy to be found, and the workmanship, at least, twice as cheap. Besides, the work may be
done gradually, with allowances for the poverty of the nation, by so many perch a year; but
with a special care to encourage skill and diligence, and to prevent fraud in the undertakers,
to which we are too liable, and which are not always confined to those of the meaner sort:
but against these, no doubt, the wisdom of the nation may and will provide.

Another evil, which, in my opinion, deserves the public care, is the ill management of the
bogs; the neglect whereof is a much greater mischief to this kingdom than most people seem
to be aware of.

It is allowed, indeed, by those who are esteemed most skilful in such matters, that the red,
swelling mossy bog, whereof we have so many large tracts in this island, is not by any means
to be fully reduced; but the skirts, which are covered with a green coat, easily may, being
not an accretion, or annual growth of moss, like the other.

Now, the landlords are generally too careless that they suffer their tenants to cut their turf
in these skirts, as well as the bog adjoined; whereby there is yearly lost a considerable quantity
of land throughout the kingdom, never to be recovered.

But this is not the greatest part of the mischief: for the main bog, although, perhaps, not
reducible to natural soil, yet, by continuing large, deep, straight canals through the middle,
cleaned at proper times as low as the channel or gravel, would become a secure summer-pasture;
the margins might, with great profit and ornament, be filled with quickens, birch, and other
trees proper for such a soil, and the canals be convenient for water-carriage of the turf,
which is now drawn upon sled-cars, with great expense, difficulty, and loss of time, by reason
of the many turf-pits scattered irregularly through the bog, wherein great numbers of cattle
are yearly drowned. And it hath been, I confess, to me a matter of the greatest vexation, as
well as wonder, to think how any landlord could be so absurd as to suffer such havoc to be made.

All the acts for encouraging plantations of forest-trees are, I am told, extremely defective;[98]
which, with great submission, must have been owing to a defect of skill in the contrivers of
them. In this climate, by the continual blowing of the west-south-west wind, hardly any tree
of value will come to perfection that is not planted in groves, except very rarely, and where
there is much land-shelter. I have not, indeed, read all the acts; but, from enquiry, I cannot
learn that the planting in groves is enjoined. And as to the effects of these laws, I have
not seen the least, in many hundred miles riding, except about a very few gentlemen's houses,
and even those with very little skill or success. In all the rest, the hedges generally miscarry,
as well as the larger slender twigs planted upon the tops of ditches, merely for want of common
skill and care.

I do not believe that a greater and quicker profit could be made, than by planting large groves
of ash a few feet asunder, which in seven years would make the best kind of hop-poles, and
grow in the same or less time to a second crop from their roots.

It would likewise be of great use and beauty in our desert scenes, to oblige all tenants and
cottagers to plant ash or elm before their cabins, and round their potato-gardens, where cattle
either do not or ought not to come to destroy them.

The common objections against all this, drawn from the laziness, the perverseness, or thievish
disposition, of the poor native Irish, might be easily answered, by shewing the true reasons
for such accusations, and how easily those people may be brought to a less savage manner of
life: but my printers have already suffered too much for my speculations. However, supposing
the size of a native's understanding just equal to that of a dog or horse, I have often seen
those two animals to be civilized by rewards, at least as much as by punishments.

It would be a noble achievement to abolish the Irish language in this kingdom, so far at least
as to oblige all the natives to speak only English on every occasion of business, in shops,
markets, fairs, and other places of dealing: yet I am wholly deceived, if this might not be
effectually done in less than half an age, and at a very trifling expense; for such I look
upon a tax to be of only six thousand pounds a year, to accomplish so great a work.[99] This
would, in a great measure, civilize the most barbarous among them, reconcile them to our customs
and manner of living, and reduce great numbers to the national religion, whatever kind may
then happen to be established. The method is plain and simple; and although I am too desponding
to produce it, yet I could heartily wish some public thoughts were employed to reduce this
uncultivated people from that idle, savage, beastly, thievish manner of life, in which they
continue sunk to a degree, that it is almost impossible for a country gentleman to find a servant
of human capacity, or the least tincture of natural honesty; or who does not live among his
own tenants in continual fear of having his plantations destroyed, his cattle stolen, and his
goods pilfered.

The love, affection, or vanity of living in England, continuing to carry thither so many wealthy
families, the consequences thereof, together with the utter loss of all trade, except what
is detrimental, which hath forced such great numbers of weavers, and others, to seek their
bread in foreign countries; the unhappy practice of stocking such vast quantities of land with
sheep and other cattle, which reduceth twenty families to one: these events, I say, have exceedingly
depopulated this kingdom for several years past. I should heartily wish, therefore, under this
miserable dearth of money, that those who are most concerned would think it advisable to save
a hundred thousand pounds a year, which is now sent out of this kingdom, to feed us with corn.
There is not an older or more uncontroverted maxim in the politics of all wise nations, than
that of encouraging agriculture: and therefore, to what kind of wisdom a practice so directly
contrary among us may be reduced, I am by no means a judge. If labour and people make the true
riches of a nation, what must be the issue where one part of the people are forced away, and
the other part have nothing to do?

If it should be thought proper by wiser heads, that his Majesty might be applied to in a national
way, for giving the kingdom leave to coin halfpence for its own use, I believe no good subject
will be under the least apprehension that such a request could meet with refusal, or the least
delay. Perhaps we are the only kingdom upon earth, or that ever was or will be upon earth,
which did not enjoy that common right of civil society, under the proper inspection of its
prince or legislature, to coin money of all usual metals for its own occasions. Every petty
prince in Germany, vassal to the Emperor, enjoys this privilege. And I have seen in this kingdom
several silver pieces, with the inscription of CIVITAS WATERFORD, DROGHEDAGH, and other towns.

A LETTER

TO THE ARCHBISHOP OF DUBLIN,

CONCERNING THE WEAVERS.

WRITTEN IN THE YEAR 1729.

     NOTE.

     The archbishop to whom Swift wrote was Dr. William King, for many
     years his friend. King was a fine patriot and had stood out
     strongly against the imposition of Wood's Halfpence. In this
     letter, so characteristic of Swift's attitude towards the condition
     of Ireland, he aims at a practical and immediate relief. The causes
     for this condition discussed so ably by Molesworth, Prior and Dobbs
     in their various treatises are too academic for him. His "Proposal
     for the Universal Use of Irish Manufacture" well illustrates the
     kind of practical reform Swift insisted on. Yet the insistence was
     more because of the spirit of independence such a course demanded.
     To Swift there was no hope for Ireland without a radical change in
     the spirit of its people. The change meant the assertion of
     manliness, independence, and strength of character. How to attain
     these, and how to make the people aware of their power, were always
     Swift's aims. All his tracts are assertions of and dilations on
     these themes. If the people were but to insist on wearing their own
     manufactures, since they were prohibited from exporting them, they
     would keep their money in the kingdom. Likewise, if they were to
     deny themselves the indulgence in luxuries, they would not have to
     send out their money to the countries from which these luxuries
     were obtained. There were methods ready at hand, but the practice
     in them would result in the cultivation of that respect for
     themselves without which a nation is worse than a pauper and lower
     than a slave.

       *       *       *       *       *

     The text of this edition is based on the original manuscript, and
     collated with that of Scott's second edition of Swift's collected
     works.

     [T. S.]

A LETTER TO THE ARCHBISHOP OF DUBLIN, CONCERNING THE WEAVERS.

MY LORD,

The corporation of weavers in the woollen manufacture, who have so often attended your Grace,
and called upon me with their schemes and proposals were with me on Thursday last, when he
who spoke for the rest and in the name of his absent brethren, said, "It was the opinion of
the whole body, that if somewhat were written at this time by an able hand to persuade the
people of the Kingdom to wear their own woollen manufactures, it might be of good use to the
Nation in general, and preserve many hundreds of their trade from starving." To which I answered,
"That it was hard for any man of common spirit to turn his thoughts to such speculations, without
discovering a resentment which people are too delicate to bear." For, I will not deny to your
Grace, that I cannot reflect on the singular condition of this Country, different from all
others upon the face of the Earth, without some emotion, and without often examining as I pass
the streets whether those animals which come in my way with two legs and human faces, clad
and erect, be of the same species with what I have seen very like them in England, as to the
outward shape, but differing in their notions, natures, and intellectuals, more than any two
kinds of brutes in a forest, which any men of common prudence would immediately discover, by
persuading them to define what they mean by law, liberty, property, courage, reason, loyalty
or religion.

One thing, my Lord, I am very confident of; that if God Almighty for our sins would most justly
send us a pestilence, whoever should dare to discover his grief in public for such a visitation,
would certainly be censured for disaffection to the Government. For I solemnly profess, that
I do not know one calamity we have undergone this many years, whereof any man whose opinions
were not in fashion dared to lament without being openly charged with that imputation. And
this is the harder, because although a mother when she hath corrected her child may sometimes
force it to kiss the rod, yet she will never give that power to the footboy or the scullion.

My Lord, there are two things for the people of this Kingdom to consider. First their present
evil condition; and secondly what can be done in some degree to remedy it.

I shall not enter into a particular description of our present misery; It hath been already
done in several papers, and very fully in one, entitled, "A short View of the State of Ireland."
It will be enough to mention the entire want of trade, the Navigation Act executed with the
utmost rigour, the remission of a million every year to England, the ruinous importation of
foreign luxury and vanity, the oppression of landlords, and discouragement of agriculture.

Now all these evils are without the possibility of a cure except that of importations, and
to fence against ruinous folly will be always in our power in spite of the discouragements,
mortifications, contempt, hatred, and oppression we can lie under. But our trade will never
mend, the Navigation Act never be softened, our absentees never return, our endless foreign
payments never be lessened, or our landlords ever be less exacting.

All other schemes for preserving this Kingdom from utter ruin are idle and visionary, consequently
drawn from wrong reasoning, and from general topics which for the same causes that they may
be true in all Nations are certainly false in ours; as I have told the Public often enough,
but with as little effect as what I shall say at present is likely to produce.

I am weary of so many abortive projects for the advancement of trade, of so many crude proposals
in letters sent me from unknown hands, of so many contradictory speculations about raising
or sinking the value of gold and silver: I am not in the least sorry to hear of the great numbers
going to America, though very much so for the causes that drive them from us, since the uncontrolled
maxim, "That people are the riches of a Nation," is no maxim here under our circumstances.
We have neither [manufactures] to employ them about, nor food to support them.

If a private gentleman's income be sunk irretrievably for ever from a hundred pounds to fifty,
and that he hath no other method to supply the deficiency, I desire to know, my Lord, whether
such a person hath any other course to take than to sink half his expenses in every article
of economy, to save himself from ruin and the gaol. Is not this more than doubly the case of
Ireland, where the want of money, the irrecoverable ruin of trade, with the other evils above
mentioned, and many more too well known and felt, and too numerous or invidious to relate,
have been gradually sinking us for above a dozen years past, to a degree that we are at least
by two thirds in a worse condition than was ever known since the Revolution? Therefore instead
of dreams and projects for the advancing of trade, we have nothing left but to find out some
expedient whereby we may reduce our expenses to our incomes.

Yet this procedure, allowed so necessary in all private families, and in its own nature so
easy to be put in practice, may meet with strong opposition by the cowardly slavish indulgence
of the men to the intolerable pride arrogance vanity and luxury of the women, who strictly
adhering to the rules of modern education seem to employ their whole stock of invention in
contriving new arts of profusion, faster than the most parsimonious husband can afford; and
to compass this work the more effectually, their universal maxim is to despise and detest everything
of the growth and manufacture of their own country, and most to value whatever comes from the
very remotest parts of the globe. And I am convinced, that if the virtuosi could once find
out a world in the moon, with a passage to it, our women would wear nothing but what came directly
from thence.[100]

The prime cost of wine yearly imported to Ireland is valued at thirty thousand pounds, and
the tea (including coffee and chocolate) at five times that sum. The lace, silks, calicoes,
and all other unnecessary ornaments for women, including English cloths and stuffs, added to
the former articles, make up (to compute grossly), about four hundred thousand pounds.

Now, if we should allow the thirty thousand pounds for wine, wherein the women have their share,
and which is all we have to comfort us, and deduct seventy thousand pounds more for over-reckoning,
there would still remain three hundred thousand pounds, annually spent for unwholesome drugs,
and unnecessary finery. Which prodigious sum would be wholly saved, and many thousands of our
miserable shopkeepers and manufacturers comfortably supported.

Let speculative people busy their brains as much as they please, there is no other way to prevent
this Kingdom from sinking for ever than by utterly renouncing all foreign dress and luxury.

It is absolutely so in fact that every husband of any fortune in the Kingdom is nourishing
a poisonous, devouring serpent in his bosom with all the mischief but with none of its wisdom.

If all the women were clad with the growth of their own Country, they might still vie with
each other in the cause of foppery, and still have room left to vie with each other, and equally
shew their wit and judgment in deciding upon the variety of Irish stuffs; And if they could
be contented with their native wholesome slops for breakfast, we should hear no more of their
spleen, hysterics, colics, palpitations, and asthmas. They might still be allowed to ruin each
other and their husbands at play, because the money lost would only circulate among ourselves.

My Lord; I freely own it a wild imagination that any words will cure the sottishness of men,
or the vanity of women, but the Kingdom is in a fair way of producing the most effectual remedy,
when there will not be money left for the common course of buying and selling the very necessaries
of life in our markets, unless we absolutely change the whole method of our proceedings.

This Corporation of Weavers in Woollen and Silks, who have so frequently offered proposals
both to your Grace and to me, are the hottest and coldest generation of men that I have known.
About a month ago they attended your Grace, when I had the honour to be with you, and designed
me then the same favour. They desired you would recommend to your clergy to wear gowns of Irish
stuffs, which might probably spread the example among all their brethren in the Kingdom, and
perhaps among the lawyers and gentlemen of the University and among the citizens of those Corporations
who appear in gowns on solemn occasions. I then mentioned a kind of stuff, not above eightpence
a yard, which I heard had been contrived by some of the trade and was very convenient. I desired
they would prepare some of that or any sort of black stuff on a certain day, when your Grace
would appoint as many clergymen as could readily be found to meet at your Palace, and there
give their opinions; and that your Grace's visitations approaching you could then have the
best opportunity of seeing what could be done in a matter of such consequence, as they seemed
to think, to the woollen manufacture. But instead of attending, as was expected, they came
to me a fortnight after, with a new proposal; that something should be writ by an acceptable
and able hand to promote in general the wearing of home manufactures, and their civilities
would seem to fix that work upon me. I asked whether they had prepared the stuffs, as they
had promised, and your Grace expected; but they had not made the least step in the matter,
nor as it appears thought of it more.

I did some years ago propose to the masters and principal dealers in the home manufactures
of silk and wool, that they should meet together, and after mature consideration, publish advertisements
to the following purpose.[101] That in order to encourage the wearing of Irish manufactures
in silk and woollen, they gave notice to the nobility and gentry of the Kingdom, That they
the undersigned would enter into bonds, for themselves and for each other, to sell the several
sorts of stuffs, cloths and silks, made to the best perfection they were able, for certain
fixed prices, and in such a manner, that if a child were sent to any of their shops, the buyer
might be secure of the value and goodness, and measure of the ware, and lest this might be
thought to look like a monopoly any other member of the trade might be admitted upon such conditions
as should be agreed on. And if any person whatsoever should complain that he was ill used in
the value or goodness of what he bought, the matter should be examined, the person injured
be fully satisfied, by the whole corporation without delay, and the dishonest seller be struck
out of the society, unless it appeared evidently that the failure proceeded only from mistake.

The mortal danger is, that if these dealers could prevail by the goodness and cheapness of
their cloths and stuffs to give a turn to the principal people of Ireland in favour of their
goods, they would relapse into the knavish practice peculiar to this Kingdom, which is apt
to run through all trades even so low as a common ale-seller, who as soon as he gets a vogue
for his liquor, and outsells his neighbour, thinks his credit will put off the worst he can
buy; till his customers will come no more. Thus I have known at London in a general mourning,
the drapers dye black all their old damaged goods, and sell them at double rates, and then
complain and petition the Court, that they are ready to starve by the continuance of the mourning.

Therefore I say, those principal weavers who would enter in such a compact as I have mentioned,
must give sufficient security against all such practices; for if once the women can persuade
their husbands that foreign goods besides the finery will be as cheap, and do more service,
our last state will be worse than the first.

I do not here pretend to digest perfectly the method by which these principal shopkeepers shall
proceed in such a proposal; but my meaning is clear enough, and cannot reasonably be objected
against.

We have seen what a destructive loss the Kingdom received by the detestable fraud of the merchants,
or Northern weavers, or both, notwithstanding all the care of the Governers at that Board;
the whole trade with Spain for our linen, when we had an offer of commerce with the Spaniards,
to the value as I am told of three hundred thousand pounds a year. But while we deal like pedlars,
we shall practise like pedlars; and sacrifice all honesty to the present urging advantage.

What I have said may serve as an answer to the desire made me by the Corporation of Weavers,
that I would offer my notions to the public. As to anything further, let them apply themselves
to the Parliament in their next Session. (I have coloured the fluid, that you may see the action
better.) You observe that, now I pour in the fluid, it rises and gradually creeps up the salt
higher and higher; and provided the column does not tumble over, it will go to the top.

If this blue solution were combustible, and we were to place a wick at the top of the salt,
it would burn as it entered into the wick. It is a most curious thing to see this kind of
action taking place, and to observe how singular some of the circumstances are about it. When
you wash your hands, you take a towel to wipe off the water; and it is by that kind of wetting,
or that kind of attraction which makes the towel become wet with water, that the wick is made
wet with the tallow. I have known some careless boys and girls (indeed, I have known it happen to careful
people as well) who, having washed their hands and wiped them with a towel, have thrown the
towel over the side of the basin, and before long it has drawn all the water out of the basin and
conveyed it to the floor, because it happened to be thrown over the
side in such a way as to serve the purpose of a syphon.[5] That you
may the better see the way in which the substances act one upon another,
I have here a vessel made of wire gauze filled with water, and you
may compare it in its action to the cotton in one respect, or to a
piece of calico in the other.

In fact, wicks are sometimes made of a kind of wire gauze. You will observe that this vessel is
a porous thing; for if I pour a little water on to the top, it will run out at the bottom.
 Yet I am often tempted to pity when I hear the poor farmer and cottager
lamenting the hardness of the times, and imputing them either to one or two ill seasons, which
better climates than ours are more exposed to, or to the scarcity of silver which to a Nation
of Liberty would be only a slight and temporary inconveniency, to be removed at a month's warning.

Ap., 1729. The reasonings of the authors are just, the facts true, and the consequences natural.
But his censure of those seven vile citizens, who import such a quantity of silk stuffs and
woollen cloth from England, is an hundred times gentler than enemies to their country deserve;
because I think no punishment in this world can be great enough for them, without immediate
repentance and amendment. But, after all, the writer of that paper hath very lightly touched
one point of the greatest importance, and very poorly answered the main objection, that the
clothiers are defective both in the quality and quantity of their goods.

For my own part, when I consider the several societies of handicraftsmen in all kinds, as well
as shopkeepers, in this city, after eighteen years' experience of their dealings, I am at a
loss to know in which of these societies the most or least honesty is to be found. For instance,
when any trade comes first into my head, upon examination I determine it exceeds all others
in fraud. But after I have considered them all round, as far as my knowledge or experience
reacheth, I am at a loss to determine, and to save trouble I put them all upon a par. This
I chiefly apply to those societies of men who get their livelihood by the labour of their hands.
For, as to shopkeepers, I cannot deny that I have found some few honest men among them, taking
the word honest in the largest and most charitable sense. But as to handicraftsmen, although
I shall endeavour to believe it possible to find a fair dealer among their clans, yet I confess
it hath never been once my good fortune to employ one single workman, who did not cheat me
at all times to the utmost of his power in the materials, the work, and the price. One universal
maxim I have constantly observed among them, that they would rather gain a shilling by cheating
you, than twenty in the honest way of dealing, although they were sure to lose your custom,
as well as that of others, whom you might probably recommend to them.

This, I must own, is the natural consequence of poverty and oppression. These wretched people
catch at any thing to save them a minute longer from drowning. Thus Ireland is the poorest
of all civilized countries in Europe, with every natural advantage to make it one of the richest.

As to the grand objection, which this writer slubbers over in so careless a manner, because
indeed it was impossible to find a satisfactory answer, I mean the knavery of our woollen manufacturers
in general, I shall relate some facts, which I had more opportunities to observe than usually
fall in the way of men who are not of the trade. For some years, the masters and wardens, with
many of their principal workmen and shopkeepers, came often to the Deanery to relate their
grievances, and to desire my advice as well as my assistance. What reasons might move them
to this proceeding, I leave to public conjecture. The truth is, that the woollen manufacture
of this kingdom sate always nearest my heart. But the greatest difficulty lay in these perpetual
differences between the shopkeepers and workmen they employed. Ten or a dozen of these latter
often came to the Deanery with their complaints, which I often repeated to the shopkeepers.
As, that they brought their prices too low for a poor weaver to get his bread by; and instead
of ready money for their labour on Saturdays, they gave them only such a quantity of cloth
or stuff, at the highest rate, which the poor men were often forced to sell one-third below
the rate, to supply their urgent necessities. On the other side, the shopkeepers complained
of idleness, and want of skill, or care, or honesty, in their workmen; and probably their accusations
on both sides were just.

Whenever the weavers, in a body, came to me for advice, I gave it freely, that they should
contrive some way to bring their goods into reputation; and give up that abominable principle
of endeavouring to thrive by imposing bad ware at high prices to their customers, whereby no
shopkeeper can reasonably expect to thrive. For, besides the dread of God's anger, (which is
a motive of small force among them,) they may be sure that no buyer of common sense will return
to the same shop where he was once or twice defrauded. That gentlemen and ladies, when they
found nothing but deceit in the sale of Irish cloths and stuffs, would act as they ought to
do, both in prudence and resentment, in going to those very bad citizens the writer mentions,
and purchase English goods.

I went farther, and proposed that ten or a dozen of the most substantial woollen-drapers should
join in publishing an advertisement, signed with their names to the following purpose:--That
for the better encouragement of all gentlemen, &c. the persons undernamed did bind themselves
mutually to sell their several cloths and stuffs, (naming each kind) at the lowest rate, right
merchantable goods, of such a breadth, which they would warrant to be good according to the
several prices; and that if a child of ten years old were sent with money, and directions what
cloth or stuff to buy, he should not be wronged in any one article. And that whoever should
think himself ill-used in any of the said shops, he should have his money again from the seller,
or upon his refusal, from the rest of the said subscribers, who, if they found the buyer discontented
with the cloth or stuff, should be obliged to refund the money; and if the seller refused to
repay them, and take his goods again, should publicly advertise that they would answer for
none of his goods any more. This would be to establish credit, upon which all trade dependeth.

I proposed this scheme several times to the corporation of weavers, as well as to the manufacturers,
when they came to apply for my advice at the Deanery-house. I likewise went to the shops of
several woollen-drapers upon the same errand, but always in vain; for they perpetually gave
me the deaf ear, and avoided entering into discourse upon that proposal: I suppose, because
they thought it was in vain, and that the spirit of fraud had gotten too deep and universal
a possession to be driven out by any arguments from interest, reason, or conscience.

THE

PRESENT MISERABLE STATE

OF

IRELAND.

     NOTE.

     The following tract was taken by Sir Walter Scott "from a little
     miscellaneous 12mo volume of pamphlets, communicated by Mr.
     Hartsonge, relating chiefly to Irish affairs, the property at one
     time of Thomas Kingsbury, Esq., son of Dr. Kingsbury, who attended
     Swift in his last illness." The present editor came across a
     similar volume while on a visit of research in Dublin, among the
     collection of books which belonged to the late Sir W. Gilbert, and
     which were being catalogued for auction by the bookseller, Mr.
     O'Donoghue. The little 12mo contained this tract which had, as Sir
     W. Scott points out, a portrait of Swift at the end, on the recto
     of the last leaf.

     According to Sir W. Scott, the friend in Dublin to whom the letter
     is supposed to be addressed, was Sir Robert Walpole. If Scott be
     correct, and there seems little reason to doubt his conjecture, the
     tract must have been written in the second half of the year 1726.
     In the early part of that year Swift had an interview with Walpole.
     Our knowledge of what transpired at that interview is obtained from
     Swift's letter of April 28th, 1726, to Lord Peterborough; from
     Swift's letter to Dr. Stopford of July 20th, 1726; from Pope's
     letter to Swift of September 3rd, 1726; and from Swift's letter to
     Lady Betty Germaine of January 8th, 1732/3. From these letters we
     learn that Swift was really invited by Walpole to meet him. Swift's
     visit to England concerned itself mainly with the publication of
     "Gulliver's Travels," but Sir Henry Craik thinks that Swift had
     other thoughts. "As regards politics," says this biographer, "he
     was encouraged to hope that without loss either of honour or
     consistency, it was open to him to make terms with the new powers.
     In the end, the result proved that he either over-estimated his own
     capacity of surrendering his independence, or under-estimated the
     terms that would be exacted." This remark would leave it open for a
     reader to conclude that Swift would, at a certain price, have been
     ready to join Walpole and his party. But the letters referred to do
     not in the least warrant such a conclusion. Swift's thought was for
     Ireland, and had he been successful with Walpole in his pleading
     for Ireland's cause that minister might have found an ally in
     Swift; but the price to be paid was not to the man. From Swift's
     letter to Peterborough we are at once introduced to Ireland's case,
     and his point of view on this was so opposed to Walpole's
     preconceived notions of how best to govern Ireland, as well as of
     his settled plans, that Swift found, as he put it, that Walpole
     "had conceived opinions ... which I could not reconcile to the
     notions I had of liberty." Not at all of his own liberty, but of
     that of the liberty of a nation; for, as he says (giving now the
     quotation in full): "I had no other design in desiring to see Sir
     Robert Walpole, than to represent the affairs of Ireland to him in
     a true light, not only without any view to myself, but to any party
     whatsoever ... I failed very much in my design; for I saw that he
     had conceived opinions, from the example and practices of the
     present, and some former governors, which I could not reconcile to
     the notions I had of liberty." The part given here in italics is
     omitted by Sir H. Craik in his quotation.

     Swift saw Walpole twice--once at Walpole's invitation at a dinner
     at Chelsea, and a second time at his own wish, expressed through
     Lord Peterborough. At the first meeting nothing of politics could
     be broached, as the encounter was a public one. The second meeting
     was private and resulted in nothing. The letter to Peterborough was
     written by Swift the day after he had seen Walpole, and
     Peterborough was requested to show it to that minister. The letter
     is so pertinent to the subject-matter of this volume that it is
     printed here:

                                                  "April 28th, 1726.
            "SWIFT TO THE EARL OF PETERBOROUGH.

     "MY LORD,

     "Your lordship having, at my request, obtained for me an hour from
     Sir Robert Walpole, I accordingly attended him yesterday at eight
     o'clock in the morning, and had somewhat more than an hour's
     conversation with him. Your lordship was this day pleased to
     inquire what passed between that great minister and me; to which I
     gave you some general answers, from whence you said you could
     comprehend little or nothing.

     "Sir Robert Walpole was pleased to enlarge very much upon the
     subject of Ireland, in a manner so alien from what I conceived to
     be the rights and privileges of a subject of England, that I did
     not think proper to debate the matter with him so much as I
     otherwise might, because I found it would be in vain. I shall,
     therefore, without entering into dispute, make bold to mention to
     your lordship some few grievances of that kingdom, as it consists
     of a people who, beside a natural right of enjoying the privileges
     of subjects, have also a claim of merit from their extraordinary
     loyalty to the present king and his family.

     "First, That all persons born in Ireland are called and treated as
     Irishmen, although their fathers and grandfathers were born in
     England; and their predecessors having been conquerors of Ireland,
     it is humbly considered they ought to be on as good a foot as any
     subjects of Britain, according to the practice of all other
     nations, and particularly of the Greeks and Romans.

     "Secondly, That they are denied the natural liberty of exporting
     their manufactures to any country which is not engaged in a war
     with England.

     "Thirdly, That whereas there is a university in Ireland, founded by
     Queen Elizabeth, where youth are instructed with a much stricter
     discipline than either in Oxford or Cambridge, it lies under the
     greatest discouragements, by filling all the principal employments,
     civil and ecclesiastical, with persons from England, who have
     neither interest, property, acquaintance, nor alliance, in that
     kingdom; contrary to the practice of all other states in Europe
     which are governed by viceroys, at least what hath never been used
     without the utmost discontents of the people.

     "Fourthly, That several of the bishops sent over to Ireland, having
     been clergymen of obscure condition, and without other distinction
     than that of chaplains to the governors, do frequently invite over
     their old acquaintances or kindred, to whom they bestow the best
     preferment in their gift. The like may be said of the judges, who
     take with them one or two dependants, to whom they give their
     countenance; and who, consequently, without other merit, grow
     immediately into the chief business of their courts. The same
     practice is followed by all others in civil employments, if they
     have a cousin, a valet, or footman in their family, born in
     England.

     "Fifthly, That all civil employments, granted in reversion, are
     given to persons who reside in England.

     "The people of Ireland, who are certainly the most loyal subjects
     in the world, cannot but conceive that most of these hardships have
     been the consequence of some unfortunate representations (at least)
     in former times; and the whole body of the gentry feel the effects
     in a very sensible part, being utterly destitute of all means to
     make provision for their younger sons, either in the Church, the
     law, the revenue, or (of late) in the army; and, in the desperate
     condition of trade, it is equally vain to think of making them
     merchants. All they have left is, at the expiration of leases, to
     rack their tenants, which they have done to such a degree, that
     there is not one farmer in a hundred through the kingdom who can
     afford shoes or stockings to his children, or to eat flesh, or
     drink anything better than sour milk or water, twice in a year; so
     that the whole country, except the Scottish plantation in the
     north, is a scene of misery and desolation hardly to be matched on
     this side of Lapland.

     "The rents of Ireland are computed to about a million and a half,
     whereof one half million at least is spent by lords and gentlemen
     residing in England, and by some other articles too long to
     mention.

     "About three hundred thousand pounds more are returned thither on
     other accounts; and, upon the whole, those who are the best versed
     in that kind of knowledge agree, that England gains annually by
     Ireland a million at least, which even I could make appear beyond
     all doubt.

     "But, as this mighty profit would probably increase, with tolerable
     treatment, to half a million more, so it must of necessity sink,
     under the hardships that kingdom lies at present.

     "And whereas Sir Robert Walpole was pleased to take notice, how
     little the king gets by Ireland, it ought, perhaps to be
     considered, that the revenues and taxes, I think, amount to above
     four hundred thousand pounds a-year; and, reckoning the riches of
     Ireland, compared with England, to be as one to twelve, the king's
     revenues there would be equal to more than five millions here;
     which, considering the bad payment of rents, from such miserable
     creatures as most of the tenants in Ireland are, will be allowed to
     be as much as such a kingdom can bear.

     "The current coin of Ireland is reckoned, at most, but at five
     hundred thousand pounds; so that above four-fifths are paid every
     year into the exchequer.

     "I think it manifest, that whatever circumstances could possibly
     contribute to make a country poor and despicable, are all united
     with respect to Ireland. The nation controlled by laws to which
     they do not consent, disowned by their brethren and countrymen,
     refused the liberty not only of trading with their own
     manufactures, but even their native commodities, forced to seek for
     justice many hundred miles by sea and land, rendered in a manner
     incapable of serving their king and country in any employment of
     honour, trust, or profit; and all this without the least demerit;
     while the governors sent over thither can possibly have no
     affection to the people, further than what is instilled into them
     by their own justice and love of mankind, which do not always
     operate; and whatever they please to represent hither is never
     called in question.

     "Whether the representatives of such a people, thus distressed and
     laid in the dust, when they meet in a parliament, can do the public
     business with that cheerfulness which might be expected from
     free-born subjects, would be a question in any other country except
     that unfortunate island; the English inhabitants whereof have given
     more and greater examples of their loyalty and dutifulness, than
     can be shown in any other part of the world.

     "What part of these grievances may be thought proper to be
     redressed by so wise and great a minister as Sir Robert Walpole, he
     perhaps will please to consider; especially because they have been
     all brought upon that kingdom since the Revolution; which, however,
     is a blessing annually celebrated there with the greatest zeal and
     sincerity.

     "I most humbly entreat your lordship to give this paper to Sir
     Robert Walpole, and desire him to read it, which he may do in a few
     minutes. I am, with the greatest respect, my lord,

                                 "Your lordship's
                                       "most obedient and humble servant,
                                                          "JON. SWIFT."

     Scott thinks that had Swift been anxious for personal favours from
     Walpole he could easily have obtained them; "but the minister did
     not choose to gain his adherence at the expense of sacrificing the
     system which had hitherto guided England in her conduct towards the
     sister kingdom, and the patriot of Ireland was not to be won at a
     cheaper rate than the emancipation of his country."

     The original pamphlet bears neither date nor printer's name.

     [T. S.]

THE PRESENT MISERABLE STATE OF IRELAND.

SIR,

By the last packets I had the favour of yours, and am surprised that you should apply to a
person so ill qualified as I am, for a full and impartial account of the state of our trade.
I have always lived as retired as possible; I have carefully avoided the perplexed honour of
city-offices; I have never minded anybody's business but my own; upon all which accounts, and
several others, you might easily have found among my fellow-citizens, persons more capable
to resolve the weighty questions you put to me, than I can pretend to be.

But being entirely at leisure, even at this season of the year, when I used to have scarce
time sufficient to perform the necessary offices of life, I will endeavour to comply with your
requests, cautioning you not implicitly to rely upon what I say, excepting what belongs to
that branch of trade in which I am more immediately concerned.

The Irish trade is, at present, in the most deplorable condition that can be imagined; to remedy
it, the causes of its languishment must be inquired into: But as those causes (you may assure
yourself) will not be removed, you may look upon it as a thing past hopes of recovery.

The first and greatest shock our trade received, was from an act passed in the reign of King
William, in the Parliament of England, prohibiting the exportation of wool manufactured in
Ireland. An act (as the event plainly shews) fuller of greediness than good policy; an act
as beneficial to France and Spain, as it has been destructive to England and Ireland.[103]
At the passing of this fatal act, the condition of our trade was glorious and flourishing,
though no way interfering with the English; we made no broad-cloths above 6s. per yard; coarse
druggets, bays and shalloons, worsted damasks, strong draught works, slight half-works, and
gaudy stuffs, were the only product of our looms: these were partly consumed by the meanest
of our people, and partly sent to the northern nations, from which we had in exchange, timber,
iron, hemp, flax, pitch, tar, and hard dollars. At the time the current money of Ireland was
foreign silver, a man could hardly receive 100l., without finding the coin of all the northern
powers, and every prince of the empire among it. This money was returned into England for fine
cloths, silks, &c. for our own wear, for rents, for coals, for hardware, and all other English
manufactures, and, in a great measure, supplied the London merchants with foreign silver for
exportation.

The repeated clamours of the English weavers produced this act, so destructive to themselves
and us. They looked with envious eyes upon our prosperity, and complained of being undersold
by us in those commodities, which they themselves did not deal in. At their instances the act
was passed, and we lost our profitable northern trade. Have they got it? No, surely, you have
found they have ever since declined in the trade they so happily possessed; you shall find
(if I am rightly informed) towns without one loom in them, which subsisted entirely upon the
woollen manufactory before the passing of this unhappy bill; and I will try if I can give the
true reasons for the decay of their trade, and our calamities.

Three parts in four of the inhabitants of that district of the town where I dwell were English
manufacturers, whom either misfortunes in trade, little petty debts, contracted through idleness,
or the pressures of a numerous family, had driven into our cheap country: These were employed
in working up our coarse wool, while the finest was sent into England. Several of these had
taken the children of the native Irish apprentices to them, who being humbled by the forfeiture
of upward of three millions by the Revolution, were obliged to stoop to a mechanic industry.
Upon the passing of this bill, we were obliged to dismiss thousands of these people from our
service. Those who had settled their affairs returned home, and overstocked England with workmen;
those whose debts were unsatisfied went to France, Spain, and the Netherlands, where they met
with good encouragement, whereby the natives, having got a firm footing in the trade, being
acute fellows, soon became as good workmen as any we have, and supply the foreign manufactories
with a constant recruit of artisans; our island lying much more under pasture than any in Europe.
The foreigners (notwithstanding all the restrictions the English Parliament has bound us up
with) are furnished with the greatest quantity of our choicest wool. I need not tell you, sir,
that a custom-house oath is held as little sacred here as in England, or that it is common
for masters of vessels to swear themselves bound for one of the English wool ports, and unload
in France or Spain. By this means the trade in those parts is, in a great measure, destroyed,
and we were obliged to try our hands at finer works, having only our home consumption to depend
upon; and, I can assure you, we have, in several kinds of narrow goods, even exceeded the English,
and I believe we shall, in a few years more, be able to equal them in broad cloths; but this
you may depend upon, that scarce the tenth part of English goods are now imported, of what
used to be before the famous act.

The only manufactured wares we are allowed to export, are linen cloth and linen yarn, which
are marketable only in England; the rest of our commodities are wool, restrained to England,
and raw hides, skins, tallow, beef, and butter. Now, these are things for which the northern
nations have no occasion; we are therefore obliged, instead of carrying woollen goods to their
markets, and bringing home money, to purchase their commodities.

In France, Spain, and Portugal, our wares are more valuable, though it must be owned, our fraudulent
trade in wool is the best branch of our commerce; from hence we get wines, brandy, and fruit,
very cheap, and in great perfection; so that though England has constrained us to be poor,
they have given us leave to be merry. From these countries we bring home moydores, pistoles,
and louisdores, without which we should scarce have a penny to turn upon.

To England we are allowed to send nothing but linen cloth, yarn, raw hides, skins, tallow,
and wool. From thence we have coals, for which we always pay ready money, India goods, English
woollen and silks, tobacco, hardware, earthenware, salt, and several other commodities. Our
exportations to England are very much overbalanced by our importations; so that the course
of exchange is generally too high, and people choose rather to make their remittances to England
in specie, than by a bill, and our nation is perpetually drained of its little running cash.

Another cause of the decay of trade, scarcity of money, and swelling of exchange, is the unnatural
affectation of our gentry to reside in and about London.[104] Their rents are remitted to them,
and spent there. The countryman wants employment from them; the country shopkeeper wants their
custom. For this reason he can't pay his Dublin correspondent readily, nor take off a great
quantity of his wares. Therefore, the Dublin merchant can't employ the artisan, nor keep up
his credit in foreign markets.

I have discoursed some of these gentlemen, persons esteemed for good sense, and demanded a
reason for this their so unaccountable proceeding,--expensive to them for the present, ruinous
to their country, and destructive to the future value of their estates,--and find all their
answers summed up under three heads, curiosity, pleasure, and loyalty to King George. The two
first excuses deserve no answer; let us try the validity of the third. Would not loyalty be
much better expressed by gentlemen staying in their respective countries, influencing their
dependents by their examples, saving their own wealth, and letting their neighbours profit
by their necessary expenses, thereby keeping them from misery, and its unavoidable consequence,
discontent? Or is it better to flock to London, be lost in a crowd, kiss the King's hand, and
take a view of the royal family? The seeing of the royal house may animate their zeal for it;
but other advantages I know not. What employment have any of our gentlemen got by their attendance
at Court, to make up to them their expenses? Why, about forty of them have been created peers,
and a little less than a hundred of them baronets and knights. For these excellent advantages,
thousands of our gentry have squeezed their tenants, impoverished the trader, and impaired
their own fortunes!

Another great calamity, is the exorbitant raising of the rents of lands. Upon the determination
of all leases made before the year 1690, a gentleman thinks he has but indifferently improved
his estate if he has only doubled his rent-roll. Farms are screwed up to a rack-rent, leases
granted but for a small term of years, tenants tied down to hard conditions, and discouraged
from cultivating the lands they occupy to the best advantage, by the certainty they have of
the rent being raised, on the expiration of their lease, proportionably to the improvements
they shall make. Thus is honest industry restrained; the farmer is a slave to his landlord;
'tis well if he can cover his family with a coarse home-spun frieze. The artisan has little
dealings with him; yet he is obliged to take his provisions from him at an extravagant price,
otherwise the farmer cannot pay his rent.

The proprietors of lands keep great part of them in their own hands for sheep-pasture; and
there are thousands of poor wretches who think themselves blessed, if they can obtain a hut
worse than the squire's dog-kennel, and an acre of ground for a potato-plantation, on condition
of being as very slaves as any in America. What can be more deplorable, than to behold wretches
starving in the midst of plenty!

We are apt to charge the Irish with laziness, because we seldom find them employed; but then
we don't consider they have nothing to do. Sir William Temple, in his excellent remarks on
the United Provinces, inquires why Holland, which has the fewest and worst ports and commodities
of any nation in Europe, should abound in trade, and Ireland, which has the most and best of
both, should have none? This great man attributes this surprising accident to the natural aversion
man has for labour; who will not be persuaded to toil and fatigue himself for the superfluities
of life throughout the week, when he may provide himself with all necessary subsistence by
the labour of a day or two. But, with due submission to Sir William's profound judgment, the
want of trade with us is rather owing to the cruel restraints we lie under, than to any disqualification
whatsoever in our inhabitants.

I have not, sir, for these thirty years past, since I was concerned in trade, (the greatest
part of which time distresses have been flowing in upon us,) ever observed them to swell so
suddenly to such a height as they have done within these few months. Our present calamities
are not to be represented; you can have no notion of them without beholding them. Numbers of
miserable objects crowd our doors, begging us to take their wares at any price, to prevent
their families from immediate starving. We cannot part with our money to them, both because
we know not when we shall have vent for their goods; and, as there are no debts paid, we are
afraid of reducing ourselves to their lamentable circumstances. The dismal time of trade we
had during Marr's Troubles in Scotland, are looked upon as happy days when compared with the
present.[105]

I need not tell you, sir, that this griping want, this dismal poverty, this additional woe,
must be put to the accursed stocks, which have desolated our country more effectually than
England. Stockjobbing was a kind of traffic we were utterly unacquainted with. We went late
to the South Sea market, and bore a great share in the losses of it, without having tasted
any of its profits.

If many in England have been ruined by stocks, some have been advanced. The English have a
free and open trade to repair their losses; but, above all, a wise, vigilant, and uncorrupted
Parliament and ministry, strenuously endeavouring to restore public trade to its former happy
state. Whilst we, having lost the greatest part of our cash, without any probability of its
returning, must despair of retrieving our losses by trade, and have before our eyes the dismal
prospect of universal poverty and desolation.

I believe, sir, you are by this time heartily tired with this indigested letter, and are firmly
persuaded of the truth of what I said in the beginning of it, that you had much better have
imposed this task on some of our citizens of greater abilities. But perhaps, sir, such a letter
as this may be, for the singularity of it, entertaining to you, who correspond with the politest
and most learned men in Europe. But I am satisfied you will excuse its want of exactness and
perspicuity, when you consider my education, my being unaccustomed to writings of this nature,
and, above all, those calamitous objects which constantly surround us, sufficient to disturb
the cleanest imagination, and the soundest judgment.

     NOTE.

     It was only proper and fitting that the citizens and freemen of the
     City of Dublin should express their sense of the high appreciation
     in which they held the writer of the "Drapier's Letters," and the
     man who had fought and was still fighting for an alleviation of the
     grievances under which their country suffered. The Dublin
     Corporation, in 1729, presented Swift with the freedom of the city,
     an honour rarely bestowed, and only on men in high position and
     power. To Swift the honour was welcome. It was a public act of
     justification of what he had done, and it came gratefully to the
     man who had at one time been abused and reviled by the people of
     the very city which was now honouring him. Furthermore, such a
     confirmation of his acts set the seal of public authority which was
     desirable, even if not necessary, to a man of Swift's temper. He
     could save himself much trouble by merely pointing to the gold box
     which was presented to him with the freedom. Even in this last
     moment, however, of public recognition, he was not allowed to
     receive it without a snarl from one of the crowd of the many
     slanderers who found it safer to backbite him. Lord Allen may have
     been wrong in his head, or ill-advised, or foolishly over-zealous,
     but his ill-tempered upbraiding of the Dublin Corporation for what
     he called their treasonable extravagance in thus honouring Swift,
     whom he deemed an enemy of the King, was the act of a fool. Swift
     was not the man to let the occasion slip by without advantage. In
     the substance of what he said to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of
     Dublin in accepting their gift, he replied to the charges made by
     Lord Allen, and also issued a special advertisement by way of
     defence against what the lord had thought fit to say.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Both these pieces are here reprinted; the first from a broadside in
     the British Museum, and the second from a manuscript copy in the
     Forster Collection at South Kensington.

When his Lordship had said a few words, and presented the instrument, the Dean gently put it
back, and desired first to be heard. He said, "He was much obliged to his lordship and the
city for the honour they were going to do him, and which, as he was informed, they had long
intended him. That it was true, this honour was mingled with a little mortification by the
delay which attended it, but which, however, he did not impute to his lordship or the city;
and that the mortification was the less, because he would willingly hope the delay was founded
on a mistake;--for which opinion he would tell his reason."

He said, "It was well known, that, some time ago, a person with a title[106] was pleased, in
two great assemblies, to rattle bitterly somebody without a name, under the injurious appellations
of a Tory, a Jacobite, an enemy to King George, and a libeller of the government; which character,"
the Dean said that, "many people thought was applied to him. But he was unwilling to be of
that opinion, because the person who had delivered those abusive words, had, for several years,
caressed, and courted, and solicited his friendship more than any man in either kingdom had
ever done,--by inviting him to his house in town and country,--by coming to the Deanery often,
and calling or sending almost every day when the Dean was sick,--with many other particulars
of the same nature, which continued even to a day or two of the time when the said person made
those invectives in the council and House of Lords. Therefore, that the Dean would by no means
think those scurrilous words could be intended against him; because such a proceeding would
overthrow all the principles of honour, justice, religion, truth, and even common humanity.
Therefore the Dean will endeavour to believe, that the said person had some other object in
his thoughts, and it was only the uncharitable custom of the world that applied this character
to him. However, that he would insist on this argument no longer. But one thing he would affirm
and declare, without assigning any name, or making any exception, that whoever either did,
or does, or shall hereafter, at any time, charge him with the character of a Jacobite, an enemy
to King George, or a libeller of the government, the said accusation was, is, and will be,
false, malicious, slanderous, and altogether groundless. And he would take the freedom to tell
his lordship, and the rest that stood by, that he had done more service to the Hanover title,
and more disservice to the Pretender's cause, than forty thousand of those noisy, railing,
malicious, empty zealots, to whom nature hath denied any talent that could be of use to God
or their country, and left them only the gift of reviling, and spitting their venom, against
all who differ from them in their destructive principles, both in church and state. That he
confessed, it was sometimes his misfortune to dislike some things in public proceedings in
both kingdoms, wherein he had often the honour to agree with wise and good men; but this did
by no means affect either his loyalty to his prince, or love to his country. But, on the contrary,
he protested, that such dislikes never arose in him from any other principles than the duty
he owed to the king, and his affection to the kingdom. That he had been acquainted with courts
and ministers long enough, and knew too well that the best ministers might mistake in points
of great importance; and that he had the honour to know many more able, and at least full as
honest, as any can be at present."

The Dean further said, "That since he had been so falsely represented, he thought it became
him to give some account of himself for about twenty years, if it were only to justify his
lordship and the city for the honour they were going to do him." He related briefly, how, "merely
by his own personal credit, without other assistance, and in two journeys at his own expense,
he had procured a grant of the first-fruits to the clergy, in the late Queen's time, for which
he thought he deserved some gentle treatment from his brethren.[107] That, during all the administration
of the said ministry, he had been a constant advocate for those who are called the Whigs,--and
kept many of them in their employments both in England and here,--and some who were afterwards
the first to lift up their heels against him." He reflected a little upon the severe treatment
he had met with upon his return to Ireland after her Majesty's death, and for some years after.
"That being forced to live retired, he could think of no better way to do public service, than
by employing all the little money he could save, and lending it, without interest, in small
sums to poor industrious tradesmen, without examining their party or their faith. And God had
so far pleased to bless his endeavours, that his managers tell him he hath recovered above
two hundred families in this city from ruin, and placed most of them in a comfortable way of life."

The Dean related, how much he had suffered in his purse, and with what hazard to his liberty,
by a most iniquitous judge[108]; who, to gratify his ambition and rage of party, had condemned
an innocent book, written with no worse a design, than to persuade the people of this kingdom
to wear their own manufactures.[109] How the said judge had endeavoured to get a jury to his
mind; but they proved so honest, that he was forced to keep them eleven hours, and send them
back nine times; until, at last, they were compelled to leave the printer[110] to the mercy
of the court, and the Dean was forced to procure a noli prosequi from a noble person, then
secretary of state, who had been his old friend.

The Dean then freely confessed himself to be the author of those books called "The Drapier's
Letters;" spoke gently of the proclamation, offering three hundred pounds to discover the writer.[111]
He said, "That although a certain person was pleased to mention those books in a slight manner
at a public assembly, yet he (the Dean) had learned to believe, that there were ten thousand
to one in the kingdom who differed from that person; and the people of England, who had ever
heard of the matter, as well as in France, were all of the same opinion."

The Dean mentioned several other particulars, some of which those from whom I had the account
could not recollect; and others, although of great consequence, perhaps his enemies would not
allow him.

The Dean concluded, with acknowledging to have expressed his wishes, that an inscription might
have been graven on the box, shewing some reason why the city thought fit to do him that honour,
which was much out of the common forms to a person in a private station;--those distinctions
being usually made only to chief governors, or persons in very high employments.

ADVERTISEMENT BY DR. SWIFT,

IN HIS

DEFENCE AGAINST JOSHUA, LORD ALLEN,

Feb. 18, 1729.

ADVERTISEMENT BY DR. SWIFT, IN HIS DEFENCE AGAINST JOSHUA, LORD ALLEN.[112]

"Whereas Dr. Jonathan Swift, Dean of St. Patrick's, Dublin, hath been credibly informed, that,
on Friday the 13th of this instant February, a certain person did, in a public place, and in
the hearing of a great number, apply himself to the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor of this
city, and some of his brethren, in the following reproachful manner: 'My lord, you and your
city can squander away the public money, in giving a gold box to a fellow who hath libelled
the government!' or words to that effect.

"Now, if the said words, or words to the like effect, were intended against him the said Dean,
and as a reflection on the Right Hon. the Lord Mayor, aldermen, and commons, for their decreeing
unanimously, and in full assembly, the freedom of this city to the said Dean, in an honourable
manner, on account of an opinion they had conceived of some services done by him the said Dean
to this city, and to the kingdom in general,--the said Dean doth declare, That the said words,
or words to the like effect, are insolent, false, scandalous, malicious, and, in a particular
manner, perfidious; the said person, who is reported to have spoken the said or the like words,
having, for some years past, and even within some few days, professed a great friendship for
the said Dean; and, what is hardly credible, sending a common friend of the Dean and himself,
not many hours after the said or the like words had been spoken, to renew his profession of
friendship to the said Dean, but concealing the oratory; whereof the said Dean had no account
till the following day, and then told it to all his friends."

A

LETTER

ON

MR. M'CULLA'S PROJECT ABOUT HALFPENCE,

AND A NEW ONE PROPOSED.

WRITTEN IN 1729.

     NOTE.

     The matter of this tract explains itself. M'Culla's project was to
     put in circulation notes stamped on copper to supply the deficiency
     in copper coins which Wood attempted. Swift, apparently, took a
     mild tone towards M'Culla's plan, but thought that M'Culla would
     make too much out of it for himself. He made a counter proposal
     which is fully entered into here. Nothing came either of M'Culla's
     proposal or Swift's counter-suggestion.

       *       *       *       *       *

     The present text is based on that given in the eighth volume of the
     edition of 1765, and compared with that of Faulkner's edition of
     1772. Faulkner's edition differs in many details from that given by
     Scott. The first sheet only of the original autograph manuscript is
     in the Forster Collection at South Kensington.

     [T. S.]

A LETTER ON MR. M'CULLA'S PROJECT ABOUT HALFPENCE, AND A NEW ONE PROPOSED.

 SIR,

You desire to know my opinion concerning Mr. M'Culla's project, of circulating notes stamped
on copper, that shall pass for the value of halfpence and pence. I have some knowledge of the
man; and about a month ago he brought me his book, with a couple of his halfpenny notes: but
I was then out of order, and he could not be admitted. Since that time I called at his house;
where I discoursed, the whole affair with him as thoroughly as I could. I am altogether a stranger
to his character. He talked to me in the usual style, with a great profession of zeal for the
public good, which is the common cant of all projectors in their Bills, from a First Minister
of State down to a corn-cutter. But I stopped him short, as I would have done a better man;
because it is too gross a pretence to pass at any time, and especially in this age, where we
all know one another so well. Yet, whoever proposeth any scheme which may prove to be a public
benefit, I shall not quarrel if it prove likewise very beneficial to the contriver. It is certain,
that next to the want of silver, our greatest distress in point of coin is the want of small
change, which may be some poor relief for the defect of the former, since the Crown will not
please to take that work upon them here as they do in England. One thing in Mr. M'Culla's book
is certainly right, that no law hinders me from giving a payable note upon leather, wood, copper,
brass, iron, or any other material (except gold and silver) as well as upon paper. The question
is, whether I can sue him on a copper bond, when there is neither his hand nor seal, nor witnesses
to prove it? To supply this, he hath proposed, that the materials upon which his note is written,
shall be in some degree of value equal to the debt. But that is one principal matter to be
enquired into. His scheme is this:

He gives you a piece of copper for a halfpenny or penny, stamped with a promissory note to
pay you twentypence for every pound of the said copper notes, whenever you shall return them.
Eight and forty of the halfpenny pieces are to weigh a pound, and he sells you that pound coined
and stamped for two shillings: by which he clearly gains a little more than sixteen per cent.;
that is to say, twopence in every shilling. This will certainly arise to a great sum, if he
should circulate as large a quantity of his notes, as the kingdom, under the great dearth of
silver, may very probably require: enough indeed to make any Irish tradesman's fortune; which,
however, I should not repine at in the least, if we could be sure of his fair-dealing.

It was obvious for me to raise the common objection, why Mr. M'Culla would not give security
to pay the whole sum to any man who returned him his copper notes, as my Lord Dartmouth and
Colonel Moor were, by their patents, obliged to do.[113] To which he gave some answers plausible
enough. First, "He conceived that his coins were much nearer to the intrinsic value than any
of those coined by patents, the bulk and goodness of the metal fully equalling the best English
halfpence made by the crown: That he apprehended the ill-will of envious and designing people,
who, if they found him to have a great vent for his notes, since he wanted the protection of
a patent, might make a run upon him, which he could not be able to support: And lastly, that
his copper, (as is already said,) being equal in value and bulk to the English halfpence, he
did not apprehend they should ever be returned, unless a combination, proceeding from spite
and envy, might be formed against him."

But there are some points in his proposals which I cannot well answer for; nor do I know whether
he would be able to do it himself. The first is, whether the copper he gives us will be as
good as what the crown provided for the English halfpence and farthings; and, secondly, whether
he will always continue to give us as good; and, thirdly, when he will think fit to stop his
hand, and give us no more; for I should be as sorry to lie at the mercy of Mr. M'Culla, as
of Mr. Wood.

There is another difficulty of the last importance. It is known enough that the Crown is supposed
to be neither gainer nor loser by the coinage of any metal; for they subtract, or ought to
subtract, no more from the intrinsic value than what will just pay all the charges of the mint;
and how much that will amount to, is the question. By what I could gather from Mr. M'Culla,
good copper is worth fourteenpence per pound. By this computation, if he sells his copper notes
for two shillings the pound, and will pay twentypence back, then the expense of coinage for
one pound of copper must be sixpence, which is thirty per cent. The world should be particularly
satisfied on this article before he vends his notes; for the discount of thirty per cent. is
prodigious, and vastly more than I can conceive it ought to be. For, if we add to that proportion
the sixteen per cent. which he avows to keep for his own profit, there will be a discount of
about forty-six per cent. Or, to reckon, I think, a fairer way: Whoever buys a pound of Mr.
M'Culla's coin, at two shillings per pound, carries home only the real value of fourteenpence,
which is a pound of copper; and thus he is a loser of 41l. 13s. 4d. per cent.[114] But, however,
this high discount of thirty per cent. will be no objection against M'Culla's proposals; because,
if the charge of coinage will honestly amount to so much, and we suppose his copper notes may
be returned upon him, he will be the greater sufferer of the two; because the buyer can lose
but fourpence in the pound, and M'Culla must lose sixpence, which was the charge of the coinage.[115]

Upon the whole, there are some points which must be settled to the general satisfaction, before
we can safely take Mr. M'Culla's copper notes for value received; and how he will give that
satisfaction, is not within my knowledge or conjecture. The first point is, that we shall be
always sure of receiving good copper, equal in bulk and fineness to the best English halfpence.

The second point is, to know what allowance he makes to himself, either out of the weight or
mixture of his copper, or both, for the charge of his coinage. As to the weight, the matter
is easy by his own scheme; for, as I have said before, he proposes forty-eight to weigh a pound,
which he gives you for two shillings, and receives it by the pound at twentypence: so that,
supposing pure copper to be fourteenpence a pound, he makes you pay thirty per cent. for the
labour of coining, as I have already observed, besides sixteen per cent. when he sells it.
But if to this he adds any alloy, to debase the metal, although it be not above ten per cent.;
then Mr. M'Culla's promissory notes will, as to the intrinsic value of the metal, be above
forty-seven per cent. discount. 

You remember that in that rising current having its origin at the candle, we found that one part
was condensable against a cold spoon, or against a clean plate, or
any other cold thing, and another part was incondensable.

                      
                       
                      We will
  first take the condensable part, and examine it; and, strange to
say, we find that that part of the product is just water--nothing
but water.

On the last occasion I spoke of it incidentally, merely saying that water was produced among the
condensable products of the candle; but to-day I wish to draw your attention to water, that we
may examine it carefully, especially in relation to this subject, and also with respect to its
general existence on the surface of the globe.

Now, having previously arranged an experiment for the purpose of condensing water from the
products of the candle, my next point will be to shew you this water;
and perhaps one of the best means that I can adopt for shewing its
presence to so many at once, is to exhibit a very visible action of
water, and then to apply that test to what is collected as a drop
at the bottom of that vessel.

I have here a chemical substance, discovered by Sir Humphrey Davy, which has a very energetic
action upon water, which I shall use as a test of the presence of
water.

If I take a little piece of it--it is called potassium, as coming from potash,--if I take a little
piece of it, and throw it into that basin, you see how it shews the presence of water by lighting
up and floating about, burning with a violent flame.

I am now going to take away the candle which has been burning beneath the vessel containing
ice and salt, and you see a drop of water--a condensed product of the candle--hanging from
under the surface of the dish.

I will shew you that potassium has the same action upon it as upon the water in that basin
in the experiment we have just tried. See, it takes fire, and burns in just the same manner.
I will take another drop upon this glass slab, and when I put the potassium on to it, you see
at once, from its taking fire, that there is water present. Now, that water was produced by the
candle. In the same manner, if I put this spirit-lamp under that jar, you will soon see the latter
become damp, from the dew which is deposited upon it--that dew being the result of combustion;
and I have no doubt you will shortly see by the drops of water which fall upon the paper below,
that there is a good deal of water produced from the combustion of the lamp. I will let it remain,
and you can afterwards see how much water has been collected. So, if I take a gas-lamp, and
put any cooling arrangement over it, I shall get water--water being likewise produced from the
combustion of gas. Here, in this bottle, is a quantity of water--perfectly pure, distilled water,
produced from the combustion of a gas-lamp--in no point different from the water that you distil
from the river, or ocean, or spring, but exactly the same thing. Water is one individual thing--it
never changes.

We can add to it by careful adjustment, for a little while, or we can take it apart, and get other
things from it; but water, as water, remains always the same, either in a solid, liquid, or
fluid state. Here, again [holding another bottle], is some water produced by the combustion of
an oil-lamp. A pint of oil, when burnt fairly and properly, produces rather more than a pint
of water.

Here, again, is some water, produced by a rather long experiment from a wax candle. And so we
can go on with almost all combustible substances, and find that if they burn with a flame, as a candle,
they produce water. You may make these experiments yourselves. The head of a poker is a very
good thing to try with, and if it remains cold long enough over the candle, you may get water condensed
in drops on it; or a spoon or ladle, or anything else may be used,
provided it be clean, and can carry off the heat, and so condense
the water.

And now--to go into the history of this wonderful production of water from combustibles, and
by combustion--I must first of all tell you that this water may exist in different conditions;
and although you may now be acquainted with all its forms, they still require us to give a little
attention to them for the present, so that we may perceive how the water, whilst it goes through
its Protean changes, is entirely and absolutely the same thing, whether it is produced from
a candle, by combustion, or from the rivers or ocean.

First of all, water, when at the coldest, is ice. Now, we philosophers---I hope that I may class
you and myself together in this case--speak of water as water, whether it be in its solid, or
liquid, or gaseous state,--we speak of it chemically as water. Water is a thing compounded of two
substances, one of which we have derived from the candle, and the other we shall find elsewhere.
Water may occur as ice; and you have had most excellent opportunities lately of seeing this.
Ice changes back into water--for we had on our last Sabbath a strong instance of this change,
by the sad catastrophe which occurred in our own house, as well as in the houses of many of our
friends,--ice changes back into water when the temperature is raised: water also changes into
steam when it is warmed enough. The water which we have here before us is in its densest state[11],
and although it changes in weight, in condition, in form, and in many other qualities, it
still is water; and whether we alter it into ice by cooling, or whether we change it into steam
by heat, it increases in volume,--in the one case very strangely
and powerfully, and in the other case very largely and wonderfully.

For instance, I will now take this tin cylinder, and pour a little water into it; and seeing how much
water I pour in, you may easily estimate for yourselves how high it will rise in the vessel: it will
cover the bottom about two inches. I am now about to convert the water into steam, for the purpose
of shewing to you the different volumes which water occupies in its different states of water
and steam.

Let us now take the case of water changing into ice: we can effect that by cooling it in a
mixture of salt and pounded ice[12]; and I shall do so to shew you the expansion of water into
a thing of larger bulk when it is so changed.

These bottles [holding one] are made of strong cast iron, very strong and very thick--I suppose
they are the third of an inch in thickness; they are very carefully filled with water, so as
to exclude all air, and then they are screwed down tight. We shall see that when we freeze the water
in these iron vessels, they will not be able to hold the ice, and the expansion within them
will break them in pieces as these [pointing to some fragments] are broken, which have been bottles
of exactly the same kind.

I am about to put these two bottles into that mixture of ice and salt, for the purpose of
shewing that when water becomes ice, it changes in volume in this extraordinary way.

In the mean time look at the change which has taken place in the water to which we have applied heat--it
is losing its fluid state. You may tell this by two or three circumstances. I have covered
the mouth of this glass flask, in which water is boiling, with a watch-glass. Do you see what
happens? It rattles away like a valve chattering, because the steam rising from the boiling water
sends the valve up and down, and forces itself out, and so makes it clatter. You can very easily
perceive that the flask is quite full of steam, or else it would not force its way out. You see,
also, that the flask contains a substance very much larger than the water, for it fills the
whole of the flask over and over again, and there it is blowing away into the air; and yet
you cannot observe any great diminution in the bulk of the water, which shews you that its change
of bulk is very great when it becomes steam.

I have put our iron bottles containing water into this freezing mixture, that you may see what
happens. No communication will take place, you observe, between the water in the bottles and
the ice in the outer vessel. But there will be a conveyance of heat from the one to the other;
and if we are successful--we are making our experiment in very great haste--I expect you will by-and-by,
so soon as the cold has taken possession of the bottles and their contents, hear a pop on
the occasion of the bursting of the one bottle or the other; and, when we come to examine the
bottles, we shall find their contents masses of ice, partly enclosed
by the covering of iron which is too small for them, because the ice
is larger in bulk than the water.

You know very well that ice floats upon water: if a boy falls through a hole into the water,
he tries to get on the ice again to float him up. Why does the ice
float?--think of that, and philosophise.

Because the ice is larger than the quantity of water which can produce it; and therefore the
ice weighs the lighter, and the water is the heavier.

To return now to the action of heat on water. See what a stream of vapour is issuing from this
tin vessel!

You observe, we must have made it quite full of steam to have it sent out in that great quantity.
And now, as we can convert the water into steam by heat, we convert
it back into liquid water by the application of cold.

And if we take a glass, or any other cold thing, and hold it over this steam, see how soon
it gets damp with water; it will condense it until the glass is warm--it condenses the water which
is now running down the sides of it.

I have here another experiment to shew the condensation of water from a vaporous state back into
a liquid state, in the same way as the vapour, one of the products of the candle, was condensed
against the bottom of the dish, and obtained in the form of water; and to shew you how truly
and thoroughly these changes take place, I will take this tin flask, which is now full of steam,
and close the top. We shall see what takes place when we cause this water or steam to return back
to the fluid state by pouring some cold water on the outside. [The Lecturer poured the cold water
over the vessel, when it immediately collapsed.] You see what has happened. If I had closed
the stopper, and still kept the heat applied to it, it would have burst the vessel; yet, when
the steam returns to the state of water, the vessel collapses, there being a vacuum produced
inside by the condensation of the steam. I shew you these experiments for the purpose of pointing
out that in all these occurrences there is nothing that changes the water into any other thing--it
still remains water; and so the vessel is obliged to give way, and is crushed inwards, as in the
other case, by the further application of heat, it would have been
blown outwards.

And what do you think the bulk of that water is when it assumes the vaporous condition? You see
that cube [pointing to a cubic foot]. There, by its side, is a cubic inch, exactly the same shape
as the cubic foot, and that bulk of water [the cubic inch] is sufficient to expand into that
bulk [the cubic foot] of steam; and, on the contrary, the application
of cold will contract that large quantity of steam into this small
quantity of water.

[One of the iron bottles burst at that moment.] Ah! There is one of our bottles burst, and here
you see is a crack down one side an eighth of an inch in width. [The other now exploded, sending
the freezing mixture in all directions.] This other bottle is also broken; although the iron
was nearly half-an-inch thick, the ice has burst it asunder. These changes always take place in
water: they do not require to be always produced by artificial means,--we only use them here
because we want to produce a small winter round that little bottle,
instead of a long and severe one.

But if you go to Canada, or to the North, you will find the temperature there out of doors will
do the same thing as has been done here by the freezing mixture.

To return to our quiet philosophy. We shall not in future be deceived, therefore, by any changes
that are produced in water. Water is the same everywhere, whether produced from the ocean or from
the flame of the candle. Where, then, is this water which we get from a candle? I must anticipate
a little, and tell you. It evidently comes, as to part of it, from the candle; but is it within
the candle beforehand? No. It is not in the candle; and it is not in the air round about the
candle which is necessary for its combustion. It is neither in one nor the other, but it comes
from their conjoint action, a part from the candle, a part from the
air; and this we have now to trace, so that we may understand thoroughly
what is the chemical history of a candle when we have it burning on
our table.

How shall we get at this? I myself know plenty of ways, but I want you to get at it from the
association in your own minds of what I have already told you.

I think you can see a little in this way. We had just now the case of a substance which acted
upon the water in the way that Sir Humphrey Davy shewed us[13], and
which I am now going to recall to your minds by making again an experiment
upon that dish.

It is a thing which we have to handle very carefully, for you see, if I allow a little splash of water
to come upon this mass, it sets fire to part of it; and if there
were free access of air, it would quickly set fire to the whole.

Now, this is a metal--a beautiful and bright metal--which rapidly changes in the air, and,
as you know, rapidly changes in water.

I will put a piece on the water, and you see it burns beautifully, making a floating lamp, using the
water in the place of air. Again, if we take a few iron filings or turnings, and put them in
water, we find that they likewise undergo an alteration.

They do not change so much as this potassium does, but they change somewhat in the same way;
they become rusty, and shew an action upon the water, though in a different degree of intensity
to what this beautiful metal does: but they act upon the water in
the same manner generally as this potassium.

I want you to put these different facts together in your minds. I have another metal here [zinc],
and when we examined it with regard to the solid substance produced
by its combustion, we had an opportunity of seeing that it burned;
and I suppose, if I take a little strip of this zinc and put it over
the candle, you will see something half-way, as it were, between the
combustion of potassium on the water and the action of iron,--you
see there is a sort of combustion.

It has burned, leaving a white ash or residuum, and here also we find that the metal has a
certain amount of action upon water.

By degrees we have learned how to modify the action of these different
substances, and to make them tell us what we want to know. And now,
first of all, I take iron. It is a common thing in all chemical reactions,
where we get any result of this kind, to find that it is increased
by the action of heat; and if we want to examine minutely and carefully
the action of bodies one upon another, we often have to refer to the
action of heat.

I shall here subjoin some computations relating to Mr. M'Culla's copper notes. They were sent
to me by a person well skilled in such calculations; and therefore I refer them to the reader.[118]

Mr. M'Culla charges good copper at fourteenpence per pound: but I know not whether he means
avoirdupois or troy weight.

  Avoirdupois is sixteen ounces to a pound,                    6960 grains.
  A pound troy weight,                                         5760 grains.
    Mr. M'Culla's copper is fourteenpence per pound avoirdupois.
  Two of Mr. M'Culla's penny notes, one with another, weigh     524 grains.
  By which computation, two shillings of his notes, which he
    sells for one pound weight, will weigh                     6288 grains.
  But one pound avoirdupois weighs, as above,                  6960 grains.
    This difference makes 10 per cent.
    to Mr. M'Culla's profit, in point of weight.
    The old Patrick and David halfpenny weighs                  149 grains.
    Mr. M'Culla's halfpenny weighs                              131 grains.
                                                               ------
                                         The difference is       18

  Which is equal to 10-1/2 per cent.
  The English halfpenny of King Charles II. weighs              167 grains.
  M'Culla's halfpenny weighs                                    131 grains.
                                                               ------
                                             The difference      36

  Which difference, allowed a fifth part, is 20 per cent.

ANOTHER COMPUTATION.

Mr. M'Culla allows his pound of copper (coinage included) to be worth twentypence; for which
he demands two shillings.

  His coinage he computes at sixpence per pound weight; therefore,
    he laying out only twentypence, and gaining fourpence,
    he makes per cent. profit,                                        20
  The sixpence per pound weight, allowed for coinage,
    makes per cent.                                                   30
  The want of weight in his halfpenny, compared as above,
    is per cent.                                                      10
  By all which (viz. coinage, profit, and want of weight)
    --the public loses per cent.                                      60

If Mr. M'Culla's coins will not pass, and he refuses to receive them back, the owner cannot
sell them at above twelvepence per pound weight; whereby, with the defect of weight of 10 per
cent., he will lose 60 per cent.

The scheme of the society, raised as high as it can possibly be, will be only thus:

  For interest of their money, per cent.                               8
  For coinage, instead of 10, suppose at most per cent.               20
  For l.300 laid out for tools, a mint, and house-rent,
    charge 3 per cent. upon the coinage of l.10,000,                 3
                                                                     ----
  Charges in all upon interest, coinage, &c. per cent.,               31

Which, with all the advantages above-mentioned, of the goodness of the metal, the largeness
of the coin, the deepness and fairness of the impression, the assurance of the society confining
itself to such a sum as they undertake, or as the kingdom shall approve; and lastly, their
paying in gold or silver for all their coin returned upon their hands without any defalcation,
would be of mighty benefit to the kingdom; and, with a little steadiness and activity, could,
I doubt not, be easily compassed. 

Mr. Anderson will give me a tube coming from our oxygen reservoir, and I am about to apply it to
this flame, which I will previously make burn badly on purpose. There comes the oxygen: what
a combustion that makes! But if I shut it off, what becomes of the
lamp?

A PROPOSAL

THAT

ALL THE LADIES AND WOMEN OF IRELAND

SHOULD APPEAR CONSTANTLY IN

IRISH MANUFACTURES.

     NOTE.

