In this one example I have given the bare and simple outline by following which a weaver whose
previous work has been only rag carpet weaving can manufacture a good and valuable wool rug.
The difference will be simply that of close warping and a substitution of wool for rags. Its
value will be considerably increased or lessened by the choice of material both in quality
and colour and the closeness and perfection of weaving.

The example given calls for a rug six feet long by three feet in width. "Why," said Mara, her eyes
staring with excitement, "that was just like this shipwreck; and 'twas Ariel made those balls
of fire; he says so; he said he 'flamed amazement' all over the ship."

"I've heard Miss Roxy tell about witches that made storms," said Sally.
 When this is complete, two narrow strips one foot in width, woven with mixed black filling,
must be sewed on either side, making a rug eight feet long and five in width. It is not a disadvantage
to have this border strip sewn, instead of being woven as a part of the centre. Many of the
cheaper Oriental weavings are put together in this way, and as many of the older house-looms
will only weave a three-foot width, it is well to know that that need not prevent the production
of rugs of considerable size.

Endless variations of this very simple yarn rug can be made with variation in size as well
as in colour. Two breadths and two borders, the breadths three feet in width and the borders
one foot and six inches, will give a breadth of nine feet, which with a corresponding length
will give a rug which will sufficiently cover the floor of an ordinary room. If the centre
is skilfully mottled and shaded, it will make a floor spread of beautiful colour, and one which
could hardly be found in shops.

The border can be made brighter, as well as firmer and stiffer, by using two filling threads
together--a red and a black; or an alternate use of red and black, using two shuttles, will
give a lighter and better effect than when black is used exclusively.

After size and weight--or, to speak comprehensively, quality--is secured in this kind of simple
weaving, the next most important thing is colour. Of course the colour must be absolutely fast,
but I have shown how much variety can be made by shading and mixing of three fast colours,
and much more subtle and artistic effects can be produced by weaving alternate threads of different
colours. Indeed, the effects obtained by using alternate threads can be varied to almost any
extent; as, for instance, a blue and yellow thread--provided the blue is no deeper than the
yellow--will give the effect of green to the eye. If the blue is stronger or deeper, as it
will almost necessarily be, it will be modified and softened into a greenish blue.

Red and white woven in alternate threads upon a white warp will give an effect of pink, and
with this colour for a centre the border should be a good gray.

Of course, alternate throwing of different coloured yarns makes the weaving go more slowly
than when one alone is used, and something of the same colour effect can be produced by doubling,
instead of alternating. It is, of course, not quite the same, as one colour may show either
under or over the other, and the effect is apt to be mottled instead of one of uniform stripes.

The end in view in all these mixtures is variation and liveliness of colour, not an effect
of stripes or spots; indeed, these are very objectionable, especially when in contrasted or
different colors. A deepening or lightening of the same colour in irregular patches, as will
occur in clouded yarns, gives interest, whereas if these cloudings were in strongly contrasted
colours they would be crude and unrestful. For this reason, if for no other, it is well to
work in few tints, and use contrasting colours only for borders.

To show how much variety is possible in weaving with the few dyes I have named, I will give
a number of combinations which will produce good results and be apt to harmonize with ordinary
furnishing. By adding orange yellow, which is also one of the simplest and safest of dyes,
we secure by mixture with blue a mottled green, and this completes a range of colour which
really leaves nothing to be desired.

No. 1. Colours black and red. Border, alternate stripes of black and dark red, as follows:
First stripe of black, one and a half inches; second stripe of red, one inch; third stripe
of black, one inch; fourth stripe of red, one-half inch; fifth stripe of black, three-quarters
inch; sixth stripe of red, one-half inch; seventh stripe of black, half-inch; centre of light
red clouded with dark red; reversed border.

No. 2. Colours black and red. Border one foot in depth, of black and red threads woven alternately.
Centre dark red, clouded with light red. Woven six feet, with one-foot border at sides as well
as ends.

No. 3. Colours red and white. Border seven inches of plain red. Centre of red and white woven
alternately.

No. 4. Colours red and black. Border black and red, threads woven alternately, one foot in
depth; centre of alternate stripes, two inches in width, of dark red and light red; eight feet
in length, with foot-wide side borders, woven with alternate threads of red and black.

No. 5. Colours red and black. Border eighteen inches in depth, of alternate red and black,
half-inch stripes. Centre of dark red, clouded with light.

No. 6. Colours gray, red and white, to be woven of doubled, slightly twisted threads. Border
one foot in depth at ends and sides, woven of red and gray yarn twisted together. Centre of
red and white yarn in twisted threads.

No. 7. Colours red and white. Border of plain red, twenty inches in depth. Centre in alternate
half-inch stripes of red and white.

No. 8. Colours blue, red and black. Border four inches deep of black, two inches of plain red,
one inch of black. Centre of clouded blue.

No. 9. Colour blue. Border eight inches of darkest blue. This great plenty of water, nevertheless, has not induced the Romans
to be cleanly.

Their streets, and even their palaces, are disgraced with filth. The noble Piazza Navona,
is adorned with three or four fountains, one of which is perhaps
the most magnificent in Europe, and all of them discharge vast streams
of water: but, notwithstanding this provision, the piazza is almost
as dirty, as West Smithfield, where the cattle are sold in London.

The corridores, arcades, and even staircases of their most elegant
palaces, are depositories of nastiness, and indeed in summer smell
as strong as spirit of hartshorn.

I have a great notion that their ancestors were not much more cleanly. If we consider that the
city and suburbs of Rome, in the reign of Claudius, contained about
seven millions of inhabitants, a number equal at least to the sum
total of all the souls in England; that great part of antient Rome
was allotted to temples, porticos, basilicae, theatres, thermae, circi,
public and private walks and gardens, where very few, if any, of this
great number lodged; that by far the greater part of those inhabitants
were slaves and poor people, who did not enjoy the conveniencies of
life; and that the use of linen was scarce known; we must naturally
conclude they were strangely crouded together, and that in general
they were a very frowzy generation.

That they were crouded together appears from the height of their houses, which the poet Rutilius
compared to towers made for scaling heaven.

In order to remedy this inconvenience, Augustus Caesar published a decree, that for the future
no houses should be built above seventy feet high, which, at a moderate
computation, might make six stories.

But what seems to prove, beyond all dispute, that the antient Romans were dirty creatures, are
these two particulars. Vespasian laid a tax upon urine and ordure, on pretence of being at
a great expence in clearing the streets from such nuisances; an imposition
which amounted to about fourteen pence a year for every individual;
and when Heliogabalus ordered all the cobwebs of the city and suburbs
to be collected, they were found to weigh ten thousand pounds.



These examples of fifteen different rugs which can be woven from the three tints of blue, red
and orange, together with black and white, do not by any means exhaust the possibilities of
variety which can be obtained from three tints. Each rug will give a suggestion for the next,
and each may be an improvement upon its predecessor.

CHAPTER VII.

COTTON RUGS.

The warp-covered weaving which I have described in a previous chapter as being the simplest
and best method for woolen rugs, is equally applicable to cotton weaving. It is, in fact, the
one used in making the cotton rugs woven in prisons in India, and which in consequence are
known as "prison rugs." They are generally woven in stripes of dark and light shades of indigo
blue and measure about four by eight feet. They are greatly used by English residents in India,
being much better adapted to life in a hot climate than the more costly Indian and Persian
rugs, which supply the world-demand for floor coverings.

In our own summer climate and chintz-furnished summer cottages they would be an extremely appropriate
and economical covering for floors. The warp is like that of the Navajo blanket, a heavy cotton
cord, the filling or woof of many doubled fine cotton threads, which quite cover the heavy
warp, and give the ridged effect of a coarse rep.

As I have said, they are woven almost invariably in horizontal stripes of two blues, or blue
and white, with darker ends and a warp fringe. Simple as they are and indeed must be, as they
are the result of unskilled labour, they are pleasant to look at, and have many virtues not
dependent upon looks. They are warm and pleasant to unshod feet, and therefore suitable for
bedroom use. They are soft to shoe tread, and give colour and comfort to a summer piazza. They
can be hung as portieres in draughty places with a certainty of shelter, and can be lifted
and thrown upon the grass to be washed by the downpour of a thunder shower, and left to dry
in the sun without detriment to colour or quality.

Surely this is a goodly list of virtues, and the sum of them is by no means exhausted. Their
durability is surprising; and they can be sewn together and stretched upon large floors with
excellent colour effect. They can be turned or moved from room to room and place to place with
a facility which makes them more than useful. The manufacture is so simple that a child might
weave them, while at the same time, by a skilful use of colour and good arrangement of border,
they can be made to fit the needs of the most luxurious as well as the simplest summer cottage.
In short, they are capable of infinite variation and improvement, without departure from the
simple method of the "prison rug."

Of course the variation must be in colour and the arrangement of colour; and in studying this
possible improvement it must be remembered that cotton will neither take nor hold dyes as readily
as wool or silk, and that certain dyes which are very tenacious in their hold upon animal fibre
cannot be depended upon when applied to vegetable fibre. There are, however, certain dyes upon
which we can safely rely. Indigo blue, and the red used in dyeing what is called Turkey red,
are reliable in application to both wool and cotton, and are water and sun proof as well. Walnut
and butternut stains will give fast shades of brown and yellow, and in addition there is also
the buff or nankeen-coloured cotton, the natural tint of which combines well with brown and blue.

In giving directions for rug colourings in cottons, I shall confine myself to the use of black,
white, blue and red, because these colours are easily procurable, and also because rugs manufactured
from them will fit the style of furnishing which demands cotton rugs.

The examples I shall give call for graduated dyeing, especially in the two tints of red and blue.

Any one expecting to succeed in rug weaving must be able to procure or produce from two to
three planes of colour, as well as two mixtures in each. These would be as follows:

In blue:--1st, dark blue; 2d, medium blue; 3d, light blue.

After these three tints are secure, three variations of blue can be made by knotting the skeins
more or less closely and throwing medium, light blue and white together into the dye-tub. Here
they must remain until the white skeins show an outside of light blue; the light blue skeins
are apparently changed to medium, and the medium to dark. When they are untied and dried they
will show three clouded mixtures:

1st, the medium blue clouded with dark; 2d, light blue clouded with medium blue; 3d, white,
clouded with light blue.

Here we have six variations of the one tint. Red can be treated in the same way, except that
a rather light and a very dark red are all that can be counted upon safely as plain tints.
A very light red will not hold. Therefore we have in reds:--1st, dark red; 2d, light red; 3d,
light red, clouded with dark; 4th, white, clouded with light red. 

Here most of the English reside: the apartments are generally commodious and well furnished;
and the lodgers are well supplied with provisions and all necessaries of life. But, if I studied
oeconomy, I would choose another part of the town than the Piazza
d'Espagna, which is, besides, at a great distance from the antiquities.

For a decent first floor and two bed-chambers on the second, I payed no more than a scudo (five
shillings) per day. Our table was plentifully furnished by the landlord for two and thirty
pauls, being equal to sixteen shillings. I hired a town-coach at the rate of fourteen pauls, or
seven shillings a day; and a servitore di piazza for three pauls,
or eighteen-pence.

The coachman has also an allowance of two pauls a day. The provisions at Rome are reasonable and
good, the vitella mongana, however, which is the most delicate veal I ever tasted, is very
dear, being sold for two pauls, or a shilling, the pound.

Here are the rich wines of Montepulciano, Montefiascone, and Monte di Dragone; but what we
commonly drink at meals is that of Orvieto, a small white wine, of
an agreeable flavour.

Strangers are generally advised to employ an antiquarian to instruct them in all the curiosities
of Rome; and this is a necessary expence, when a person wants to become a connoisseur in painting,
statuary, and architecture. For my own part I had no such ambition. I longed to view the remains
of antiquity by which this metropolis is distinguished; and to contemplate
the originals of many pictures and statues, which I had admired in
prints and descriptions.



White, however, can often be used in borders of rather dark rugs in alternation with black
or any dark colour, because its total absence of tint makes it strong and distinct, and gives
it force in marking a limit.

One successful combination of colours will suggest others, and the weaver who has taken pains
to provide herself with a variety of shades, and will follow the rules of proportion, will
be at no loss in laying out the plan of her weavings.

The examples for fifteen weavings given in the paper on wool rugs are equally available in
cotton. I will, however, add a few variations especially adapted for cotton rugs:

No. 1. Colours blue and white. Border six inches of plain dark blue. Six inches of alternate
half-inch stripes of dark blue and white. Four to five feet of clouded blue, border repeated,
with four inches of warp fringe as a finish.

No. 2. Colours blue and white. Border eight inches wide of plain medium blue. Centre, six feet
of light blue, clouded with medium. Two side borders eight inches wide; finish of white warp
fringe.

No. 3. Colours black, white and red. Border twelve inches of alternate half-inch stripes of
black and white. Centre, four feet of light red, clouded with dark. Repeat border, and finish
with warp fringe.

No. 4. Colours red and white. Border, twelve inches of dark and light red, in twisted double
thread. Centre, light red and white twisted double thread. Repeat border and finish with four-inch
fringe.

No. 5. Colours butternut-brown, walnut-yellow, red, and white. Border of six inches of brown
and yellow, twisted together. Centre, five feet of light red and white, twisted together. Repeat
border, and finish with fringe.

No. 6. Colours brown, blue, and clouded-white. Border, half-inch stripes of medium blue and
brown alternated for six inches. Centre, five feet of light blue, clouded with medium. Repeat
border and finish with warp fringe.

These six examples may be varied to any extent by the use of clouded, plain or mixed centres.
Borders, as a rule, should be woven of unclouded colours.

A natural development of the cotton rug would be the weaving of coarse cotton yarns into piece
lengths which could be cut and sewn like ingrain carpet, or like the fine cotton-warped mattings
which have been so popular of late years. They would have the advantage over grass-weavings
in durability, ease of handling and liveliness of effect. Indeed, the latter consideration
is of great importance, as cotton carpets can be woven to harmonize with the chintzes and cottons
which are so much used in summer furnishings. This is especially true of indigo-blue floor
covering, since so few things are absolutely perfect as an adjunct to the blue chambrays, striped
awning-cloths, denims, and India prints so constantly and effectively used in draperies. Indeed,
such excellent art in design has been devoted to blue prints, both foreign and domestic, that
one can safely reckon upon their prolonged use, and this being taken for granted, it is well
to extend the weaving of mixtures of white and blue indefinitely.

Although the warp-covered method described for woolen and cotton rug weaving can very well
be used for carpets, the still simpler one of the alternate thread, or basket-weaving, when
warp and filling are of equal weight and size, can be made to answer the purpose quite as well.
In fact, there is a certain advantage in the latter method, since it makes the warp a factor
in the arrangement of colour.

It is necessary in this style of weaving that the filling should be a hand-twisted thread of
the same weight and size as the warp, and of a lighter or darker shade of the same colour.
If the warp is dark, the filling may be light, or the reverse. It should be warped at the rate
of about twenty-four threads to the inch.

In this kind of weaving the colours must be plain--that is, unclouded--as the variation is
obtained by the different shades of warp and filling. Still another variation is made by using
a closer warp of thirty threads to the inch and a large soft vari-colour filling which will
show between the warp threads with a peculiar watered or vibratory effect. A light red warp,
with a very loosely twisted filling of black and white, or a medium blue warp with a black
and orange filling, will give extremely good results.

What I have said thus far as to the weaving of woolen and cotton rugs, and of cotton carpets,
gives practical directions for artistic results to women who understand the use of the loom
in very simple weaving. Of course, more difficult things can be done even with ordinary looms,
as any one who has examined the elaborate blue-and-white spreads our grandmothers wove upon
the cumbrous house-loom of that period can testify. In fact, the degree of skill required in
the weaving of these precious heirlooms would be quite sufficient for the production of rugs
adapted to very exacting purchasers.

Perhaps it is as well to add that the directions given in this and the preceding chapter for
rug weaving are designed not only or exclusively for weavers, but also for club women who are
so situated as to have access to and influence in farming or weaving neighbourhoods.

Home manufactures, guided by women of culture and means, would have the advantage not only
of refinement of taste, but of a certainty of aim. Women know what women like, and as they
are the final purchasers of all household furnishings, they are not apt to encourage the making
of things for which there is no demand.

I am often asked the question, How are all of these homespun and home-woven things to be disposed
of? To this I answer that the first effort of the promoters or originators must be--to fit
them for an existing demand.

There is no doubt of the genuineness of a demand for special domestic weavings. Any neighbourhood
or combination of women known to be able to furnish such articles to the public would find
the want far in excess of the supply, simply because undirected or commercial manufactures
cannot fit personal wants as perfectly as special things can do. It must be remembered, also,
that the interchange of news between bodies of women interested in industrial art will be a
very potent factor in the creation of a market for any domestic specialty. In fact, it is in
response to a demand that these articles upon home-weavings have been prepared, and a demand
for technical instruction presupposes an interest in the result.

CHAPTER VIII.

LINSEY WOOLSEY.

It has often been given as a reason for the discontinuance of home weaving, that no product
of the hand loom can be as exact or as cheap as that of the power loom. The statement as to
cost and quality is true, but so far from being a discouraging one, it gives actual reasons
for the continuance of domestic weavings. The very fact that homespun textiles are not exact--in
the sense of absolute sameness--and not cheap, in the sense of first cost, is apt to be a reason
for buying them. Hand-weaving, like handwriting, is individual, and this is a virtue instead
of a defect, since it gives the variety which satisfies some mystery of human liking, a preference
for inequality rather than monotonous excellence.

Every hand-woven web differs from every other one in certain characteristics which are stamped
upon it by the weaver, and we value these differences. In fact, this very trace of human individuality
is the initial charm belonging to all art industries, and even if we discount this advantage,
and reckon only money cost and money value, durability must certainly count for something.
A thing which costs more and lasts longer is as cheap as one which costs less and goes to pieces
before its proper time.

In a long and intimate acquaintance with what are called "art textiles"--that is, textiles
which satisfy the eye and the imagination and fulfill more or less competently the function
of use, I have learned that certain very desirable qualities are more often found in home-woven
than in machine-woven goods. Something is wanting in each of the excellent and wonderful variety
of commercial manufactures which would fit it for the various decorative and art processes
which modern life demands. To perfectly satisfy this demand, we should have a weaving which
is not only in itself an artistic manufacture, but which easily absorbs any additional application
of art.

In my own mind I call the thing which might and does not exist, The Missing Textile. To make
it entirely appropriate to our esthetic and practical needs, the missing textile must be strong
enough for every-day wear and use; it must be capable of soft, round folds in hanging; and
have the quality of elasticity which will prevent creasing; and above all, it must have beautiful
and lasting colour. If it can add to these qualities an adaptability to various household uses,
it will achieve success and deserve it. These different qualities, and especially the one of
a natural affinity for such art-processes as colour and embroidery, exist in none of our domestic
weavings, excepting only linsey woolsey. After much study of this virtuous product of the mountain
regions of our Southern States I find it capable of great development. It has two qualities
which are not often co-existent, and these are strength and flexibility; and this is owing
not only to its being hand-woven, but also to its being a wool-filled textile--that is, it
is woven upon a cotton warp, with a single twisted wool-filling. This peculiarity of texture
makes it very suitable for embroidery, since it offers little resistance to the needle, and
yet is firm enough to prevent stitches sinking into its substance--a frequent fault with soft
or loosely woven textiles. The warp is generally made of what the weavers call mill yarns,
cotton yarns spun and often dyed in cotton mills; and when the cloth is woven for women's wear
it is apt to carry a striped warp of red and blue, with a mixed filling made from spinning
the wool of black sheep with a small proportion of white.

In searching for art textiles, one would not find much encouragement in this particular variety
of linsey woolsey, but the unbleached, uncoloured material which is woven for all kinds of
household use, or piece-dyed for men's wear, is quite a different thing. From the Capitol to the
Coliseo, including the Forum Romanum and Boarium, there is nothing intire but one or two churches, built
with the fragments of ancient edifices. You descend from the Capitol between the remaining pillars
of two temples, the pedestals and part of the shafts sunk in the rubbish: then passing through
the triumphal arch of Septimius Severus, you proceed along the foot
of Mons Palatinus, which stands on your right hand, quite covered
with the ruins of the antient palace belonging to the Roman emperors,
and at the foot of it, there are some beautiful detached pillars still
standing.

On the left you see the remains of the Templum Pacis, which seems to have been the largest and
most magnificent of all the temples in Rome. It was built and dedicated by the emperor Vespasian,
who brought into it all the treasure and precious vessels which he found in the temple of Jerusalem.
The columns of the portico he removed from Nero's golden house, which he levelled with the ground.
This temple was likewise famous for its library, mentioned by Aulus Gellius, Further on, is the
arch of Constantine on the right, a most noble piece of architecture, almost entire; with the
remains of the Meta Sudans before it; and fronting you, the noble ruins of that vast amphitheatre,
called the Colossaeum, now Coliseo, which has been dismantled and
dilapidated by the Gothic popes and princes of modern Rome, to build
and adorn their paultry palaces.

Behind the amphitheatre were the thermae of the same emperor Titus Vespasian. In the same quarter
was the Circus Maximus; and the whole space from hence on both sides, to the walls of Rome, comprehending
above twice as much ground as the modern city, is almost covered with the monuments of antiquity.
I suppose there is more concealed below ground than appears above. The miserable houses, and even
garden-walls of the peasants in this district, are built with these
precious materials.

I mean shafts and capitals of marble columns, heads, arms, legs, and mutilated trunks of statues.
What pity it is that among all the remains of antiquity, at Rome, there is not one lodging-house
remaining. I should be glad to know how the senators of Rome were lodged. I want to be better
informed touching the cava aedium, the focus, the ara deorum penatum, the conclavia, triclinia,
and caenationes; the atria where the women resided, and employed themselves in the woolen manufacture;
the praetoria, which were so spacious as to become a nuisance in the reign of Augustus; and the
Xysta, which were shady walks between two porticos, where the men exercised themselves in the winter.
I am disgusted by the modern taste of architecture, though I am no judge of the art. The churches
and palaces of these days are crowded with pretty ornaments, which distract the eye, and by breaking
the design into a variety of little parts, destroy the effect of the whole. Every door and window
has its separate ornaments, its moulding, frize, cornice, and tympanum; then there is such
an assemblage of useless festoons, pillars, pilasters, with their architraves, entablatures, and
I know not what, that nothing great or uniform remains to fill the view; and we in vain look
for that simplicity of grandeur, those large masses of light and
shadow, and the inexpressible EUSUINOPTON, which characterise the
edifices of the antients.

A great edifice, to have its full effect, ought to be isole, or detached from all others, with
a large space around it: but the palaces of Rome, and indeed of all the other cities of Italy,
which I have seen, are so engaged among other mean houses, that their beauty and magnificence
are in a great measure concealed. Even those which face open streets and piazzas are only clear
in front.


If one was intent only upon producing an imitation of the Bagdad curtains in linsey woolsey,
it would be easy to weave narrow lengths of various colours, and by choosing those which were
good contrasts or harmonies, and embroidering them together with buttonhole-stitch, or cat-stitch,
or any ornamental stitch, to get something very like them in effect and far better in quality.
But it should be the aim of domestic manufacture to do something which is distinctive, and
therefore it would be better to start with the intention of producing the effect in one's own
way. This could be done by weaving the cloth in full width (which should, if possible, be four
feet), depending entirely upon the warp threads for colour. This, it may be remembered, is
already one of the means of variation applied to linsey woolsey in weaving homespun dress goods;
but in this case it must be carefully chosen art-effort, using colours which are in themselves
beautiful. In depending upon the warp alone for colour the fact must be kept in mind that it
will be much obscured by the over-weaving of the wool filling. It will be necessary, therefore,
to use far stronger colours than if they were to stand unmixed or unobscured. Vivid blue, strong
orange, flaming red and gold-brown could be used in the warp in stripes of about ten inches
in width, with two inches of dead black on the sides and between each colour. The filling must
be of one pale tint, either an ivory white or lemon yellow, or a very pale spring green woven
over all. This would modify the violence of colour, giving an effect like hoar frost over autumn
leaves. As a simple weaving this would have a beautiful effect, but when a coarse orange-coloured
silk embroidery, consisting of a waved stem and alternate leaves, is carried down the centre
of each black stripe, the simple length of linsey woolsey is transformed into what would be
called a very Eastern-looking and valuable embroidery.

This is just one of its possible and easily possible adaptations for portieres and hangings.
Quite another and perhaps equally popular one would be cross-colour upon a tinted warp. In
this case the warp might be ivory white, yellow, light green, or even for darker effects, claret
red, dark blue, dark green, or black. If an ivory white or light warp colour should be chosen,
the cross-colours must be selected with special reference to the warp tint. A beautiful effect
for a light room would be made on an ivory-coloured warp by weaving at the top and also below
the middle a series of narrow stripes like a Roman scarf. There should be a finger's depth
of rose colour at the top, and this would be obtained by a filling of light red, woven upon
the ivory white warp. Then should come an inch stripe of pale blue, an inch of gold, another
inch of blue; three inches of orange, then the inch of blue, the gold, and the blue again,
and after that the rose-red for two-thirds the length of the portiere, when the ribbon stripes
should again occur, after which the remaining third should be woven with a deeper red or a
pale green.

Such a portiere would not require embroidery to complete its effect, for if the tints were
pure as well as delicate, it would be a lovely piece of colour in itself.

This variety or style of hanging would have the advantage of throwing the burden of colour
upon the wool, and as the animal fibre is apt to be more tenacious in its hold upon colour
than vegetable, the question of fading would not have to be considered.

These two varieties of artistic homespun can by experiment be made to cover a great deal that
is beautiful and artistic in manufacture, and yet it leaves untouched the extensive field of
plain piece-dyed or yarn-dyed weavings. Yarn-dyed material always has the advantage of the
possible use of two colours, one in the warp and one in the filling, but in certain places,
as in upholstery, a solid colour produced by piece-dyeing would be preferable. Linsey woolsey
dyed in fast and attractive colour would undoubtedly be a good material for upholstery of simple
furniture, because of its strength and durability, but it seems to me its chief mission and
probable future is to supply an exceptional art textile; one which has the firmness and flexibility
belonging to hand-woven stuffs, and can be at the same time beautiful in colour, capable of
hard wear and reasonably inexpensive. I am tempted to modify the last qualification, because
no hand-woven goods ought to be or can be inexpensive, in comparison with those manufactured
under every condition of competitive economy. And in truth, domestic weavings are sure of their
market at paying prices, simply because they are what they are, hand products.

I have shown in a limited way some of the possibilities of artistic hand-weaving without touching
upon cotton or flax diapers and damasks, since these cannot readily compete with power-weavings,
but I have not spoken of the difference it would make in the lives of the mountain weavers
of the South if their horizon could be widened by the introduction of art industries. Only
those who know the joy and compensation of producing things of beauty can realize the change
it might work in lives which have been for generations narrowed to merely physical wants; but
there are many gifted Southern women who do fully realize it, and we may safely leave to them
the introduction and encouragement of art in domestic manufactures.

NEIGHBOURHOOD INDUSTRIES

AFTER-WORD

I am often asked by women who are interested in domestic manufactures, how one should go to
work to build up a profitable neighbourhood industry. "Well," said Mara, "my enchanter was a king;
and when he got through all he wanted, and got his daughter married to the beautiful young prince,
he said he would break his staff, and deeper than plummet sounded
he would bury his book."

In every farming community there will be one or two ingenious or ambitious women who do something
which is not general, and which they would gladly turn to account. One woman may be a skilled
knitter of tidies, or laces, or rag mats; another may pull rags through burlap, and so construct
a thick and rather luxurious-looking door-mat; another may have an old-fashioned loom and weave
carpets for all the neighbourhood; and each one of these simple arts is a foundation upon which
an industry may be built, important to the neighbourhood, and in the aggregate to the country.

The city woman or club woman who wishes to become a link between these things and a purchaser
must begin by improving or adapting them. She must show the knitter of tidies an imported golf
stocking with all of the latest stitches and stripes and fads, and if the yarn can be had,
undoubtedly the tidy-knitter can make exactly such another. All the adjacent country is naked and
barren. On the third day we entered the pope's territories, some parts of which are delightful.
Having passed Aqua-Pendente, a beggarly town, situated on the top of a rock, from whence there
is a romantic cascade of water, which gives it the name, we travelled along the side of the lake
Bolsena, a beautiful piece of water about thirty miles in circuit, with two islands in the
middle, the banks covered with noble plantations of oak and cypress. All of which will be true, and
equally so when the demand has increased and it has become a neighbourhood industry.

A golf player hardly need be told how to create a demand for hand-knit stockings, or how to
assist the knitter by advice, both in the improvement and disposal of her wares; but it should
be a veritable golf player and not a philanthropic amateur.

It is the same with other industries. The adviser must study them, improve them, adapt them,
and find the first market, after which they will sell upon their own merits.

As far as I know, nothing has been done in the way of improvement of knitted mats or rugs,
although a very beautiful manufacture has been founded upon the method of pulling rags through
burlap. Knitted rugs have much to recommend them. They can be made of all sorts of pieces,
even the smallest; they wear well, and can easily be made beautiful.

The building up of a rag carpet or rag rug industry is a much simpler matter, because the demand
exists everywhere for cheap, durable and well-coloured floor covering. In my own experience
I have found that the thing chiefly necessary is to teach the weavers that the colour must
be pleasing and permanent, and to put them in communication with sources of supply of rags
and warp. The rugs sell themselves, and probably will continue to do so. 

The castle of St. Angelo, howsoever ridiculous as a fortress, appears respectable as a noble monument
of antiquity, and though standing in a low situation, is one of the first objects that strike
the eye of a stranger approaching Rome. On the opposite side of the river, are the wretched remains
of the Mausoleum Augusti, which was still more magnificent. Part of the walls is standing,
and the terraces are converted into garden-ground. In viewing these ruins, I remembered Virgil's
pathetic description of Marcellus, who was here intombed.
 All good and well-founded industries take care of themselves in time,
but until the merchant finds them out, and interposes the wedge of personal profit between
things and their market--inciting and encouraging both--it seems to be the business of women
in every lot of life to help each other.