The Marvelous Exploits of Paul Bunyan as Told in the Camps of the White Pine Lumbermen for
Generations During Which Time the Loggers Have Pioneered the Way Through the North Woods From
Maine to California Collected from Various Sources and Embellished for Publication

Text and Illustrations By W. B. Laughead

Published for the Amusement of our Friends by

The Red River Lumber Company Minneapolis, Westwood, Cal., Chicago, Los Angeles - San Francisco

Historical Note

The Red River Lumber Company takes its name from the Red River of the North, down which the
Walkers drove their logs to Winnipeg before the railroads had reached their forest holdings
in northern Minnesota. Later on they built a sawmill on the Red River at East Grand Forks,
which was followed by the mills at Crookston and Akeley, Minnesota. Their last Minnesota log
was cut at Akeley in 1915.

Editorial Note

The first edition of Paul Bunyan and His Big Blue Ox appeared in 1922, with ten thousand copies,
followed in the same year with a printing of five thousand. Subsequent editions were printed
in 1924, 1927 and 1931. Since the first edition, copies have been sent out only on request.

With this printing, January, 1934, the size of the book has been changed and the supplementary
text has been revised. The stories are the same as in the preceding editions, and include material
used in small booklets issued by The Red River Lumber Company in 1914 and 1916. So far as we
know, this was the first appearance of the Paul Bunyan stories in print.

The student of folklore will easily distinguish the material derived from original sources
from that written for the purposes of this book. It should be stated that the names of the
supporting characters, including the animals, are inventions by the writer of this version.
The oral chroniclers did not, in his hearing, which goes back to 1900, call any of the characters
by name except Paul Bunyan himself.

Investigators have failed to establish the source or age of the first Paul Bunyan stories.
One of our correspondents, a man of advanced years, wrote us in 1922 that he had heard some
of the stories when a boy in his grandfather's logging camps in New York, and that they were
supposed to be old at that time. A distinct Paul Bunyan legend has grown up in the oil fields,
evidently originating with lumberjacks from the northern and eastern white pine camps who came
to work with the drillers.

Paul Bunyan

Scholars Say He is the Only American Myth.

Paul Bunyan is the hero of lumbercamp whoppers that have been handed down for generations.
These stories, never heard outside the haunts of the lumberjack until recent years, are now
being collected by learned educators and literary authorities who declare that Paul Bunyan
is "the only American myth."

The best authorities never recounted Paul Bunyan's exploits in narrative form. They made their
statements more impressive by dropping them casually, in an off hand way, as if in reference.
to actual events of common knowledge. To overawe the greenhorn in the bunkshanty, or the paper-collar
stiffs and home guards in the saloons, a group of lumberjacks would remember meeting each other
in the camps of Paul Bunyan. With painful accuracy they established the exact time and place,
"on the Big Onion the winter of the blue snow" or "at Shot Gunderson's camp on the Tadpole
the year of the sourdough drive." They elaborated on the old themes and new stories were born
in lying contests where the heights of extemporaneous invention were reached.

In these conversations the lumberjack often took on the mannerisms of the French Canadian.
This was apparently done without special intent and no reason for it can be given except for
a similarity in the mock seriousness of their statements and the anti-climax of the bulls that
were made, with the braggadocio of the habitant. Some investigators trace the origin of Paul
Bunyan to Eastern Canada. Who can say?

Paul Bunyan came to Westwood, California, in 1913 at the suggestion of some of the most prominent
loggers and lumbermen in the country. When the Red River Lumber Company announced their plans
for opening up their forests of Sugar Pine and California White Pine, friendly advisors shook
their heads and said,

"Better send for Paul Bunyan."

Apparently here was the job for a Superman, - quality-and-quantity-production on a big scale
and great engineering difficulties to be overcome. Why not Paul Bunyan? This is a White Pine
job and here in the High Sierras the winter snows lie deep, just like the country where Paul
grew up. Here are trees that dwarf the largest "cork pine" of the Lake States and many new
stunts were planned for logging, milling and manufacturing a product of supreme quality - just
the job for Paul Bunyan.

The Red River people had been cutting White Pine in Minnesota for two generations; the crews
that came west with them were old heads and every one knew Paul Bunyan of old. Paul had followed
the White Pine from the Atlantic seaboard west to the jumping-off place in Minnesota, why not
go the rest of the way?

Paul Bunyan's picture had never been published until he joined Red River and this likeness,
first issued in 1914 is now the Red River trademark. It stands for the quality and service
you have the right to expect from Paul Bunyan.

-

When and where did this mythical Hero get his start? Paul Bunyan is known by his mighty works,
his antecedents and personal history are lost in doubt. You can prove that Paul logged off
North Dakota and grubbed the stumps, not only by the fact that there are no traces of pine
forests in that State, but by the testimony of oldtimers who saw it done. On the other hand,
Paul's parentage and birth date are unknown. Like Topsy, he jes' growed.

Nobody cared to know his origin until the professors got after him. As long as he stayed around
the camps his previous history was treated with the customary consideration and he was asked
no questions, but when he broke into college it was all off. Then he had to have ancestors,
a birthday and all sorts of vital statistics.

Now Paul is a regular myth and students of folklore make scientific research of "The Paul Bunyan
Legend".

His first appearance in print was in the booklets published by The Red River Lumber Company
in 1914 and 1916, these stories are reprinted in the present volume, with additions. Paul has
followed the wanderings of pioneering workmen and performed new wonders in the oil fields,
on big construction jobs and in the wheat fields but the stories in this book deal only with
his work in the White Pine camps where he was born and raised. Care has been taken to preserve
the atmosphere of the old style camps.

So now we will get on with Paul's doings and in the language of the four-horse skinner, "Let's
dangle!"

Babe, the big blue ox constituted Paul Bunyan's assets and liabilities. History disagrees as
to when, where and how Paul first acquired this bovine locomotive but his subsequent record
is reliably established. Babe could pull anything that had two ends to it.

Babe was seven axehandles wide between the eyes according to some authorities; others equally
dependable say forty-two axehandles and a plug of tobacco. Like other historical contradictions
this comes from using different standards. Seven of Paul's axehandles were equal to a little
more than forty-two of the ordinary kind.

When cost sheets were figured on Babe, Johnny Inkslinger found that upkeep and overhead were
expensive but the charges for operation and depreciation were low and the efficiency was very
high. How else could Paul have hauled logs to the landing a whole section (640 acres) at a
time? He also used Babe to pull the kinks out of the crooked logging roads and it was on a
job of this kind that Babe pulled a chain of three-inch links out into a straight bar.

They could never keep Babe more than one night at a camp for he would eat in one day all the
feed one crew could tote to camp in a year. For a snack between meals he would eat fifty bales
of hay, wire and all and six men with picaroons were kept busy picking the wire out of his
teeth. Babe was a great pet and very docile as a general thing but he seemed to have a sense
of humor and frequently got into mischief, He would sneak up behind a drive and drink all the
water out of the river, leaving the logs high and dry. It was impossible to build an ox-sling
big enough to hoist Babe off the ground for shoeing, but after they logged off Dakota there
was room for Babe to lie down for this operation. 

Calling there the following spring, accompanied by my good godfather, we again saw Honor silent and
pensive as ever. The old gentleman was much struck with her figure and her melancholy. "Fine girl
that!" observed he to me; "looks as if she was in love though," added he, putting his finger to
his nose with a knowing nod, as was usual with him upon occasions of that kind. I, for my part,
in whom a passion for literature was just beginning to develope itself had a theory of my
own upon the subject, and regarded her with unwonted respect in consequence.

Her abstraction appeared to me exactly that of an author when contemplating some great work, and
I had no doubt but she would turn out a poetess. Both conjectures were characteristic, and both,
as it happened, wrong.

Upon my next visit to London, I found that a great change had happened in Honor's destiny. Her
father, whom she had been fond of investing with the dignity of a rebel, but who had, according
to Mrs. Sherwood's more reasonable suspicion, been a reckless, extravagant, thoughtless person,
whose follies had been visited upon himself and his family, with the evil consequences of crimes,
had died in America; and his sister, the richly-jointured widow of a baronet, of old Milesian
blood, who during his life had been inexorable to his entreaties
to befriend the poor girl, left as it were in pledge at a London boarding-school,
had relented upon hearing of his death, had come to England, settled
all pecuniary matters to the full satisfaction of the astonished and
delighted governess, and finally carried Honor back with her to Dublin.

From

this time we lost sight altogether of our old companion. With her schoolfellows she had never
formed even the common school intimacies, and to Mrs. Sherwood and her functionaries, she
owed no obligation except that of money, which was now discharged.

The only debt of gratitude which she had ever acknowledged, was to the old French teacher,
who, although she never got nearer the pronunciation or the orthography
of her name than Mademoiselle l'Ocalle, had yet, in the overflowing
benevolence of her temper, taken such notice of the deserted child,
as amidst the general neglect might pass for kindness.

But she had returned to France. For no one else did Honor profess the slightest interest Accordingly,
she left the house where she had passed nearly all her life, without expressing any desire
to hear again of its inmates, and never wrote a line to any of them.

We did hear of her, however, occasionally. Rumours reached us, vague and distant, and more conflicting
even than distant rumours are wont to be. She was distinguished at the vice-regal court, a
beauty and a wit; she was married to a nobleman of the highest rank; she was a nun of the order
of Mercy; she was dead.

And as years glided on, as the old school passed into other hands,
and the band of youthful companions became more and more dispersed,
one of the latter opinions began to gain ground among us, when two
or three chanced to meet, and to talk of old schoolfellows.

If she had been alive and in the great world, surely some of us should
have heard of her.

Her having been a Catholic, rendered her taking the veil not improbable; and to a person of her
enthusiastic temper, the duties of the sisters of Mercy would have
peculiar charms.

As one of that most useful and most benevolent order, or as actually
dead, we were therefore content to consider her, until, in the lapse
of years and the changes of destiny, we had ceased to think of her
at all.

The second of this present month of May was a busy and a noisy day in my garden. All the world
knows what a spring this has been.

The famous black spring commemorated by Gilbert White can hardly have been more thoroughly ungenial,
more fatal to man or beast, to leaf and flower, than this most miserable season, this winter
of long days, when the sun shines as if in mockery, giving little more heat than his cold sister
the moon, and the bitter north-east produces at one and the same moment the incongruous annoyances
of biting cold and suffocating dust Never was such a season.

The swallows, nightingales, and cuckoos were a fortnight after their usual time. I wonder what
they thought of it, pretty creatures, and how they made up their minds to come at all!--and the
sloe blossom, the black thorn winter as the common people call it, which generally makes its
appearance early in March along with the first violets, did not whiten
the hedges this year until full two months later,* In short, everybody
knows that this has been a most villanous season, and deserves all
the ill that can possibly be said of it.

But the second of May held forth a promise which, according to a very usual trick of English
weather, it has not kept; and was so mild and smiling and gracious, that, without being quite
so foolish as to indulge in any romantic and visionary expectation of ever seeing summer again,
we were yet silly enough to be cheered by the thought that spring was coming at last in good earnest.
 He
made soup out of everything and did most of his work with a dipper. When the big tote-sled
broke through the ice on Bull Frog Lake with a load of split peas, he served warmed up, lake
water till the crew struck. His idea of a lunch box was a jug or a rope to freeze soup onto
like a candle. Some cooks used too much grease. It was said of one of these that he had to
wear calked shoes to keep from sliding out of the cook-shanty and rub sand on his hands when
he picked anything up.

There are two kinds of camp cooks, the Baking Powder Bums and the Sourdough Stiffs. Sourdough
Sam belonged to the latter school. He made everything but coffee out of Sourdough. He had only
one arm and one leg, the other members having been lost when his sourdough barrel blew up.
Sam officiated at Tadpole River headquarters, the winter Shot Gunderson took charge.

After all others had failed at Big Onion camp, Paul hired his cousin Big Joe who came from
three weeks below Quebec. This boy sure put a mean scald on the chuck. He was the only man
who could make pancakes fast enough to feed the crew. He had Big Ole, the blacksmith, make
him a griddle that was so big you couldn't see across it when the steam was thick. The batter,
stirred in drums like concrete mixers was poured on with cranes and spouts. The griddle was
greased by colored boys who skated over the surface with hams tied to their feet. They had
to have colored boys to stand the heat.

At this camp the flunkeys wore roller skates and an idea of the size of the tables is gained
from the fact that they distributed the pepper with four-horse teams.

Sending out lunch and timing the meals was rendered difficult by the size of the works which
required three crews - one going to work, one on the job and one coming back. Joe had to start
the bull-cook out with the lunch sled two weeks ahead of dinner time. To call the men who came
in at noon was another problem. Big Ole made a dinner horn so big that no one could blow it
but Big Joe or Paul himself. The first time Joe blew it be blew down ten acres of pine. The
Red River people wouldn't stand for that so the next time he blew straight up but this caused
severe cyclones and storms at sea so Paul had to junk the horn and ship it East where later
it was made into a tin roof for a big Union Depot.

When Big Joe came to Westwood with Paul, he started something. About that time you may have
read in the papers about a volcanic eruption at Mt. Lassen, heretofore extinct for many years.
That was where Big Joe dug his bean-hole and when the steam worked out of the bean kettle and
up through the ground, everyone thought the old hill had turned volcano. Every time Joe drops
a biscuit they talk of earthquakes.

It was always thought that the quality of the food at Paul's Camps had a lot to do with the
strength and endurance of the men. No doubt it did, but they were a husky lot to start with.
As the feller said about fish for a brain food, "It won't do you no good unless there is a
germ there to start with."

There must have been something to the food theory for the chipmunks that ate the prune pits
got so big they killed all the wolves and years later the settlers shot them for tigers.

A visitor at one of Paul's camps was astonished to see a crew of men unloading four-horse logging
sleds at the cook-shanty. They appeared to be rolling logs into a trap door from which poured
clouds of steam.

"That's a heck of a place to land logs," he remarked.

"Them ain't logs," grinned a bull-cook, "them's sausages for the teamsters' breakfast."

At Paul's camp up where the little Gimlet empties into the Big Auger, newcomers used to kick
because they were never served beans. The bosses and the men could never be interested in beans.
E. E. Terrill tells us the reason:

Once when the cook quit they had to detail a substitute to the job temporarily. There was one
man who was no good anywhere. He had failed at every job. Chris Crosshaul, the foreman, acting
on the theory that every man is good somewhere, figured that this guy must be a cook, for it
was the only job he had not tried. So he was put to work and the first thing he tackled was
beans. He filled up a big kettle with beans and added some water. When the heat took hold the
beans swelled up till they lifted off the roof and bulged out the walls. There was no way to
get into the place to cook anything else, so the whole crew turned in to eat up the half cooked
beans. By keeping at it steady they cleaned them up in a week and rescued the would-be-cook.
After that no one seemed to care much for beans.

It used to be a big job to haul prune pits and coffee grounds away from Paul's camps. It required
a big crew of men and either Babe or Benny to do the hauling. Finally Paul decided it was cheaper
to build new camps and move every month.

The winter Paul logged off North Dakota with the Seven Axemen, the Little Chore Boy and the
300 cooks, he worked the cooks in three shifts - one for each meal. The Seven Axemen were hearty
eaters; a portion of bacon was one side of a 1600-pound pig. Paul shipped a stern-wheel steamboat
up Red River and they put it in the soup kettle to stir the soup.

Like other artists, cooks are temperamental and some of them are full of cussedness but the
only ones who could sass Paul Bunyan and get away with it were the stars like Big Joe and Sourdough
Sam. The lunch sled, - most popular institution in the lumber industry! Its arrival at, the
noon rendezvous has been hailed with joy by hungry men on every logging job since Paul invented
it. What if the warm food freezes on your tin plate, the keen cold air has sharpened your appetite
to enjoy it. The crew that toted lunch for Paul Bunyan had so far to travel and so many to
feed they hauled a complete kitchen on the lunch sled, cooks and all.

When Paul invented logging he had to invent all the tools and figure out all his own methods.
There were no precedents. At the start his outfit consisted of Babe and his big axe.

No two logging jobs can be handled exactly the same way so Paul adapted his operations to local
conditions. In the mountains he used Babe to pull the kinks out of the crooked logging roads;
on the Big Onion he began the system of hauling a section of land at a time to the landings
and in North Dakota he used the Seven Axemen.

At that time marking logs was not thought of, Paul had no need for identification when there
were no logs but his own. About the time he started the Atlantic Ocean drive others had come
into the industry and although their combined cut was insignificant compared to Paul's, there
was danger of confusion, and Paul had most to lose.

At first Paul marked his logs by pinching a piece out of each log. When his cut grew so large
that the marking had to be detailed to the crews, the "scalp" on each log was put on with an
axe, for even in those days not every man could nip out the chunk with his fingers.

The Grindstone was invented by Paul the winter he logged off North Dakota. Before that Paul's
axemen had to sharpen their axes by rolling rocks down hill and running along side of them.
When they got to "Big Dick," as the lumberjacks called Dakota, hills and rocks were so hard
to find that Paul rigged up the revolving rock.

This was much appreciated by the Seven Axemen as it enabled them to grind an axe in a week,
but the grindstone was not much of a hit with the Little Chore Boy whose job it was to turn
it. The first stone was so big that working at full speed, every time it turned around once
it was payday.

The Little Chore Boy led a strenuous life. He was only a kid and like all youngsters putting
in their first winter in the woods, he was put over the jumps by the oldtimers. His regular
work was heavy enough, splitting all the wood for the camp, carrying water and packing lunch
to the men, but his hazers sent him on all kinds of wild goose errands to all parts of the
works, looking for a "left-handed peavy" or a "bundle of cross-hauls."

He had to take a lot of good natured roughneck wit about his size for he only weighed 800 pounds
and a couple of surcingles made a belt for him. What he lacked in size he made up in grit and
the men secretly respected his gameness. They said he might make a pretty good man if he ever
got any growth, and considered it a necessary education to give him a lot of extra chores.

Often in the evening, after his day's work and long hours put in turning the grindstone and
keeping up fires in the camp stoves - that required four cords of wood apiece to kindle a fire,
he could be found with one of Big Ole's small 600-pound anvils in his lap pegging up shoes
with railroad spikes.

It was a long time before they solved the problem of turning logging sleds around in the road.
When a sled returned from the landing and put on a load they had to wait until Paul came along
to pick up the four horses and the load and head them the other way. Judson M. Goss says he
worked for Paul the winter he invented the round turn.

All of Paul's inventions were successful except when he decided to run three ten-hour shifts
a day and installed the Aurora Borealis. After a number of trials the plan was abandoned because
the lights were not dependable.

"The Seven Axemen of the Red River" they were called because they had a camp on Red River with
the three-hundred cooks and the Little Chore Boy. The whole State was cut over from the one
camp and the husky seven chopped from dark to dark and walked to and from work.

Their axes were so big it took a week to grind one of them. Each man had three axes and two
helpers to carry the spare axes to the river when they got red hot from chopping. Even in those
days they had to watch out for forest fires. The axes were hung on long rope handles. Each
axeman would march through the timber whirling his axe around him till the hum of it sounded
like one of Paul's for-and-aft mosquitoes, and at every step a quarter-section of timber was cut.

The height, weight and chest measurement of the Seven Axemen are not known. Authorities differ.
History agrees that they kept a cord of four-foot wood on the table for toothpicks. After supper
they would sit on the deacon seat in the bunk shanty and sing "Shanty Boy" and "Bung Yer Eye"
till the folks in the settlements down on the Atlantic would think another nor'wester was blowing
up.

Some say the Seven Axemen were Bay Chaleur men; others declare they were all cousins and came
from down Machias way. Where they came from or where they went to blow their stake after leaving
Paul's camp no one knows but they are remembered as husky lads and good fellows around camp.

After the Seven Axemen had gone down the tote road, never to return, Paul Bunyan was at a loss
to find a method of cutting down trees that would give him anything like the output he had
been getting. Many trials and experiments followed and then Paul invented the two-man Saw.

The first saw was made from a strip trimmed off in making Big Joe's dinner horn and was long
enough to reach across a quarter section, for Paul could never think in smaller units. This
saw worked all right in a level country, in spite of the fact that all the trees fell back
on the saw, but in rough country only the trees on the hill tops were cut. Trees in the valleys
were cut off in the tops and in the pot holes the saw passed over the trees altogether.

It took a good man to pull this saw in heavy timber when Paul was working on the other end.
Paul used to say to his fellow sawyer, "I don't care if you ride the saw, but please don't
drag your feet." A couple of cousins of Big Ole's were given the job and did so well that ever
afterward in the Lake States the saw crews have generally been Scandinavians.

It was after this that Paul had Big Ole make the "Down-Cutter." This was a rig like a mowing
machine. They drove around eight townships and cut a swath 500 feet wide.

Paul Bunyan's Trained Ants are proving so successful that they may replace donkeys and tractors
on the rugged slopes of the Sierras. Inspired by his success with Bees and Mosquitoes, Paul
has developed a breed of Ants that stand six feet tall and weigh 200 pounds.

To overcome their habit of hibernating all Winter, Paul supplied the Ants with Mackinaws made
with three pairs of sleeves or legs. They eat nothing but Copenhagen Snuff. The Ants (or Uncles
as they prefer to be called) can run to the Westwood shops with a damaged locomotive quicker
than the Wrecking Crew can come out. They do not patronize bootleggers or require time off
to fix their automobiles.

Lucy, Paul Bunyan's cow was not, so far as we can learn, related to either Babe or Benny. Statements
that she was in any way their mother are without basis in fact. The two oxen had been in Paul's
possession for a long time before Lucy arrived on the scene.

No reliable data can be found as to the pedigree of this remarkable dairy animal. There are
no official records of her butterfat fat production nor is it known where or how Paul got her.

Paul always said that Lucy was part Jersey and part wolf. Maybe so. Her actions and methods
of living seemed to justify the allegation of wolf ancestry, for she had an insatiable appetite
and a roving disposition. Lucy ate everything in sight and could never be fed at the same camp
with Babe or Benny. In fact, they quit trying to feed her at all but let her forage her own
living. The Winter of the Deep Snow, when even the tallest White Pines were buried, Brimstone
Bill outfitted Lucy with a set of Babe's old snowshoes and a pair of green goggles and turned
her out to graze on the snowdrifts. At first she had some trouble with the new foot gear but
once she learned to run them and shift gears without wrecking herself, she answered the call
of the limitless snow fields and ran away all over North America until Paul decorated her with
a bell borrowed from a buried church.

In spite of short rations she gave enough milk to keep six men busy skimming the cream. If
she bad been kept in a barn and fed regularly she might have made a milking record. When she
fed on the evergreen trees and her milk got so strong of White Pine and Balsam that the men
used it for cough medicine and liniment, they quit serving the milk on the table and made butter
out of it. By using this butter, to grease the logging roads when the snow and ice thawed off,
Paul was able to run big logging sleds all summer.

The family life of Paul Bunyan, from all accounts, has been very happy. A charming glimpse
of Mrs. Bunyan is given by Mr. E. S. Shepard of Rhinelander, Wis., who tells of working in
Paul's camp on Round River in '62, the Winter of the Black Snow. Paul put him wheeling prune
pits away from the cook camp. After he had worked at this job for three months Paul had him
haul them back again as Mrs. Bunyan, who was cooking at the camp, wanted to use them to make
the hot fires necessary to cook her famous soft nosed pancakes.

Mrs. Bunyan, at this time used to call the men to dinner by blowing into a woodpecker hole
in an old hollow stub that stood near the door. In this stub there was a nest of owls that
had one short wing and flew in circles. When Mr. Shepard made a sketch of Paul, Mrs. Bunyan,
with wifely solicitude for his appearance, parted Paul's hair with a handaxe and combed it
with an old cross-cut saw.

From other sources we have fragmentary glimpses of Jean, Paul's youngest son. When Jean was
three weeks old he jumped from his cradle one night and seizing an axe, chopped the four posts
out from under his father's bed. The incident greatly tickled Paul, who used to brag about
it to any one who would listen to him. "The boy is going to be a great logger some day," he
would declare with fatherly pride.

The last we heard of Jean he was working for a lumber outfit in the South, lifting logging
trains past one another on a single track railroad.

What is camp without a dog? Paul Bunyan loved dogs as well as the next man but never would
have one around that could not earn its keep. Paul's dogs had to work, hunt or catch rats.
It took a good dog to kill the rats and mice in Paul's camp for the rodents picked up scraps
of the buffalo milk pancakes and grew to be as big as two year old bears.

Elmer, the moose terrier, practiced up on the rats when he was a small pup and was soon able
to catch a moose on the run and finish it with one shake. Elmer loafed around the cook camp
and if the meat supply happened to run low the cook would put the dog out the door and say,
"Bring in a moose." Elmer would run into the timber, catch a moose and bring it in and repeat
the performance until, after a few minutes work, the cook figured he had enough for a mess
and would call the dog in.

Sport, the reversible dog was really the best hunter. He was part wolf and part elephant hound
and was raised on bear milk. One night when Sport was quite young, he was playing around in
the horse barn and Paul, mistaking him for a mouse, threw a band axe at him. The axe cut the
dog in two but Paul, instantly realizing what had happened, quickly stuck the two halves together,
gave the pup first aid and bandaged him up. With careful nursing the dog soon recovered and
then it was seen that Paul in his haste had twisted the two halves so that the hind legs pointed
straight up. This proved to be an advantage for the dog learned to run on one pair of legs
for a while and then flop over without loss of speed and run on the other pair. Because of
this he never tired and anything he started after got caught. Sport never got his full growth.
While still a pup he broke through four feet of ice on Lake Superior and was drowned.

As a hunter, Paul would make old Nimrod himself look like a city dude lost from his guide.
He was also a good fisherman. Old-timers tell of seeing Paul as a small boy, fishing off the
Atlantic Coast. He would sail out early in the morning in his three-mast schooner and wade
back before breakfast with his boat full of fish on his shoulder.

About this time he got his shot gun that required four dishpans full of powder and a keg of
spikes to load each barrel. With this gun he could shoot geese so high in the air they would
spoil before reaching the ground.

Tracking was Paul's favorite sport and no trail was too old or too dim for him to follow. He
once came across the skeleton of a moose that had died of old age and, just for curiosity,
picked up the tracks of the animal and spent the whole afternoon following its trail back to
the place where it was born.

The shaggy dog that spent most of his time pretending to sleep in front of Johnny Inkslinger's
counter in the camp office was Fido, the watch dog. Fido was the bug-bear (not bearer, just
bear) of the greenhorns. They were told that Paul starved Fido all winter and then, just before
payday, fed him all the swampers, barn boys, and student bullcooks. The very marrow was frozen
in their heads at the thought of being turned into dog food. Their fears were groundless for
Paul would never let a dog go hungry or mistreat a human being. Fido was fed all the watch
peddlers, tailors' agents, and camp inspectors and thus served a very useful purpose.

It is no picnic to tackle the wilderness and turn the very forest itself into a commercial
commodity delivered at the market. A logger needs plenty of brains and back bone.

Paul Bunyan had his setbacks the same as every logger only his were worse. Being a pioneer
he had to invent all his stuff as he went along. Many a time his plans were upset by the mistakes
of some swivel-headed strawboss or incompetent foreman. The winter of the blue snow, Shot Gunderson
had charge in the Big Tadpole River country. He landed all of his logs in a lake and in the
spring when ready to drive he boomed the logs three times around the lake before be discovered
there was no outlet to it. High hills surrounded the lake and the drivable stream was ten miles
away. Apparently the logs were a total loss.

Then Paul came on the job himself and got busy. Calling in Sourdough Sam, the cook who made
everything but coffee out of sourdough, he ordered him to mix enough sourdough to fill the
big watertank. Hitching Babe to the tank he hauled it over and dumped it into the lake. When
it "riz," as Sam said, a mighty lava-like stream poured forth and carried the logs over the
hills to the river. There is a landlocked lake in Northern Minnesota that is called "Sourdough
Lake" to this day.

Chris Crosshaul was a careless cuss. He took a big drive down the Mississippi for Paul and
when the logs were delivered in the New Orleans boom it was found that he had driven the wrong
logs. The owners looked at the barkmarks and refused to accept them. It was up to Paul to drive
them back upstream.

No one but Paul Bunyan would ever tackle a job like that. To drive logs upstream is impossible,
but if you think a little thing like an impossibility could stop him, you don't know Paul Bunyan.
He simply fed Babe a good big salt ration and drove him to the upper Mississippi to drink.
Babe drank the river dry and sucked all the water upstream. The logs came up river faster than
they went down.

-

Big Ole was the Blacksmith at Paul's headquarters camp on the Big Onion. Ole had a cranky disposition
but he was a skilled workman. No job in iron or steel was too big or too difficult for him.
One of the cooks used to make doughnuts and have Ole punch the holes. He made the griddle on
which Big Joe cast his pancakes and the dinner horn that blew down ten acres of pine. Ole was
the only man who could shoe Babe or Benny. Every time he made a set of shoes for Babe they
had to open up another Minnesota iron mine. Ole once carried a pair of these shoes a mile and
sunk knee deep into solid rock at every step. Babe cast a shoe while making a hard pull one
day, and it was hurled for a mile and tore down forty acres of pine and injured eight Swedes
that were swamping out skidways. Ole was also a mechanic and built the Downcutter, a rig like
a mowing machine that cut down a swath of trees 500 feet wide.

-

In the early days, whenever Paul Bunyan was broke between logging seasons, he traveled around
like other lumberjacks doing any kind of pioneering work he could find. Witnesses, constables, and other
officials were loitering in the court, and dogs were barking, women chattering, boys blowing
horns, and babies squalling through all. It was as pretty a scene of crowd and din and bustle
as one shall see in a summer's day. The fair itself was calm and quiet in comparison; the
complication of discordant sounds in Hogarth's Enraged Musician was nothing to it.

Within my garden the genius of noise was equally triumphant.

An ingenious device, contrived and executed by a most kind and ingenious friend, for the purpose
of sheltering the pyramid of geraniums in front of my greenhouse,--consisting of a wooden roof,
drawn by pullies up and down a high, strong post, something like the mast of a ship,* had given
way; and another most kind friend had arrived with the requisite
machinery, blocks and ropes, and tackle of all sorts, to replace it
upon an improved construction.

With him came a tall blacksmith, a short carpenter, and a stout collar-maker, with hammers,
nails, chisels, and tools of all sorts, enough to build a house; ladders of all heights and
sizes, two or three gaping apprentices, who stood about in the way, John willing to lend his
aid in behalf of his flowers, and master Dick with his hands in his
pockets looking on.

The short carpenter perched himself upon one ladder, the tall blacksmith on another; my good
friend, Mr. Lawson, mounted to the mast head; and such a clatter ensued of hammers and voices--(for
it was exactly one of those fancy jobs where every one feels privileged
to advise and find fault)--such clashing of opinions and conceptions
and suggestions as would go to the building a county town.

* This description does not sound prettily, but the real effect is exceedingly graceful: the appearance
of the dark canopy suspended over the pile of bright flowers, at
a considerable height, has something about it not merely picturesque
but oriental; and that a gentleman's contrivance should succeed at
all points, as if he had been a real carpenter, instead of an earl's
son and a captain in the navy, is a fact quite unparalleled in the
annals of inventions.

Whilst this was going forward in middle air, I and my company were doing our best to furnish
forth the chorus below. It so happened that two sets of my visiters were scientific botanists, the
one party holding the Linnoean system, the others disciples of Jussieu;
and the garden being a most natural place for such a discussion, a
war of hard words ensued, which would have done honour to the Tower
of Babel.

"Tetradynamia," exclaimed one set; "Monocotyledones," thundered the other; whilst a third friend,
a skilful florist, but no botanist, unconsciously out-long-worded both of them, by telling
me that the name of a new annual was "Leptosiphon androsaceus."

Never was such a confusion of noises!

The house door opened, and my father's strong clear voice was heard in tones of warning. "Woman,
how can you swear to this goose?" Whilst the respondent squeaked out in something between a scream
and a cry, "Please your worship, the poor bird having a-laid all his eggs, we had marked un,
and so--" What farther she would have said being drowned in a prodigious clatter occasioned by the
downfal of the ladder that supported the tall blacksmith, which, striking against that whereon
was placed the short carpenter, overset that climbing machine also,
and the clamor incident to such a calamity overpowered all minor noises.

In

the meanwhile I became aware that a fourth party of visiters had entered
the garden, my excellent neighbour, Miss Mortimer, and three other
ladies, whom she introduced as Mrs. and the Misses Dobbs; and the
botanists and florists having departed, and the disaster at the mast
being repaired, quiet was so far restored, that I ushered my guests
into the greenhouse, with something like a hope that we should be
able to hear each other speak.

Mrs. Dobbs was about the largest woman I had ever seen in my life, fat, fair, and fifty with
a broad rosy countenance, beaming with good-humour and contentment, and with a general look
of affluence over her whole comfortable person.

She spoke in a loud voice which made itself heard over the remaining din in the garden and
out, and with a patois between Scotch and Irish, which puzzled me, until I found from her discourse
that she was the widow of a linen manufacturer, in the neighbourhood of Belfast.

"Ay," quoth she, with the most open-hearted familiarity, "times are changed for the better with
me since you and I parted in Cadogan Place. Poor Mr. Dobbs left me and those two girls a fortune
of---- Why, I verily believe," continued she, interrupting herself, "that you don't know me!"
 The big buck mosquitoes fought among themselves and trampled down the weaker
members of the swarm and to this alone Paul Bunyan and his crew owe their lives.

Paul determined to conquer the mosquitoes before another season arrived. He thought of the
big Bumble Bees back home and sent for several yoke of them. These, he hoped would destroy
the mosquitoes. Sourdough Sam brought out two pair of bees, overland on foot. There was no
other way to travel for the flight of the beasts could not be controlled. Their wings were
strapped with surcingles, they checked their stingers with Sam and walking shoes were provided
for them. Sam brought them through without losing a bee.

The cure was worse than the original trouble. The Mosquitoes and the Bees made a hit with each
other. They soon intermarried and their off-spring, as often happens, were worse than their
parents. They had stingers fore-and-aft and could get you coming or going.

Their bee blood caused their downfall in the long run. Their craving for sweets could only
be satisfied by sugar and molasses in large quantities, for what is a flower to an insect with
a ten-gallon stomach? One day the whole tribe flew across Lake Superior to attack a fleet of
ships bringing sugar to Paul's camps. They destroyed the ships but ate so much sugar they could
not fly and all were drowned.

One pair of the original bees were kept at headquarters camp and provided honey for the pancakes
for many years.

-

If Paul Bunyan did not invent Geography be created a lot of it. The Great Lakes were first
constructed to provide a water hole for Babe the Big Blue Ox. Just what year his work was done
is not known but they were in use prior to the Year of the Two Winters.

The Winter Paul Bunyan logged off North Dakota he hauled water for his ice roads from the Great
Lakes. One day when Brimstone Bill had Babe hitched to one of the old water tanks and was making
his early morning trip, the tank sprung a leak when they were half way across Minnesota. Bill
saved himself from drowning by climbing Babe's tail but all efforts to patch up the tank were
in vain so the old tank was abandoned and replaced by one of the new ones. This was the beginning
of the Mississippi River and the truth of this is established by the fact that the old Mississippi
is still flowing.

The cooks in Paul's camps used a lot of water and to make things handy, they used to dig wells
near the cook shanty. At headquarters on the Big Auger, on top of the hill near the mouth of
the Little Gimlet, Paul dug a well so deep that it took all day for the bucket to fall to the
water, and a week to haul it up. They had to run so many buckets that the well was forty feet
in diameter. It was shored up with tamarac poles and when the camp was abandoned Paul pulled
up this cribbing. Travelers who have visited the spot say that the sand has blown away until
178 feet of the well is sticking up into the air, forming a striking landmark.

The Winter of the Deep Snow everything was buried. Paul had to dig down to find the tops of
the tallest White Pines. He had the snow dug away around them and lowered his sawyers down
to the base of the trees. When the tree was cut off he hauled it to the surface with a long
parbuckle chain to which Babe, mounted on snowshoes, was hitched. It was impossible to get
enough stove pipe to reach to the top of the snow, so Paul had Big Ole make stovepipe by boring
out logs with a long six-inch auger.

The year of the Two Winters they had winter all summer and then in the fall it turned colder.
One day Big Joe set the boiling coffeepot on the stove and it froze so quick that the ice was
hot. That was right after Paul had built the Great Lakes and that winter they froze clear to
the bottom. They never would have thawed out if Paul had not chopped out the ice and hauled
it out on shore for the sun to melt. He finally got all the ice thawed but he had to put in
all new fish.

The next spring was the year the rain came up from China. It rained so hard and so long that
the grass was all washed out by the roots and Paul had a great time feeding his cattle. Babe
had to learn to eat pancakes like Benny. That was the time Paul used the straw hats for an
emergency ration.

When Paul's drive came down, folks in the settlements were astonished to see all the river-pigs
wearing huge straw bats. The reason for this was soon apparent. When the fodder ran out every
man was politely requested to toss his hat into the ring. Hundreds of straw hats were used
to make a lunch for Babe.

When Paul Bunyan took up efficiency engineering he went at the the job with all his customary
thoroughness. He did not fool around clocking the crew with a stop watch, counting motions
and deducting the ones used for borrowing chews, going for drinks, dodging the boss and preparing
for quitting time. He decided to cut out labor altogether.

"What's the use," said Paul, "of all this sawing, swamping, skidding, decking, grading and
icing roads, loading, hauling and landing? The object of the game is to get the trees to the
landing, ain't it? Well, why not do it and get it off your mind?"

So he hitched Babe to a section of land and snaked in the whole 640 acres at one drag. At the
landing the trees were cut off just like shearing a sheep and the denuded section hauled back
to its original place. This simplified matters and made the work a lot easier. Six trips a
day, six days a week just cleaned up a township for section 37 was never hauled back to the
woods on Saturday night but was left on the landing to wash away in the early spring when the
drive went out,

Documentary evidence of the truth of this is offered by the United States government surveys.
Look at any map that shows the land subdivisions and you will never find a township with more
than thirty-six sections.

The foregoing statement, previously published, has caused some controversy. Mr. T. S. Sowell
of Miami, Florida wrote to us citing the townships in his State that have sections numbered
37 to 40. He said that the government survey had been complicated by the old Spanish land grants.
We put the matter up to Paul Bunyan and from his camp near Westwood came this reply:

Red River Advertising Department.

Dear Sir: Yes sir, I remember those sections and a lot of bother they made me too. One winter
when I was starting the White Pine business and snaking sections down to the Atlantic Ocean,
a man from Florida came along and ordered a bunch of sections delivered down to his place.
He wanted to see if he could grow the same kind of White Pine down there. I yarded out a nice
bunch of sections and next summer when my drive was in and I wasn't busy I took a crew of Canada
Boys and Mainites and poled them down the coast. When I come to collect they said this man
was gone looking for a Fountain of Youth or some fool thing.

I don't know what luck he had with his White Pine ranch. I never seen them again. I had a lot
of other things to tend to and clean forgot it till you sent me Mr. Sowell's letter. Maybe
that man was a Spaniard I don't know.     

Yours respectively, P. Bunyan.

-

From 1917 to 1920 Paul Bunyan was busy toting the supplies and building camps for a bunch of
husky young fellow-Americans who bad a contract on the other side of the Atlantic, showing
a certain prominent European (who is now logging in Holland) how they log in the United States.

After his service overseas with the A. E. F., Paul couldn't get back to the States quick enough.
Airplanes were too slow so Paul embarked in his Bark Canoe, the one he used on the Big Onion
the year he drove logs upstream. When be threw the old paddle into high he sure rambled and
the sea was covered with dead fish that broke their backs trying to watch him coming and going.

As he shoved off from France, Paul sent a wireless to New York but passed the Statue of Liberty
three lengths ahead of the message. From New York to Westwood he traveled on skis. When the
home folks asked him if the Allegheney Mountains and the Rockies had bothered him, Paul replied,
"I didn't notice any mountains but the trail was a little bumpy in a couple of spots."

In the forests of the Red River Lumber Company Paul Bunyan can cut his lumber for many future
years in the region where Nature found conditions exactly suited to the growth of pine of the
finest texture and largest size.

Early in the closing decade of the nineteenth century the Red River people took a long look
into the future. Foreseeing the exhaustion of their Minnesota white pine, which came a quarter
of a century later, they set out to find the pine that would take its place. Their search covered
several years and reached all the important stands in the western States. This was well in
advance of the westward movement of the industry and Red River had the pioneer's opportunity
for choice and rejection.

Sugar Pine, "cork pine's big brother," is botanically and physically true white pine, with
all the family virtues. It is the largest of all pines.

California Pine is the trade name for pinus ponderosa or western yellow pine from certain regions
where conditions of growth have so modified the nature of the wood that it is more like white
pine than it is like its botanical brothers that grow elsewhere. Some say this change is due
to volcanic soil. Whatever the cause, California Pine from Red River's forest is exceptionally
light, brightly colored, soft and even textured and second only to Sugar Pine in size.

Red River "Paul Bunyan's" California Pine and Sugar Pine meet the strict requirements of trades
that have made white pine their standard. Where freedom from distortion is essential, as for
example piano actions, organ pipes, foundry patterns and the best sash and doors, Red River
pines are used. They finish economically with paints, stains and enamels and are highly valued
as cores for fine hardwood veneers. They work easily, smoothly and cleanly with edged tools
and do not nail-split.

The durability of these California pines is shown by their sound condition in California buildings
that have stood for generations, many of them in regions where climatic conditions are more
conducive to decay than in the middle western and eastern states.

Paul Bunyan tackled a real problem when he came to Westwood. The site of the mill and town
was unbroken forest in 1913, sixty mountainous miles from the nearest railroad. Trails were
graded into passable roads and materials and machinery were freighted in. When the railroad
arrived in 1914 the first mill was in operation and the town well under construction. Town
and plant had been detailed on the drafting boards in Minneapolis. Sanitary sewers, water system,
electric lights and telephones were extended as the forest was cleared and Westwood, with a
population of 5,000, enjoys all the facilities of a modern American community.

The electrically operated sawmill has an annual capacity of 250 million board feet. Dry kilns,
one of the largest plywood factories in the country, sash and door factory and re-manufacturing
departments round out production of a complete line of lumber products.

Red River operates its own logging railroad, 20 miles of which are electrified, hydro-electric
plants and the foundry and machine shops, where many units of the logging and plant machinery
are designed and built.

Back in the early days, when his camps were so far from any where that the wolves following
the tote-teams got lost in the woods, Paul Bunyan made no attempt to keep in touch with the
trade. What's the use when every letter that comes in is about things that happened the year
before?

Since he came to Westwood Paul has renewed old friendships, formed new ones and kept close
contact with the world. Everyone expects great things of Paul Bunyan and with the Red River
outfit back of him he has the chance of his life to make good. Continuous production keeps
a full assortment of stock on hand. Customers in all parts of America find Westwood a dependable
source of supply.

Here is an instance. This old friend of Paul's a prominent furniture manufacturer in the Lake
States, was disappointed because an item he wanted for immediate shipment was not in stock
in the grade and thickness required. He wrote the letter shown below and was given an explanation
of the facts in the case in the accompanying reply.

Paul Bunyan Makes Plywood

Paul Bunyan says that making plywood reminds him of the way Mrs. Bunyan made pies during the
hard times of pioneer days. She would take pancakes, spread molasses between and sew around
the edges with yarn.

Plywood panels differ from other wall coverings in that the natural texture of the wood is
not altered. While the lathe-cut sheets are thin, they are solid wood with the cell structure
just the same as it grew in the tree. In making plywood the inside sheets are placed crossgrained
with the face sheets. These sheets are then united with a glue bond that is stronger than the
wood itself. This cross-grained construction prevents splitting and produces a panel much stronger
than solid wood of the same thickness.

Paul Bunyan's California Pines give Red River plywood's a distinctive character. She announced
herself to me as the wife of Captain ----, aid-de-camp to General C----: by some mistake of
orders, fatal to her peace of mind, the baggage of her husband's regiment had not been included
in the general orders for following the army. Anguish was expressed
on her fine countenance.

She knew only that we were victorious; but she knew not whether her husband was to be numbered
with the dead, or with the living. She was without resource, and unacquainted with the French
language. Painstaking workmanship and careful inspection and grading
make Red River plywood's outstanding in quality.

Plywood panels have revolutionized the use of wood in building and in industry. From the growing
list of industrial uses we might note the following as typical: trunks, concrete forms, furniture
backs, drawer bottoms and cores for fine hardwood veneers; cabinets, car bodies, boxes, table
and counter tops, door panels, signs, toys and ship bulkheads.

Builders use plywood panels for interior walls and ceilings and for insulation, sub-floors,
sheathing, shelving, cupboards and built-in units. The richness of wood-paneled rooms can now
be enjoyed at a cost that compares favorably with other wall coverings. The paneled interiors
do not go out of style or require redecoration. They are not damaged by water or shock and
ordinary breakage. They do not crack or peel.

