When I went through Russia after the Russian-Japanese War, I met one of the leading diplomats
of that country who greeted me with, "Well, how do you like it?" "How do I like what?" I asked.
"How do you like helping Japan to lick Russia?" Those were the homely expressions that he used.
To which I replied, "We did not help Japan to lick Russia." "But," he said, "you did in effect.
Your people and your press sympathized and they expressed the kindly sympathy that counts for
so much at such a time." "The government cannot control our people," I responded. "They think
for themselves and express themselves as they see fit. We cannot control the press in our country,
but we have observed all the laws of neutrality with respect to the war, and if some of the
people expressed themselves in favor of Japan, it was only because they were in favor of the
under dog in the fight." "Why did you give up?" I inquired further; "You were getting stronger
and stronger." "Yes," he said, "we had to fight at the end of a 5,000-mile, single-track railway,
but handicapped as we were, we got our forces out there ready to fight and we could have gone
in and beaten the Japanese." "Why didn't you?" I asked. "Why did you make peace?" "The trouble
is," he explained, "we were living on a volcano at home. Our people were opposed to the war,
and we did not go on, lest the throne would be a forfeit." This is only an indication that
even in the country that is supposed to represent the most absolute of empires, the people
are manifesting a control. The Douma was given too much power at first, so that universal suffrage
was necessarily a failure in the condition of the people at that time. But the Douma now is
gradually acquiring useful power and in the course of the next twenty-five or fifty years Russia
will probably have a popular constitutional government. We have had democracy in this country
for one hundred and twenty-five years, or indeed for two hundred and twenty-five years. It
is now proposed to have more democracy to supply the present defects of our existing democracy.
This is one phase of the present situation that I wish to discuss. Another is the spread of
the fraternal spirit, the desire of one to help another, the actual improvement and increase
in the brotherhood of man which we are seeing in society, and a third is trades-unionism, its
essence and what is to be hoped for or feared from it.

If you will read a book like Chamberlain on "The Foundations of the Nineteenth Century," especially
the preface, which is written by a man who uses a better style than Chamberlain, you will find
that he attempts to summarize the progress of the previous eighteen centuries as a predicate
for the strides of human civilization in the nineteenth. As he minimizes the effect of one
century and then another, you note how few centuries, in his judgment, play any part in the
onward march, and you are discouraged as to what one man can do to help along any movement
that shall really be world-wide or permanent.

The effect is much the same upon your personal hope of accomplishing some good in the world
as when a professor of astronomy takes you over to the observatory, lets you look through the
telescope, tells you that light takes something like eight minutes to come the 95,000,000 miles
from the sun to the earth, and then says that the sun after all is a pretty poor thing considered
in connection with what other suns there are. When you find furthermore that some stars are
so far distant that the light you are now receiving on your retina started from them centuries
ago, you say to yourself: "Well, what's the use? If we are such atoms and so unimportant in
the general result, what's the use?"

Still if you study Chamberlain's history of the eighteen centuries you will find that, after
all, the men who were real factors in the world civilization were the geniuses who were able
to interpret and enforce what was inchoate in the minds of all but had no definite expression
and led to no useful action. Each atom counts something, two make a molecule and the world
is made up of them--at least it was in my college days. Therefore, what we are here for is
to make the best possible effort to help along the general weal, and it is no excuse, because
we cannot play a large part, that we should play no part at all and should feel no sense of
responsibility for what we can do.

What then of conditions of civilization in our country in the last half-century? The Civil
War grew out of a great moral and social issue. It was a moral issue on the part of the North
and a social issue on the part of the South. Material considerations were subordinated. After
the war we had a pretty hard time in getting over its immediate effects. The panic of 1873,
which prostrated all business, was the result of the excesses of the war, the overissue of
legal tender and the feverish, unhealthy expansion that followed. In 1878, we resumed specie
payments. I presume no country in the world ever showed such an enormous expansion and such
material growth as ours between 1878 and 1907. It was shown in the useful inventions. Steam
had been invented before, but it was increased in its uses, and electricity was made the tool
of man. Now it is easy to follow that kind of material expansion. We can count the growth in
wealth and trace the effect of it on the people, for they all got into the chase for the dollar.

In the West, the pioneer spirit was so strong that they were glad to have anything in the way
of development at any cost. Counties would issue railroad bonds to build railroads and would
give the bonds to the railroads. They would give franchises of all sorts and do everything
that they thought would help open the country. There was a most substantial increase in the
average income, and the average comfort, especially in the bodily comfort, of everyone. Have
you ever thought that today the humblest workman has more bodily comfort in many ways than
Queen Elizabeth or even George III? We had learned the advantage of combination in machinery
and we adopted it in business.

This brought about great combinations of plant and capital which reduced the cost of producing
commodities necessary to man to a price never conceived of before. I do not wish to depreciate
the value or importance of improvement in material comfort. When you hear a man denounce it,
you may know that either he is not a clear, calm thinker, or else he is a demagogue. Material
growth and material comfort are essential for the development of mental and spiritual activities.
The result of this combination and material expansion, however, was to create great corporations
which began to get control of things. The same spirit of combination entered into politics
and we had machines and bosses which lent their hand to, and furnished a complacent instrument
for, corporations. Time was when they ordered delegates in a convention with the same degree
of certainty that the order would be supplied, as they did steel rails or any other commodity.
That time has passed and why? Because the danger of plutocracy forced itself on the people.
Leaders took it up and showed it to them; and in the last ten years we have had a great movement
to eliminate corporate and money control in politics. Great statutes have been passed--the
anti-trust law, the interstate commerce law, the statutes against the use of contributions
from corporations in politics, the statutes requiring the showing of the electoral expenses,
have all been brought about in response to a popular demand.

The people failed to scrutinize before, but now that they are aroused and have taken matters
in their own hands, they have brought about reform. The fact that he is supported by bosses
is now generally enough to defeat a man, and the charge that he has a machine with him is enough
to interfere with his electoral success. Organization is necessary for political success; even
reformers find that out after they get into politics, but today there is an unreasonable prejudice
against it. The great and good effect of the reform, however, is that corporations are no longer
in politics. Of course corruption is not all gone, but it is largely stayed, and there is no
longer any chance that corporations can control as they did.

But the leviathan of the people cannot be aroused in this way and his movement stopped at the
median line. We must expect unwise excess. Sincere reformers have reasoned that because we
had the representative form of government during this corrupt period, it is the representative
form of government which is responsible. Because we had courts during the corrupt period, the
courts are responsible for the corruption. Therefore we must change the representative system
by injecting more democracy into it and we must change the courts by injecting more democracy
into them and require the people at an election to decide cases instead of judges on the Bench.
These are the excesses to which we trend.

We are a pretty great people. We admit it. We have great confidence in what we can do, and
when we are set, neither an economic law drawn from political science nor experience seems
a very formidable objection. We are a successful people in machinery, and so we take our analogy
for political reforms from machinery. We found that by uniting various mechanical elements
we could make machines which would do as much as one hundred or one thousand men in the same
time. So we think that if we are only acute enough to devise a governmental machine which will
work without effort on the part of the people, we can sit at home while elections run themselves
so well that only what the good people desire in political action will necessarily result.
We want the equivalent of what, in the slang of practical mechanics, we call a fool-proof machine,
because anybody can run it and no fool can interfere with its normal operation. So these political
reformers are hunting a corrupt-politician-proof machine for government. It does not and cannot
exist. No government can exist which does not depend upon the activity, the honesty and the
intelligence of those who form it. The initiative, the referendum and the recall have been
urged and in many states adopted, as a machine which no boss or corrupt politician can prevent
from producing honest, effective political results. They are expected to reform everything
and those who doubt their wisdom are, for the time being, in the minds of many enthusiasts,
public enemies.

The representative system, on the contrary, recognizes that government, in the actual execution
of governmental measures, and in the actual detailed preparation of governmental measures,
is an expert matter. To attempt to devise and adopt detailed legislative measures to accomplish
the general purpose of the people through a mass vote at a popular election is just as absurd
as it would be for all those present at a town meeting to say, "We will all of us now go out
and build a bridge, or we will use a theodolite." Thus to say that by injecting more democracy
you can cure the defects of our present democracy is to express one of those epigrams that,
like many of its kind, is either not true at all or is only partly true and is even more deceptive
than if it were wholly untrue.

Take the power of appointment in executive work. You elect officers, choosing men of character,
intelligence, and experience for a few great offices, and then what do you do under the Federal
Constitution? You turn over to the President the appointment of great officers because he needs
intelligence, knowledge and skill to make their selections.

Consider the system of general direct primaries in the selection of judges. There is a ticket
at the primaries on which something like twenty or thirty lawyers run for the Supreme Bench.
Some of them go around and tell the electors how they will decide on questions after they get
in. The qualifications of most of them as lawyers and as men are not known to the people. Some
of them are prominent because they have been in the headlines of newspapers as figuring in
sensational cases. Others have political prominence but no public experience to test their
judicial capacity. Do you think this method of selection by the people would lead to the choice
of a learned, skilled lawyer with that experience, courage and fine judicial quality that are
to make him a great judge? Of course it would not. It has been my duty to select more judges
in a term of four years than any other President, and I have had to look into and compare the
results of selection of judicial candidates by popular general primary and by convention, so
that I know what I am talking about when I say that the primary system has greatly injured
the average capacity of our elective judiciary.

Why should we not use common sense in matters of government just as we use common sense in
our own business? Why should we be afraid to tell the people that they are not fitted to select
high judicial officers? They are not. You know you are not. You could not tell me who would
be good judges for Connecticut, or for any state in the Union where you happen to live unless
you went about and investigated the matter. If you are put in a position of responsibility,
you have sense enough to know where to find out the facts and then to make the selection, but
the people lack that opportunity. So how is the question to be solved? By electing a Chief
Executive and charging him with the responsibility of selecting competent men to act as judges.
That is what is meant by the short ballot.

Reformers-for-politics-only include as many vote-getting planks in a platform as they can get
in it without regard to their consistency or inconsistency. They sometimes combine the short
ballot with the initiative, referendum and recall though they are utterly at variance. The
referendum is the submission of every issue to the people.

The short ballot, on the contrary, means putting up one or two men whose names shall not encumber
the ballot. Have you ever seen these ballots? They are a yard long and a yard wide. They have
a hundred and twenty names on them and the people are expected to make a selection. They are
to make a selection of ten out of fifty or one hundred names. Why, it would seem to be mathematically
demonstrable that that is absurd. But when some men get into politics and talk about the people,
it seems as if they had to abandon ordinary logic. I am just as much in favor of popular government
as anybody, but I am in favor of popular government as a means to attain good government, not
in order to go upon the stump and say, "Vote for me because I am in favor of the people. The
people are all wise and never make a mistake."

