It is a decision against which all our persuasions struggle, and we must be long convicted
before we can be convinced that the solid universe of external things is 'such stuff as dreams
are made of.' The shocking absurdities of the popular philosophy of mind and matter, its fatal
consequences in morals, and their violent dogmatism concerning the source of all things, had
early conducted me to materialism. This materialism is a seducing system to young and superficial
minds. It allows its disciples to talk, and dispenses them from thinking. But I was discontented
with such a view of things as it afforded; man is a being of high aspirations, 'looking both
before and after,' whose 'thoughts wander through eternity,' disclaiming alliance with transience
and decay; incapable of imagining to himself annihilation; existing but in the future and the
past; being, not what he is, but what he has been and shall be. The potato, nutritive and harmless
as it appears, belongs to a family suspected of very dangerous traits. It is a family connection
of the deadly nightshade and other ill-reputed gentry, and sometimes shows strange proclivities
to evil,--now breaking out uproariously, as in the noted potato rot, and now more covertly
in various evil affections. For this reason, scientific directors bid us beware of the water
in which potatoes are boiled,--into which, it appears, the evil principle
is drawn off; and they caution us not to shred them into stews without
previously suffering the slices to lie for an hour or so in salt and
water.

These cautions are worth attention.

The most usual modes of preparing the potato for the table are by roasting or boiling.


After such an exposition, it would be idle to translate into other words what could only lose
its energy and fitness by the change. Examined point by point, and word by word, the most discriminating
intellects have been able to discern no train of thoughts in the process of reasoning, which
does not conduct inevitably to the conclusion which has been stated.

What follows from the admission? It establishes no new truth, it gives us no additional insight
into our hidden nature, neither its action nor itself. Philosophy, impatient as it may be to
build, has much work yet remaining, as pioneer for the overgrowth of ages. It makes one step
towards this object; it destroys error, and the roots of error. It leaves, what it is too often
the duty of the reformer in political and ethical questions to leave, a vacancy. It reduces
the mind to that freedom in which it would have acted, but for the misuse of words and signs,
the instruments of its own creation. By signs, I would be understood in a wide sense, including
what is properly meant by that term, and what I peculiarly mean. In this latter sense, almost
all familiar objects are signs, standing, not for themselves, but for others, in their capacity
of suggesting one thought which shall lead to a train of thoughts. Our whole life is thus an
education of error.

Let us recollect our sensations as children. What a distinct and intense apprehension had we
of the world and of ourselves! Many of the circumstances of social life were then important
to us which are now no longer so. But that is not the point of comparison on which I mean to
insist. We less habitually distinguished all that we saw and felt, from ourselves. They seemed
as it were to constitute one mass. There are some persons who, in this respect, are always
children. Those who are subject to the state called reverie, feel as if their nature were dissolved
into the surrounding universe, or as if the surrounding universe were absorbed into their being.
They are conscious of no distinction. And these are states which precede, or accompany, or
follow an unusually intense and vivid apprehension of life. As men grow up this power commonly
decays, and they become mechanical and habitual agents. Thus feelings and then reasonings are
the combined result of a multitude of entangled thoughts, and of a series of what are called
impressions, planted by reiteration.

The view of life presented by the most refined deductions of the intellectual philosophy, is
that of unity. Nothing exists but as it is perceived. The difference is merely nominal between
those two classes of thought, which are vulgarly distinguished by the names of ideas and of
external objects. Pursuing the same thread of reasoning, the existence of distinct individual
minds, similar to that which is employed in now questioning its own nature, is likewise found
to be a delusion. The words I, YOU, THEY, are not signs of any actual difference subsisting
between the assemblage of thoughts thus indicated, but are merely marks employed to denote
the different modifications of the one mind.

Let it not be supposed that this doctrine conducts to the monstrous presumption that I, the
person who now write and think, am that one mind. I am but a portion of it. The words I, and
YOU, and THEY, are grammatical devices invented simply for arrangement, and totally devoid
of the intense and exclusive sense usually attached to them. It is difficult to find terms
adequate to express so subtle a conception as that to which the Intellectual Philosophy has
conducted us. We are on that verge where words abandon us, and what wonder if we grow dizzy
to look down the dark abyss of how little we know. The relations of THINGS remain unchanged,
by whatever system. By the word THINGS is to be understood any object of thought, that is any
thought upon which any other thought is employed, with an apprehension of distinction.

The relations of these remain unchanged; and such is the material of our knowledge. What is
the cause of life? that is, how was it produced, or what agencies distinct from life have acted
or act upon life? All recorded generations of mankind have weariedly busied themselves in inventing
answers to this question; and the result has been,--Religion. Yet, that the basis of all things
cannot be, as the popular philosophy alleges, mind, is sufficiently evident. Mind, as far as
we have any experience of its properties, and beyond that experience how vain is argument!
cannot create, it can only perceive. It is said also to be the cause. But cause is only a word
expressing a certain state of the human mind with regard to the manner in which two thoughts
are apprehended to be related to each other. If any one desires to know how unsatisfactorily
the popular philosophy employs itself upon this great question, they need only impartially
reflect upon the manner in which thoughts develop themselves in their minds. It is infinitely
improbable that the cause of mind, that is, of existence, is similar to mind.

[1815; publ. 1840]

ON A FUTURE STATE

It has been the persuasion of an immense majority of human beings in all ages and nations that
we continue to live after death,--that apparent termination of all the functions of sensitive
and intellectual existence. The water passes between each of these islands. I went out to the extreme
point of the furthest. The sight here is perhaps second only to the great Fall itself. The
river, about a mile and a quarter wide, rushes down the heavy descent, contracting as it goes,
before leaping the precipice below. The water was tossing and foaming like an angry sea, reminding
me of the ocean when the waves are running high and curling their white crests after a storm.

These rapids had far more fascination for me than the Falls themselves. I could sit and watch
for hours the water rushing past; and it was long before I could leave them, though my feet were in
deep snow. It must be very fine to sit out at that extreme point in summer time, shaded by the rich
foliage of the trees, and dream away the hours. The seat is known as the Lovers' seat, but lovers
would need to have strong lungs to shout their whispers to each other there, if they wished them to
be heard.

At length I turned my back upon the foaming torrent, and resumed the road to my hotel. On my
way back, I stopped at the genuine Niagara curiosity-shop, where photographs, Indian bead and
feather work, and articles manufactured out of the "real Niagara spar," are sold. Only the photographs
are really genuine and good. The bead-work is a manufacture, and probably never passed through
Indian hands; while the Niagara spar is imported from Matlock, much of it doubtless returning to
England in the form of curious specimens of workmanship from the
Great Falls.

* * * * *

I have very little more to add relating to my journey through the States. I was not making a
tour, but passing through America at railway speed on my way home to England; and I have merely
described, in the most rapid and cursory way, the things that struck me along my route. All that remained
for me to do between Niagara and New York, was to call at Rochester, and pay an unheralded visit
to my American cousins there. What English family has not got relations in the States? I find that
I have them living in Rochester, Boston, and St. Louis. It is the same blood, after all, in both countries--in
Old and New England.

After travelling through the well-cultivated, well-peopled country that extends eastward from
Niagara to Rochester, I arrived at my destination about four in the afternoon, and immediately went
in search of my American cousins.

I was conscious of being a rather untidy sight to look at, after my long railway journey of nearly
three thousand miles, and did not know what, in my rough travelling guise, my reception might
be. But any misgivings on that point were soon set at rest by the cordiality of my reception.
I was at once made one of the family, and treated as such. I enjoyed with my new-found relatives
four delightful days of recruiting rest and friendly intercourse. To use the common American
phrase, I had a "real good time."

The town of Rochester is much bigger than the English city of the
same name. It is a place of considerable trade and importance, with
a population of about 60,000. Some of the commercial buildings are
very fine; and I was told of one place, that it was "the finest fire-proof
establishment in the world." Possibly the American world was meant,
and that is by no means a small one. Rochester is especially famous
for its nurseries, where trees of all kinds are reared and sent far
and near; its principal nursery firms being known all over Europe.

There
are some fine waterfalls near Rochester--the falls of the Genesee.
Had I not seen Niagara, I should have doubtless wondered at their
beauty. Their height is as great, but the quantity of water is wanting.
After Niagara, all other falls must seem comparatively tame. The common observer is struck with dejection at the spectacle. He contends in
vain against the persuasion of the grave, that the dead indeed cease to be. The corpse at his
feet is prophetic of his own destiny. Those who have preceded him, and whose voice was delightful
to his ear; whose touch met his like sweet and subtle fire; whose aspect spread a visionary
light upon his path--these he cannot meet again. The organs of sense are destroyed, and the
intellectual operations dependent on them have perished with their sources. How can a corpse
see or feel? its eyes are eaten out, and its heart is black and without motion. What intercourse
can two heaps of putrid clay and crumbling bones hold together? When you can discover where
the fresh colours of the faded flower abide, or the music of the broken lyre, seek life among
the dead. Such are the anxious and fearful contemplations of the common observer, though the
popular religion often prevents him from confessing them even to himself.

The natural philosopher, in addition to the sensations common to all men inspired by the event
of death, believes that he sees with more certainty that it is attended with the annihilation
of sentiment and thought. He observes the mental powers increase and fade with those of the
body, and even accommodate themselves to the most transitory changes of our physical nature.
Sleep suspends many of the faculties of the vital and intellectual principle; drunkenness and
disease will either temporarily or permanently derange them. Madness or idiotcy may utterly
extinguish the most excellent and delicate of those powers. In old age the mind gradually withers;
and as it grew and was strengthened with the body, so does it together with the body sink into
decrepitude. Assuredly these are convincing evidences that so soon as the organs of the body
are subjected to the laws of inanimate matter, sensation, and perception, and apprehension,
are at an end.  It is probable that what we call thought is not an actual being, but no more
than the relation between certain parts of that infinitely varied mass, of which the rest of
the universe is composed, and which ceases to exist so soon as those parts change their position
with regard to each other. Thus colour, and sound, and taste, and odour exist only relatively.
But let thought be considered as some peculiar substance, which permeates, and is the cause
of, the animation of living beings. Why should that substance be assumed to be something essentially
distinct from all others, and exempt from subjection to those laws from which no other substance
is exempt? It differs, indeed, from all other substances, as electricity, and light, and magnetism,
and the constituent parts of air and earth, severally differ from all others. Each of these
is subject to change and to decay, and to conversion into other forms. Yet the difference between
light and earth is scarcely greater than that which exists between life, or thought, and fire.
The difference between the two former was never alleged as an argument for the eternal permanence
of either, in that form under which they first might offer themselves to our notice. Why should
the difference between the two latter substances be an argument for the prolongation of the
existence of one and not the other, when the existence of both has arrived at their apparent
termination? To say that fire exists without manifesting any of the properties of fire, such
as light, heat, etc., or that the principle of life exists without consciousness, or memory,
or desire, or motive, is to resign, by an awkward distortion of language, the affirmative of
the dispute. To say that the principle of life MAY exist in distribution among various forms,
is to assert what cannot be proved to be either true or false, but which, were it true, annihilates
all hope of existence after death, in any sense in which that event can belong to the hopes
and fears of men. Suppose, however, that the intellectual and vital principle differs in the
most marked and essential manner from all other known substances; that they have all some resemblance
between themselves which it in no degree participates.  In what manner can this concession
be made an argument for its imperishability? All that we see or know perishes and is changed.
Life and thought differ indeed from everything else. But that it survives that period, beyond
which we have no experience of its existence, such distinction and dissimilarity affords no
shadow of proof, and nothing but our own desires could have led us to conjecture or imagine.
Have we existed before birth? It is difficult to conceive the possibility of this. There is,
in the generative principle of each animal and plant, a power which converts the substances
by which it is surrounded into a substance homogeneous with itself. That is, the relations
between certain elementary particles of matter undergo a change, and submit to new combinations.
For when we use the words PRINCIPLE, POWER, CAUSE, we mean to express no real being, but only
to class under those terms a certain series of co-existing phenomena; but let it be supposed
that this principle is a certain substance which escapes the observation of the chemist and
anatomist. It certainly MAY BE; though it is sufficiently unphilosophical to allege the possibility
of an opinion as a proof of its truth. Does it see, hear, feel, before its combination with
those organs on which sensation depends? Does it reason, imagine, apprehend, without those
ideas which sensation alone can communicate? If we have not existed before birth; if, at the
period when the parts of our nature on which thought and life depend, seem to be woven together;
if there are no reasons to suppose that we have existed before that period at which our existence
apparently commences, then there are no grounds for supposition that we shall continue to exist
after our existence has apparently ceased.  So far as thought is concerned, the same will take
place with regard to use, individually considered, after death, as had place before our birth.

It is said that it, is possible that we should continue to exist in some mode totally inconceivable
to us at present. This is a most unreasonable presumption. It casts on the adherents of annihilation
the burthen of proving the negative of a question, the affirmative of which is not supported
by a single argument, and which, by its very nature, lies beyond the experience of the human
understanding. It is sufficiently easy, indeed, to form any proposition, concerning which we
are ignorant, just not so absurd as not to be contradictory in itself, and defy refutation.
The possibility of whatever enters into the wildest imagination to conceive is thus triumphantly
vindicated. But it is enough that such assertions should be either contradictory to the known
laws of nature, or exceed the limits of our experience, that their fallacy or irrelevancy to
our consideration should be demonstrated. They persuade, indeed, only those who desire to be
persuaded. This desire to be for ever as we are; the reluctance to a violent and unexperienced
change, which is common to all the animated and inanimate combinations of the universe, is,
indeed, the secret persuasion which has given birth to the opinions of a future state.

[1815; publ. 1840]

ON THE PUNISHMENT OF DEATH

A FRAGMENT

The first law which it becomes a Reformer to propose and support, at the approach of a period
of great political change, is the abolition of the punishment of death.

It is sufficiently clear that revenge, retaliation, atonement, expiation, are rules and motives,
so far from deserving a place in any enlightened system of political life, that they are the
chief sources of a prodigious class of miseries in the domestic circles of society. It is clear
that however the spirit of legislation may appear to frame institutions upon more philosophical
maxims, it has hitherto, in those cases which are termed criminal, done little more than palliate
the spirit, by gratifying a portion of it; and afforded a compromise between that which is
bests--the inflicting of no evil upon a sensitive being, without a decisively beneficial result
in which he should at least participates--and that which is worst; that he should be put to
torture for the amusement of those whom he may have injured, or may seem to have injured.

Omitting these remoter considerations, let us inquire what, DEATH is; that punishment which
is applied as a measure of transgressions of indefinite shades of distinction, so soon as they
shall have passed that degree and colour of enormity, with which it is supposed no, inferior
infliction is commensurate.

And first, whether death is good or evil, a punishment or a reward, or whether it be wholly
indifferent, no man can take upon himself to assert. That that within us which thinks and feels,
continues to think and feel after the dissolution of the body, has been the almost universal
opinion of mankind, and the accurate philosophy of what I may be permitted to term the modern
Academy, by showing the prodigious depth and extent of our ignorance respecting the causes
and nature of sensation, renders probable the affirmative of a proposition, the negative of
which it is so difficult to conceive, and the popular arguments against which, derived from
what is called the atomic system, are proved to be applicable only to the relation which one
object bears to another, as apprehended by the mind, and not to existence itself, or the nature
of that essence which is the medium and receptacle of objects.

The popular system of religion suggests the idea that the mind, after death, will be painfully
or pleasurably affected according to its determinations during life. However ridiculous and
pernicious we must admit the vulgar accessories of this creed to be, there is a certain analogy,
not wholly absurd, between the consequences resulting to an individual during life from the
virtuous or vicious, prudent or imprudent, conduct of his external actions, to those consequences
which are conjectured to ensue from the discipline and order of his internal thoughts, as affecting
his condition in a future state. They omit, indeed, to calculate upon the accidents of disease,
and temperament, and organization, and circumstance, together with the multitude of independent
agencies which affect the opinions, the conduct, and the happiness of individuals, and produce
determinations of the will, and modify the judgement, so as to produce effects the most opposite
in natures considerably similar. These are those operations in the order of the whole of nature,
tending, we are prone to believe, to some definite mighty end, to which the agencies of our
peculiar nature are subordinate; nor is there any reason to suppose, that in a future state
they should become suddenly exempt from that subordination.  The philosopher is unable to determine
whether our existence in a previous state has affected our present condition, and abstains
from deciding whether our present condition will affect us in that which may be future. That,
if we continue to exist, the manner of our existence will be such as no inferences nor conjectures,
afforded by a consideration of our earthly experience, can elucidate, is sufficiently obvious.
The opinion that the vital principle within us, in whatever mode it may continue to exist,
must lose that consciousness of definite and individual being which now characterizes it, and
become a unit in the vast sum of action and of thought which disposes and animates the universe,
and is called God, seems to belong to that class of opinion which has been designated as indifferent.

To compel a person to know all that can be known by the dead concerning that which the living
fear, hope, or forget; to plunge him into the pleasure or pain which there awaits him; to punish
or reward him in a manner and in a degree incalculable and incomprehensible by us; to disrobe
him at once from all that intertexture of good and evil with which Nature seems to have clothed
every form of individual existence, is to inflict on him the doom of death.

A certain degree of pain and terror usually accompany the infliction of death. This degree
is infinitely varied by the infinite variety in the temperament and opinions of the sufferers.
As a measure of punishment, strictly so considered, and as an exhibition, which, by its known
effects on the sensibility of the sufferer, is intended to intimidate the spectators from incurring
a similar liability, it is singularly inadequate.

Firstly, Persons of energetic character, in whom, as in men who suffer for political crimes,
there is a large mixture of enterprise, and fortitude, and disinterestedness, and the elements,
though misguided and disarranged, by which the strength and happiness of a nation might have
been cemented, die in such a manner, as to make death appear not evil, but good. The death
of what is called a traitor, that is, a person who, from whatever motive, would abolish the
government of the day, is as often a triumphant exhibition of suffering virtue, as the warning
of a culprit. The multitude, instead of departing with a panic-stricken approbation of the
laws which exhibited such a spectacle, are inspired with pity, admiration and sympathy; and
the most generous among them feel an emulation to be the authors of such flattering emotions,
as they experience stirring in their bosoms.  Impressed by what they see and feel, they make
no distinctive between the motives which incited the criminals to the action for which they
suffer, or the heroic courage with which they turned into good that which their judges awarded
to them as evil or the purpose itself of those actions, though that purpose may happen to be
eminently pernicious. The laws in this case lose their sympathy, which it ought to be their
chief object to secure, and in a participation of which consists their chief strength in maintaining
those sanctions by which the parts of the social union are bound together, so as to produce,
as nearly as possible, the ends for which it is instituted.

Secondly,--Persons of energetic character, in communities not modelled with philosophical skill
to turn all the energies which they contain to the purposes of common good, are prone also
to fall into the temptation of undertaking, and are peculiarly fitted for despising the perils
attendant upon consummating, the most enormous crimes. Murder, rapes, extensive schemes of
plunder are the actions of persons belonging to this class; and death is the penalty of conviction.
But the coarseness of organization, peculiar to men capable of committing acts wholly selfish,
is usually found to be associated with a proportionate insensibility to fear or pain. Their
sufferings communicate to those of the spectators, who may be liable to the commission of similar
crimes a sense of the lightness of that event, when closely examined which, at a distance,
as uneducated persons are accustomed to do, probably they regarded with horror. But a great
majority of the spectators are so bound up in the interests and the habits of social union
that no temptation would be sufficiently strong to induce them to a commission of the enormities
to which this penalty is assigned. The more powerful, and the richer among them,--and a numerous
class of little tradesmen are richer and more powerful than those who are employed by them,
and the employer, in general, bears this relation to the employed,--regard their own wrongs
as, in some degree, avenged, and their own rights secured by this punishment, inflicted as
the penalty of whatever crime. In cases of murder or mutilation, this feeling is almost universal.
In those, therefore, whom this exhibition does not awaken to the sympathy which extenuates
crime and discredits the law which restrains it, it produces feelings more directly at war
with the genuine purposes of political society.  It excites those emotions which it is the
chief object of civilization to extinguish for ever, and in the extinction of which alone there
can be any hope of better institutions than those under which men now misgovern one another.
Men feel that their revenge is gratified, and that their security is established by the extinction
and the sufferings of beings, in most respects resembling themselves; and their daily occupations
constraining them to a precise form in all their thoughts, they come to connect inseparably
the idea of their own advantage with that of the death and torture of others. It is manifest
that the object of sane polity is directly the reverse; and that laws founded upon reason,
should accustom the gross vulgar to associate their ideas of security and of interest with
the reformation, and the strict restraint, for that purpose alone, of those who might invade it.

The passion of revenge is originally nothing more than an habitual perception of the ideas
of the sufferings of the person who inflicts an injury, as connected, as they are in a savage
state, or in such portions of society as are yet undisciplined to civilization, with security
that that injury will not be repeated in future. This feeling, engrafted upon superstition
and confirmed by habit, at last loses sight of the only object for which it may be supposed
to have been implanted, and becomes a passion and a duty to be pursued and fulfilled, even
to the destruction of those ends to which it originally tended. The other passions, both good
and evil. Avarice, Remorse, Love, Patriotism, present a similar appearance; and to this principle
of the mind over-shooting the mark at which it aims, we owe all that is eminently base or excellent
in human nature; in providing for the nutriment or the extinction of which, consists the true
art of the legislator. [Footnote: The savage and the illiterate are but faintly aware of the
distinction between the future and the past; they make actions belonging to periods so distinct,
the subjects of similar feelings; they live only in the present, or in the past, as it is present.
It is in this that the philosopher excels one of the many; it is this which distinguishes the
doctrine of philosophic necessity from fatalism; and that determination of the will, by which
it is the active source of future events, from that liberty or indifference, to which the abstract
liability of irremediable actions is attached, according to the notions of the vulgar.

This is the source of the erroneous excesses of Remorse and Revenge; the one extending itself
over the future, and the other over the past; provinces in which their suggestions can only
be the sources of evil. The purpose of a resolution to act more wisely and virtuously in future,
and the sense of a necessity of caution in repressing an enemy, are the sources from which
the enormous superstitions implied in the words cited have arisen.]

Nothing is more clear than that the infliction of punishment in general, in a degree which
the reformation and the restraint of those who transgress the laws does not render indispensable,
and none more than death, confirms all the inhuman and unsocial impulses of men. It is almost
a proverbial remark, that those nations in which the penal code has been particularly mild,
have been distinguished from all others by the rarity of crime.  But the example is to be admitted
to be equivocal. A more decisive argument is afforded by a consideration of the universal connexion
of ferocity of manners, and a contempt of social ties, with the contempt of human life. Governments
which derive their institutions from the existence of circumstances of barbarism and violence,
with some rare exceptions perhaps, are bloody in proportion as they are despotic, and form
the manners of their subjects to a sympathy with their own spirit.

The spectators who feel no abhorrence at a public execution, but rather a self-applauding superiority,
and a sense of gratified indignation, are surely excited to the most inauspicious emotions.
The first reflection of such a one is the sense of his own internal and actual worth, as preferable
to that of the victim, whom circumstances have led to destruction. The meanest wretch is impressed
with a sense of his own comparative merit. He is one of those on whom the tower of Siloam fell
not--he is such a one as Jesus Christ found not in all Samaria, who, in his own soul, throws
the first stone at the woman taken in adultery.  The popular religion of the country takes
its designation from that illustrious person whose beautiful sentiment I have quoted.  Any
one who has stript from the doctrines of this person the veil of familiarity, will perceive
how adverse their spirit is to feelings of this nature.

SPECULATIONS ON METAPHYSICS

I--THE MIND

It is an axiom in mental philosophy, that we can think of nothing which we have not perceived.
When I say that we can think of nothing, I mean, we can imagine nothing, we can reason of nothing,
we can remember nothing, we can foresee nothing.  The most astonishing combinations of poetry,
the subtlest deductions of logic and mathematics, are no other than combinations which the
intellect makes of sensations according to its own laws.  A catalogue of all the thoughts of
the mind, and of all their possible modifications, is a cyclopedic history of the universe.

But, it will be objected, the inhabitants of the various planets of this and other solar systems;
and the existence of a Power bearing the same relation to all that we perceive and are, as
what we call a cause does to what we call effect, were never subjects of sensation, and yet
the laws of mind almost universally suggest, according to the various disposition of each,
a conjecture, a persuasion, or a conviction of their existence. The reply is simple; these
thoughts are also to be included in the catalogue of existence; they are modes in which thoughts
are combined; the objection only adds force to the conclusion, that beyond the limits of perception
and thought nothing can exist.

Thoughts, or ideas, or notions, call them what you will, differ from each other, not in kind,
but in force. It has commonly been supposed that those distinct thoughts which affect a number
of persons, at regular intervals, during the passage of a multitude of other thoughts, which
are called REAL or EXTERNAL OBJECTS, are totally different in kind from those which affect
only a few persons, and which recur at irregular intervals, and are usually more obscure and
indistinct, such as hallucinations, dreams, and the ideas of madness. No essential distinction
between any one of these ideas, or any class of them, is founded on a correct observation of
the nature of things, but merely on a consideration of what thoughts are most invariably subservient
to the security and happiness of life; and if nothing more were expressed by the distinction,
the philosopher might safely accommodate his language to that of the vulgar. These being washed,
she tumbles them into her oven at a leisure interval, and there lets them lie till it is time to
serve breakfast, whenever that may be. As a result, if the largest are cooked, the smallest are
presented in cinders, and the intermediate sizes are withered and watery. Nothing is so utterly
ruined by a few moments of overdoing. That which at the right moment was plump with mealy richness,
a quarter of an hour later shrivels and becomes watery,--and it is
in this state that roast potatoes are most frequently served. The principle of the agreement and similarity of all thoughts, is, that
they are all thoughts; the principle of their disagreement consists in the variety and irregularity
of the occasions on which they arise in the mind. That in which they agree, to that in which
they differ, is as everything to nothing. Important distinctions, of various degrees of force,
indeed, are to be established between them, if they were, as they may be, subjects of ethical
and economical discussion; but that is a question altogether distinct. By considering all knowledge
as bounded by perception, whose operations may be indefinitely combined, we arrive at a conception
of Nature inexpressibly more magnificent, simple and true, than accords with the ordinary systems
of complicated and partial consideration. Nor does a contemplation of the universe, in this
comprehensive and synthetical view, exclude the subtlest analysis of its modifications and parts.

A scale might be formed, graduated according to the degrees of a combined ratio of intensity,
duration, connexion, periods of recurrence, and utility, which would be the standard, according
to which all ideas might be measured, and an uninterrupted chain of nicely shadowed distinctions
would be observed, from the faintest impression on the senses, to the most distinct combination
of those impressions; from the simplest of those combinations, to that mass of knowledge which,
including our own nature, constitutes what we call the universe.

We are intuitively conscious of our own existence, and of that connexion in the train of our
successive ideas, which we term our identity. We are conscious also of the existence of other
minds; but not intuitively. Our evidence, with respect to the existence of other minds, is
founded upon a very complicated relation of ideas, which it is foreign to the purpose of this
treatise to anatomize. The basis of this relation is, undoubtedly, a periodical recurrence
of masses of ideas, which our voluntary determinations have, in one peculiar direction, no
power to circumscribe or to arrest, and against the recurrence of which they can only imperfectly
provide. All that remains, after the proper preparation of the fibre and juices, is the flavoring,
and it is in this, particularly, that French soups excel those of America and England and all the
world.
English and American soups are often heavy and hot with spices.

We see trees, houses, fields, living beings in our own shape, and in shapes more or less analogous
to our own. These are perpetually changing the mode of their existence relatively to us. To
express the varieties of these modes, we say, WE MOVE, THEY MOVE; and as this motion is continual,
though not uniform, we express our conception of the diversities of its course by--IT HAS BEEN,
IT IS, IT SHALL BE. In the same manner we have seen boiled potatoes from an untaught cook coming
upon the table like lumps of yellow wax,--and the same article, the
day after, under the directions of a skillful mistress, appearing
in snowy balls of powdery lightness. For if the inequalities,
produced by what has been termed the operations of the external universe, were levelled by
the perception of our being, uniting and filling up their interstices, motion and mensuration,
and time, and space; the elements of the human mind being thus abstracted, sensation and imagination
cease. Mind cannot be considered pure.

II--WHAT METAPHYSICS ARE. ERRORS IN THE USUAL METHODS OF CONSIDERING THEM

We do not attend sufficiently to what passes within ourselves. We combine words, combined a
thousand times before. In our minds we assume entire opinions; and in the expression of those
opinions, entire phrases, when we would philosophize. Our whole style of expression and sentiment
is infected with the tritest plagiarisms. Our words are dead, our thoughts are cold and borrowed.

Let us contemplate facts; let us, in the great study of ourselves, resolutely compel the mind
to a rigid consideration of itself. We are not content with conjecture, and inductions, and
syllogisms, in sciences regarding external objects. As in these, let us also, in considering
the phenomena of mind, severely collect those facts which cannot be disputed. Metaphysics will
thus possess this conspicuous advantage over every other science, that each student, by attentively
referring to his own mind, may ascertain the authorities upon which any assertions regarding
it are supported. There can thus be no deception, we ourselves being the depositaries of the
evidence of the subject which we consider.

