Such were his thoughts when an angry bark from Bijou warned him to be on the alert.  A man--ay,
one of the new men-at-arms--was springing up the ramp leading to the summit of the wall almost
immediately in front of the little group.  There was a gleam of steel in his hand. With one
long ringing whistle, Humfrey bounded from his place, and at the moment when the ruffian was
on the point of assailing the Queen, he caught him with one hand by the collar, with the other
tried to master the arm that held the weapon.  It was a sharp struggle, for the fellow was
a trained soldier in the full strength of manhood, and Humfrey was a youth of twenty-three,
and unarmed.  They went down together, rolling on the ground before Mary's chair; but in another
moment Humfrey was the uppermost.  He had his knee on the fellow's chest, and held aloft, though
in a bleeding hand, the dagger wrenched from him.  The victory had been won in a few seconds,
before the two men, whom his whistle had brought, had time to rush forward.  They were ready
now to throw themselves on the assailant.  "Hold!" cried Humfrey, speaking for the first time.
"Hurt him not!  Hold him fast till I have him to Sir Amias!"

Each had an arm of the fallen man, and Humfrey rose to meet the eyes of the Queen sparkling,
as she cried, "Bravely, bravely done, sir! We thank you.  Though it be but the poor remnant
of a worthless life that you have saved, we thank you.  The sight of your manhood has gladdened
us."

Humfrey bowed low, and at the same time there was a cry among the ladies that he was bleeding.
It was only his hand, as he showed them. The dagger had been drawn across the palm before he
could capture it. By the bye, excepting the hurried, thick utterance of Incledon when speaking,
there is great resemblance, as far as regards voice, between that
singer and Mr. Young.

As a Shakspearean, I must class next his two sweet songs in "As You Like it." His was the pipe
to be listened to amongst the warblers of "Ardenne," in Dr. Arne's delicious "Blow! blow! thou
Winter's wind," and "Under the green-wood tree." "Oh!" as Jaques
says, "I can suck melancholy from the recollection of these songs
as a weasel sucks eggs."  Gorion must treat that
hand, and then you will tell me what you have heard of her."

"Naught, alas, madam," said Humfrey with an expressive shake of the head, but ere he turned
away Mary extended her hand to him, and as he bent his knee to kiss it she laid the other kindly
on his dark curled head and said, "God bless thee, brave youth."

She was escorted to the door nearest to her apartments, and as she sank back on her day bed
she could not help murmuring to Mary Seaton, "A brave laddie.  Would that he had one drop of
princely blood."

"The Talbot blood is not amiss," said the lady.

"True; and were it but mine own Scottish royalty that were in question I should see naught
amiss, but with this English right that hath been the bane of us all, what can their love bring
the poor children save woe?"

Meantime Humfrey was conducting his prisoner to Sir Amias Paulett. The man was a bronzed, tough-looking
ruffian, with an air of having seen service, and a certain foreign touch in his accent.  He
glanced somewhat contemptuously at his captor, and said; "Neatly done, sir; I marvel if you'll
get any thanks."

"What mean you?" said Humfrey sharply, but the fellow only shrugged his shoulders.  The whole
affair had been so noiseless, that Humfrey brought the first intelligence when he was admitted
to the sick chamber, where Sir Amias sat in a large chair by the fire.  He had left his prisoner
guarded by two men at the door.  "How now!  What is it?" cried Paulett at first sight of his
bandaged hand.  "Is she safe?"

"Even so, sir, and untouched," said Humfrey.

"Thanks be to God!" he exclaimed.  "This is what I feared.  Who was it?"

"One of the new men-at-arms from London--Peter Pierson he called himself, and said he had served
in the Netherlands."

And after a few further words of explanation, Humfrey called in the prisoner and his guards,
and before his face gave an account of his attempt upon the helpless Queen.

"Godless and murderous villain!" said Paulett, "what hast thou to say for thyself that I should
not hang thee from the highest tower?"

"Naught that will hinder you, worshipful seignior," returned the man with a sneer.  "In sooth
I see no great odds between taking life with a dagger and with an axe, save that fewer folk
are regaled with the spectacle."

"Wretch," said Paulett, "wouldst thou confound private murder with the open judgment of God
and man?"

"Judgment hath been pronounced," said the fellow, "but it needs not to dispute the matter.
Only if this honest youth had not come blundering in and cut his fingers in the fray, your
captive would have been quietly rid of all her troubles, and I should have had my reward from
certain great folk you wot of.  Ay," as Sir Amias turned still yellower, "you take my meaning,
sir."

"Take him away," said Paulett, collecting himself; "he would cloak his crime by accusing others
of his desperate wickedness."

"Where, sir?" inquired Humfrey.

Sir Amias would have preferred hanging the fellow without inquiry, but as Fotheringhay was
not under martial law, he ordered him off to the dungeons for the present, while the nearest
justice of the peace was sent for.  The knight bade Humfrey remain while the prisoner was walked
off under due guard, and made a few more inquiries, adding, with a sigh, "You must double the
guard, Master Talbot, and get rid of all those London rogues--sons of Belial are they all,
and I'll have none for whom I cannot answer--for I fear me 'tis all too true what the fellow says."

"Who would set him on?"

"That I may not say.  But would you believe it, Humfrey Talbot, I have been blamed--ay, rated
like a hound, for that I will not lend myself to a privy murder."

"Verily, sir?"

"Verily, and indeed, young man.  'Tis the part of a loyal subject, they say, to spare her Majesty's
womanish feelings and her hatred of bloodshed, and this lady having been condemned, to take
her off secretly so as to save the Queen the pain and heart-searchings of signing the warrant.
You credit me not, sir, but I have the letter--to my sorrow and shame."

No wonder that the poor, precise, hard-hearted, but religious and high-principled man was laid
up with a fit of the gout, after receiving the shameful letter which he described, which is
still extant, signed by Walsingham and Davison.

"Strange loyalty," said Humfrey.

"And too much after the Spanish sort for an English Protestant," said Sir Amias.  "I made answer
that I would lay down my life to guard this unhappy woman to undergo the justice that is to
be done upon her, but murder her, or allow her to be slain in my hands, I neither can nor will,
so help me Heaven, as a true though sinful man."

"Amen," said Humfrey.

"And no small cause of thanks have I that in you, young sir, I have one who may be trusted
for faith as well as courage, and I need not say discretion."

As he spoke, Sir Drew Drury, who had been out riding, returned, anxious to hear the details
of this strange event.  Sir Amias could not leave his room.  Sir Drew accompanied Humfrey to
the Queen's apartments to hear her account and that of her attendants.  It was given with praises
of the young gentleman which put him to the blush, and Sir Drew then gave permission for his
hurt to be treated by Maitre Gorion, and left him in the antechamber for the purpose.

Sir Amias would perhaps have done more wisely if he had not detained Humfrey from seeing the
criminal guarded to his prison.  For Sir Drew Drury, going from the Queen's presence to interrogate
the fellow before sending for a magistrate, found the cell empty.  It had been the turn of
duty of one of the new London men-at-arms, and he had been placed as sentry at the door by
the sergeant--the stupidest and trustiest of fellows--who stood gaping in utter amazement when
he found that sentry and prisoner were both alike missing.

On the whole, the two warders agreed that it would be wiser to hush up the matter.  When Mary
heard that the man had escaped, she quietly said, "I understand.  They know how to do such
things better abroad."

Things returned to their usual state except that Humfrey had permission to go daily to have
his hand attended to by M. Gorion, and the Queen never let pass this opportunity of speaking
to him, though the very first time she ascertained that he knew as little as she did of the
proceedings of his father and Cicely.

Now, for the first time, did Humfrey understand the charm that had captivated Babington, and
that even his father confessed.  Ailing, aging, and suffering as she was, and in daily expectation
of her sentence of death, there was still something more wonderfully winning about her, a sweet
pathetic cheerfulness, kindness, and resignation, that filled his heart with devotion to her.
And then she spoke of Cicely, the rarest and greatest delight that he could enjoy.  She evidently
regarded him with favour, if not affection, because he loved the maiden whom she could not
but deny to him.  Would he not do anything for her?  Ay, anything consistent with duty.  And
there came a twinge which startled him.  Was she making him value duty less? Never. Besides,
how few days he could see her.  His hand was healing all too fast, and what might not come
any day from London?  Was Queen Mary's last conquest to be that of Humfrey Talbot?

CHAPTER XL.

THE SENTENCE.

The tragedies of the stage compress themselves into a few hours, but the tragedies of real
life are of slow and heavy march, and the heart-sickness of delay and hope and dread alike
deferred is one of their chief trials.

Humfrey's hurt was quite well, but as he was at once trusted by his superiors, and acceptable
to the captive, he was employed in many of those lesser communications between her and her
keepers, for which the two knights did not feel it necessary to harass her with their presence.
His post, for half the twenty-four hours, was on guard in the gallery outside her anteroom
door; but he often knocked and was admitted as bearer of some message to her or her household;
and equally often was called in to hear her requests, and sometimes he could not help believing
because it pleased her to see him, even if there were nothing to tell her.

Nor was there anything known until the 19th of November, when the sound of horses' feet in
large numbers, and the blast of bugles, announced the arrival of a numerous party.  When marshalled
into the ordinary dining-hall, they proved to be Lord Buckhurst, a dignified-looking nobleman,
who bore a sad and grave countenance full of presage, with Mr. Beale, the Clerk of the Council,
and two or three other officials and secretaries, among whom Humfrey perceived the inevitable
Will Cavendish.

The two old comrades quickly sought each other out, Will observing, "So here you are still,
Humfrey.  We are like to see the end of a long story."

"How so?" asked Humfrey, with a thrill of horror, "is she sentenced?"

"By the Commissioners, all excepting my Lord Zouch, and by both houses of Parliament!  We are
come down to announce it to her.  I'll have you into the presence-chamber if I can prevail.
It will be a noteworthy thing to see how the daughter of a hundred kings brooks such a sentence."

"Hath no one spoken for her?" asked Humfrey, thinking at least as much of Cicely as of the victim.

"The King of Scots hath sent an ambassage," returned Cavendish, "but when I say 'tis the Master
of Gray, you know what that means.  King James may be urgent to save his mother--nay, he hath
written more sharply and shrewishly than ever he did before; but as for this Gray, whatever
he may say openly, we know that he has whispered to the Queen, 'The dead don't bite.'"

"The villain!"

"That may be, so far as he himself is concerned, but the counsel is canny, like the false Scot
himself.  What's this I hear, Humfrey, that you have been playing the champion, and getting
wounded in the defence?"

"A mere nothing," said Humfrey, opening his hand, however, to show the mark.  "I did but get
my palm scored in hindering a villainous man-at-arms from slaying the poor lady."

"Yea, well are thy race named Talbot!" said Cavendish.  "Sturdy watch-dogs are ye all, with
never a notion that sometimes it may be for the good of all parties to look the other way."

"If you mean that I am to stand by and see a helpless woman--"

"Hush! my good friend," said Will, holding up his hand.  "I know thy breed far too well to
mean any such thing.  Moreover, thy precisian governor, old Paulett there, hath repelled, like
instigations of Satan, more hints than one that pain might be saved to one queen and publicity
to the other, if he would have taken a leaf from Don Philip's book, and permitted the lady
to be dealt with secretly.  Had he given an ear to the matter six months back, it would have
spared poor Antony."

"Speak not thus, Will," said Humfrey, "or thou wilt make me believe thee a worse man than thou
art, only for the sake of showing me how thou art versed in state policy.  Tell me, instead,
if thou hast seen my father."

"Thy father? yea, verily, and I have a packet for thee from him.  It is in my mails, and I
will give it thee anon.  He is come on a bootless errand!  As long as my mother and my sister
Mall are both living, he might as well try to bring two catamounts together without hisses
and scratches."

"Where is he lying?" asked Humfrey.

"In Shrewsbury House, after the family wont, and Gilbert makes him welcome enough, but Mall
is angered with him for not lodging his daughter there likewise!  I tell her he is afraid lest
she should get hold of the wench, and work up a fresh web of tales against this lady, like
those which did so much damage before.  'Twould be rare if she made out that Gravity himself,
in the person of old Paulett, had been entranced by her."

"Peace with thy gibes," said Humfrey impatiently, "and tell me where my sister is."

"Where thinkest thou?  Of all strange places in the world, he hath bestowed her with Madame
de Salmonnet, the wife of one of the French Ambassador's following, to perfect her French,
as he saith.  Canst thou conceive wherefore he doth it?  Hath he any marriage in view for her?
Mall tried to find out, but he is secret.  Tell me, Numps, what is it?"

"If he be secret, must not I be the same?" said Humfrey, laughing.

"Nay, thou owest me some return for all that I have told thee."

"Marry, Will, that is more like a maiden than a statesman!  But be content, comrade, I know
no more than thou what purposes there may be anent my sister's marriage," he added.  "Only
if thou canst give me my father's letter, I should be beholden to thee."

They were interrupted, however, by a summons to Humfrey, who was to go to the apartments of
the Queen of Scots, to bear the information that in the space of half an hour the Lord Buckhurst
and Master Beale would do themselves the honour of speaking with her.

"So," muttered Cavendish to himself as Humfrey went up the stairs, "there is then some secret.
I marvel what it bodes!  Did not that crafty villain Langston utter some sort of warning which
I spurned, knowing the Bridgefield trustiness and good faith?  This wench hath been mightily
favoured by the lady.  I must see to it."

Meantime Humfrey had been admitted to Queen Mary's room, where she sat as usual at her needlework.
"You bring me tidings, my friend," she said, as he bent his knee before her.  "Methought I
heard a fresh stir in the Castle; who is arrived?"

"The Lord Buckhurst, so please your Grace, and Master Beale.  They crave an audience of your
Grace in half an hour's time."

"Yea, and I can well guess wherefore," said the Queen.  "Well, Fiat voluntas tua!  Buckhurst?
he is kinsman of Elizabeth on the Boleyn side, methinks!  She would do me grace, you see, my
masters, by sending me such tidings by her cousin.  They cannot hurt me!  I am far past that!
So let us have no tears, my lassies, but receive them right royally, as befits a message from
one sovereign to another! Remember, it is not before my Lord Buckhurst and Master Beale that
we sit, but before all posterities for evermore, who will hear of Mary Stewart and her wrongs.
Tell them I am ready, sir.  Nay but, my son," she added, with a very different tone of the
tender woman instead of the outraged sovereign, "I see thou hast news for me.  Is it of the child?"

"Even so, madam.  I wot little yet, but what I know is hopeful.  She is with Madame de Salmonnet,
wife of one of the suite of the French Ambassador."

"Ah! that speaketh much," said Mary, smiling, "more than you know, young man.  Salmonnet is
sprung of a Scottish archer, Jockie of the salmon net, whereof they made in France M. de Salmonnet.
Chateauneuf must have owned her, and put her under the protection of the Embassy. Hast thou
had a letter from thy father?"

"I am told that one is among Will Cavendish's mails, madam, and I hope to have it anon."

"These men have all unawares brought with them that which may well bear me up through whatever
may be coming."

A second message arrived from Lord Buckhurst himself, to say how grieved he was to be the bearer
of heavy tidings, and to say that he would not presume to intrude on her Majesty's presence
until she would notify to him that she was ready to receive him.

"They have become courteous," said Mary.  "But why should we dally? The sooner this is over,
the better."

The gentlemen were then admitted: Lord Buckhurst grave, sad, stately, and courteous; Sir Annas
Paulett, as usual, grim and wooden in his puritanical stiffness; Sir Drew Drury keeping in
the background as one grieved; and Mr. Beale, who had already often harassed the Queen before,
eager, forward, and peremptory, as one whose exultation could hardly be repressed by respect
for his superior, Lord Buckhurst.

Bending low before her, this nobleman craved her pardon for that which it was his duty to execute;
and having kissed her hand, in token of her personal forgiveness, he bade Mr. Beale read the
papers.

The Clerk of the Council stood forth almost without obeisance, till it was absolutely compelled
from him by Buckhurst.  He read aloud the details of the judgment, that Mary had been found
guilty by the Commission, of conspiracy against the kingdom, and the life of the Queen, with
the sentence from the High Court of Parliament that she was to die by being beheaded.

Mary listened with unmoved countenance, only she stood up and made solemn protest against the
authority and power of the Commission either to try or condemn her.  Beale was about to reply,
but Lord Buckhurst checked him, telling him it was simply his business to record the protest;
and then adding that he was charged to warn her to put away all hopes of mercy, and to prepare
for death.  This, he said, was on behalf of his Queen, who implored her to disburthen her conscience
by a full confession.  "It is not her work," added Buckhurst; "the sentence is not hers, but
this thing is required by her people, inasmuch as her life can never be safe while your Grace
lives, nor can her religion remain in any security."

Mary's demeanour had hitherto been resolute.  Here a brightness and look of thankful joy came
over her, as she raised her eyes to Heaven and joined her hands, saying, "I thank you, my lord;
you have made it all gladness to me, by declaring me to be an instrument in the cause of my
religion, for which, unworthy as I am, I shall rejoice to shed my blood."

"Saint and martyr, indeed!" broke out Paulett.  "That is fine! when you are dying for plotting
treason and murder!"

"Nay, sir," gently returned Mary, "I am not so presumptuous as to call myself saint or martyr;
but though you have power over my body, you have none over my soul, nor can you prevent me
from hoping that by the mercy of Him who died for me, my blood and life may be accepted by
Him, as offerings freely made for His Church."

She then begged for the restoration of her Almoner De Preaux.  She was told that the request
would be referred to the Queen, but that she should have the attendance of an English Bishop
and Dean. Paulett was so angered at the manner in which she had met the doom, that he began
to threaten her that she would be denied all that could serve to her idolatries.

"Yea, verily," said she calmly, "I am aware that the English have never been noted for mercy."

Lord Buckhurst succeeded in getting the knight away without any more bitter replies.  Humfrey
and Cavendish had, of course, to leave the room in their train, and as it was the hour of guard
for the former, he had to take up his station and wait with what patience he could until it
should please Master William to carry him the packet.  He opened it eagerly, standing close
beneath the little lamp that illuminated his post, to read it: but after all, it was somewhat
disappointing, for Mr. Talbot did not feel that absolute confidence in the consciences of gentlemen-in-place
which would make him certain of that of Master Cavendish, supposing any notion should arise
that Cicely's presence in London could have any purpose connected with the prisoner.

"To my dear son Humfrey, greeting--

"I do you to wit that we are here safely arrived in London, though we were forced by stress
of weather to tarry seven days in Hull, at the house of good Master Heatherthwayte, where we
received good and hospitable entertainment.  The voyage was a fair one, and the old Mastiff
is as brave a little vessel as ever she was wont to be; but thy poor sister lay abed all the
time, and was right glad when we came into smooth water.  We have presented the letters to
those whom we came to seek, and so far matters have gone with us more towardly than I had expected.
There are those who knew Cicely's mother at her years who say there is a strange likeness between
them, and who therefore received her the more favourably.  I am lying at present at Shrewsbury
House, where my young Lord makes me welcome, but it hath been judged meet that thy sister should
lodge with the good Madame de Salmonnet, a lady of Scottish birth, who is wife to one of the
secretaries of M. de Chateauneuf, the French Ambassador, but who was bred in the convent of
Soissons.  She is a virtuous and honourable lady, and hath taken charge of thy sister while
we remain in London. For the purpose for which we came, it goeth forward, and those who should
know assure me that we do not lose time here.  Diccon commendeth himself to thee; he is well
in health, and hath much improved in all his exercises.  Mistress Curll is lodging nigh unto
the Strand, in hopes of being permitted to see her husband; but that hath not yet been granted
to her, although she is assured that he is well in health, and like ere long to be set free,
as well as Monsieur Nau. 

But it includes the entire hierarchy of institutions by which life is determined, from the family to the
trade, and from the trade to the church and the university. It includes all of them, not as
the mere collection of the growths of the country, but as the structures which give life and meaning
to the political whole, while receiving from it mutual adjustment, and therefore expansion and
a more liberal air."[51] In a similar strain T. H. Green says: "The State is for its members,
the society of societies, the society in which all their claims upon each other are mutually
adjusted."[52] The keynote of both of these profound utterances is "adjustment." They recognize
the fact that the convictions and opinions of individuals differ, that the purposes of parties
conflict, that the interests of racial units and social classes diverge from one another, that the
demands of churches are mutually irreconcilable. They recognize further that unless individuals,
parties, races, classes, churches agree in acknowledging the adjusting
authority of the general will of the community to which all belong,
endless struggle and hopeless chaos must supervene.

No pretension is made that the State is of supernatural origin; no claim to divine right is advanced.
It is admitted that the State at one time did not exist. It is foreseen that a day may come
when it will be merged in a still larger community.

                                       But for the present it is the only possible organ by means of which
the common will can operate in the interests of the common good.



On that day, Paulett worked himself up to the strange idea that it was for the good of the
unfortunate prisoner's soul, and an act of duty to his own sovereign, to march into the prison
chamber and announce to Queen Mary that being a dead woman in the eye of the law, no royal
state could be permitted her, in token of which he commanded her servants to remove the canopy
over her chair.  They all flatly refused to touch it, and the women began to cry "Out upon
him," for being cowardly enough to insult their mistress, and she calmly said, "Sir, you may
do as you please.  My royal state comes from God, and is not yours to give or take away.  I
shall die a Queen, whatever you may do by such law as robbers in a forest might use with a
righteous judge."

Intensely angered, Sir Amias came, hobbling and stumbling out to the door, pale with rage,
and called on Talbot to come and bring his men to tear down the rag of vanity in which this
contumacious woman put her trust.

"The men are your servants, sir," said Humfrey, with a flush on his cheek and his teeth set;
"I am here to guard the Queen of Scots, not to insult her."

"How, sirrah?  Do you know to whom you speak?  Have you not sworn obedience to me?"

"In all things within my commission, sir; but this is as much beyond it, as I believe it to
be beyond yours."

"Insolent, disloyal varlet!  You are under ward till I can account with and discharge you.
To your chamber!"

Humfrey could but walk away, grieved that his power of bearing intelligence or alleviation
to the prisoner had been forfeited, and that he should probably not even take leave of her.
Was she to be left to all the insults that the malice of her persecutor could devise?  Yet
it was not exactly malice.  Paulett would have guarded her life from assassination with his
own, though chiefly for his own sake, and, as he said, for that of "saving his poor posterity
from so foul a blot;" but he could not bear, as he told Sir Drew Drury, to see the Popish,
bloodthirsty woman sit queening it so calmly; and when he tore down her cloth of state, and
sat down in her presence with his hat on, he did not so much intend to pain the woman, Mary,
as to express the triumph of Elizabeth and of her religion.  Humfrey believed his service over,
and began to occupy himself with putting his clothes together, while considering whether to
seek his father in London or to go home.  After about an hour, he was summoned to the hall,
where he expected to have found Sir Amias Paulett ready to give him his discharge.  He found,
however, only Sir Drew Drury, who thus accosted him--"Young man, you had better return to your
duty.  Sir Amias is willing to overlook what passed this morning."

"I thank you, sir, but I am not aware of having done aught to need forgiveness," said Humfrey.

"Come, come, my fair youth, stand not on these points.  'Tis true my good colleague hath an
excess of zeal, and I could wish he could have found it in his heart to leave the poor lady
these marks of dignity that hurt no one.  I would have no hand in it, and I am glad thou wouldst
not.  He knoweth that he had no power to require such service of thee.  He will say no more,
and I trust that neither wilt thou; for it would not be well to change warders at this time.
Another might not be so acceptable to the poor lady, and I would fain save her all that I can."

Humfrey bowed, and thanked "him of milder mood," nor was any further notice taken of this hasty
dismissal.

When next he had to enter the Queen's apartments, the absence of all the tokens of her royal
rank was to him truly a shock, accustomed as he had been, from his earliest childhood, to connect
them with her, and knowing what their removal signified.

Mary, who was writing, looked up as, with cap in hand, he presented himself on one knee, his
head bowed lower than ever before, perhaps to hide the tear that had sprung to his eye at sight
of her pale, patient countenance.

"How now, sir?" she said.  "This obeisance is out of place to one already dead in law.  Don
your bonnet.  There is no queen here for an Englishman."

"Ah! madam, suffer me.  My reverence cannot but be greater than ever," faltered Humfrey from
his very heart, his words lost in the kiss he printed on the hand she granted him.

Mary bent "her gray discrowned head," crowned in his eyes as the Queen of Sorrows, and said
to Marie de Courcelles, who stood behind her, "Is it not true, ma mie, that our griefs have
this make-weight, namely, that they prove to us whose are the souls whose generosity is above
all price!  And what saith thy good father, my Humfrey?"

He had not ventured on bringing the letter into the apartments, but he repeated most of the
substance of it, without, however, greatly raising the hopes of the Queen, though she was gratified
that her cause was not neglected either by her son or by her brother-in-law.

"They, and above all my poor maid, will be comforted to have done their utmost," she said;
"but I scarcely care that they should prevail.  As I have written to my cousin Elizabeth, I
am beholden to her for ending my long captivity, and above all for conferring on me the blessings
and glories of one who dies for her faith, all unworthy as I am!" and she clasped her hands,
while a rapt expression came upon her countenance.

Her chief desire seemed to be that neither Cicely nor her foster-father should run into danger
on her account, and she much regretted that she had not been able to impress upon Humfrey messages
to that effect before he wrote in answer to his father, sending his letter by Cavendish.

"Thou wilt not write again?" she asked.

"I doubt its being safe," said Humfrey.  "I durst not speak openly even in the scroll I sent
yesterday."

Then Mary recurred to the power which he possessed of visiting Sir Andrew Melville and the
Almoner, the Abbe de Preaux, who were shut up in the Fetterlock tower and court, and requested
him to take a billet which she had written to the latter.  The request came like a blow to
the young man.  "With permission--" he began.

"I tell thee," said Mary, "this concerns naught but mine own soul. It is nothing to the State,
but all and everything to me, a dying woman."

"Ah, madam!  Let me but obtain consent."

"What! go to Paulett that he may have occasion to blaspheme my faith and insult me!" said the
Queen, offended.

"I should go to Sir Drew Drury, who is of another mould," said Humfrey--

"But who dares not lift a finger to cross his fellow," said Mary, leaning back resignedly.

"And this is the young gentleman's love for your Grace!" exclaimed Jean Kennedy.

"Nay, madam," said Humfrey, stung to the quick, "but I am sworn!"

"Let him alone, Nurse Jeanie!" said Mary.  "He is like the rest of the English.  They know
not how to distinguish between the spirit and the letter!  I understand it all, though I had
thought for a moment that in him there was a love for me and mine that would perceive that
I could ask nothing that could damage his honour or his good faith. I--who had almost a mother's
love and trust in him." 

These are a pair of dog, or brandirons, with the date of 1115 on each.

Suppose their original cost to have been five shillings; this sum put out at simple interest,
together with the principal, would now have amounted to nine pounds, twelve shillings, and
sixpence; but at compound interest it would be two hundred and fifty eight billions, seven hundred
and eighty four millions, two hundred and thirty thousand, six hundred
and fifty six pounds sterling.

  I may not be the bearer of aught in writing from this chamber.  'Twas the
very reason I would not bring in my father's letter.  Madam, say but you pardon me."

"Of course I pardon you," returned Mary coldly.  "I have so much to pardon that I can well
forgive the lukewarmness and precision that are so bred in your nature that you cannot help
them.  I pardon injuries, and I may well try to pardon disappointments.  Fare you well, Mr.
Talbot; may your fidelity have its reward from Sir Amias Paulett."

Humfrey was obliged to quit the apartment, cruelly wounded, sometimes wondering whether he
had really acted on a harsh selfish punctilio in cutting off the dying woman from the consolations
of religion, and thus taking part with the persecutors, while his heart bled for her. Sometimes
it seemed to him as if he had been on the point of earning her consent to his marriage with
her daughter, and had thrown it away, and at other moments a horror came over him lest he was
being beguiled as poor Antony had been before him.  And if he let his faith slip, how should
he meet his father again?  Yet his affection for the Queen repelled this idea like a cruel
injury, while, day by day, it was renewed pain and grief to be treated by her with the gentlest
and most studied courtesy, but no longer as almost one of her own inner circle of friends and
confidants.

And as Sir Andrew Melville was in a few days more restored to her service, he was far less
often required to bear messages, or do little services in the prison apartments, and he felt
himself excluded, and cut off from the intimacy that had been very sweet, and even a little
hopeful to him.

CHAPTER XLI.

HER ROYAL HIGHNESS.

Cicely had been living in almost as much suspense in London as her mother at Fotheringhay.
For greater security Mr. Talbot had kept her on board the Mastiff till he had seen M. d'Aubepine
Chateauneuf, and presented to him Queen Mary's letter.  The Ambassador, an exceedingly polished
and graceful Frenchman, was greatly astonished, and at first incredulous; but he could not
but accept the Queen's letter as genuine, and he called into his counsels his Secretary De
Salmonnet, an elderly man, whose wife, a Scotswoman by birth, preferred her husband's society
to the delights of Paris.  She was a Hamilton who had been a pensionnaire in the convent at
Soissons, and she knew that it had been expected that an infant from Lochleven might be sent
to the Abbess, but that it had never come, and that after many months of waiting, tidings had
arrived that the vessel which carried the babe had been lost at sea.

