"I don't know why," said Augustus, who was determined not to put up with the rebuke implied
in the doctor's words. After that there was nothing more said between them till they all went
to their separate apartments. "Don't contradict him," his aunt said to him the next morning,
"and if he reprimands you, acknowledge that you have been wrong."

"That's hard, when I haven't been wrong."

"But so much depends upon it; and he is so stern. Of course, I wish well for both of you. There
is plenty enough,--plenty; if only you could agree together."

"But the injustice of his treatment. Is it true that he now declares Mountjoy to be the eldest
son?"

"I believe so. I do not know, but I believe it."

"Think of what his conduct has been to me. And then you tell me that I am to own that I have
been wrong! In what have I been wrong?"

"He is your father, and I suppose you have said hard words to him."

"Did I rebuke him because he had fraudulently kept me for so many years in the position of
a younger son? Did I not forgive him that iniquity?"

"But he says you are a younger son."

"This last move," he said, with great passion, "has only been made in an attempt to punish
me, because I would not tell him that I was under a world of obligations to him for simply
declaring the truth as to my birth. We cannot both be his eldest son."

"No, certainly, not both."

"At last he declared that I was his heir. If I did say hard words to him, were they not justified?"

"Not to your father," said Miss Scarborough, shaking her head.

"That is your idea? How was I to abstain? Think what had been done to me. Through my whole
life he had deceived me, and had attempted to rob me."

"But he says that he had intended to get the property for you."

"To get it! It was mine. According to what he said it was my own. He had robbed me to give
it to Mountjoy. Now he intends to rob me again in order that Mountjoy may have it. He will
leave such a kettle of fish behind him, with all his manoeuvring, that neither of us will be
the better of Tretton."

Then he went to the squire. In spite of what had passed between him and his aunt, he had thought
deeply of his conduct to his father in the past, and of the manner in which he would now carry
himself. He was aware that he had behaved,--not badly, for that he esteemed nothing,--but most
unwisely. When he had found himself to be the heir to Tretton he had fancied himself to be
almost the possessor, and had acted on the instincts which on such a case would have been natural
to him. To have pardoned the man because he was his father, and then to have treated him with
insolent disdain, as some dying old man, almost entirely beneath his notice, was what he felt
the nature of the circumstances demanded. And whether the story was true or false it would
have been the same. He had come at last to believe it to be true, and had therefore been the
more resolute; but, whether it were true or false, the old man had struck his blow, and he
must abide by it. Till the moment came in which he had received that communication from Tretton,
the idea had never occurred to him that another disposition of the property might still be
within his father's power. But he had little known the old man's power, or the fertility of
his resources, or the extent of his malice. "After what you have done you should cease to stay
and disturb us," he had once said, when his father had jokingly alluded to his own death. He
had at once repented, and had felt that such a speech had been iniquitous as coming from a
son. But his father had, at the moment, expressed no deep animosity. Some sarcastic words had
fallen from him of which Augustus had not understood the bitterness. But he had remembered
it since, and was now not so much surprised at his father's wish to injure him as at his power.

But could he have any such power? Mr. Grey, he knew, was on his side, and Mr. Grey was a thorough
lawyer. All the world was on his side,--all the world having been instructed to think and to
believe that Mr. Scarborough had not been married till after Mountjoy was born. All the world
had been much surprised, and would be unwilling to encounter another blow. Should he go into
his father's room altogether penitent, or should he hold up his head and justify himself?

One thing was brought home to him, by thinking, as a matter of which he might be convinced.
No penitence could now avail him anything. He had at any rate by this time looked sufficiently
into his father's character to be sure that he would not forgive such an offence as had been
his. Any vice, any extravagance, almost any personal neglect, would have been pardoned. "I
have so brought him up," the father would have said, "and the fault must be counted as my own."
But his son had deliberately expressed a wish for his father's death, and had expressed it
in his father's presence. He had shown not only neglect, which may arise at a distance, and
may not be absolutely intentional; but these words had been said with the purpose of wounding,
and were, and would be, unpardonable. Augustus, as he went along the corridor to his father's
room, determined that he would at any rate not be penitent.

"Well, sir, how do you find yourself?" he said, walking in briskly and putting out his hand
to his father. The old man languidly gave his hand, but only smiled. "I hear of you, though
not from you, and they tell me that you have not been quite so strong of late."

"I shall soon cease to stay and trouble you," said the squire, with affected weakness, in a
voice hardly above a whisper, using the very words which Augustus had spoken.

"There have been some moments between us, sir, which have been, unfortunately, unpleasant."

"And yet I have done so much to make them pleasant to you! I should have thought that the offer
of all Tretton would have gone for much with you."

Augustus was again taken in. There was a piteous whine about his father's voice which once
more deceived him. He did not dream of the depth of the old man's anger. He did not imagine
that at such a moment it could boil over with such ferocity; nor was he altogether aware of
the cat-like quietude with which he could pave the way for his last spring. Mountjoy, by far
the least gifted of the two, had gained the truer insight to his father's character.

"You had done much, or rather, as I supposed, circumstances had done much."

"Circumstances?"

"The facts, I mean, as to Mountjoy's birth and my own."

"I have not always left myself to be governed by actual circumstances."

"If there was any omission on my part of an expression of proper feeling, I regret it."

"I don't know that there was. What is proper feeling? There was no hypocrisy, at any rate."

"You sometimes are a little bitter, sir."

"I hope you won't find it so when I am gone."

"I don't know what I said that has angered you, but I may have been driven to say what I did
not feel."

"Certainly not to me."

"I'm not here to beg pardon for any special fault, as I do not quite know of what I am accused."

"Of nothing. There is accusation at all."

"Nor what the punishment is to be. I have learned that you have left to Mountjoy all the furniture
in the house."

"Yes, poor boy!--when I found that you had turned him out."

"I never turned him out,--not till your house was open to receive him."

"You would not have wished him to go into the poor-house?"

"I did the very best for him. I kept him going when there was no one else to give him a shilling."

"He must have had a bitter time," said the father. "I hope it may have done him good."

"I think I behaved to him just as an elder brother should have done. He was not particularly
grateful, but that was not my fault."

"Still, I thought it best to leave him the old sticks about the place. As he was to have the
property, it was better that he should have the sticks." As he said this he managed to turn
himself round and look his son full in the face. Such a look as it was! There was the gleam
of victory, and the glory of triumph, and the venom of malice. "You wouldn't have them separated,
would you?"

"I have heard of some farther trick of this kind."

"Just the ordinary way in which things ought to be allowed to run. Mr. Grey, who is a very
good man, persuaded me. No man ought to interfere with the law. An attempt in that direction
led to evil. Mountjoy is the eldest son, you know."

"I know nothing of the kind."

"Oh dear, no! there is no question at all as to the date of my marriage with your mother. We
were married in quite a straightforward way at Rummelsburg. When I wanted to save the property
from those harpies, I was surprised to find how easily I managed it. Grey was a little soft
there: an excellent man, but too credulous for a lawyer."

"I do not believe a word of it."

"You'll find it all go as naturally as possible when I have ceased to stay and be troublesome.
But one thing I must say in your favor."

"What do you mean?"

"I never could have managed it all unless you had consented to that payment of the creditors.
Indeed, I must say, that was chiefly your own doing. When you first suggested it, I saw what
a fine thing you were contriving for your brother. I should think, after that, of leaving it
all so that you need not find out the truth when I am dead. I do think I had so managed it
that you would have had the property. Mountjoy, who has some foolish feeling about his mother,
and who is obstinate as a pig, would have fought it out; but I had so contrived that you would
have had it. I had sealed up every document referring to the Rummelsburg marriage, and had
addressed them all to you. I couldn't have made it safer, could I?"

"I don't know what you mean."

"You would have been enabled to destroy every scrap of the evidence which will be wanted to
prove your brother's legitimacy. Had I burned the papers I could not have put them more beyond
poor Mountjoy's reach. Now they are quite safe in Mr. Grey's office; his clerk took them away
with him. I would not leave them here with Mountjoy because,--well,--you might come, and he
might be murdered!" Now Mr. Scarborough had had his revenge.

"You think you have done your duty," said Augustus.

"I do not care two straws about doing my duty, young man." Here Mr. Scarborough raised himself
in part, and spoke in that strong voice which was supposed to be so deleterious to him. "Or
rather, in seeking my duty, I look beyond the conventionalities of the world. I think that
you have behaved damnably, and that I have punished you. Because of Mountjoy's weakness, because
he had been knocked off his legs, I endeavored to put you upon yours. You at once turned upon
me, when you thought the deed was done, and bade me go--and bury myself. You were a little
too quick in your desire to become the owner of Tretton Park at once. I have stayed long enough
to give some farther trouble. You will not say, after this, that I am non compos, and unable
to make a will. You will find that, under mine, not one penny-piece, not one scrap of property,
will become yours. Mountjoy will take care of you, I do not doubt. He must hate you, but will
recognize you as his brother. I am not so soft-hearted and will not recognize you as my son.
Now you may go away." So saying, he turned himself round to the wall, and refused to be induced
to utter another word. Augustus began to speak, but when he had commenced his second sentence
the old man rung his bell. "Mary," said he to his sister, "will you have the goodness to get
Augustus to go away? I am very weak, and if he remains he will be the death of me. He can't
get anything by killing me at once; it is too late for that."

Then Augustus did leave the room, and before the night came had left Tretton also. He presumed
there was nothing for him to do there. One word he did say to Mountjoy,--"You will understand,
Mountjoy, that when our father is dead Tretton will not become your property."

"I shall understand nothing of the kind," said Mountjoy "but I suppose Mr. Grey will tell me
what I am to do."

CHAPTER LVII.

MR. PROSPER SHOWS HIS GOOD-NATURE.

While these things were going on at Tretton, and while Mr. Scarborough was making all arrangements
for the adequate disposition of his property,--in doing which he had happily come to the conclusion
that there was no necessity for interfering with what the law had settled,--Mr. Prosper was
lying very ill at Buston, and was endeavoring on his sick-bed to reconcile himself to what
the entail had done for him. There could be no other heir to him but Harry Annesley. As he
thought of the unmarried ladies of his acquaintance, he found that there was no one who would
have done for him but Miss Puffle and Matilda Thoroughbung. All others were too young or too
old, or chiefly penniless. Miss Puffle would have been the exact thing--only for that intruding
farmer's son.

As he lay there alone in his bedroom his mind used to wander a little, and he would send for
Matthew, his butler, and hold confidential discussions with him. "I never did think, sir, that
Miss Thoroughbung was exactly the lady," said Matthew.

"Why not?"

"Well, sir, there is a saying--But you'll excuse me."

"Go on, Matthew."

"There is a saying as how 'you can't make a silk purse out of a sow's ear.'"

"I've heard that."

"Just so, sir. Now, Miss Thoroughbung is a very nice lady."

"I don't think she's a nice lady at all."

"But--Of course it's not becoming in me to speak against my betters, and as a menial servant
I never would."

"Go on, Matthew."

"Miss Thoroughbung is--"

"Go on, Matthew."

"Well;--she is a sow's ear. Ain't she, now? The servants here never would have looked upon
her as a silk purse."

"Wouldn't they?"

"Never! She has a way with her just as though she didn't care for silk purses. And it's my
mind, sir, that she don't. She wishes, however, to be uppermost, and if she had come here she'd
have said so."

"That can never be. Thank God, that can never be!"

"Oh, no! Brewers is brewers, and must be. There's Mr. Joe--He's very well, no doubt."

"I haven't the pleasure of his acquaintance."

"Him as is to marry Miss Molly. But Miss Molly ain't the head of the family; is she, sir?"
Here the squire shook his head. "You're the head of the family, sir."

"I suppose so."

"And is--I might make so bold as to speak?"

"Go on, Matthew."

"Miss Thoroughbung would be a little out of place at Buston Hall. Now, as to Miss Puffle--"

"Miss Puffle is a lady,--or was."

"No doubt, sir. The Puffles is not quite equal to the Prospers, as I can hear. But the Puffles
is ladies--and gentlemen. The servants below all give it up to them that they're real gentlefolk.
But--"

"Well?"

"She demeaned herself terribly with young Tazlehurst. They all said as there were more where
that came from."

"What should they mean by that?"

"She'd indulge in low 'abits,--such as never would have been put up with at Buston Hall,--a-cursing
and a-swearing--"

"Miss Puffle!"

"Not herself,--I don't say that; but it's like enough if you 'ad heard all. But them as lets
others do it almost does it themselves. And them as lets others drink sperrrits o' mornings
come nigh to having a dram down their own throats."

"Oh laws!" exclaimed Mr. Prosper, thinking of the escape he had had.

"You wouldn't have liked it, sir, if there had been a bottle of gin in the bedroom!" Here Mr.
Prosper hid his face among the bedclothes. "It ain't all that comes silk out of the skein that
does to make a purse of."

There were difficulties in the pursuit of matrimony of which Mr. Prosper had not thought. His
imagination at once pictured to himself a bride with a bottle of gin under her pillow, and
he went on shivering till Matthew almost thought that he had been attacked by an ague-fit.

"I shall give it up, at any rate," he said, after a pause.

"Of course you're a young man, sir."

"No, I'm not."

"That is, not exactly young,"

"You're an old fool to tell such lies!"

"Of course I'm an old fool; but I endeavor to be veracious. I never didn't take a shilling
as were yours, nor a shilling's worth, all the years I have known you, Mr. Prosper."

"What has that to do with it? I'm not a young man."

"What am I to say, sir? Shall I say as you are middle-aged?"

"The truth is, Matthew, I'm worn out."

"Then I wouldn't think of taking a wife."

"Troubles have been too heavy for me to bear. I don't think I was intended to bear trouble."

"I suppose so. But one man's luck is harder than another's. They've been too many for me, and
I feel that I'm sinking under them. It's no good my thinking of marrying now."

"That's what I was coming to when you said I was an old fool. Of course I am an old fool."

"Do have done with it! Mr. Harry hasn't been exactly what he ought to have been to me."

"He's a very comely young gentleman."

"What has comely to do with it?"

"Them as is plain-featured is more likely to stay at home and be quiet. You couldn't expect
one as is so handsome to stay at Buston and hear sermons."

"I don't expect him to be knocking men about in the streets at midnight."

"It ain't that, sir."

"I say it is that!"

"Very well, sir. Only we've all heard down-stairs as Mr. Harry wasn't him as struck the first
blow. It was all about a young lady."

"I know what it was about."

"A young lady as is a young lady."--This was felt to the quick by Mr. Prosper, in regard to
the gin-drinking Miss Puffle and the brewer-bred Miss Thoroughbung; but as he was beginning
to think that the continuation of the family of the Prospers must depend on the marriage which
Harry might make, he passed over the slur upon himself for the sake of the praise given to
the future mother of the Prospers.--"And when a young gentleman has set his heart on a young
lady he's not going to be braggydoshoed out of it."

"Captain Scarborough knew her first."

"First come first served isn't always the way with lovers. Mr. Harry was the conquering hero.
'Weni, widi, wici.'"

"Halloo, Matthew!"

"Them's the words as they say a young gentleman ought to use when he's got the better of a
young lady's affections; and I dare say they're the very words as put the captain into such
a towering passion. I can understand how it happened, just as if I saw it."

"But he went away, and left him bleeding and speechless."

"He'd knocked his weni, widi, wici out of him, I guess! I think, Mr. Prosper, you should forgive
him." Mr. Prosper had thought so too, but had hardly known how to express himself after his
second burst of anger. But he was at the present ill and weak, and was anxious to have some
one near to him who should be more like a silk purse than his butler, Matthew. "Suppose you
was to send for him, sir."

"He wouldn't come."

"Let him alone for coming! They tell me, sir--"

"Who tells you?"

"Why, sir, the servants now at the rectory. Of course, sir, where two families is so near connected,
the servants are just as near: it's no more than natural. They tell me now that since you were
so kind about the allowance, their talk of you is all changed." Then the squire's anger was
heated hot again. Their talk had all been against him till he had opened his hand in regard
to the allowance. And now when there was something again to be got they could be civil. There
was none of that love of him for himself for which an old man is always hankering,--for which
the sick man breaks his heart,--but which the old and sick find it so difficult to get from
the young and healthy. It is in nature that the old man should keep the purse in his own pocket,
or otherwise he will have so little to attract. He is weak, querulous, ugly to look at, apt
to be greedy, cross, and untidy. Though he himself can love, what is his love to any one? Duty
demands that one shall smooth his pillow, and some one does smooth it,--as a duty. But the
old man feels the difference, and remembers the time when there was one who was anxious to
share it.

Mr. Prosper was not in years an old man, and had not as yet passed that time of life at which
many a man is regarded by his children as the best of their playfellows. But he was weak in
body, self-conscious, and jealous in spirit. He had the heart to lay out for himself a generous
line of conduct, but not the purpose to stick to it steadily. His nephew had ever been a trouble
to him, because he had expected from his nephew a kind of worship to which he had felt that
he was entitled as the head of the family. All good things were to come from him, and therefore
good things should be given to him. Harry had told himself that his uncle was not his father,
and that it had not been his fault that he was his uncle's heir. He had not asked his uncle
for an allowance. He had grown up with the feeling that Buston Hall was to be his own, and
had not regarded his uncle as the donor. His father, with his large family, had never exacted
much,--had wanted no special attention from him. And if not his father, then why his uncle?
But his inattention, his absence of gratitude for peculiar gifts, had sunk deep into Mr. Prosper's
bosom. Hence had come Miss Thoroughbung as his last resource, and Miss Thoroughbung had--called
him Peter. Hence his mind had wandered to Miss Puffle, and Miss Puffle had gone off with the
farmer's son, and, as he was now informed, had taken to drinking gin. Therefore he turned his
face to the wall and prepared himself to die.

On the next day he sent for Matthew again. Matthew first came to him always in the morning,
but on that occasion very little conversation ever took place. In the middle of the day he
had a bowl of soup brought to him, and by that time had managed to drag himself out of bed,
and to clothe himself in his dressing-gown, and to seat himself in his arm-chair. Then when
the soup had been slowly eaten, he would ring his bell, and the conversation would begin. "I
have been thinking over what I was saying yesterday, Matthew." Matthew simply assented, but
he knew in his heart that his master had been thinking over what he himself had said.

"Is Mr. Harry at the rectory?"

"Oh yes; he's there now. He wouldn't stir from the rectory till he hears that you are better."

"Why shouldn't he stir? Does he mean to say that I'm going to die? Perhaps I am. I'm very weak,
but he doesn't know it."

Matthew felt that he had made a blunder, and that he must get out of it as well as he could.
"It isn't that he is thinking anything of that, but you are confined to your room, sir. Of
course he knows that."

"I never told him."

"He's most particular in his inquiries from day to day."

"Does he come here?"

"He don't venture on that, because he knows as how you wouldn't wish it."

"Why shouldn't I wish it? It'd be the most natural thing in the world."

"But there has been--a little--I'm quite sure Mr. Harry don't wish to intrude. If you'd let
me give it to be understood that you'd like him to call, he'd be over here in a jiffy." Then,
very slowly, Mr. Prosper did give it to be understood that he would take it as a compliment
if his nephew would walk across the park and ask after him. He was most particular as to the
mode in which this embassy should be conducted. Harry was not to be made to think that he was
to come rushing into the house after his old fashion,--"Halloo, uncle, aren't you well? Hope
you'll be better when I come back. Have got to be off by the next train." Then he used to fly
away and not be heard of again for a week. And yet the message was to be conveyed with an alluring
courtesy that might be attractive, and might indicate that no hostility was intended. But it
was not to be a positive message, but one which would signify what might possibly take place.
If it should happen that Mr. Harry was walking in this direction, it might also happen that
his uncle would be pleased to see him. There was no better ambassador at hand than Matthew,
and therefore Matthew was commissioned to arrange matters. "If you can get at Mrs. Weeks, and
do it through his mother," suggested Mr. Prosper. Then Matthew winked and departed on his errand.

In about two hours there was a ring at the back-door, of which Mr. Prosper knew well the sound.
Miss Thoroughbung had not been there very often, but he had learned to distinguish her ring
or her servant's. In old days, not so very far removed, Harry had never been accustomed to
ring at all. But yet his uncle knew that it was he, and not the doctor, who might probably
come,--or Mr. Soames, of whose coming he lived in hourly dread. "You can show him up," he said
to Matthew, opening the door with great exertion, and attempting to speak to the servant down
the stairs. Harry, at any rate, was shown up, and in two minutes' time was standing over his
uncle's sick-chair. "I have not been quite well just lately," he said, in answer to the inquiries
made.

"We are very sorry to hear that, sir."

"I suppose you've heard it before."

"We did hear that you were a little out of sorts."

"Out of sorts! I don't know what you call out of sorts. I have not been out of this room for
well-nigh a month. My sister came to see me one day, and that's the last Christian I've seen."

"My mother would be over daily if she fancied you'd like it."

"She has her own duties, and I don't want to be troublesome."

"The truth is, Uncle Prosper, that we have all felt that we have been in your black books;
and as we have not thought that we deserved it, there has been a little coolness."

"I told your mother that I was willing to forgive you."

"Forgive me what? A fellow does not care to be forgiven when he has done nothing. But if you'll
only say that by-gones shall be by-gones quite past I'll take it so." He could not give up
his position as head of the family so easily,--an injured head of the family. And yet he was
anxious that by-gones should be by-gones, if only the young man would not be so jaunty, as
he stood there by his arm-chair. "Just say the word, and the girls shall come up and see you
as they used to do." Mr. Prosper thought at the moment that one of the girls was going to marry
Joe Thoroughbung, and that he would not wish to see her. "As for myself, if I've been in any
way negligent, I can only say that I did not intend it. I do not like to say more, because
it would seem as though I were asking you for money."

"I don't know why you shouldn't ask me."

"A man doesn't like to do that. But I'd tell you of everything if you'd only let me."

"What is there to tell?" said Uncle Prosper, knowing well that the love-story would be communicated
to him.

"I've got myself engaged to marry a young woman."

"A young woman!"

"Yes;--she's a young woman, of course; but she's a young lady as well. You know her name: it
is Florence Mountjoy."

"That is the young lady that I've heard of. Was there not some other gentleman attached to her?"

"There was;--her cousin, Mountjoy Scarborough."

"His father wrote to me."

"His father is the meanest fellow I ever met."

"And he himself came to me,--down here. They were fighting your battle for you."

"I'm much obliged to them. For I have even interfered with him about the lady."

Then Harry had to repeat his veni, vidi, vici after his own fashion. "Of course I interfered
with him. How is a fellow to help himself? We both of us were spooning on the same girl, and
of course she had to decide it."

"And she decided for you?"

"I fancy she did. At any rate I decided for her, and I mean to have her."

Then Mr. Prosper was, for him, very gracious in his congratulations, saying all manner of good
things of Miss Mountjoy. "I think you'd like her, Uncle Prosper." Mr. Prosper did not doubt
but that he would "appease the solicitor." He also had heard of Miss Mountjoy, and what he
had heard had been much to the "young lady's credit." Then he asked a few questions as to the
time fixed for the marriage. Here Harry was obliged to own that there were difficulties. Miss
Mountjoy had promised not to marry for three years without her mother's consent. "Three years!"
said Mr. Prosper. "Then I shall be dead and buried." Harry did not tell his uncle that in that
case the difficulty might probably vanish, as the same degree of fate which had robbed him
of his poor uncle would have made him owner of Buston. In such a case as that Mrs. Mountjoy
might probably give way.

"But why is the young lady to be kept from marriage for three years? Does she wish it?"

Harry said that he did not exactly think that Miss Mountjoy, on her own behalf, did wish for
so prolonged a separation. "The fact is, sir, that Mrs. Mountjoy is not my best friend. This
nephew of hers, Mountjoy Scarborough, has always been her favorite."

"But he's a man that always loses his money at cards."

"He's to have all Tretton now, it seems."

"And what does the young lady say?"

"All Tretton won't move her. I'm not a bit afraid. I've got her word, and that's enough for
me. How it is that her mother should think it possible;--that's what I do not know."

"The three years are quite fixed?"

"I don't quite say that altogether."

"But a young lady who will be true to you will be true to her mother also." Harry shook his
head. He was quite willing to guarantee Florence's truth as to her promise to him, but he did
not think that her promise to her mother need be put on the same footing. "I shall be very
glad if you can arrange it any other way. Three years is a long time."

"Quite absurd, you know," said Harry, with energy.

"What made her fix on three years?"

"I don't know how they did it between them. Mrs. Mountjoy, perhaps, thought that it might give
time to her nephew. Ten years would be the same as far as he is concerned. Florence is a girl
who, when she says that she loves a man, means it. For you don't suppose I intend to remain
three years?"

"What do you intend to do?"

"One has to wait a little and see." Then there was a long pause, during which Harry stood twiddling
his fingers. He had nothing farther to suggest, but he thought that his uncle might say something.
"Shall I come again to-morrow, Uncle Prosper?" he said.

"I have got a plan," said Uncle Prosper.

"What is it, uncle?"

"I don't know that it can lead to anything. It's of no use, of course, if the young lady will
wait the three years."

"I don't think she's at all anxious," said Harry.

"You might marry almost at once."

"That's what I should like."

"And come and live here."

"In this house?"

"Why not? I'm nobody. You'd soon find that I'm nobody."

"That's nonsense, Uncle Prosper. Of course you're everybody in your own house."

"You might endure it for six months in the year."

Harry thought of the sermons, but resolved at once to face them boldly. "I am only thinking
how generous you are."

"It's what I mean. I don't know the young lady, and perhaps she mightn't like living with an
old gentleman. In regard to the other six months, I'll raise the two hundred and fifty pounds
to five hundred pounds. If she thinks well of it, she should come here first and let me see
her. She and her mother might both come." Then there was a pause. "I should not know how to
bear it,--I should not, indeed. But let them both come."

After some farther delay this was at last decided on. Harry went away supremely happy and very
grateful, and Mr. Prosper was left to meditate on the terrible step he had taken.

CHAPTER LVIII.

MR. SCARBOROUGH'S DEATH.

It is a melancholy fact that Mr. Barry, when he heard the last story from Tretton, began to
think that his partner was not so wide-awake as he had hitherto always regarded him. As time
runs on, such a result generally takes place in all close connections between the old and the
young. Ten years ago Mr. Barry had looked up to Mr. Grey with a trustful respect. Words which
fell from Mr. Grey were certainly words of truth, but they were, in Mr. Barry's then estimation,
words of wisdom also. Gradually an altered feeling had grown up; and Mr. Barry, though he did
not doubt the truth, thought less about it. But he did doubt the wisdom constantly. The wisdom
practised under Mr. Barry's vice-management was not quite the same as Mr. Grey's. And Mr. Barry
had come to understand that though it might be well to tell the truth on occasions, it was
folly to suppose that any one else would do so. He had always thought that Mr. Grey had gone
a little too fast in believing Squire Scarborough's first story. "But you've been to Nice,
yourself, and discovered that it is true," Mr. Grey would say. Mr. Barry would shake his head,
and declare that in having to deal with a man of such varied intellect as Mr. Scarborough there
was no coming at the bottom of a story.

But there had been no question of any alterations in the mode of conducting the business of
the firm. Mr. Grey had been, of course, the partner by whose judgment any question of importance
must ultimately be decided; and, though Mr. Barry had been sent to Nice, the Scarborough property
was especially in Mr. Grey's branch. He had been loud in declaring the iniquity of his client,
but had altogether made up his mind that the iniquity had been practised; and all the clerks
in the office had gone with him, trusting to his great character for sober sagacity. And Mr.
Grey was not a man who would easily be put out of his high position.

The respect generally felt for him was too high; and he carried himself before his partner
and clerks too powerfully to lose at once his prestige. But Mr. Barry, when he heard the new
story, looked at his own favorite clerk and almost winked an eye; and when he came to discuss
the matter with Mr. Grey, he declined even to pretend to be led at once by Mr. Grey's opinion.
"A gentleman who has been so very clever on one occasion may be very clever on another." That
had been his argument. Mr. Grey's reply had simply been to the effect that you cannot twice
catch an old bird with chaff. Mr. Barry seemed, however, to think, in discussing the matter
with the favorite clerk, that the older the bird became, the more often he could be caught
with chaff.

Mr. Grey in these days was very unhappy,--not made so simply by the iniquity of his client,
but by the insight which he got into his partner's aptitude for business. He began to have
his doubts about Mr. Barry. Mr. Barry was tending toward sharp practice. Mr. Barry was beginning
to love his clients,--not with a proper attorney's affection, as his children, but as sheep
to be shorn. With Mr. Grey the bills had gone out and had been paid, no doubt, and the money
had in some shape found its way into Mr. Grey's pockets. But he had never looked at the two
things together. Mr. Barry seemed to be thinking of the wool as every client came or was dismissed.
Mr. Grey, as he thought of these things, began to fancy that his own style of business was
becoming antiquated. He had said good words of Mr. Barry to his daughter, but just at this
period his faith both in himself and in his partner began to fail. His partner was becoming
too strong for him, and he felt that he was failing. Things were changed; and he did not love
his business as he used to do. He had fancies, and he knew that he had fancies, and that fancies
were not good for an attorney. When he saw what was in Mr. Barry's mind as to this new story
from Tretton, he became convinced that Dolly was right. Dolly was not fit, he thought, to be
Mr. Barry's wife. She might have been the wife of such another as himself, had the partner
been such another. But it was not probable that any partner should have been such as he was.
"Old times are changed," he said to himself; "old manners gone." Then he determined that he
would put his house in order, and leave the firm. A man cannot leave his work forever without
some touch of melancholy.

But it was necessary that some one should go to Rummelsburg and find what could be learned
there. Mr. Grey had sworn that he would have nothing to do with the new story, as soon as the
new story had been told to him; but it soon became apparent to him that he must have to do
with it. As soon as the breath should be out of the old squire's body, some one must take possession
of Tretton, and Mountjoy would be left in the house. In accordance with Mr. Grey's theory,
Augustus would be the proper possessor. Augustus, no doubt, would go down and claim the ownership,
unless the matter could be decided to the satisfaction of them both beforehand. Mr. Grey thought
that there was little hope of such satisfaction; but it would of course be for him or his firm
to see what could be done. "That I should ever have got such a piece of business!" he said
to himself. But it was at last settled among them that Mr. Barry should go to Rummelsburg.
He had made the inquiry at Nice, and he would go on with it at Rummelsburg. Mr. Barry started,
with Mr. Quaverdale, of St. John's, the gentleman whom Harry Annesley had consulted as to the
practicability of his earning money by writing for the Press. Mr. Quaverdale was supposed to
be a German scholar, and therefore had his expenses paid for him, with some bonus for his time.

A conversation between Mr. Barry and Mr. Quaverdale, which took place on their way home, shall
be given, as it will best describe the result of their inquiry. This inquiry had been conducted
by Mr. Barry's intelligence, but had owed so much to Mr. Quaverdale's extensive knowledge of
languages, that the two gentlemen may be said, as they came home, to be equally well instructed
in the affairs of Mr. Scarborough's property.

"He has been too many for the governor," said Barry. Mr. Barry's governor was Mr. Grey.

"It seems to me that Scarborough is a gentleman who is apt to be too many for most men."

"The sharpest fellow I ever came across, either in the way of a cheat or in any other walk
of life. If he wanted any one else to have the property, he'd come out with something to show
that the entail itself was all moonshine."

"But when he married again at Nice, he couldn't have quarrelled with his eldest son already.
The child was not above four or five months old." This came from Quaverdale.

"It's my impression," said Barry, "that it was then his intention to divide the property, and
that this was done as a kind of protest against primogeniture. Then he found that that would
fail,--that if he came to explain the whole matter to his sons, they would not consent to be
guided by him, and to accept a division. From what I have seen of both of them, they are bad
to guide after that fashion. Then Mountjoy got frightfully into the hands of the money-lenders,
and in order to do them it became necessary that the whole property should go to Augustus."

"They must look upon him as a nice sort of old man!" said Quaverdale.

"Rather! But they have never got at him to speak a bit of their mind to him. And then how clever
he was in getting round his own younger son. The property got into such a condition that there
was money enough to pay the Jews the money they had really lent. Augustus, who was never quite
sure of his father, thought it would be best to disarm them; and he consented to pay them,
getting back all their bonds. But he was very uncivil to the squire,--told him that the sooner
he died the better, or something of that sort; and then the squire immediately turned round
and sprung this Rummelsburg marriage upon us, and has left every stick about the place to Mountjoy.
It must all go to Mountjoy,--every acre, every horse, every bed, and every book."

"And these, in twelve months' time, will have been divided among the card-players of the metropolis,"
said Quaverdale.

"We've got nothing to do with that. If ever a man did have a lesson he has had it. If he chose
to take it, no man would ever have been saved in so miraculous a manner. But there can be no
doubt that John Scarborough and Ada Sneyd were married at Rummelsburg, and that it will be
found to be impossible to unmarry them."

"Old Mrs. Sneyd, the lady's mother, was then present?" said Quaverdale.

"Not a doubt about it, and that Fritz Deutchmann was present at the marriage. I almost think
that we ought to have brought him away with us. It would have cost a couple of hundred pounds,
but the estate can bear that. We can have him by sending for him, if we should want it." Then,
after many more words on the same subject and to the same effect, Mr. Barry went on to give
his own private opinions: "In fact, the only blemish in old Scarborough's plans was this,--that
the Rummelsburg marriage was sure to come out sooner or later."

"Do you think so? Fritz Deutchmann is the only one of the party alive, and it's not probable
that he would ever have heard of Tretton."

"These things always do come out. But it does not signify now. And the world will know how
godless and reprobate old Scarborough has been; but that will not interfere with Mountjoy's
legitimacy. And the world has pretty well understood already that the old man has cared nothing
for God or man. It was bad enough, according to the other story, that he should have kept Augustus
so long in the dark, and determined to give it all to a bastard by means of a plot and a fraud.
The world has got used to that. The world will simply be amused by this other turn. And as
the world generally is not very fond of Augustus Scarborough, and entertains a sort of a good-natured
pity for Mountjoy, the first marriage will be easily accepted."

"There'll be a lawsuit, I suppose?" said Quaverdale.

"I don't see that they'll have a leg to stand on. When the old man dies the property will be
exactly as it would have been. This latter intended fraud in favor of Augustus will be understood
as having been old Scarborough's farce. The Jews are the party who have really suffered."

"And Augustus?"

"He will have lost nothing to which he was by law entitled. His father might of course make
what will he pleased. If Augustus was uncivil to his father, his father could of course alter
his will. The world would see all that. But the world will be inclined to say that these poor
money-lenders have been awfully swindled."

"The world won't pity them."

"I'm not so sure. It's a hard case to get hold of a lot of men and force them to lend you a
hundred pounds without security and without interest. That's what has been done in this case."

"They'll have no means of recovering anything."

"Not a shilling. The wonder is that they should have got three hundred thousand pounds. They
never would have had it unless the squire had wished to pave the way back for Mountjoy. And
then he made Augustus do it for him! In my mind he has been so clever that he ought to be forgiven
all his rascality. There has been, too, no punishment for him, and no probability of punishment.
He has done nothing for which the law can touch him. He has proposed to cheat people, but before
he would have cheated them he might be dead. The money-lenders will have been swindled awfully,
but they have never had any ground of tangible complaint against him. 'Who are you?' he has
said. 'I don't know you.' They alleged that they had lent their money to his eldest son. 'That's
as you thought,' he replied. 'I ain't bound to come and tell you all the family arrangements
about my marriage.' If you look at it all round it was uncommonly well done."

When Mr. Barry got back he found that it was generally admitted at the Chambers that the business
had been well done. Everybody was prepared to allow that Mr. Scarborough had not left a screw
loose in the arrangement,--though he was this moment on his death-bed, and had been under surgical
tortures and operations, and, in fact, slowly dying, during the whole period that he had been
thus busy. Every one concerned in the matter seemed to admire Mr. Scarborough except Mr. Grey,
whose anger, either with himself or his client, became the stronger the louder grew the admiration
of the world.

A couple of barristers very learned in the law were consulted, and they gave it as their opinion
that from the evidence as shown to them there could be no doubt but that Mountjoy was legitimate.
There was no reason in the least for doubting it, but for that strange episode which had occurred
when, in order to get the better of the law, Mr. Scarborough had declared that at the time
of Mountjoy's birth he had not been married. They went on to declare that on the squire's death
the Rummelsburg marriage must of course have been discovered, and had given it as their opinion
that the squire had never dreamed of doing so great an injustice either to his elder or his
younger son. He had simply desired, as they thought, to cheat the money-lenders, and had cheated
them beautifully. That Mr. Tyrrwhit should have been so very soft was a marvel to them; but
it only showed how very foolish a sharp man of the world might be when he encountered one sharper.

And Augustus, through an attorney acting on his own behalf, consulted two other barristers,
whose joint opinion was not forthcoming quite at once, but may have to be stated. Augustus
was declared by them to have received at his father's hands a most irreparable injury to such
an extent that an action for damages would, in their opinion, lie.

He had, by accepting his father's first story, altered the whole course of his life, abandoned
his profession, and even paid large sums of money out of his own pocket for the maintenance
of his elder brother. A jury would probably award him some very considerable sum,--if a jury
could get hold of his father while still living. No doubt the furniture and other property
would remain, and might be held to be liable for the present owner's laches. But these two
learned lawyers did not think that an action could be taken with any probability of success
against the eldest son, with reference to his tables and chairs, when the Tretton estates should
have become his. As these learned lawyers had learned that old Mr. Scarborough was at this
moment almost in articulo mortis, would it not be better that Augustus should apply to his
elder brother to make him such compensation as the peculiarities of the case would demand?
But as this opinion did not reach Augustus till his father was dead, the first alternative
proposed was of no use.

"I suppose, sir, we had better communicate with Mr. Scarborough?" Mr. Barry said to his partner,
on his return.

"Not in my name," Mr. Grey replied. "I've put Mr. Scarborough in such a state that he is not
allowed to see any business letter. Sir William Brodrick is there now." But communications
were made both to Mountjoy and to Augustus. There was nothing for Mountjoy to do; his case
was in Mr. Barry's hands; nor could he take any steps till something should be done to oust
him from Tretton. Augustus, however, immediately went to work and employed his counsel, learned
in the law.

"You will do something, I suppose, for poor Gus?" the old man said to his son one morning.
It was the last morning on which he was destined to awake in the world, and he had been told
by Sir William and by Mr. Merton that it would probably be so. But death to him had no terror.
Life to him, for many weeks past, had been so laden with pain as to make him look forward to
a release from it with hope. But the business of life had pressed so hard upon him as to make
him feel that he could not tell what had been accomplished.

The adjustment of such a property as Tretton required, he thought, his presence, and, till
it had been adjusted, he clung to life with a pertinacity which had seemed to be oppressive.
Now Mountjoy's debts had been paid, and Mountjoy could be left a bit happier. Having achieved
so much, he was delighted to think that he might. But there had come latterly a claim upon
him equally strong,--that he should wreak his vengeance upon Augustus. Had Augustus abused
him for keeping him in the dark so long, he would have borne it patiently. He had expected
as much. But his son had ridiculed him, laughed at him, made nothing of him, and had at last
told him to die out of the way. He would, at any rate, do something before he died.

He had had his revenge, very bitter of its kind. Augustus should be made to feel that he had
not been ridiculous,--not to be laughed at in his last days. He had ruined his son, inevitably
ruined him, and was about to leave him penniless upon the earth. But now in his last moments,
in his very last, there came upon him some feeling of pity, and in speaking of his son he once
more called him "Gus."

"I don't know how it will all be, sir; but if the property is to be mine--"

"It will be yours; it must be yours."

"Then I will do anything for him that he will accept."

"Do not let him starve, or have to earn his bread."

"Say what you wish, sir, and it shall be done, as far as I can do it."

"Make an offer to him of some income, and settle it on him. Do it at once." The old man, as
he said this, was thinking probably of the great danger that all Tretton might, before long,
have been made to vanish. "And, Mountjoy--"

"Sir."

"You have gambled surely enough for amusement. With such a property as this in your hands gambling
becomes very serious."

They were the last words,--the last intelligible words,--which the old man spoke. He died with
his left hand on his son's neck, and took Merton and his sister by his side. It was a death-bed
not without its lesson,--not without a certain charm in the eyes of some fancied beholder.
Those who were there seemed to love him well, and should do so.

He had contrived, in spite of his great faults, to create a respect in the minds of those around
him, which is itself a great element of love. But there was something in his manner which told
of love for others. He was one who could hate to distraction, and on whom no bonds of blood
would operate to mitigate his hatred. He would persevere to injure with a terrible persistency;
but yet in every phase of his life he had been actuated by love for others. He had never been
selfish, thinking always of others rather than of himself. Supremely indifferent he had been
to the opinion of the world around him, but he had never run counter to his own conscience.
For the conventionalities of the law he entertained a supreme contempt, but he did wish so
to arrange matters with which he was himself concerned as to do what justice demanded. Whether
he succeeded in the last year of his life the reader may judge. But certainly the three persons
who were assembled around his death-bed did respect him, and had been made to love him by what
he had done.

Merton wrote the next morning to his friend Henry Annesley respecting the scene. "The poor
old boy has gone at last, and, in spite of all his faults, I feel as though I had lost an old
friend. To me he has been most kind, and did I not know of all his sins I should say that he
had been always loyal and always charitable. Mr. Grey condemns him, and all the world must
condemn him. One cannot make an apology for him without being ready to throw all truth and
all morality to the dogs. But if you can imagine for yourself a state of things in which neither
truth nor morality shall be thought essential, then old Mr. Scarborough would be your hero.
He was the bravest man I ever knew. He was ready to look all opposition in the face, and prepared
to bear it down. And whatever he did, he did with the view of accomplishing what he thought
to be right for other people. Between him and his God I cannot judge, but he believed in an
Almighty One, and certainly went forth to meet him without a fear in his heart."

CHAPTER LIX.

JOE THOROUGHBUNG'S WEDDING.

While some men die others are marrying. While the funeral dirge was pealing sadly at Tretton,
the joyful marriage-bells were ringing both at Buntingford and Buston. Joe Thoroughbung, dressed
all in his best, was about to carry off Molly Annesley to Rome previous to settling down to
a comfortable life of hunting and brewing in his native town. Miss Thoroughbung sent her compliments
to Mrs. Annesley. Would her brother be there? She thought it probable that Mr. Prosper would
not be glad to see her. She longed to substitute "Peter" for Mr. Prosper, but abstained. In
such case she would deny herself the pleasure of "seeing Joe turned off." Then there was an
embassy sent to the Hall. The two younger girls went with the object of inviting Uncle Prosper,
but with a desire at their hearts that Uncle Prosper might not come. "I presume the family
at Buntingford will be represented?" Uncle Prosper had asked. "Somebody will come, I suppose,"
said Fanny. Then Uncle Prosper had sent down a pretty jewelled ring, and said that he would
remain in his room. His health hardly permitted of his being present with advantage. So it
was decided that Miss Thoroughbung should come, and every one felt that she would be the howling
spirit,--if not at the ceremony, at the banquet which would be given afterward.

Miss Thoroughbung was not the only obstacle, had the whole been known. Young Soames, the son
of the attorney with whom Mr. Prosper had found it so evil a thing to have to deal, was to
act as Joe's best man. Mr. Prosper learned this, probably, from Matthew, but he never spoke
of it to the family.

It was a sad disgrace in his eyes that any Soames should have been so far mixed up with the
Prosper blood. Young Algy Soames was in himself a very nice sort of young fellow, who liked
a day's hunting when he could be spared out of his father's office, and whose worst fault was
that he wore loud cravats. But he was an abomination to Mr. Prosper, who had never seen him.
As it was, he carried himself very mildly on this occasion.

"It's a pity we're not to have two marriages at the same time," said Mr. Crabtree, a clerical
wag from the next parish. "Don't you think so, Mrs. Annesley?" Mrs. Annesley was standing close
by, as was also Miss Thoroughbung, but she made no answer to the appeal. People who understood
anything knew that Mrs. Annesley would not be gratified by such an allusion. But Mr. Crabtree
was a man who understood nothing.

"The old birds never pair so readily as the young ones," said Miss Thoroughbung.

"Old! Who talks of being old?" said Mr. Crabtree. "My friend Prosper is quite a boy. There's
a good time coming, and I hope you'll give way yet, Miss Thoroughbung."

Then they were all marshalled on their way to church. It is quite out of my power to describe
the bride's dress, or that of the bride's maids. They were the bride's sisters and two of Joe's
sisters. An attempt had been made to induce Florence Mountjoy to come down, but it had been
unsuccessful. Things had gone so far now at Cheltenham that Mrs. Mountjoy had been driven to
acknowledge that if Florence held to her project for three years she should be allowed to marry
Harry Annesley. But she had accompanied this permission by many absurd restrictions. Florence
was not to see him, at any rate, during the first year; but she was to see Mountjoy Scarborough
if he came to Cheltenham. Florence declared this to be impossible; but, as the Buston marriage
took place just at this moment, she could not have her way in everything. Joe drove up to the
church with Algy Soames, it not having been thought discreet that he should enter the parsonage
on that morning, though he had been there nearly every day through the winter. "I declare,
here he is!" said Miss Thoroughbung, very loudly. "I never thought he'd have the courage at
the last moment."

"I wonder how a certain gentleman would have felt when it came to his last moment," said Mr.
Crabtree.

Mrs. Annesley took to weeping bitterly, which seemed to be unnecessary, as she had done nothing
but congratulate herself since the match had first been made, and had rejoiced greatly that
one of her numerous brood should have "put into such a haven of rest."

"My dear Mrs. Annesley," said Mrs. Crabtree, consoling her in that she would not be far removed
from her child, "you can almost see the brewery chimneys from the church tower." Those who
knew the two ladies well were aware that there was some little slur intended by the allusion
to brewery chimneys. Mrs. Crabtree's girl had married the third son of Sir Reginald Rattlepate.
The Rattlepates were not rich, and the third son was not inclined to earn his bread.

"Thank God, yes!" said Mrs. Annesley, through her tears. "Whenever I shall see them I shall
know that there's an income coming out with the smoke."

The boys were home from school for the occasion. "Molly, there's Joe coming after you," said
the elder.

"If he gives you a kiss now you needn't pretend to mind," said the other.

"My darling, my own one, that so soon will be my own no longer!" said the father, as he made
his way into the vestry to put on his surplice.

"Dear papa!" It was the only word the bride said as she walked in at the church-door, and prepared
to make her way up the nave at the head of her little bevy. They were all very bright, as they
stood there before the altar, but the brightest spot among them was Algy Soames's blue necktie.
Joe for the moment was much depressed, and thought nothing of the last run in which he had
distinguished himself; but nevertheless he held up his head well as a man and a brewer.

"Dont'ee take on so," Miss Thoroughbung said to Mrs. Annesley at the last moment. "He'll give
her plenty to eat and to drink, and will never do her a morsel of harm." Joe overheard this,
and wished that his aunt was back in her bed at Marmaduke Lodge.

Then the marriage was over, and they all trooped into the vestry to sign the book. "You can't
get out of that now," said Mrs. Crabtree to Joe.

"I don't want to. I have got the fairest girl in these parts for my wife, and, as I believe,
the best young woman." This he said with a spirit for which Mrs. Crabtree had not given him
credit, and Algy Soames heard him and admired his friend beneath his blue necktie. And one
of the girls heard it, and cried tears of joy as she told her sister afterward in the bedroom.
"Oh, what a darling he is!" Molly had said, amid her own sobbing. Joe stood an inch higher
among them all because of that word.

