Our armies just now were, it must be admitted, in by no means a good condition.  The generals
owed their promotion to favour and fantasy. The King thought he gave them capacity when he
gave them their patents. Under M. de Turenne the army had afforded, as in a school, opportunities
for young officers to learn the art of warfare, and to qualify themselves step by step to take
command.  They were promoted as they showed signs of their capacity, and gave proof of their
talent.  Now, however, it was very different.  Promotion was granted according to length of
service, thus rendering all application and diligence unnecessary, except when M. de Louvois
suggested to the King such officers as he had private reasons for being favourable to, and
whose actions he could control.  He persuaded the King that it was he himself who ought to
direct the armies from his cabinet.  The King, flattered by this, swallowed the bait, and Louvois
himself was thus enabled to govern in the name of the King, to keep the generals in leading-strings,
and to fetter their every movement. In consequence of the way in which promotions were made,
the greatest ignorance prevailed amongst all grades of officers.  None knew scarcely anything
more than mere routine duties, and sometimes not even so much as that.  The luxury which had
inundated the army, too, where everybody wished to live as delicately as at Paris, hindered
the general officers from associating with the other officers, and in consequence from knowing
and appreciating them.  As a matter of course, there were no longer any deliberations upon
the state of affairs, in which the young might profit by the counsels of the old, and the army
profit by the discussions of all.  The young officers talked only of pay and women; the old,
of forage and equipages; the generals spent half their time in writing costly despatches, often
useless, and sending them away by couriers.  The luxury of the Court and city had spread into
the army, so that delicacies were carried there unknown formerly.  Nothing was spoken of but
hot dishes in the marches and in the detachments; and the repasts that were carried to the
trenches, during sieges, were not only well served, but ices and fruits were partaken of as
at a fete, and a profusion of all sorts of liqueurs.  Expense ruined the officers, who vied
with one another in their endeavours to appear magnificent; and the things to be carried, the
work to be done, quadrupled the number of domestics and grooms, who often starved.  For a long
time, people had complained of all this; even those who were put to the expenses, which ruined
them; but none dared to spend less.  At last, that is to say, in the spring of the following
year, the King made severe rules, with the object of bringing about a reform in this particular.
There is no country in Europe where there are so many fine laws, or where the observance of
them is of shorter duration.  It often happens, that in the first year all are infringed, and
in the second, forgotten.  Such was the army at this time, and we soon had abundant opportunities
to note its incapacity to overcome the enemies with whom we had to contend.

The King wished to open this campaign with two battles; one in Italy, the other in Flanders.
His desire was to some extent gratified in the former case; but in the other he met with a
sad and cruel disappointment.  Since the departure of Marechal de Villeroy for Flanders, the
King had more than once pressed him to engage the enemy.  The Marechal, piqued with these reiterated
orders, which he considered as reflections upon his courage, determined to risk anything in
order to satisfy the desire of the King.  But the King did not wish this.  At the same time
that he wished for a battle in Flanders, he wished to place Villeroy in a state to fight it.
He sent orders, therefore, to Marsin to take eighteen battalions and twenty squadrons of his
army, to proceed to the Moselle, where he would find twenty others, and then to march with
the whole into Flanders, and join Marechal de Villeroy.  At the same time he prohibited the
latter from doing anything until this reinforcement reached him. Four couriers, one after the
other, carried this prohibition to the Marechal; but he had determined to give battle without
assistance, and he did so, with what result will be seen.

On the 24th of May he posted himself between the villages of Taviers and Ramillies.  He was
superior in force to the Duke of Marlborough, who was opposed to him, and this fact gave him
confidence.  Yet the position which he had taken up was one which was well known to be bad.
The late M. de Luxembourg had declared it so, and had avoided it.  M. de Villeroy had been
a witness of this, but it was his destiny and that of France that he should forget it.  Before
he took up this position he announced that it was his intention to do so to M. d'Orleans. 
M. d'Orleans said publicly to all who came to listen, that if M. de Villeroy did so he would
be beaten.  M. d'Orleans proved to be only too good a prophet.

Just as M. de Villeroy had taken up his position and made his arrangements, the Elector arrived
in hot haste from Brussels.  It was too late now to blame what had been done.  There was nothing
for it but to complete what had been already begun, and await the result.

It was about two hours after midday when the enemy arrived within range, and came under our
fire from Ramillies.  It forced them to halt until their cannon could be brought into play,
which was soon done.  The cannonade lasted a good hour.  At the end of that time they marched
to Taviers, where a part of our army was posted, found but little resistance, and made themselves
masters of that place.  From that moment they brought their cavalry to bear.  They perceived
that there was a marsh which covered our left, but which hindered our two wings from joining.
They made good use of the advantage this gave them.  We were taken in the rear at more than
one point, and Taviers being no longer able to assist us, Ramillies itself fell, after a prodigious
fire and an obstinate resistance.  The Comte de Guiche at the head of the regiment of Guards
defended it for four hours, and performed prodigies, but in the end he was obliged to give
way.  All this time our left had been utterly useless with its nose in the marsh, no enemy
in front of it, and with strict orders not to budge from its position.

Our retreat commenced in good order, but soon the night came and threw us into confusion. 
The defile of Judoigne became so gorged with baggage and with the wrecks of the artillery we
had been able to save, that everything was taken from us there.  Nevertheless, we arrived at
Louvain, and then not feeling in safety, passed the canal of Wilworde without being very closely
followed by the enemy.

We lost in this battle four thousand men, and many prisoners of rank, all of whom were treated
with much politeness by Marlborough.  Brussels was one of the first-fruits he gathered of this
victory, which had such grave and important results.

The King did not learn this disaster until Wednesday, the 26th of May, at his waking.  I was
at Versailles.  Never was such trouble or such consternation.  The worst was, that only the
broad fact was known; for six days we were without a courier to give us details.  Even the
post was stopped.  Days seemed like years in the ignorance of everybody as to details, and
in the inquietude of everybody for relatives and friends. The King was forced to ask one and
another for news; but nobody could tell him any.  Worn out at last by the silence, he determined
to despatch Chamillart to Flanders to ascertain the real state of affairs. Chamillart accordingly
left Versailles on Sunday, the 30th of May, to the astonishment of all the Court, at seeing
a man charged with the war and the finance department sent on such an errand.  He astonished
no less the army when he arrived at Courtrai, where it had stationed itself.  Having gained
all the information he sought, Chamillart returned to Versailles on Friday, the 4th of June,
at about eight o'clock in the evening, and at once went to the King, who was in the apartments
of Madame de Maintenon. It was known then that the army, after several hasty marches, finding
itself at Ghent, the Elector of Bavaria had insisted that it ought at least to remain there.
A council of war was held, the Marechal de Villeroy, who was quite discouraged by the loss
he had sustained, opposed the advice of the Elector.  Ghent was abandoned, so was the open
country. The army was separated and distributed here and there, under the command of the general
officers.  In this way, with the exception of Namur, Mons, and a very few other places, all
the Spanish Low Countries were lost, and a part of ours, even.  Never was rapidity equal to
this.  The enemies were as much astonished as we.

However tranquilly the King sustained in appearance this misfortune, he felt it to the quick.
He was so affected by what was said of his body- guards, that he spoke of them himself with
bitterness.  Court warriors testified in their favour, but persuaded nobody.  But the King
seized these testimonies with joy, and sent word to the Guards that he was well contended with
them.  Others, however, were not so easily satisfied.

This sad reverse and the discontent of the Elector made the King feel at last that his favourites
must give way to those better able to fill their places.  Villeroy, who, since his defeat,
had quite lost his head, and who, if he had been a general of the Empire, would have lost it
in reality in another manner, received several strong hints from the King that he ought to
give up his command.  But he either could not or would not understand them, and so tired out
the King's patience, at length. But he was informed in language which admitted of no misapprehension
that he must return.  Even then, the King was so kindly disposed towards him, that he said
the Marechal had begged to be recalled with such obstinacy that he could not refuse him.  But
M. de Villeroy was absurd enough to reject this salve for his honour; which led to his disgrace.
M. de Vendome had orders to leave Italy, and succeed to the command in Flanders, where the
enemies had very promptly taken Ostend and Nieuport.

CHAPTER XXXV

Meanwhile, as I have promised to relate, in a continuous narrative, all our military operations
of this year, let me say what passed in other directions.  The siege of Barcelona made no progress.
Our engineers were so slow and so ignorant, that they did next to nothing.  They were so venal,
too, that they aided the enemy rather than us by their movements. According to a new rule made
by the King, whenever they changed the position of their guns, they were entitled to a pecuniary
recompense. Accordingly, they passed all their time in uselessly changing about from place
to place, in order to receive the recompense which thus became due to them.

Our fleet, too, hearing that a much superior naval force was coming to the assistance of the
enemy, and being, thanks to Pontchartrain, utterly unable to meet it, was obliged to weigh
anchor, and sailed away to Toulon.  The enemy's fleet arrived, and the besieged at once took
new courage.  Tesse, who had joined the siege, saw at once that it was useless to continue
it.  We had for some time depended upon the open sea for supplies.  Now that the English fleet
had arrived, we could depend upon the sea no longer.  The King of Spain saw, at last, that
there was no help for it but to raise the siege.

It was raised accordingly on the night between the 10th and 11th of May, after fourteen days'
bombardment.  We abandoned one hundred pieces of artillery; one hundred and fifty thousand
pounds of powder; thirty thousand sacks of flour; twenty thousand sacks of sevade, a kind of
oats; and a great number of bombs, cannon-balls, and implements.  As Catalonia was in revolt,
it was felt that retreat could not take place in that direction; it was determined, therefore,
to retire by the way of the French frontier.  For eight days, however, our troops were harassed
in flank and rear by Miquelets, who followed us from mountain to mountain. It was not until
the Duc de Noailles, whose father had done some service to the chiefs of these Miquelets, had
parleyed with them, and made terms with them, that our troops were relieved from these cruel
wasps.  We suffered much loss in our retreat, which, with the siege, cost us full four thousand
men.  The army stopped at Roussillon, and the King of Spain, escorted by two regiments of dragoons,
made the best of his way to Madrid.  That city was itself in danger from the Portuguese, and,
indeed, fell into their hands soon after.  The Queen, who, with her children, had left it in
time to avoid capture, felt matters to be in such extremity, that she despatched all the jewels
belonging to herself and her husband to France.  They were placed in the custody of the King.
Among them was that famous pear-shaped pearl called the Peregrine, which, for its weight, its
form, its size, and its water, is beyond all price and all comparison.

The King of Spain effected a junction with the army of Berwick, and both set to work to reconquer
the places the Portuguese had taken from them. In this they were successful.  The Portuguese,
much harassed by the people of Castille, were forced to abandon all they had gained; and the
King of Spain was enabled to enter Madrid towards the end of September, where he was received
with much rejoicing.

In Italy we experienced the most disastrous misfortunes.  M. de Vendome, having been called
from the command to go into Flanders, M. d'Orleans, after some deliberation, was appointed
to take his place.  M. d'Orleans set out from Paris on the 1st of July, with twenty-eight horses
and five chaises, to arrive in three days at Lyons, and then to hasten on into Italy.  La Feuillade
was besieging Turin.  M. d'Orleans went to the siege.  He was magnificently received by La
Feuillade, and shown all over the works.  He found everything defective.  La Feuillade was
very young, and very inexperienced.  I have already related an adventure of his, that of his
seizing upon the coffers of his uncle, and so forestalling his inheritance.  To recover from
the disgrace this occurrence brought upon him, he had married a daughter of Chamillart.  Favoured
by this minister, but coldly looked upon by the King, he had succeeded in obtaining command
in the army, and had been appointed to conduct this siege.  Inflated by the importance of his
position, and by the support of Chamillart, he would listen to no advice from any one.  M.
d'Orleans attempted to bring about some changes, and gave orders to that effect, but as soon
as he was gone, La Feuillade countermanded those orders and had everything his own way.  The
siege accordingly went on with the same ill-success as before.

M. d'Orleans joined M. de Vendome on the 17th of July, upon the Mincio. The pretended hero
had just made some irreparable faults.  He had allowed Prince Eugene to pass the Po, nearly
in front of him, and nobody knew what had become of twelve of our battalions posted near the
place where this passage had been made.  Prince Eugene had taken all the boats that we had
upon the river.  We could not cross it, therefore, and follow the enemy without making a bridge.
Vendome feared lest his faults should be perceived.  He wished that his successor should remain
charged with them. M. d'Orleans, indeed, soon saw all the faults that M. de Vendome had committed,
and tried hard to induce the latter to aid him to repair them. But M. de Vendome would not
listen to his representations, and started away almost immediately to take the command of the
army in Flanders, leaving M. d'Orleans to get out of the difficulty as he might.

M. d'Orleans, abandoned to himself (except when interfered with by Marechal de Marsin, under
whose tutelage he was), could do nothing.  He found as much opposition to his plans from Marsin
as he had found from M. de Vendome.  Marsin wished to keep in the good graces of La Feuillade,
son-in-law of the all-powerful minister, and would not adopt the views of M. d'Orleans.  This
latter had proposed to dispute the passage of the Tanaro, a confluent of the Po, with the enemy,
or compel them to accept battle.  An intercepted letter, in cypher, from Prince Eugene to the
Emperor, which fell into our hands, proved, subsequently, that this course would have been
the right one to adopt; but the proof came too late; the decyphering table having been forgotten
at Versailles! M. d'Orleans had in the mean time been forced to lead his army to Turin, to
assist the besiegers, instead of waiting to stop the passage of the troops that were destined
for the aid of the besieged.  He arrived at Turin on the 28th of August, in the evening.  La
Feuillade, now under two masters, grew, it might be imagined, more docile.  But no!  He allied
himself with Marsin (without whom M. d'Orleans could do nothing), and so gained him over that
they acted completely in accord.  When M. d'Orleans was convinced, soon after his arrival,
that the enemy was approaching to succour Turin, he suggested that they should be opposed as
they attempted the passage of the Dora.

But his advice was not listened to.  He was displeased with everything. He found that all the
orders he had given had been disregarded.  He found the siege works bad, imperfect, very wet,
and very ill-guarded.  He tried to remedy all these defects, but he was opposed at every step.
A council of war was held.  M. d'Orleans stated his views, but all the officers present, with
one honourable exception, servilely chimed in with the views of Marsin and La Feuillade, and
things remained as they were. M. d'Orleans, thereupon, protested that he washed his hands of
all the misfortunes that might happen in consequence of his advice being neglected.  He declared
that as he was no longer master over anything, it was not just that he should bear any part
of the blame which would entail to those in command.  He asked, therefore, for his post-chaise,
and wished immediately to quit the army.  La Feuillade and Marsin, however, begged him to remain,
and upon second thoughts he thought it better to do so.  The simple reason of all this opposition
was, that La Feuillade, being very young and very vain, wished to have all the honours of the
siege.  He was afraid that if the counsel of M. d'Orleans prevailed, some of that honour would
be taken from him.  This was the real reason, and to this France owes the disastrous failure
of the siege of Turin.

After the council of war, M. d'Orleans ceased to take any share in the command, walked about
or stopped at home, like a man who had nothing to do with what was passing around him.  On
the night of the 6th to the 7th of September, he rose from his bed alarmed by information sent
to him in a letter, that Prince Eugene was about to attack the castle of Pianezza, in order
to cross the Dora, and so proceed to attack the besiegers.  He hastened at once to Marsin,
showed him the letter, and recommended that troops should at once be sent to dispute the passage
of a brook that the enemies had yet to cross, even supposing them to be masters of Pianezza.
Even as he was speaking, confirmation of the intelligence he had received was brought by one
of our officers.  But it was resolved, in the Eternal decrees, that France should be struck
to the heart that day.

Marsin would listen to none of the arguments of M. d'Orleans.  He maintained that it would
be unsafe to leave the lines; that the news was false; that Prince Eugene could not possibly
arrive so promptly; he would give no orders; and he counselled M. d'Orleans to go back to bed.
The Prince, more piqued and more disgusted than ever, retired to his quarters fully resolved
to abandon everything to the blind and deaf, who would neither see nor hear.

Soon after entering his chamber the news spread from all parts of the arrival of Prince Eugene.
He did not stir.  Some general officers came, and forced him to mount his horse.  He went forth
negligently at a walking pace.  What had taken place during the previous days had made so much
noise that even the common soldiers were ashamed of it.  They liked him, and murmured because
he would no longer command them.  One of them called him by his name, and asked him if he refused
them his sword.  This question did more than all that the general officers had been able to
do. M. d'Orleans replied to the soldier, that he would not refuse to serve them, and at once
resolved to lend all his aid to Marsin and La Feuillade.

But it was no longer possible to leave the lines.  The enemy was in sight, and advanced so
diligently, that there was no time to make arrangements.  Marsin, more dead than alive, was
incapable of giving any order or any advice.  But La Feuillade still persevered in his obstinacy.
He disputed the orders of the Duc d'Orleans, and prevented their execution, possessed by I
know not what demon.

The attack was commenced about ten o'clock in the morning, was pushed with incredible vigour,
and sustained, at first, in the same manner. Prince Eugene poured his troops into those places
which the smallness of our forces had compelled us to leave open.  Marsin, towards the middle
of the battle, received a wound which incapacitated him from further service, end was taken
prisoner immediately after.  Le Feuillade ran about like a madman, tearing his hair, and incapable
of giving any order. The Duc d'Orleans preserved his coolness, and did wonders to save the
day.  Finding our men beginning to waver, he called the officers by their names, aroused the
soldiers by his voice, and himself led the squadrons and battalions to the charge.  Vanquished
at last by pain, and weakened by the blood he had lost, he was constrained to retire a little,
to have his wounds dressed.  He scarcely gave himself time for this, however, but returned
at once where the fire was hottest.  Three times the enemy had been repulsed and their guns
spiked by one of our officers, Le Guerchois, with his brigade of the old marine, when, enfeebled
by the losses he had sustained, he called upon a neighbouring brigade to advance with him to
oppose a number of fresh battalions the enemy had sent against him.  This brigade and its brigadier
refused bluntly to aid him.  It was positively known afterwards, that had Le Guerchois sustained
this fourth charge, Prince Eugene would have retreated.

This was the last moment of the little order that there had been at this battle.  All that
followed was only trouble, confusion, disorder, flight, discomfiture.  The most terrible thing
is, that the general officers, with but few exceptions, more intent upon their equipage and
upon what they had saved by pillage, added to the confusion instead of diminishing it, and
were worse than useless.

M. d'Orleans, convinced at last that it was impossible to re-establish the day, thought only
how to retire as advantageously as possible.  He withdrew his light artillery, his ammunition,
everything that was at the siege, even at the most advanced of its works, and attended to everything
with a presence of mind that allowed nothing to escape him.  Then, gathering round him all
the officers he could collect, he explained to them that nothing but retreat was open to them,
and that the road to Italy was that which they ought to pursue.  By this means they would leave
the victorious army of the enemy in a country entirely ruined and desolate, and hinder it from
returning into Italy, where the army of the King, on the contrary, would have abundance, and
where it would cut off all succour from the others.

This proposition dismayed to the last degree our officers, who hoped at least to reap the fruit
of this disaster by returning to France with the money with which they were gorged.  La Feuillade
opposed it with so much impatience, that the Prince, exasperated by an effrontery so sustained,
told him to hold his peace and let others speak.  Others did speak, but only one was for following
the counsel of M. d'Orleans.  Feeling himself now, however, the master, he stopped all further
discussion, and gave orders that the retreat to Italy should commence.  This was all he could
do.  His body and his brain were equally exhausted.  After having waited some little time,
he was compelled to throw himself into a post-chaise, and in that to continue the journey.

The officers obeyed his orders most unwillingly.  They murmured amongst each other so loudly
that the Duc d'Orleans, justly irritated by so much opposition to his will, made them hold
their peace.  The retreat continued.  But it was decreed that the spirit of error and vertigo
should ruin us and save the allies.  As the army was about to cross the bridge over the Ticino,
and march into Italy, information was brought to M. d'Orleans, that the enemy occupied the
roads by which it was indispensable to pass.  M. d'Orleans, not believing this intelligence,
persisted in going forward.  Our officers, thus foiled, for it was known afterwards that the
story was their invention, and that the passes were entirely free, hit upon another expedient.
They declared there were no more provisions or ammunition, and that it was accordingly impossible
to go into Italy.  M. d'Orleans, worn out by so much criminal disobedience, and weakened by
his wound, could hold out no longer.  He threw himself back in the chaise, and said they might
go where they would.  The army therefore turned about, and directed itself towards Pignerol,
losing many equipages from our rear-guard during the night in the mountains, although that
rear-guard was protected by Albergotti, and was not annoyed by the enemy.

The joy of the enemy at their success was unbounded.  They could scarcely believe in it.  Their
army was just at its last gasp.  They had not more than four days' supply of powder left in
the place.  After the victory, M. de Savoie and Prince Eugene lost no time in idle rejoicings.
They thought only how to profit by a success so unheard of and so unexpected. They retook rapidly
all the places in Piedmont and Lombardy that we occupied, and we had no power to prevent them.

