I have noticed, that when the seabreeze sets in from a point to the westward of South-West,
it does not blow so strong, and generally lulls at sunset; but if more southerly, or from South-South-West,
it is a fiery breeze, and often lasts until midnight.

During the prevalence of these strong seabreezes, communication between Gage Road and the shore
is very inconvenient--particularly for laden boats.

In March, the seabreezes are not nearly so strong, but are generally moderate, and not unfrequently
bring in thick misty weather from southwards, with drizzling rain.

Generally speaking, when the seabreezes are the strongest, the land winds are light, and vice
versa.

I cannot speak from experience of the winds or weather during the month of April, at Swan River,
but have been told that the seabreezes are moderate, and the land winds of longer duration;
calms are frequent--and the weather altogether seems to indicate the breaking up of the summer
season; light winds are occasionally felt from the northward, with a dull, gloomy appearance
between that point and South-West.

May is the month in which the winter weather fairly sets in, and it rarely happens that the
middle of this month passes without the rains having commenced. This season seems to vary but
little as to the time and manner of setting in--it is ushered in by blowing weather, from about
North-North-East, the wind gradually veering round to the westward, as it increases in strength.
The first of this weather usually lasts from a week to fourteen days; then comes an interval
of fine weather, generally of a fortnight's duration, and sometimes a month; after which the
rains set in more constant, and the intervals of fine weather are shorter; this weather lasts
until October, and at times throughout that month.

During the intervals of fine weather the climate is delightful, and the country has a fresh
and pleasing appearance; land and seabreezes are as regular as in summer, with the exception,
that the latter are much more moderate.

The North-West gales that occasionally occur during the winter months, on the southern parts
of the west coast of Australia, are probably felt as far north as Shark's Bay. They blow with
great violence, and are accompanied by dark, gloomy weather, and rain. It is then unsafe to
be near the land--as the gale that commences at North-North-East, invariably veers to the westward,
making a lee shore of the whole line of coast, and between West-North-West and West-South-West
blows the hardest.

Fortunately these gales give ample warning; the barometer always foretells their approach,
and generally begins to fall three or four days before the commencement of the gale--besides
which, there are other never-failing indications of a northerly wind, such as, the change of
the current, which (owing to the prevailing southerly winds) usually sets to the northward,
but runs strong to the southward during northerly winds--frequently preceding them, and giving
more timely notice than the barometer.

A rising of the water is likewise a certain prognostic of a northerly wind; and has been invariably
noticed, at Swan River, to precede all gales from that quarter--this, of course, can only be
observed while at anchor on the coast.

Another, and perhaps equally certain sign of approaching bad weather, during the winter season
(and which is almost certain to be from the northward) is the strength of the North-East winds--as
it has been observed, that when the land winds blow strong, particularly from the North-East
and the seabreezes are light, with a falling barometer, a gale from the northward will follow.
Perhaps these latter remarks, are only applicable to that distance from the shore, where a
ship will be within the influence of the land and seabreezes; but as I conceive the limit of
that distance to be full 30 miles off shore, a notice of such a symptom of approaching bad
weather, may not be altogether useless. I am of opinion, that land winds are at times felt
as far off shore as the edge of soundings, which is not less than 30 miles, and generally between
that and 40.

(In latitude 30 degrees 25 minutes South and 65 miles from the land, soundings were got from
the Beagle, with 185 fathoms of line, upon a coral bottom. Between Swan River and Houtman's
Abrolhos, soundings may be had at a greater distance from the land, than off any other part
of the west coast.)

The North-West gales are of longer duration, in the latitude of Swan River, and south of that,
than they are to the northward; they do not appear to be entirely confined to the winter months,
as I am told that a very heavy one was experienced at Swan River, early in March, 1832, and
on the 13th December, 1839, the Beagle experienced a strong breeze from the northward, while
at anchor in Gage Road, in consequence of which, it was considered necessary to let go an extra
anchor.

As it may be satisfactory to know more particularly the progress of these gales, and the effect
they have upon the barometer and sympiesometer, I give the details of two that were experienced
in H.M.S. Beagle, one at Swan River, in the beginning of June 1838, the other at Houtman's
Abrolhos, in the beginning of May 1840; they may be taken as fair criterions of the strength
and duration of these gales, the latter having been experienced, probably, within 5 degrees
of their northern limit, and the former near the southern extreme of the west coast.

As our barometer had been broken in March 1838, the register of a sympiesometer will be given
in describing the gale of June in that year; but as this instrument had been found (by comparison
with the barometer) to act exceedingly well, it will be sufficient for our purpose; the GENERAL
use of a marine barometer being merely that of a weather glass, for which purpose a sympiesometer
is equally good, and more sensitive.

For the gale of 1840, the register of a barometer is shown, which, although 0.2 too low, will
serve to show the effect upon the mercury.

At Swan River, on the 24th of May, 1838, the wind was strong and squally from North-East by
North; sympiesometer standing at 30.74. During the day the oil commenced to fall, and continued
falling slowly until the 30th, when it was 30.16; during the greater part of this interval,
the winds were light, generally from some eastern point in the morning, and going round the
compass, by north and west, during the day; the nights were mostly calm, a heavy bank of clouds
was collecting between North-North-East and South-West and the whole western horizon had a
gloomy appearance. On the evening of the 30th, the water had risen considerably at the anchorage,
and the stream ran to the southward; a fresh breeze also set in from North-East and gradually
veered to the northward, as it increased in strength. On the 31st it blew hard all day, between
North-North-East and North-North-West, with dark squally weather, much lightning in South-West
and heavy rain, that continued all night. On June the 1st, the gale was at its height, and
at 8 A.M. (the sympiesometer having fallen to 29.93) was blowing a hard gale, with heavy squalls
and rain, from North-West; towards noon the wind veered to west, but still blew very hard;
the sympiesometer now began to rise, and in the evening the wind was West-South-West and had
moderated considerably, the weather was also clearer, although heavy clouds still hung on the
western horizon.

The next morning (the 2nd) the sympiesometer had risen to 30.26; but this was much too sudden
a rise (0.33 in 24 hours) to allow us to suppose, that the favourable change in the weather
was to be of long continuance; during the day the oil began to fall again, and the wind veered
to West and North-West and on the 3rd blew harder than ever, with heavy rain, thunder, and
lightning; and, with the exception of occasional intervals, when the wind moderated, this weather
continued until the 10th. The wind during this time was variable, between North-North-West
and West-South-West, the sympiesometer between 29.81 and 30.16--falling with the North-West
winds, and rising as the wind veered to west and West-South-West.

This gale, which may be said to have been of ten days' continuance, caused a very heavy sea
upon the coast; the oldest residents at Swan River said they had never experienced so heavy
a sea before. On the 10th the glass commenced to rise steadily, and the weather was fine, with
light variable winds, until the Beagle sailed (on the 20th).

Owing to the security of Owen's anchorage, and the good quality of the bottom, the Beagle rode
out this bad weather, without causing the slightest apprehension to anyone on board; but had
a merchant vessel been in Gage Road, in all probability, she would have added one more to the
list of wrecks, that have already done too much in prejudicing strangers against the Swan River
settlement.

The gale of May, 1840, at Houtman's Abrolhos, commenced in a similar manner with that already
described, but being in a lower latitude, was of shorter duration, and the indications did
not precede it such a length of time; still they were in every respect similar.

This gale commenced on the 2nd of May, in the evening, and lasted until the evening of the
4th. on April the 29th, the barometer stood at 30.17 (having been some days steadily high);
it then commenced to fall, and on the evening of May the 2nd, was 29.86; during this interval
we daily experienced strong East-North-East and North-East winds; they generally commenced
after midnight, and lasted until noon; a bank of clouds was also collecting in the North-West
and there was occasional lightning in that quarter; the early part of May the 2nd was nearly
calm, and there was a heavy bank of clouds between North and South-West. After noon a light
breeze sprang up from North-West which gradually freshened; and during the night the barometer
fell 17-hundredths.

At sunrise on May the 3rd, there was a fresh breeze from North-North-West and the weather had
a very dull and gloomy appearance, the wind increasing rapidly, and by noon it blew a heavy
gale at West-North-West; the barometer had fallen to 29.58, at which it continued until midnight,
when the wind drew to the southward of west, and the mercury began to rise. The gale continued
unabated, with squalls and rain, until noon of the 4th, although the barometer had been rising
since the previous midnight; in the afternoon the wind moderated, and the weather became fine.

From this it would appear that the barometer gives ample warning of an approaching North-West
gale, as it had been falling nearly four days before the commencement of the bad weather, this
alone ought to be sufficient to put a man upon his guard if near the shore. Between April the
29th (the first day of the fresh north-easterly winds) and May the 3rd (when the gale was at
its height, and the wind began to draw to the southward of west) the mercury had fallen 6-tenths.
The change of current did not precede the wind, but changed with it; when the gale was strong
from North-West and West-North-West the current ran a knot an hour to the South-East, and when
the wind changed to South-West it ran with the same velocity to the North-East.

The west coast of New Holland is at times visited by sudden squalls, resembling hurricanes.
I was told by the master of an American whaler, that in March 1839, when in company with several
whalers off Sharks' Bay, he experienced some very bad weather, which came on suddenly, without
having given any previous warning, but it was not of long continuance; the gusts of wind were
very violent, shifting suddenly to all points of the compass. Some of the ships suffered considerable
damage, in loss of topmasts, etc. others in sails, but all more or less. I think the first
squall was from North-East off the land.

The American whalers that resort to the west coast of Australia, are upon different parts of
it at all seasons of the year; their range is between the parallel of 10 and 50 degrees of
south latitude. In the summer they fish to the southward, and at that season visit Swan River
and King George's Sound, for refreshments; but during the winter months they are rarely to
the southward of Sharks' Bay; numbers are to be met off the North-West Cape.

Between the parallels of 40 and 45 degrees they meet much bad weather, as it is generally blowing
strong with a heavy sea; but between 45 and 50 degrees the weather is much more settled, and
finer. November is said to be generally the finest of the summer months, the winds are mostly
moderate, and the weather more settled than at other periods.

Two gales that were experienced by the Beagle in November 1837, between the islands of St.
Paul and Amsterdam and Swan River, will serve to show the different effects upon the barometer
by gales from opposite quarters, one being from North-West and the other from South-East.

On November the 1st, the barometer stood at 29.90, having been gradually rising for some days
previous to that, and the wind had been fresh between north and west. After 8 P.M. on the 1st,
the mercury began to fall, and on the 2nd, the wind was strong from North-North-West--barometer
falling all day. During the night it blew a heavy gale, and the barometer fell to 29.34. On
the morning of the 3rd the wind veered to the westward, and the mercury began to rise, the
weather also became more moderate, and gradually fine.

On the 8th of the same month, the barometer was 30.05 at 8 P.M. with fine weather, wind South-East
by East, it then commenced to fall, and at 8 P.M. on the 9th was 29.80, and blowing a heavy
gale at South-East, which continued all night, and until 8 P.M. on the 10th, at which time
it became more moderate, and the barometer began to rise.

What a different effect these gales had on the barometer; that from the North-West causing
the mercury to fall nearly 6-tenths, whereas, the last, from South-East only lowered it 2-tenths,
and 5-hundredths; they were of equal strength and duration, and both accompanied by heavy rain.

...

ON THE NORTH-WEST COAST OF AUSTRALIA.

The great extent of the North-West coast of Australia, lying as it does between the parallels
of 12 and 22 degrees of south latitude, no doubt subjects it to a variety of winds and weather,
that is not experienced on the north coast; although, on that part of it north of the parallel
of 15 degrees, there is probably much similarity.

As I cannot speak with certainty of the winds and weather that prevail on this extent of coast,
at all seasons of the year, the following remarks will be confined to such portions of it as
were visited by the Beagle, and will apply only to the particular seasons in which she was
employed there.

To the eastward of the meridian of 123 degrees east longitude, and at a short distance from
the land, the east and west monsoons will be found regular; but the easterly monsoon is very
light to the southward of 13 degrees latitude.

Between Clarence Straits and Cambridge Gulf, and during the months of September, October, November,
and December, the wind during the day is a seabreeze between North-West and West. In September,
and until the middle of October, we found the wind as follows: About sunrise, a light breeze
sprang up from South-East or East which gradually drew to the northward towards the middle
of the day, in the afternoon, a seabreeze from North-West or west, becoming light towards sunset,
but freshening again soon after that, and blowing a moderate and pleasant breeze between North-West
and South-West all night.

During the latter part of the period (November and December) the winds were more constantly
from the West or West-North-West, blowing from that quarter throughout the twenty-four hours,
but much more moderate at night than during the day; at full and change of the moon, the breezes
were much stronger than at other times, and upon one or two occasions, at the time of the moon's
quartering, there was a light breeze from South-East in the morning.

During the month of November, the ship was at anchor, twelve miles within the entrance to Victoria
River, and sixty-five from Point Pearce, on the sea coast. For the first three weeks of this
time, the seabreeze was regular from North-West or West-North-West, generally setting in about
noon, and lasting the greater part of the night; in the mornings, and until noon, it was mostly
calm, or very light winds from the northward. In the last week of this month the weather was
very unsettled and squally, with much thunder and lightning, and rain, the wind mostly between
South-East and North-East; after which, the westerly breezes set in again, and continued until
we left the coast in the middle of December.

During the whole of this period the westerly winds did not appear to come from any distance,
but to be merely local seabreezes, as they did not cause any sea upon the coast, nor did they
reach far in shore; as we frequently observed smoke at no great distance from the coast, rising
perpendicularly, or influenced by a light south-easterly wind, and this at times when the seabreeze
was strong. From this it would appear, that the westerly monsoon had not reached so far to
the southward, nor did we find, after sailing from Point Pearce, that the winds were at all
steady from the westward, until we had reached to the northward of Cape Londonderry, which
is in latitude 13 degrees 45 minutes South. To the northward of this, the winds were from the
westward, accompanied by fine weather during the day to the southward of that point--sometimes
as far as South-West--and at night inclining to the northward of west, but generally speaking,
we found the wind to the southward of west, and the current running from half a mile to a mile
an hour to the North or North-North-East.

The currents between New Holland and Timor, are said to run to the westward, during the easterly
monsoon--and in the opposite direction with the westerly; but they seem to be influenced by
every trifling change of wind--as on the 20th, 21st, 22nd, and 23rd of December (when the westerly
monsoon might be supposed at its height) we experienced light, variable winds, between South-East
and East-North-East--during which period the current ran to the westward--at times, a knot
an hour. We were then between the parallels of 11 1/2 and 13 degrees, south of which we experienced
winds between South-South-West and West until we were to the southward of the North-West Cape,
when they became more southerly, and at times South-South-East (in January). Throughout all
this period, the weather was fine, and different from what was expected during the westerly
monsoon.

All that part of the North-West coast of New Holland, between the North-West Cape, and Cape
Londonderry, appears to be very much subjected to light winds, particularly during the easterly
monsoon, the strength of which is not felt to the southward of 13 or 14 degrees of south latitude.
During the westerly monsoon, strong winds and gales from the North-West at times blow upon
the coast, but they do not appear to be frequent. The strongest winds at this season, are the
heavy squalls between East-South-East and North-East (and which may with propriety be termed
hurricane squalls); fortunately they are not of long duration, rarely lasting over two hours.
They give ample warning of their approach, by the gathering of a heavy bank of clouds between
North-East and South-East, and much lightning in that quarter. Appearances such as these frequently
precede the squall some days, but coming gradually nearer (to the westward). The barometer
shows no indication of approaching bad weather, being only acted upon by the immediate change;
these squalls mostly occur in the night, or between sunset and sunrise.

During the latter part of the westerly monsoon, on that part of the coast between Cape Villaret
and Point Swan, we found the weather remarkably fine, with the exception of an occasional short,
but severe squall, from the eastward. During the day there was generally a moderate seabreeze
between North-West and South-West commencing in the forenoon, and lasting sometimes nearly
until midnight--on which occasions it blew strongest during the night); during the other part
of the twenty-four hours the wind was light from the eastward or calm. Captain King experienced
similar weather in August.

It was not until we had reached Point Swan, in latitude 16 degrees 20 minutes South that we
experienced any of the bad weather that is usually met with, at this season of the year, a
few degrees to the northward; it commenced in the last week of January, and continued until
the middle of February, during which period, there were some strong gales from the westward,
between North-West and South-West accompanied by heavy rain, thunder and lightning; but although
there was a good deal of dirty weather, it was by no means constant, as there were occasional
intervals of fine weather, with moderate westerly winds. This was the only bad weather on this
part of the coast, during the season, that could be said to be caused by the westerly monsoon,
if we except the East-South-East squalls, that do not occur in the easterly monsoon.

While this weather lasted, the easterly squalls were quite suspended, and the heavy bank of
clouds that had generally been noticed in the South-East had dispersed for the time; but after
the strong westerly winds had ceased, the weather was generally fine, and the wind mostly from
some western point; there were occasional showers, and the clouds in the eastern horizon resumed
their threatening appearance, bringing some hard squalls, and rain from that quarter. In the
middle of March (being the time when equinoctial gales are looked for in most parts of the
world) there were two or three days of squally, unsettled weather, with rain, that seemed to
terminate the season of the westerly monsoon. After the 1st of April, the weather was invariably
fine, and the easterly squalls had ceased to trouble us; land and seabreezes became regular,
and the easterly monsoon had no doubt set in to the northward; the strongest breezes now were
from South-East but, generally speaking, the winds were very light near the land.

It does not appear that the westerly monsoon blows with any degree of regularity, to the southward
of the 13th degree of south latitude; although for some degrees south of that, the weather
is influenced by it, and winds between West-North-West and South-West will be experienced,
and from the appearances on many parts of the coast, there are no doubt strong gales at times
from the westward, that send in a very heavy sea. During the easterly monsoon, the weather
is fine on the North-West coast, particularly in the months of May, June, July, and August;
this is undoubtedly the best time for visiting it; land and seabreezes are regular, and the
temperature is very agreeable.

