The world has only one Washington.  At sixteen he was county surveyor, the support of his widowed
mother; at nineteen he was military inspector, with the rank of major; at twenty the governor
of Virginia sent him six hundred miles to ask the commander of the French forces "by what authority
he had invaded the king's dominions"; at twenty-two he was colonel in command of a regiment
under General Braddock, and in the absence of a chaplain he read prayers daily himself.  He
saved the remnant of that ill-fated army from annihilation, and fifteen years after an aged
Indian chief came to see the man at whom he had fired many times and who was protected by the
Great Spirit.  At his entrance as a member of the legislature of Virginia, the speaker greeted
him with thanks for his military services.  Washington arose to reply and blushed and stammered.
The speaker said, "Mr. Washington, your modesty only equals your valor."  He was a member of
the first Continental Congress of whom Patrick Henry said, "Mr. Rutledge, of South Carolina,
is the great orator, but for solid information and sound judgement Col. Washington is unquestionably
the greatest man on that floor."  No pecuniary consideration would tempt me to accept this
position.  I will keep an exact account of my expenses, those I doubt not you will discharge.
I ask no more."  The nation applauded the prudence, the wisdom, the bravery and patriotism
of Washington.  Frederick the Great said, "His achievements are the most brilliant in military
annals."  Napoleon directed that the standard of the French army should be hung with crape
at his death.  Fox said of him in the British Parliament, "Illustrious man, it has been reserved
for him to run the race of glory without the smallest interruption to his course."  But the
noblest eulogy ever uttered were the words of Gen. Henry Lee: "First in war, first in peace
and first in the hearts of his countrymen."  I have retired from all public employment and
tread the walks of private life with heartfelt satisfaction."  The country would not permit
it.  He had refused to be a candidate for the office of president and accepted the nation's
unanimous call with a heavy heart.  His last act before leaving for New York was to visit his
aged mother, then eighty-two, and in the last year of her life.  We can picture that tender
farewell to one to whom he owed under God that beautiful faith which shed glory on his life.
The journey to New York was one continued ovation.  His Virginia neighbors and friend gave
him a God-speed and benediction. A hairdresser was murdered in his kitchen where he was sitting with
a child on each knee. A paralytic was murdered in his garden. After this came the general sack of
the town. Many of the inhabitants who escaped the massacre were kept as prisoners and compelled
to clear the houses of corpses and bury them in trenches. These prisoners were subsequently
used as a shelter and protection for a pontoon bridge which the Germans had built across the
river, and were so used to prevent the Belgian forts from firing upon it.

A few days later the Germans celebrated a Fête Nocturne in the square. Hot wine, looted in the
town, was drunk, and the women were compelled to give three cheers
for the Kaiser and to sing "Deutschland über Alles."

NAMUR DISTRICT.  In all the churches of New York there have been prayers for the new
government and its chosen head.  The streets swarm with people as the hour of noon approaches.
Every house-top and porch and window near to Federal Hall is packed with a dense mass.  The
president has been presented to the two houses of Congress.  The procession is formed. Washington
follows the senators and representatives to the balcony. Around and behind him are his staff
and distinguished patriots of the Revolution.  Every eye is fixed on the stately, majestic
man.  A little over six feet high, his form perfect in outline and figure, a florid complexion,
dark blue eyes deeply set, his rich brown hair now tinged with gray, firm jaws and broad nostrils,
lighted by a benignant expression.  Such was the Father of his Country.  The brave soldier
trembles with emotion as the chancellor of the State of New York reads the oath; the hand of
Washington is on the open Bible.  Was it a providence that they rested on the words, "His hands
were made strong by the mighty God of Israel?"  The secretary would have raised the sacred
book to the president's lips.  Washington said solemnly, "I swear, so help me God," and then
bowed reverently kissed the book.  He went to the senate chamber, and with stammering words,
for his heart was almost too full for utterance, he delivered his inaugural address, and then
turning to his friends said, "We will go to St. Paul's Church for prayers."  It had been the
habit of his life.  His pastor, Rev. Lee Massey, said, "No company ever withheld him from church."'
His secretary, Harrison, said, "Whenever the general could be spared from the camp on the Sabbath,
he never failed to ride to some neighboring church to join in the worship of God."  He claimed
no praise for his matchless victories, but reverently gave all the glory to the blessing and
protection of God.  He knew, in the words of my friend Robert C. Winthrop, that "There can
be no independence of God."  The poet will sing and the orator describe eloquently the pageant
of that day, but no incident will so touch the Christian's heart as the first act of the president
of the United States, kneeling reverently with his fellow-citizens in the public worship of
God.  The service which had been set forth and was this day used in St. Paul's Church by Bishop
Provost, also a patriot of the Revolution, and one who had suffered for his country's sake,
was substantially the same used by us to-day.  Washington assumed office in the midst of dangers. The
other Pepper is called Chilpaclagua, which hath a broad huske, and this is not so biting as the first;
nor so gentle as the last, and is that, which is usually put into the Chocolate.
There are also other ingredients, which are used in this Confection.  It is in state of probation.  You alone can
give it stability."  There was a stormy sea before the new ship of state.  The bitter hatreds
between Federalist and anti-Federalist were not healed.  Two states had not ratified the Constitution--there
were tokens in more than one direction of rebellion. Without on dollar in the treasury, we
were eighty millions in debt.  The pirates of Morocco had destroyed our commerce in the Mediterranean,
Spain threatened the valley of the Mississippi.  Our relations with England were full of bitter
memories; a country larger than Europe was to be protected, and we had a standing army of only
600 men.  Time forbids my reading you the words of wisdom, "apples of gold in pictures of silver,"
of Washington's inaugural and farewell addresses.  I wish I had time to tell how, with a prophet's
eye, he saw the future of the West, and again and again urged the opening of lines of commerce
to bind East and West together.  After eight years of wise rule, such as befitted "the Father
of our Country," he retired to the shades of Mt. Vernon, to be, as he had been through life,
the helper of the helpless, the friend of the needy and the almoner of God.  On the 12th of
December, 1799, he was exposed to a storm of sleet and rain, the severest form of quinsy set
in; two days later, the 14th of December, he died.  As friends stood weeping around his death-bed,
he said with a smile, "O don't, don't; I am dying, but thank God I am not afraid to die." 
As the hour of his death drew near he asked to be left alone.  They all went out and left him
with God. There are lessons for our hearts to-day.