Stock is the basis of all soups made from meat, and is really the juice of the meat extracted
by long and gentle simmering. In making stock for soup always use an agate or porcelain-lined
stock pot. Use one quart of cold water to each pound of meat and bone. Use cheap cuts of meat
for soup stock. Excellent stock may be made from bones and trimmings of meat and poultry. Wash
soup bones and stewing meat quickly in cold water. Never allow a roast or piece of stewing
meat to lie for a second in water. Aunt Sarah did not think that wiping meat with a damp cloth
was all that was necessary (although many wise and good cooks to the contrary). Place meat
and soup bones in a stock pot, pour over the requisite amount of soft, cold water to extract
the juice and nutritive quality of the meat; allow it to come to a boil, then stand back on
the range, where it will just simmer for 3 or 4 hours. Then add a sliced onion, several sprigs
of parsley, small pieces of chopped celery tops, well-scraped roots of celery, and allow to
simmer three-quarters of an hour longer. Season well with salt and pepper, 1 level teaspoonful
of salt will season 1 quart of soup. Strain through a fine sieve, stand aside, and when cool
remove from lop the solid cake of fat which had formed and use for frying after it has been
clarified. It is surprising to know the variety of soups made possible by the addition of a
small quantity of vegetables or cereals to stock. A couple tablespoonfuls of rice or barley
added to well-seasoned stock and you have rice or barley soup. A small quantity of stewed,
sweet corn or noodles, frequently "left-overs," finely diced or grated carrots, potatoes, celery
or onions, and you have a vegetable soup. Strain the half can of tomatoes, a "left-over" from
dinner, add a tablespoonful of butter, a seasoning of salt and pepper, thicken to a creamy
consistency with a little cornstarch, add to cup of soup stock, serve with croutons of bread
or crackers, and you have an appetizing addition to dinner or lunch.

The possibilities for utilizing left-overs are almost endless. The economically-inclined housewife
will be surprised to find how easily she may add to the stock pot by adding left-over undesirable
pieces of meat and small quantities of vegetables. One or two spoonfuls of cold left-over oatmeal
may also be added to soup with advantage, occasionally. Always remove the cake of fat which
forms on top of soup as soon as cooled, as soup will turn sour more quickly if it is allowed
to remain. If soup stock be kept several days in summer time, heat it each day to prevent souring.

Pieces of celery, onion, parsley, beans and peas may all be added to soup to make it more palatable.
Also fine noodles. The yolk of a hard-boiled egg dropped into the soup kettle and heated through,
allowing one for each plate of soup served, is a quick and appetizing addition to a soup of
plain broth or consomme.

VEGETABLE SOUP

Slice thinly 3 potatoes, 3 carrots, 3 turnips, the undesirable parts of 2 heads of celery,
2 stalks of parsley and 3 onions. Cook the onions in a little butter until they turn a yellow
brown, then add the other ingredients. Season well with salt and black pepper, also a pinch
of red pepper. Put all together in a stew-pan, cover with three quarts of water, stand on range
and simmer about three hours. Strain soup into stew-pan, place on range, and when hot add Marklose
Balls.

MARKLOSE BALLS

Take marrow from uncooked beef soup bones, enough to fill 2 tablespoons, cut fine, add 2 eggs,
1 teaspoonful grated onion to flavor, pepper and salt, stiffen with 1 cup of bread crumbs,
shape into balls size of marbles, drop into hot broth and cook uncovered from 15 to 20 minutes.

Aunt Sarah purchased two good-sized soup bones containing considerable meat. After extracting
2 tablespoonfuls of marrow from the uncooked bones, she put the bones in a stew-pan with a
couple of quarts of water, a large onion, chopped fine, and a piece of celery, and cooked for
several hours, then skimmed off scum which arises on top of broth, removed the soup bones and
meat and added a couple of tablespoonfuls of grated carrot, pepper and salt to taste, cooked
a short time, and then added the marrow balls, a little chopped parsley and a couple of tablespoonfuls
of boiled rice. Two tablespoonfuls of marrow will make about 15 balls, with the addition of
crumbs, eggs, etc.

EGG BALLS FOR SOUP

Mash the yolks of 2 hard-boiled eggs fine and smooth with a little soft butter. Beat the white
of 1 egg, and add with about 2 tablespoonfuls of flour, salt and pepper. Mix all together.
Use a little flour to mold the mixture into balls the size of quite small marbles. Do not make
too stiff. Drop these into hot broth or soup and cook about five minutes. This quantity will
make 12 small balls.

"SUPPEE SCHWANGEN"

Mary was taught to make these by the Professor's wife. She beat together either 1 or 2 raw
eggs, 1/2 cup flour, 1 tablespoonful butter, a little salt, and just enough milk to thin the
mixture enough so it may be dropped by half teaspoonfuls into hot soup stock or broth. Cook
these small dumplings about 10 minutes. Serve in soup broth.

CREAM OF OYSTER BOUILLON

Put two dozen oysters through food chopper, cook oyster liquor and oysters together five minutes,
heat 1 pint milk and 1 tablespoon flour, mixed smooth with a little cold milk, and 1 tablespoonful
butter. Let come to a boil, watching carefully that it does not burn. Pour all together when
ready to serve. Serve in bouillon cups with crackers. This recipe was given Mary by a friend
in Philadelphia, who thought it unexcelled.

GERMAN NOODLE SOUP

Place about 3 pounds of cheap stewing beef in a cook-pot with sufficient water and cook several
hours, until meat is quite tender; season with salt and pepper. About an hour before serving
chop fine 3 medium-sized potatoes and 2 onions and cook in broth until tender. Ten or fifteen
minutes before serving add noodle.

To prepare noodles, break 2 fresh eggs in a bowl, fill 1/2 an egg shell with cold water, add
the eggs, and mix with flour as stiff as can conveniently be handled. Add a little salt to
flour. Divide dough into sheets, roll on bake-board, spread on cloth a short time and let dry,
but not until too brittle to roll into long, narrow rolls. Cut this with a sharp knife into
thin, thread-like slices, unroll, drop as many as wished into the stew-pan with the meat and
cook about 10 or 15 minutes. Place the meat on a platter and serve the remainder in soup plates.
The remaining noodles (not cooked) may be unrolled and dried and later cooked in boiling salted
water, drained and placed in a dish and browned butter, containing a few soft, browned crumbs,
poured over them when served. The very fine noodles are generally served with soup and the
broad or medium-sized ones served with brown butter Germans usually serve with a dish of noodles,
either stewed, dried prunes, or stewed raisins. Both are palatable and healthful.

CREAM OF CELERY

Cook 1 large stalk of celery, also the root cut up in dice, in 1 pint of water, 1/2 hour or
longer. Mash celery and put through a fine sieve. Add 1 pint of scalded milk, and thicken with
a tablespoonful of flour, mixed with a little cold milk. Add 2 tablespoonfuls of butter, pepper
and salt, and simmer a few minutes. Just before serving add a cup of whipped cream. Serve with
the soup, small "croutons" of bread.

OYSTER STEW

Rinse a stew-pan with cold water, then put in 1 pint of milk and let come to a boil. Heat 15
oysters in a little oyster liquor a few minutes, until the oysters curl up around the edges,
then add the oysters to one-half the hot milk, add a large tablespoonful of butter, season
well with salt and pepper, and when serving the stew add the half pint of boiling hot milk
remaining. This quantity makes two small stews. Serve crackers and pickled cabbage. When possible
use a mixture of sweet cream and milk for an oyster stew instead of all milk. An old cook told
Mary she always moistened half a teaspoonful of cornstarch and added to the stew just before
removing from the range to cause it to have a creamy consistency.

CLAM BROTH

Clam broth may be digested usually by the most delicate stomach. It can be bought in cans,
but the young housewife may like to know how to prepare it herself. Strain the juice from one-half
dozen clams and save. Remove objectionable parts from clams, cut in small pieces, add 1/2 pint
of cold water and the clam juice, let cook slowly about 10 minutes, strain and season with
pepper and salt, a little butter and milk, and serve hot.

TURKEY SOUP

Take broken-lip bones and undesirable pieces of roast turkey, such as neck, wings and left-over
pieces of bread filling, put in stew-pot, cover with water, add pieces of celery, sliced onion
and parsley, cook several hours, strain, and to the strained liquor add a couple tablespoonfuls
of boiled rice, season with salt and pepper and serve. Some of the cold turkey might also be
cut in small pieces and added to the soup.

CREAM OF PEA SOUP

Cook quarter peck of green peas until very tender, reserve one-half cup, press the remainder
through a sieve with the water in which they were boiled. Season with salt and pepper. Mix
1 tablespoonful of flour, 1 tablespoonful of butter with 1 cup of hot milk. Mix flour smooth
with a little cold milk before heating it. Cook all together a few minutes, then add the one
cup of peas reserved. If soup is too thick add a small quantity of milk or water.

TOMATO SOUP

One quart of canned tomatoes, 1 tablespoonful sugar, 1 onion, and a sprig of parsley, cut fine,
and 1 carrot and 2 cloves. Stew until soft enough to mash through a fine, wire sieve. Place
one quart of sweet milk on the stove to boil. Mix 1 large tablespoonful of cornstarch smooth,
with a little cold milk, and stir into the hot milk. Add 1 large tablespoonful of butler and
1/4 teaspoonful (good measure) of soda. Let cook one minute, until it thickens, add 1 teaspoonful
of salt. Do not add the milk to the strained tomatoes until ready to serve. Then serve at once.

FRAU SCHMIDTS CLAM SOUP

Chop 12 clams fine, add enough water to the clam broth to measure one quart, cook all together
about 15 minutes; add 3 pints of scalding hot milk, season with 1-1/2 tablespoonfuls butter
and salt and pepper to taste. Serve crackers with the soup.

CLAM CHOWDER

Cut 1/4 pound of rather "fat" smoked bacon in tiny pieces the size of dice; fry until brown
and crisp. Take 25 fresh clams, after having drained a short time in a colander, run through
a food chopper and place in ice chest until required. Pour the liquor from the clams into an
agate stew-pan; add 6 medium-sized potatoes and 4 medium-sized onions, all thinly sliced; also
add the crisp bits of bacon and fat, which had fried out from the bacon, to the clam juice.
Cook all together slowly or simmer 3 or 4 hours. Add water to the clam liquor occasionally
as required. Ten or fifteen minutes before serving add 1 cup of hot water and the chopped clams
(clam juice if too strong is liable to curdle milk). Allow clams to cook in the clam broth
10 to 15 minutes. Boil 2 quarts of sweet milk, and when ready to serve add the hot milk to
the chowder, also 1 teaspoonful of chopped parsley. One-half this quantity will serve a small
family. Serve crisp crackers and small pickels, and this chowder, served with a dessert, makes
an inexpensive, nourishing lunch.

BROWN POTATO CHOWDER

Put a pint of diced, raw potatoes in a stew-pan over the fire, cover with 1 quart of water,
to which a pinch of salt has been added. Cook until tender, but not fine, then add water so
that the water in the stew-pan will still measure one quart should some have boiled away. Place
a small iron fry-part on the range, containing 1 tablespoonful of sweet lard; when melted,
it should measure about 2 tablespoonfuls. Then add 4 tablespoonfuls of flour, a pinch of salt
and stir constantly, or rather mash the flour constantly with a spoon, being careful not to
allow it to scorch, until a rich brown; add this to the diced potatoes and the quart of water
in which they were boiled, stir until the consistency of thick cream, or like clam chowder.
Should there be a few, small lumps of the browned flour not dissolved in the chowder, they
will not detract from the taste of it; in fact, some are very fond of them. Perhaps some folks
would prefer this, more like a soup; then add more hot water and thin it, but be careful to
add more seasoning, as otherwise it would taste flat and unpalatable. Very few people know
the good flavor of browned flour. It has a flavor peculiarly its own, and does not taste of
lard at all. I would never advocate any seasoning except butter, but advise economical housewives
to try this, being very careful not to scorch the flour and fat while browning.

A mixture of butter and lard may be used in which to brown the flour should there be a prejudice
against the use of lard alone.

BEAN CHOWDER

Another palatable, cheap and easily prepared dish is called Bean Chowder. Small soup beans
were soaked over night in cold water. Pour off, add fresh water and cook until tender. Then
add browned flour (same as prepared for Potato Chowder) and the water in which the beans were
cooked. When ready to serve, the beans were added. More water may be added until broth is thin
enough for soup, then it would be called "brown bean soup."

BOUILLON

Buy a soup bone, cook with a chopped onion, one stalk of celery and a sprig of parsley until
meat falls from bone. Season with salt and pepper. Strain the broth into a bowl and stand aside
until perfectly cold. Then remove the cake of fat formed on top of soup and add it to drippings
for frying. The broth may be kept several days if poured into a glass jar and set on ice. When
wanted to serve, heat 1 pint of broth, add 2 tablespoonfuls of cream to yolks of 2 eggs. Stir
well. Pour boiling hot broth over the cream and yolks of eggs and serve at once in bouillon
cups. Serve crackers also. Do not cook mixture after cream and yolks of eggs have been added.
This is very nourishing.

FARMER'S RICE

One and one-half quarts of milk, poured into a double boiler and placed on the range to heat.
One cup of flour was placed in a bowl; into the flour 1 raw egg was dropped and stirred with
a knife until mixed, then rubbed between the fingers into fine rivels. It may take a little
more flour; the rivels should be dry enough to allow of being rubbed fine. When the milk commences
to boil drop the rivels in by handfuls, slowly, stirring constantly. Salt to taste. Let cook
15 minutes. Eat while hot, adding a small piece of butter as seasoning. This should be a little
thicker than ordinary rice soup.

PHILADELPHIA "PEPPER POT"

This recipe for far-famed "Philadelphia Pepper Pot" was given Mary by a friend living in the
Quaker City, a good cook, who vouched for its excellence:

The ingredients consist of the following:

1 knuckle of veal. 2 pounds of plain tripe. 2 pounds of honeycomb tripe. 1 large onion, 1 bunch
of pot-herbs. 4 medium-sized potatoes. 1 bay leaf--salt and cayenne pepper to season. 1/2 pound
of beef suet--and flour for dumplings. Wash thoroughly in cold water place in a kettle. Cover
with cold water and boil eight hours; then remove tripe from water, and when cold cut into
pieces about 3/4 of an inch square. The day following get a knuckle of veal, wash and cover
with cold water--about three quarts--bring slowly to the simmering point, skimming off the
scum which arises, simmer for three hours. Remove the meat from the bones, cut into small pieces,
strain broth and return it to the kettle. Add a bay leaf, one large onion, chopped, simmer
one hour; then add four medium-sized potatoes, cut like dice, and add to the broth. Wash a
bunch of pot-herbs, chop parsley (and add last), rub off the thyme leaves, cut red pepper in
half and add all to broth; then add meat and tripe and season with salt; if liked hot, use
a pinch of cayenne pepper. For the dumplings, take 1 cup of beef suet, chopped fine, 2 cups
flour, pinch of salt, mix well together and moisten with enough cold water to allow of their
being molded or rolled into tiny dumplings, the size of a small marble. Flour these well to
prevent sticking together. When all are prepared drop into soup, simmer a few minutes, add
parsley and serve at once.

GERMAN VEGETABLE SOUP

Take 6 potatoes, half the quantity of onions, carrots, turnips, cabbage and a stalk of celery,
cut up into dice-shaped pieces, place all in a stew-pan and cover with a couple quarts of hot
water. Let cook about two hours, until all the vegetables are tender, then add 1 tablespoonful
of butter, a large cup of milk, and about a tablespoonful of flour mixed smooth with a little
cold milk, cook a few minutes, add a tablespoonful minced parsley, and serve.

A CHEAP RICE AND TOMATO SOUP

Take one pint of rice water which has been drained from one cupful of rice boiled in 2-1/2
quarts of water 25 minutes (the rice to be used in other ways), and after the rice has drained
in a sieve add to the rice water 1 cup stewed, strained tomatoes (measure after being strained),
1 teaspoonful butter, 1 teaspoonful flour mixed with a little cold water, salt, pepper, and
1 tablespoonful of the cooked rice, and you have a palatable soup, as the water in which the
rice was boiled is said to be more nutritious than the rice.

FISH, CLAMS AND OYSTER (BONED SHAD)

How many young cooks know how to bone a shad? It is a very simple process, and one becomes
quite expert after one or two trials. And it fully repays one for the extra time and trouble
taken, in the satisfaction experienced by being able to serve fish without bones. With a sharp
knife cut the fish open along the back bone on the outside of the fish, but do not cut through
the bone, then carefully cut the fish loose along the back bone on each side, cut the centre
bone away with the smaller bones branching out on each side attached. Cut the shad into sizable
pieces after being washed in cold water and dried on a cloth to take up all the moisture. Dip
pieces of fish into white of egg containing a teaspoonful of water, roll in fine, dried bread
crumbs, season with salt and pepper, drop in hot fat, and fry a rich brown. Serve on a platter,
surrounded by a border of parsley.

Some small portions of the fish will adhere to the bones, however carefully the fish has been
boned. The meat may be picked from the bones after cooking in salt water until tender. Flake
the fish, and either make it into small patties or croquettes.

Shad roe should be parboiled first and then dredged with flour on both sides and fried in drippings
or a little butter.

CROQUETTES OF COLD, COOKED FISH

Shred or flake cold, cooked fish, which has been carefully picked from bones. To 2 cups of
fish add an equal amount of mashed potatoes, a small half cup of cold milk, 1 tablespoonful
butter, yolk of 1 egg, lightly beaten, 1 teaspoonful of chopped parsley, season with salt and
pepper. Mix all well together, and when cold, form in small croquettes. Dip into white of egg
containing 1 tablespoonful of water, roll in fine, dried bread crumbs and fry in hot fat. Shad,
salmon, codfish, or any kind of fish may be prepared this way, or prepare same as "Rice Croquettes,"
substituting-fish for rice.

SHAD ROE

