I have already given you an account of the embarkation, of my visits to him while the vessel
remained in the river, and of our last sad, silent parting; and Mr. Ranney has finished the
picture. You will find in this closing part, some dark shadows, that will give you pain; but
you must remember that his present felicity is enhanced by those very sufferings, and we should
regret nothing that serves to brighten his crown in glory. I ought also to add, that I have
gained pleasanter impressions in conversation with Mr. R. than from his written account; but
it would be difficult to convey them to you; and, as he whom they concern was accustomed to
say of similar things, "you will learn it all in heaven."

During the last hour of your sainted brother's life, Mr. Ranney bent over him and held his
hand; while poor Pinapah stood at a little distance weeping bitterly. The table had been spread
in the cuddy, as usual, and the officers did not know what was passing in the cabin, till summoned
to dinner. Then they gathered about the door, and watched the closing scene with solemn reverence.
Now--thanks to a merciful God! his pains had left him, not a momentary spasm disturbed his
placid face, nor did the contraction of a muscle denote the least degree of suffering; the
agony of death was passed, and his wearied spirit was turning to its rest in the bosom of his
Saviour. From time to time, he pressed the hand in which his own was resting, his clasp losing
in force at each successive pressure; while his shortened breath (though there was no struggle,
no gasping, as if it came and went with difficulty) gradually grew softer and fainter, until
it died upon the air--and he was gone. Mr. Ranney closed the eyes, and composed the passive
limbs,--the ship's officers stole softly from the door, and the neglected meal was left upon
the board untasted.

They lowered him to his ocean-grave without a prayer; for his freed spirit had soared above
the reach of earthly intercession, and to the foreigners who stood around, it would have been
a senseless form. And there they left him in his unquiet sepulchre; but it matters little,
for we know that while the unconscious clay is "drifting on the shifting currents of the restless
main," nothing can disturb the hallowed rest of the immortal spirit. Neither could he have
a more fitting monument, than the blue waves which visit every coast; for his warm sympathies
went forth to the ends of the earth, and included the whole family of man. It is all as God
would have it, and our duty is but to bend meekly to his will, and wait, in faith and patience,
till we also shall be summoned home.

CHAPTER II.

CONCLUSION.

    * * * * "Last scene of all
    To close this sad, eventful history."

Scarcely four years ago,--in sickness and loneliness, and sad suspense,--in her Burman home,
from which had departed (alas, forever!) its light and head--Emily C. Judson penned the foregoing
beautiful letter. Read again its closing sentence,[11] and note how short a time she has "waited
in faith and patience;" how soon she has been "summoned home." For her, it would be wrong for
us to mourn. She has rejoined that circle, which she loved so well on earth, in a land where

    "Sickness and sorrow, pain and death
      Are felt and feared no more."

But to her aged parents--to the little flock to whom she was as the tenderest mother--to the
literary world, which enjoyed the ripe fruits of her genius--to the Christian world, of which
she was a shining ornament and glory, her loss is irreparable.

But though one of the sweet fountains that well up here and there in our desert world, and
surround themselves with greenness, and beauty, and life, has been exhaled to heaven, still
it is refreshing to know that its streams, which made glad so many hearts, have not perished,
for they were of "living water, springing up" into immortality. The writer is lost to us; her
writings remain. By them "she being dead yet speaketh," and through them, whensoever we will,
she may talk with us.

Mrs. Judson's final malady was consumption, but for several years her health had been feeble.
One who saw her just before she left America says: "Looking upon her, we saw at once that it
was a spirit which had already outworn its frame--a slight, pale, delicate, and transparent
creature, every thought and feeling shining through, and every word and movement tremulous
with fragility. * * * We said farewell with no thought that she would ever return."

From her voyage across the ocean she suffered less than was apprehended, and for a time she
found the climate of India rather congenial than otherwise to her constitution. Her short residence
at Rangoon, whither her husband removed with his family soon after reaching Burmah, was indeed
a period of great suffering, and would have given a shock to a much hardier constitution. Her
narrative of their sufferings there, contained in the life of her husband, by Dr. Wayland,
excites our wonder that she survived them. But after their removal to Maulmain, she was restored
to comparative health.

A letter from her husband, written in the latter part of 1848, when her little Emily Frances,
her "bird," was one year old, gives a glowing picture of their happiness and their labors.
He playfully says: "Even 'the young romance writer' had made a little book, (Scripture questions,)
and she manages to conduct a Bible class, and native female prayer-meetings, so that I hope
she will yet come to some good."

But a letter written to Miss Anable, Philadelphia, in the spring of 1849, is in a different
strain: "A dark cloud is gathering round me. A crushing weight is upon me. I cannot resist
the dreadful conviction that dear Emily is in a settled and rapid decline." After speaking
of the many means he had unsuccessfully employed for her restoration, he says "The symptoms
are such that I have scarcely any hope left. * * * If a change to any place promised the least
relief, I would go anywhere. But we are here in the healthiest part of India, in the dry, warm
season, and she suffers so much at sea that a voyage could hardly be recommended for itself.
My only hope is, the doctor declares her lungs are not seriously affected. * * * When at Tavoy,
she made up her mind that she must die soon, and that is now her prevailing expectation; but
she contemplates the event with composure and resignation. * * * Though she feels that in her
circumstances, prolonged life is exceedingly desirable, she is quite willing to leave all at
the Savior's call. Praise be to God for his love to her." Some days later he adds: "Emily is
better. * * * But though the deadly-pressure is removed from my heart, I do not venture to
indulge any sanguine hopes after what I have seen. * * * Do remember us in your prayers."

The doctor's predictions proved correct; Mrs. Judson partially recovered from this attack,
although in August her husband writes: "Emily's health is very delicate--her hold on life very
precarious."

Alas! his own hold on life was more precarious still. In the following spring, the heart that
had beat for her so fondly and truly was consigned to its "unquiet sepulchre;" "the blue waves
which visit every coast" his only and "fitting monument;" while the object of his tender solicitude
was compelled to endure four months the agony of suspense as to his fate, terminated by the
sad certainty of his death.[12]

After the death of her husband, Mrs. Judson expressed a strong desire to remain in Burmah and
devote herself to the cause which was so dear to her husband's and her own heart. But her health,
always delicate, was so unfavorably affected by that climate that her physicians were of opinion
another rainy season would terminate her life. A numerous family of children, several of whom
were in this country, needed her maternal care and guidance; and for their sakes, as well as
for her own, she left Burmah in the winter following her husband's death, and arrived in this
country in October, 1851, after an absence of five years and three months. She found in the
beautiful village of Hamilton a sequestered and lovely home for herself and her family, which
consisted of her aged parents, the five children of Sarah B. Judson, and her own "bird," Emily
Frances. The cares of her family, and literary labors, here divided her time until the prostration
of her health by her last sickness, since which period she has "set her house in order,"[13]
and calmly awaited the summons of death. Peacefully and sweetly did the summons come, and on
the first of June she fell asleep in Jesus. With a sister poet she might have said--

    "I'm passing through the eternal gates,
      Ere June's sweet roses blow."

Nature had no more ardent lover than she; and it is pleasant to think that her dust is returning
to dust in a lovely village church-yard, under the "pure air of heaven, and amid the luxuriance
of flowers." Pleasant also is it to read that a vast concourse of sincere admirers and loving
friends, and among them all her children, eagerly testified their respect to her, by attending
her remains to their burial. To her glorified spirit such manifestations may indeed be of little
moment. Yet even her glorified spirit may feel a new thrill of pleasure in beholding, from
its serene sphere, the love that prompted them, and sought in the choice of her last resting-place
to give even to the unconscious dead one more proof of affection.

In so imperfect a sketch as ours, a delineation of the character of Mrs. Judson will not be
attempted. We would not, if we could, anticipate her memoir, which, it is said, will soon be
published. From documents open to the public, we shall merely glean such notices of her life
and character as shall induce in our readers a desire to know those details of her personal
history which will doubtless be found in her biography.

From what we can learn, we infer that the prominent traits in her character were strong affections,
energy, and disinterestedness. Of a slight and delicate frame and constitution, and a sensibility
almost amounting to sensitiveness, she at an early age engaged in duties and made sacrifices
scarcely expected from the robust and vigorous. And her exertions had for their end mainly
to benefit those she loved. Whether she taught in the district school, or in the higher seminary,
or wrote Sunday-school books, or contributed to literary periodicals, her affection for her
mother, and desire to lighten her burdens, seem to have stimulated her exertions and called
forth her powers. In her early religious experience, the same disinterestedness manifested
itself; for no sooner did she feel the renewing power of faith in her own heart, than she longed
to impart even to the distant heathen the same precious blessing.[14] Unselfish affection is
also, we think, a strongly marked trait in her married life. Not long after their arrival in
Burmah, Mr. Judson writes: "Emily loves the children as if they were her own." And again, nearly
two years later: "We are a deliciously happy family;" and again, "Emily has taken to my two
boys as if they were her own; so that we are a very happy family; not a happier, I am sure,
on the broad earth."

Another proof of the same trait, was her loving and sympathetic appreciation of a peculiar
trait in her husband, which, had her disposition been less noble, might have caused her some
annoyance. Of this trait Dr. Wayland thus speaks: "There was a feature in Dr. Judson's affection
as a husband, which was, I think, peculiar. He was, as it is well known, married three times,
and no man was ever more tenderly attached to each of his wives. The present affection, however,
seemed in no respect to lessen his affection for those for whom he mourned. He ever spoke of
those who had gone before, with undiminished interest. In one of his letters to his daughter,
after saying he did not believe there existed on earth so happy a family as his, he soon after
adds: 'My tears fall frequently for her who lies in her lone bed at St. Helena.' It was at
his suggestion that Mrs. Emily Judson wrote the life of her predecessor. He frequently refers
with delight to the time when he, and all those whom he so much loved, shall meet in Paradise,
no more to part, but to spend an eternity together in the presence of Christ. Those that were
once loved were loved to the end; but this did not prevent the bestowment of an equal amount
of affection on a successor." To quote the words of another, speaking of Mrs. Mary Ware, who,
placed in similar circumstances to Mrs. Judson, showed the same noble superiority to a common
weakness of her sex: "She had no sympathy and little respect for that narrow view which insists
that the departed and the living cannot share the same pure love of the same true heart. With
regard to a former wife--'she was the nearest and dearest to him'--she would say, 'how then
can I do otherwise than love and cherish her memory?' And her children she received as a precious
legacy; they were to her from the first moment like her own; neither she nor they knew any
distinction."

Since writing the above, we have seen a poem, entitled "Love's Last Wish," addressed to her
husband, by Mrs. Judson when she thought herself near death, which expresses so beautifully
the sentiment we have here attributed to her, that, did our limits permit, we would copy the
whole. We can only give an extract.

    "Thou say'st I'm fading day by day,
      And in thy face I read thy fears;
    It would be hard to pass away
      So soon, and leave thee to thy tears.
    I hoped to linger by thy side,
      Until thy homeward call was given,
    Then silent to my pillow glide,
      And wake upon thy breast in heaven.

           *       *       *       *       *

    "I do not ask to be forgot;
      I've read thy heart in every line,
    And know that there one sacred spot,
      Whate'er betide, will still be mine,
    For death but lays its mystic spell
    Upon affection's earthliness,--
    I know that, though thou lov'st me well,
      Thou lov'st thy sainted none the less.

           *       *       *       *       *

    And when at last we meet above,
      Where marriage vows are never spoken,
    We all shall form one chain of love,
      Whose spirit-links can ne'er be broken."

