It will perhaps be remembered that terrible things had been foretold as about to happen between
the Hartletop and Omnium families. Lady Dumbello had smiled whenever Mr Plantagenet Palliser
had spoken to her. Mr Palliser had confessed to himself that politics were not enough for him,
and that Love was necessary to make up the full complement of his happiness. Lord Dumbello
had frowned latterly when his eyes fell on the tall figure of the duke's heir; and the duke
himself,--that potentate, generally so mighty in his silence,--the duke himself had spoken.
Lady de Courcy and Lady Clandidlem were, both of them, absolutely certain that the thing had
been fully arranged. I am, therefore, perfectly justified in stating that the world was talking
about the loves,--the illicit loves,--of Mr Palliser and Lady Dumbello.

And the talking of the world found its way down to that respectable country parsonage in which
Lady Dumbello had been born, and from which she had been taken away to those noble halls which
she now graced by her presence. The talking of the world was heard at Plumstead Episcopi, where
still lived Archdeacon Grantly, the lady's father; and was heard also at the deanery of Barchester,
where lived the lady's aunt and grandfather. By whose ill-mannered tongue the rumour was spread
in these ecclesiastical regions it boots not now to tell. He was the first Jew to make extensive
use of Christian commentaries. He must be credited with the discovery that the study of the
Bible may be unsectarian, and that all who hold the Bible in honor
may join hands in elucidating it.

A younger contemporary of Abarbanel was also an apostle of the same view. This was Elias Levita
(1469-1549). He was a Grammarian, or Massorite, i.e. a student of
the tradition (Massorah) as to the Hebrew text of the Bible, and he
was an energetic teacher of Christians. In one moiety of her character, her habits, and her desires,
she had been wedded to things good in themselves,--to religion, to charity, and to honest-hearted
uprightness. It is true that the circumstances of her life had induced her to serve both God
and Mammon, and that, therefore, she had gloried greatly in the marriage of her daughter with
the heir of a marquis. She had revelled in the aristocratic elevation of her child, though
she continued to dispense books and catechisms with her own hands to the children of the labourers
of Plumstead Episcopi. When Griselda first became Lady Dumbello the mother feared somewhat
lest her child should find herself unequal to the exigencies of her new position. But the child
had proved herself more than equal to them, and had mounted up to a dizzy height of success,
which brought to the mother great glory and great fear also. She delighted to think that her
Griselda was great even among the daughters of marquises; but she trembled as she reflected
how deadly would be the fall from such a height--should there ever be a fall!

But she had never dreamed of such a fall as this! She would have said,--indeed, she often had
said,--to the archdeacon that Griselda's religious principles were too firmly fixed to be moved
by outward worldly matters; signifying, it may be, her conviction that that teaching of Plumstead
Episcopi had so fastened her daughter into a groove, that all the future teaching of Hartlebury
would not suffice to undo the fastenings. When she had thus boasted, no such idea as that of
her daughter running from her husband's house had ever come upon her; but she had alluded to
vices of a nature kindred to that vice,--to vices into which other aristocratic ladies sometimes
fell, who had been less firmly grooved; and her boastings had amounted to this,--that she herself
had so successfully served God and Mammon together, that her child might go forth and enjoy
all worldly things without risk of damage to things heavenly. Then came upon her this rumour.
The archdeacon told her in a hoarse whisper that he had been recommended to look to it, that
it was current through the world that Griselda was about to leave her husband.

"Nothing on earth shall make me believe it," said Mrs Grantly. But she sat alone in her drawing-room
afterwards and trembled. Then came her sister, Mrs Arabin, the dean's wife, over to the parsonage,
and in half-hidden words told the same story. She had heard it from Mrs Proudie, the bishop's
wife. "That woman is as false as the father of falsehoods," said Mrs Grantly. But she trembled
the more; and as she prepared her parish work, could think of nothing but her child. What would
be all her life to come, what would have been all that was past of her life, if this thing
should happen to her? She would not believe it; but yet she trembled the more as she thought
of her daughter's exaltation, and remembered that such things had been done in that world to
which Griselda now belonged. Ah! would it not have been better for them if they had not raised
their heads so high! And she walked out alone among the tombs of the neighbouring churchyard,
and stood over the grave in which had been laid the body of her other daughter. Could be it
that the fate of that one had been the happier.

Very few words were spoken on the subject between her and the archdeacon, and yet it seemed
agreed among them that something should be done. He went up to London, and saw his daughter,--not
daring, however, to mention such a subject. Lord Dumbello was cross with him, and very uncommunicative.
Indeed both the archdeacon and Mrs Grantly had found that their daughter's house was not comfortable
to them, and as they were sufficiently proud among their own class they had not cared to press
themselves on the hospitality of their son-in-law. But he had been able to perceive that all
was not right in the house in Carlton Gardens. Lord Dumbello was not gracious with his wife,
and there was something in the silence, rather than in the speech, of men, which seemed to
justify the report which had reached him.

"He is there oftener than he should be," said the archdeacon. "And I am sure of this, at least,
that Dumbello does not like it."

"I will write to her," said Mrs Grantly at last. "I am still her mother;--I will write to her.
It may be that she does not know what people say of her."

And Mrs Grantly did write.

   PLUMSTEAD, April, 186--.

   DEAREST GRISELDA,

   It seems sometimes that you have been moved so far away
   from me that I have hardly a right to concern myself more
   in the affairs of your daily life, and I know that it is
   impossible that you should refer to me for advice or
   sympathy, as you would have done had you married some
   gentleman of our own standing. But I am quite sure that my
   child does not forget her mother, or fail to look back upon
   her mother's love; and that she will allow me to speak to
   her if she be in trouble, as I would to any other child
   whom I had loved and cherished. I pray God that I may be
   wrong in supposing that such trouble is near you. If I am
   so you will forgive me my solicitude.

   Rumours have reached us from more than one quarter
   that--oh! Griselda, I hardly know in what words to conceal
   and yet to declare that which I have to write. They say
   that you are intimate with Mr Palliser, the nephew of the
   duke, and that your husband is much offended. Perhaps I had
   better tell you all, openly, cautioning you not to suppose
   that I have believed it. They say that it is thought
   that you are going to put yourself under Mr Palliser's
   protection. My dearest child, I think you can imagine with
   what agony I write these words,--with what terrible grief I
   must have been oppressed before I could have allowed myself
   to entertain the thoughts which have produced them. Such
   things are said openly in Barchester, and your father, who
   has been in town and has seen you, feels himself unable to
   tell me that my mind may be at rest.

   I will not say to you a word as to the injury in a worldly
   point of view which would come to you from any rupture with
   your husband. I believe that you can see what would be the
   effect of so terrible a step quite as plainly as I can show
   it you. You would break the heart of your father, and send
   your mother to her grave;--but it is not even on that that
   I may most insist. It is this,--that you would offend your
   God by the worst sin that a woman can commit, and cast
   yourself into a depth of infamy in which repentance before
   God is almost impossible, and from which escape before man
   is not permitted.

   I do not believe it, my dearest, dearest child,--my only
   living daughter; I do not believe what they have said to
   me. But as a mother I have not dared to leave the slander
   unnoticed. If you will write to me and say that it is not
   so, you will make me happy again, even though you should
   rebuke me for my suspicion.

   Believe that at all times, and under all circumstances, I
   am still your loving mother, as I was in other days.

   SUSAN GRANTLY.

We will now go back to Mr Palliser as he sat in his chambers at the Albany, thinking of his
love. The duke had cautioned him, and the duke's agent had cautioned him; and he, in spite
of his high feeling of independence, had almost been made to tremble. All his thousands a year
were in the balance, and perhaps everything on which depended his position before the world.
But, nevertheless, though he did tremble, he resolved to persevere. Statistics were becoming
dry to him, and love was very sweet. Statistics, he thought, might be made as enchanting as
ever, if only they could be mingled with love. The mere idea of loving Lady Dumbello had seemed
to give a salt to his life of which he did not now know how to rob himself. It is true that
he had not as yet enjoyed many of the absolute blessings of love, seeing that his conversations
with Lady Dumbello had never been warmer than those which have been repeated in these pages;
but his imagination had been at work; and now that Lady Dumbello was fully established at her
house in Carlton Gardens, he was determined to declare his passion on the first convenient
opportunity. It was sufficiently manifest to him that the world expected him to do so, and
that the world was already a little disposed to find fault with the slowness of his proceedings.

He had been once at Carlton Gardens since the season had commenced, and the lady had favoured
him with her sweetest smile. But he had only been half a minute alone with her, and during
that half-minute had only time to remark that he supposed she would now remain in London for
the season.

"Oh, yes," she had answered, "we shall not leave till July." Nor could he leave till July,
because of the exigencies of his statistics. He therefore had before him two, if not three,
clear months in which to manoeuvre, to declare his purposes, and prepare for the future events
of his life. As he resolved on a certain morning that he would say his first tender word to
Lady Dumbello that very night, in the drawing-room of Lady de Courcy, where he knew that he
should meet her, a letter came to him by the post. He well knew the hand and the intimation
which it would contain. It was from the duke's agent, Mr Fothergill, and informed him that
a certain sum of money had been placed to his credit at his banker's. But the letter went further,
and informed him also that the duke had given his agent to understand that special instructions
would be necessary before the next quarterly payment could be made. Mr Fothergill said nothing
further, but Mr Palliser understood it all. He felt his blood run cold round his heart; but,
nevertheless, he determined that he would not break his word to Lady de Courcy that night.

And Lady Dumbello received her letter also on the same morning. She was being dressed as she
read it, and the maidens who attended her found no cause to suspect that anything in the letter
had excited her ladyship. Her ladyship was not often excited, though she was vigilant in exacting
from them their utmost cares. She read her letter, however, very carefully, and as she sat
beneath the toilet implements of her maidens, thought deeply of the tidings which had been
brought to her. She was angry with no one;--she was thankful to no one. She felt no special
love for any person concerned in the matter. Her heart did not say, "Oh, my lord and husband!"
or "Oh, my lover!" or "Oh, my mother, the friend of my childhood!" But she became aware that
matter for thought had been brought before her, and she did think. "Send my love to Lord Dumbello,"
she said, when the operations were nearly completed, "and tell him that I shall be so glad
to see him if he will come to me while I am at breakfast."

"Yes, my lady." And then the message came back: "His lordship would be with her ladyship certainly."

"Gustavus," she said, as soon as she had seated herself discreetly in her chair, "I have had
a letter from my mother, which you had better read;" and she handed to him the document. "I
do not know what I have done to deserve such suspicions from her; but she lives in the country,
and has probably been deceived by ill-natured people. At any rate you must read it, and tell
me what I should do."

We may predicate from this that Mr Palliser's chance of being able to shipwreck himself upon
that rock was but small, and that he would, in spite of himself, be saved from his uncle's
anger. Lord Dumbello took the letter and read it very slowly, standing, as he did so, with
his back to the fire. He read it very slowly, and his wife, though she never turned her face
directly upon his, could perceive that he became very red, that he was fluttered and put beyond
himself, and that his answer was not ready. She was well aware that his conduct to her during
the last three months had been much altered from his former usages; that he had been rougher
with her in his speech when alone, and less courteous in his attention when in society; but
she had made no complaint or spoken a word to show him that she had marked the change. She
had known, moreover, the cause of his altered manner, and having considered much, had resolved
that she would live it down. She had declared to herself that she had done no deed and spoken
no word that justified suspicion, and therefore she would make no change in her ways, or show
herself to be conscious that she was suspected. But now,--having her mother's letter in her
hand,--she could bring him to an explanation without making him aware that she had ever thought
that he had been jealous of her. To her, her mother's letter was a great assistance. It justified
a scene like this, and enabled her to fight her battle after her own fashion. As for eloping
with any Mr Palliser, and giving up the position which she had won;--no, indeed! She had been
fastened in her grooves too well for that! Her mother, in entertaining any fear on such a subject,
had shown herself to be ignorant of the solidity of her daughter's character.

"Well, Gustavus," she said at last. "You must say what answer I shall make, or whether I shall
make any answer." But he was not even yet ready to instruct her. So he unfolded the letter
and read it again, and she poured out for herself a cup of tea.

"It's a very serious matter," said he.

"Yes, it is serious; I could not but think such a letter from my mother to be serious. Had
it come from any one else I doubt whether I should have troubled you; unless, indeed, it had
been from any as near to you as she is to me. As it is, you cannot but feel that I am right."

"Right! Oh, yes, you are right,--quite right to tell me; you should tell me everything. D----
them!" But whom he meant to condemn he did not explain.

"I am above all things averse to cause you trouble," she said. "I have seen some little things
of late--"

"Has he ever said anything to you?"

"Who,--Mr Palliser? Never a word."

"He has hinted at nothing of this kind?"

"Never a word. Had he done so, I must have made you understand that he could not have been
allowed again into my drawing-room." Then again he read the letter, or pretended to do so.

"Your mother means well," he said.

"Oh, yes, she means well. She has been foolish to believe the tittle-tattle that has reached
her,--very foolish to oblige me to give you this annoyance."

"Oh, as for that, I'm not annoyed. By Jove, no. Come, Griselda, let us have it all out; other
people have said this, and I have been unhappy. Now, you know it all."

"Have I made you unhappy?"

"Well, no; not you. Don't be hard upon me when I tell you the whole truth. Fools and brutes
have whispered things that have vexed me. They may whisper till the devil fetches them, but
they shan't annoy me again. Give me a kiss, my girl." And he absolutely put out his arms and
embraced her. "Write a good-natured letter to your mother, and ask her to come up for a week
in May. That'll be the best thing; and then she'll understand. By Jove, it's twelve o'clock.
Goodbye."

Lady Dumbello was well aware that she had triumphed, and that her mother's letter had been
invaluable to her. But it had been used, and therefore she did not read it again. She ate her
breakfast in quiet comfort, looking over a milliner's French circular as she did so; and then,
when the time for such an operation had fully come, she got to her writing-table and answered
her mother's letter.

   DEAR MAMMA [she said],

   I thought it best to show your letter at once to Lord
   Dumbello. He said that people would be ill-natured, and
   seemed to think that the telling of such stories could not
   be helped. As regards you, he was not a bit angry, but said
   that you and papa had better come to us for a week about
   the end of next month. Do come. We are to have rather a
   large dinner-party on the 23rd. His Royal Highness is
   coming, and I think papa would like to meet him. Have you
   observed that those very high bonnets have all gone out: I
   never, liked them; and as I had got a hint from Paris, I
   have been doing my best to put them down. I do hope nothing
   will prevent your coming.

   Your affectionate daughter,

   G. DUMBELLO.

   CARLTON GARDENS, Wednesday.

Mrs Grantly was aware, from the moment in which she received the letter, that she had wronged
her daughter by her suspicions. It did not occur to her to disbelieve a word that was said
in the letter, or an inference that was implied. She had been wrong, and rejoiced that it was
so. But nevertheless there was that in the letter which annoyed and irritated her, though she
could not explain to herself the cause of her annoyance. She had thrown all her heart into
that which she had written, but in the words which her child had written, not a vestige of
heart was to be found. In that reconciling of God and Mammon which Mrs Grantly had carried
on so successfully in the education of her daughter, the organ had not been required, and had
become withered, if not defunct, through want of use.

"We will not go there, I think," said Mrs Grantly, speaking to her husband.

"Oh dear, no; certainly not. If you want to go to town at all, I will take rooms for you. And
as for his Royal Highness--! I have a great respect for his Royal Highness, but I do not in
the least desire to meet him at Dumbello's table."

And so that matter was settled, as regarded the inhabitants of Plumstead Episcopi.

And whither did Lord Dumbello betake himself when he left his wife's room in so great a hurry
at twelve o'clock? Not to the Park, nor to Tattersall's, nor to a committee-room of the House
of Commons, nor yet to the bow-window of his club. But he went straight to a great jeweller's
in Ludgate Hill, and there purchased a wonderful green necklace, very rare and curious, heavy
with green sparkling drops, with three rows of shining green stones embedded in chaste gold,
--a necklace amounting almost to a jewelled cuirass in weight and extent. It had been in all
the exhibitions, and was very costly and magnificent. While Lady Dumbello was still dressing
in the evening this was brought to her with her lord's love, as his token of renewed confidence;
and Lady Dumbello, as she counted the sparkles, triumphed inwardly, telling herself that she
had played her cards well.

But while she counted the sparkles produced by her full reconciliation with her lord, poor
Plantagenet Palliser was still trembling in his ignorance. If only he could have been allowed
to see Mrs Grantly's letter, and the lady's answer, and the lord's present! But no such seeing
was vouchsafed to him, and he was carried off in his brougham to Lady de Courcy's house, twittering
with expectant love, and trembling with expectant ruin. To this conclusion he had come at any
rate, that if anything was to be done, it should be done now. He would speak a word of love,
and prepare his future in accordance with the acceptance it might receive.

Lady de Courcy's rooms were very crowded when he arrived there. It was the first great crushing
party of the season, and all the world had been collected into Portman Square. Lady de Courcy
was smiling as though her lord had no teeth, as though her eldest son's condition was quite
happy, and all things were going well with the de Courcy interests. Lady Margaretta was there
behind her, bland without and bitter within; and Lady Rosina also, at some further distance,
reconciled to this world's vanity and finery because there was to be no dancing. And the married
daughters of the house were there also, striving to maintain their positions on the strength
of their undoubted birth, but subjected to some snubbing by the lowness of their absolute circumstances.
Gazebee was there, happy in the absolute fact of his connection with an earl, and blessed with
the consideration that was extended to him as an earl's son-in-law. And Crosbie, also, was
in the rooms,--was present there, though he had sworn to himself that he would no longer dance
attendance on the countess, and that he would sever himself away from the wretchedness of the
family. But if he gave up them and their ways, what else would then be left to him? He had
come, therefore, and now stood alone, sullen in a corner, telling himself that all was vanity.
Yes; to the vain all will be vanity; and to the poor of heart all will be poor.

Lady Dumbello was there in a small inner room, seated on a couch to which she had been brought
on her first arrival at the house, and on which she would remain till she departed. From time
to time some very noble or very elevated personage would come before her and say a word, and
she would answer that elevated personage with another word; but nobody had attempted with her
the task of conversation. It was understood that Lady Dumbello did not converse,--unless it
were occasionally with Mr Palliser.

She knew well that Mr Palliser was to meet her there. He had told her expressly that he should
do so, having inquired, with much solicitude, whether she intended to obey the invitation of
the countess. "I shall probably be there," she had said, and now had determined that her mother's
letter and her husband's conduct to her should not cause her to break her word. Should Mr Palliser
"forget" himself, she would know how to say a word to him as she had known how to say a word
to her husband. Forget himself! She was very sure that Mr Palliser had been making up his mind
to forget himself for some months past.

He did come to her, and stood over her, looking unutterable things. His unutterable things,
however, were so looked, that they did not absolutely demand notice from the lady. He did not
sigh like a furnace, nor open his eyes upon her as though there were two suns in the firmament
above her head, nor did he beat his breast or tear his hair. Mr Palliser had been brought up
in a school which delights in tranquillity, and never allows its pupils to commit themselves
either to the sublime or to the ridiculous. He did look an unutterable thing or two; but he
did it with so decorous an eye, that the lady, who was measuring it all with great accuracy,
could not, as yet, declare that Mr Palliser had "forgotten himself."

There was room by her on the couch, and once or twice, at Hartlebury, he had ventured so to
seat himself. On the present occasion, however, he could not do so without placing himself
manifestly on her dress. She would have known how to fill a larger couch even than that,--as
she would have known, also, how to make room,--had it been her mind to do so. So he stood still
over her, and she smiled at him. Such a smile! It was cold as death, flattering no one, saying
nothing, hideous in its unmeaning, unreal grace. Ah! how I hate the smile of a woman who smiles
by rote! It made Mr Palliser feel very uncomfortable,--but he did not analyse it, and persevered.

"Lady Dumbello," he said, and his voice was very low, "I have been looking forward to meeting
you here."

"Have you, Mr Palliser? Yes; I remember that you asked me whether I was coming."

"I did. Hm--Lady Dumbello!" and he almost trenched upon the outside verge of that schooling
which had taught him to avoid both the sublime and the ridiculous. But he had not forgotten
himself as yet, and so she smiled again.

"Lady Dumbello, in this world in which we live, it is so hard to get a moment in which we can
speak." He had thought that she would move her dress, but she did not.

"Oh, I don't know," she said; "one doesn't often want to say very much, I think."

"Ah, no; not often, perhaps. But when one does want! How I do hate these crowded rooms!" Yet,
when he had been at Hartlebury he had resolved that the only ground for him would be the crowded
drawing-room of some large London house. "I wonder whether you ever desire anything beyond them?"

"Oh, yes," said she; "but I confess that I am fond of parties."

Mr Palliser looked round and thought that he saw that he was unobserved. He had made up his
mind as to what he would do, and he was determined to do it. He had in him none of that readiness
which enables some men to make love and carry off their Dulcineas at a moment's notice, but
he had that pluck which would have made himself disgraceful in his own eyes if he omitted to
do that as to the doing of which he had made a solemn resolution. He would have preferred to
do it sitting, but, faute de mieux, seeing that a seat was denied to him, he would do it standing.

"Griselda," he said,--and it must be admitted that his tone was not bad. The word sank softly
into her ear, like small rain upon moss, and it sank into no other ear. "Griselda!"

"Mr Palliser!" said she;--and though she made no scene, though she merely glanced upon him
once, he could see that he was wrong.

"May I not call you so?"

"Certainly not. Shall I ask you to see if my people are there?" He stood a moment before her,
hesitating. "My carriage, I mean." As she gave the command she glanced at him again, and then
he obeyed her orders.

When he returned she had left her seat; but he heard her name announced on the stairs, and
caught a glance of the back of her head as she made her way gracefully down through the crowd.
He never attempted to make love to her again, utterly disappointing the hopes of Lady de Courcy,
Mrs Proudie, and Lady Clandidlem.

As I would wish those who are interested in Mr Palliser's fortunes to know the ultimate result
of this adventure, and as we shall not have space to return to his affairs in this little history,
I may, perhaps, be allowed to press somewhat forward, and tell what Fortune did for him before
the close of that London season. Everybody knows that in that spring Lady Glencora MacCluskie
was brought out before the world, and it is equally well known that she, as the only child
of the late Lord of the Isles, was the great heiress of the day. It is true that the hereditary
possession of Skye, Staffa, Mull, Arran, and Bute went, with the title, to the Marquis of Auldreekie,
together with the counties of Caithness and Ross-shire. But the property in Fife, Aberdeen,
Perth, and Kincardineshire, comprising the greater part of those counties, and the coal-mines
in Lanark, as well as the enormous estate within the city of Glasgow, were unentailed, and
went to the Lady Glencora. She was a fair girl, with bright blue eyes and short wavy flaxen
hair, very soft to the eye. The Lady Glencora was small in stature, and her happy round face
lacked, perhaps, the highest grace of female beauty. But there was ever a smile upon it, at
which it was very pleasant to look; and the intense interest with which she would dance, and
talk, and follow up every amusement that was offered her, was very charming. The horse she
rode was the dearest love--oh! she loved him so dearly! And she had a little dog that was almost
as dear as the horse. The friend of her youth, Sabrina Scott, was--oh, such a girl! And her
cousin, the little Lord of the Isles, the heir of the marquis, was so gracious and beautiful
that she was always covering him with kisses. Unfortunately he was only six, so that there
was hardly a possibility that the properties should be brought together.

But Lady Glencora, though she was so charming, had even in this, her first outset upon the
world, given great uneasiness to her friends, and caused the Marquis of Auldreekie to be almost
wild with dismay. There was a terribly handsome man about town, who had spent every shilling
that anybody would give him, who was very fond of brandy, who was known, but not trusted, at
Newmarket, who was said to be deep in every vice, whose father would not speak to him;--and
with him the Lady Glencora was never tired of dancing. One morning she had told her cousin
the marquis, with a flashing eye,--for the round blue eye could flash,--that Burgo Fitzgerald
was more sinned against than sinning. Ah me! what was a guardian marquis, anxious for the fate
of the family property, to do under such circumstances as that?

But before the end of the season the marquis and the duke were both happy men, and we will
hope that the Lady Glencora also was satisfied. Mr Plantagenet Palliser had danced with her
twice, and had spoken his mind. He had an interview with the marquis, which was preeminently
satisfactory, and everything was settled. Glencora no doubt told him how she had accepted that
plain gold ring from Burgo Fitzgerald, and how she had restored it; but I doubt whether she
ever told him of that wavy lock of golden hair which Burgo still keeps in his receptacle for
such treasures.

"Plantagenet," said the duke, with quite unaccustomed warmth, "in this, as in all things, you
have shown yourself to be everything that I could desire. I have told the marquis that Matching
Priory, with the whole estate, should be given over to you at once. It is the most comfortable
country-house I know. Glencora shall have The Horns as her wedding present."

But the genial, frank delight of Mr Fothergill pleased Mr Palliser the most. The heir of the
Pallisers had done his duty, and Mr Fothergill was unfeignedly a happy man.

CHAPTER LVI

Showing How Mr Crosbie Became Again a Happy Man

It has been told in the last chapter how Lady de Courcy gave a great party in London in the
latter days of April, and it may therefore be thought that things were going well with the
de Courcys; but I fear the inference would be untrue. At any rate, things were not going well
with Lady Alexandrina, for she, on her mother's first arrival in town, had rushed to Portman
Square with a long tale of her sufferings.

"Oh, mamma! you would not believe it; but he hardly ever speaks to me."

"My dear, there are worse faults in a man than that."

"I am alone there all the day. I never get out. He never offers to get me a carriage. He asked
me to walk with him once last week, when it was raining. I saw that he waited till the rain
began. Only think, I have not been out three evenings this month,--except to Amelia's; and
now he says he won't go there any more, because a fly is so expensive. You can't believe how
uncomfortable the house is."

"I thought you chose it, my dear."

"I looked at it, but, of course, I didn't know what a house ought to be. Amelia said it wasn't
nice, but he would have it. He hates Amelia. I'm sure of that, for he says everything he can
to snub her and Mr Gazebee. Mr Gazebee is as good as he, at any rate. What do you think? He
has given Richard warning to go. You never saw him, but he was a very good servant. He has
given him warning, and he is not talking of getting another man. I won't live with him without
somebody to wait upon me."

"My dearest girl, do not think of such a thing as leaving him."

"But I will think of it, mamma. You do not know what my life is in that house. He never speaks
to me,--never. He comes home before dinner at half-past six, and when he has just shown himself
he goes to his dressing-room. He is always silent at dinner-time, and after dinner he goes
to sleep. He breakfasts always at nine, and goes away at half-past nine, though I know he does
not get to his office till eleven. If I want anything, he says that it cannot be afforded.
I never thought before that he was stingy, but I am sure now that he must be a miser at heart."

"It is better so than a spendthrift, Alexandrina."

"I don't know that it is better. He could not make me more unhappy than I am. Unhappy is no
word for it. What can I do, shut up in such a house as that by myself from nine o'clock in
the morning till six in the evening? Everybody knows what he is, so that nobody will come to
see me. I tell you fairly, mamma, I will not stand it. If you cannot help me, I will look for
help elsewhere."

It may, at any rate, be said that things were not going well with that branch of the de Courcy
family. Nor, indeed, was it going well with some other branches. Lord Porlock had married,
not having selected his partner for life from the choicest cream of the aristocratic circles,
and his mother, while endeavouring to say a word in his favour, had been so abused by the earl
that she had been driven to declare that she could no longer endure such usage. She had come
up to London in direct opposition to his commands, while he was fastened to his room by gout;
and had given her party in defiance of him, so that people should not say, when her back was
turned, that she had slunk away in despair.

"I have borne it," she said to Margaretta, "longer than any other woman in England would have
done. While I thought that any of you would marry--"

"Oh, don't talk of that, mamma," said Margaretta, putting a little scorn into her voice. She
had not been quite pleased that even her mother should intimate that all her chance was over,
and yet she herself had often told her mother that she had given up all thought of marrying.

"Rosina will go to Amelia's," the countess continued; "Mr Gazebee is quite satisfied that it
should be so, and he will take care that she shall have enough to cover her own expenses. I
propose that you and I, dear, shall go to Baden-Baden."

"And about money, mamma?"

"Mr Gazebee must manage it. In spite of all that your father says, I know that there must be
money. The expense will be much less so than in our present way."

"And what will papa do himself?"

"I cannot help it, my dear. No one knows what I have had to bear. Another year of it would
kill me. His language has become worse and worse, and I fear every day that he is going to
strike me with his crutch."

Under all these circumstances it cannot be said that the de Courcy interests were prospering.

But Lady de Courcy, when she had made up her mind to go to Baden-Baden, had by no means intended
to take her youngest daughter with her. She had endured for years, and now Alexandrina was
unable to endure for six months. Her chief grievance, moreover, was this,--that her husband
was silent. The mother felt that no woman had a right to complain much of any such sorrow as
that. If her earl had sinned only in that way, she would have been content to have remained
by him till the last!

And yet I do not know whether Alexandrina's life was not quite as hard as that of her mother.
She barely exceeded the truth when she said that he never spoke to her. The hours with her
in her new comfortless house were very long,--very long and very tedious. Marriage with her
had by no means been the thing that she had expected. At home, with her mother, there had always
been people around her, but they had not always been such as she herself would have chosen
for her companions. She had thought that, when married, she could choose and have those about
her who were congenial to her: but she found that none came to her. Her sister, who was a wiser
woman than she, had begun her married life with a definite idea, and had carried it out; but
this poor creature found herself, as it were, stranded. When once she had conceived it in her
heart to feel anger against her husband,--and she had done so before they had been a week together,--there
was no love to bring her back to him again. She did not know that it behoved her to look pleased
when he entered the room, and to make him at any rate think that his presence gave her happiness.
She became gloomy before she reached her new house, and never laid her gloom aside. He would
have made a struggle for some domestic comfort, had any seemed to be within his reach. As it
was, he struggled for domestic propriety, believing that he might so best bolster up his present
lot in life. But the task became harder and harder to him, and the gloom became denser and
more dense. He did not think of her unhappiness, but of his own; as she did not think of his
tedium, but of hers. "If this be domestic felicity!" he would say to himself, as he sat in
his arm-chair, striving to fix his attention upon a book.

"If this be the happiness of married life!" she thought, as she remained listless, without
even the pretence of a book, behind her teacups. In truth she would not walk with him, not
caring for such exercise round the pavement of a London square; and he had resolutely determined
that she should not run into debt for carriage hire. He was not a curmudgeon with his money;
he was no miser. But he had found that in marrying an earl's daughter he had made himself a
poor man, and he was resolved that he would not also be an embarrassed man.

When the bride heard that her mother and sister were about to escape to Baden-Baden, there
rushed upon her a sudden hope that she might be able to accompany the flight. She would not
be parted from her husband, or at least not so parted that the world should suppose that they
had quarrelled. She would simply go away and make a long visit,--a very long visit. Two years
ago a sojourn with her mother and Margaretta at Baden-Baden would not have offered to her much
that was attractive; but now, in her eyes, such a life seemed to be a life in Paradise. In
truth, the tedium of those hours in Princess Royal Crescent had been very heavy.

But how could she contrive that it should be so? That conversation with her mother had taken
place on the day preceding the party, and Lady de Courcy had repeated it with dismay to Margaretta.

"Of course he would allow her an income," Margaretta had coolly said.

"But, my dear, they have been married only ten weeks."

"I don't see why people are to be made absolutely wretched because they are married," Margaretta
answered. "I don't want to persuade her to leave him, but if what she says is true, it must
be very uncomfortable."

Crosbie had consented to go to the party in Portman Square, but had not greatly enjoyed himself
on that festive occasion. He had stood about moodily, speaking hardly a word to any one. His
whole aspect of life seemed to have been altered during the last few months. It was here, in
such spots as this that he had been used to find his glory. On such occasions he had shone
with peculiar light, making envious the hearts of many who watched the brilliance of his career
as they stood around in dull quiescence. But now no one in those rooms had been more dull,
more silent, or less courted than he; and yet he was established there as the son-in-law of
that noble house. "Rather slow work; isn't it?" Gazebee had said to him, having, after many
efforts, succeeded in reaching his brother-in-law in a corner. In answer to this Crosbie had
only grunted. "As for myself," continued Gazebee, "I would a deal sooner be at home with my
paper and slippers. It seems to me these sort of gatherings don't suit married men." Crosbie
had again grunted, and had then escaped into another corner.

Crosbie and his wife went home together in a cab,--speechless both of them. Alexandrina hated
cabs,--but she had been plainly told that in such vehicles, and in such vehicles only, could
she be allowed to travel. On the following morning he was at the breakfast-table punctually
by nine, but she did not make her appearance till after he had gone to his office. Soon after
that, however, she was away to her mother and her sister; but she was seated grimly in her
drawing-room when he came in to see her, on his return to his house. Having said some word
which might be taken for a greeting, he was about to retire; but she stopped him with a request
that he would speak to her.

"Certainly," said he. "I was only going to dress. It is nearly the half-hour."

"I won't keep you very long, and if dinner is a few minutes late it won't signify. Mamma and
Margaretta are going to Baden-Baden."

"To Baden-Baden, are they?"

"Yes; and they intend to remain there--for a considerable time." There was a little pause,
and Alexandrina found it necessary to clear her voice and to prepare herself for further speech
by a little cough. She was determined to make her proposition, but was rather afraid of the
manner in which it might be first received.

"Has anything happened at Courcy Castle?" Crosbie asked.

"No; that is, yes; there may have been some words between papa and mamma; but I don't quite
know. That, however, does not matter now. Mamma is going, and purposes to remain there for
the rest of the year."

"And the house in town will be given up."

"I suppose so, but that will be as papa chooses. Have you any objection to my going with mamma?"

What a question to be asked by a bride of ten weeks' standing! She had hardly been above a
month with her husband in her new house, and she was now asking permission to leave it, and
to leave him also, for an indefinite number of months--perhaps for ever. But she showed no
excitement as she made her request. There was neither sorrow, nor regret, nor hope in her face.
She had not put on half the animation which she had once assumed in asking for the use, twice
a week, of a carriage done up to look as though it were her own private possession. Crosbie
had then answered her with great sternness, and she had wept when his refusal was made certain
to her. But there was to be no weeping now. She meant to go,--with his permission if he would
accord it, and without it if he should refuse it. The question of money was no doubt important,
but Gazebee should manage that,--as he managed all those things. 

Thou art light, that, in this world concealed, In the world to come
shall be revealed; In the mount of God it shall be seen.

And so the poet in one of the final hymns of the "Royal Crown," filled
with a sense of his own unworthiness, hopefully abandons himself to
God:

My God, I know that those who plead To thee for grace and mercy
need All their good works should go before, And wait for them at heaven's
high door.

But no good deeds have I to bring, No righteousness for offering.

No service for my Lord and King.

Yet hide not thou thy face from me, Nor cast me out afar from thee;
But when thou bidd'st my life to cease, O may'st thou lead me forth
in peace Unto the world to come, to dwell Among thy pious ones, who
tell Thy glories inexhaustible.

There let my portion be with those Who to eternal life arose; There
purify my heart aright, In thy light to behold the light.

Raise me from deepest depths to share Heaven's endless joys of praise
and prayer, That I may evermore declare: Though thou wast angered,
Lord, I will give thanks to thee, For past is now thy wrath, and thou
dost comfort me.

Ibn Gebirol stood a little outside and a good deal above the circle
of the Jewish poets who made this era so brilliant.

Many of them are now forgotten; they had their day of popularity in Toledo, Cordova, Seville,
and Granada, but their poems have not survived.

In the very year of Ibn Gebirol's death Moses Ibn Ezra was born. Of his life little is certain,
but it is known that he was still alive in 1138.

He is called the "poet of penitence," and a gloomy turn was given to his thought by an unhappy
love attachment in his youth. A few stanzas of one of his poems run thus:

Sleepless, upon my bed the hours I number, And, rising, seek the house of God, while slumber
Lies heavy on men's eyes, and dreams encumber Their souls in visions
of the night.

In sin and folly passed my early years, Wherefore I am ashamed, and life's arrears Now strive
to pay, the while my tears Have been my food by day and night.

* * * * *

Short is man's life, and full of care and sorrow, This way and that he turns some ease to borrow,
Like to a flower he blooms, and on the morrow Is gone--a vision of the night.

How does the weight of sin my soul oppress, Because God's law too often I transgress; I mourn and
sigh, with tears of bitterness My bed I water all the night.

* * * * *

My youth wanes like a shadow that's cast, Swifter than eagle's wings my years fly fast, And I
remember not my gladness past, Either by day or yet by night.

Proclaim we then a fast, a holy day, Make pure our hearts from sin,
God's will obey, And unto him, with humbled spirit pray Unceasingly,
by day and night.

May we yet hear his words: "Thou art my own, My grace is thine, the
shelter of my throne, For I am thy Redeemer, I alone; Endure but patiently
this night!"

But his hymns, many of which won a permanent place in the prayer-book,
are not always sad.

Often they are warm with hope, and there is a lilt about them which
is almost gay.

His chief secular poem, "The Topaz" (Tarshish), is in ten parts,
and contains 1210 lines.

It is written on an Arabic model: it contains no rhymes, but is metrical, and the same word, with
entirely different meanings, occurs at the end of several lines. It needs a good deal of imagination
to appreciate Moses Ibn Ezra, and this is perhaps what Charizi meant when he called him "the
poet's poet."

Another Ibn Ezra, Abraham, one of the greatest Jews of the Middle Ages, was born in Toledo
before 1100. He passed a hard life, but he laughed at his fate.

He said of himself:

If I sold shrouds, No one would die. If I sold lamps, Then, in the sky, The sun, for spite,
Would shine by night.

Several of Abraham Ibn Ezra's hymns are instinct with the spirit of
resignation.

Here is one of them:

I hope for the salvation of the Lord, In him I trust, when fears my being thrill, Come life, come
death, according to his word, He is my portion still.

Hence, doubting heart!

I will the Lord extol With gladness, for in him is my desire, Which,
as with fatness, satisfies my soul, That doth to heaven aspire.

All that is hidden shall mine eyes behold, And the great Lord of all be known to me, Him will I serve, his
am I as of old; I ask not to be free.

Sweet is ev'n sorrow coming in his name, Nor will I seek its purpose to explore, His praise will
I continually proclaim, And bless him evermore.

Ibn Ezra wandered over many lands, and even visited London, where
he stayed in 1158.

Ibn Ezra was famed, not only for his poetry, but also for his brilliant
wit and many-sided learning.

As a mathematician, as a poet, as an expounder of Scriptures, he
won a high place in Jewish annals.

In his commentaries he rejected the current digressive and allegorical methods, and steered a
middle course between free research on the one hand, and blind adherence to tradition on the other.
Ibn Ezra was the first to maintain that the Book of Isaiah contains the work of two prophets--a
view now almost universal. He never for a moment doubted, however, that the Bible was in every
part inspired and in every part the word of God. But he was also the father of the "Higher Criticism."
Ibn Ezra's pioneer work in spreading scientific methods of study in France was shared by Joseph
Kimchi, who settled in Narbonne in the middle of the twelfth century. His sons, Moses and
David, were afterwards famous as grammarians and interpreters of the Scriptures. David Kimchi
(1160-1235) by his lucidity and thoroughness established for his grammar, "Perfection" (Michlol),
and his dictionary, "Book of Roots," complete supremacy in the field
of exegesis.

He was the favorite authority of the Christian students of Hebrew at the time of the Reformation,
and the English Authorized Version of 1611 owed much to him.

At this point, however, we must retrace our steps, and cast a glance at Hebrew literature in
France at a period earlier than the era of Ibn Ezra.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

TRANSLATIONS OF SPANISH-HEBREW POEMS:

Emma Lazarus.--Poems (Boston, 1889).

Mrs. H. Lucas.--The Jewish Year (New York, 1898), and in Editions of the Prayer-Books. See also (Abrahams)
J.Q.R., XI, p. 64.

IBN GEBIROL.

Graetz.--III, 9.

D. Rosin.--The Ethics of Solomon Ibn Gebirol, 7. J.Q.R., III, p. 159.

MOSES IBN EZRA.

Graetz.--III, p. 319 [326].

ABRAHAM IBN EZRA.

Graetz.--III, p. 366 [375].

Abraham Ibn Ezra's Commentary on Isaiah (tr. by M. Friedländer, 1873).

M. Friedländer.--Essays on Ibn Ezra (London, 1877).

See also Transactions of the Jewish Historical Society of England,
Vol.

II, p. 47, and J. Jacobs, Jews of Angevin England, p. 29 seq.

KIMCHI FAMILY.

Graetz.--III, p. 392 [404].

SPANISH-JEWISH EXEGESIS AND POETRY.

Steinschneider.--Jewish Literature, pp. 141, 146-179.

CHAPTER XI

RASHI AND ALFASSI

Nathan of Rome.--Alfassi.--Rashi.--Rashbam.

Before Hebrew poets, scientists, philosophers, and statesmen had made
Spain famous in Jewish annals, Rashi and his school were building
up a reputation destined to associate Jewish learning with France.

In France there was none of the width of culture which distinguished
Spain.

Rashi did not shine as anything but an exponent of traditional Judaism.

He possessed no graces of style, created no new literature.

But he represented Judaism at its simplest, its warmest, its intensest. Rashi was a great writer
because his subject was great, not because he wrote greatly.

But it is only a half-truth to assert that Rashi had no graces of style. For, if grace be the
quality of producing effects with the least display of effort, then there was no writer more graceful
than Rashi. His famous Commentary on the Talmud is necessarily long and intricate, but there is
never a word too much. No commentator on any classic ever surpassed Rashi in the power of saying
enough and only enough. He owed this faculty in the first place to his intellectual grasp. He
edited the Talmud as well as explained it. He restored the original text with the surest of
critical instincts. And his conscience was in his work. So thoroughly honest was he that, instead
of slurring over difficulties, he frankly said: "I cannot understand ... I do not know," in
the rare cases in which he was at a loss. Rashi moreover possessed that wondrous sympathy with
author and reader which alone qualifies a third mind to interpret author to reader. Probing
the depth of the Talmud, Rashi probed the depth of the learned student,
and realized the needs of the beginner.

Thus the beginner finds Rashi useful, and the specialist turns to him for help. His immediate
disciples rarely quote him by name; to them he is "the Commentator."

Rashi was not the first to subject the Talmud to critical analysis.

The Gaonim had begun the task, and Nathan, the son of Yechiel of
Rome, compiled, in about the year 1000, a dictionary (Aruch) which
is still the standard work of reference.

But Rashi's nearest predecessor, Alfassi, was not an expounder of
the Talmud; he extracted, with much skill, the practical results from
the logical mazes in which they were enveloped.

Isaac, the son of Jacob Alfassi, derived his name from Fez, where he was born in 1013. He gave
his intellect entirely to the Talmud, but he acquired from the Moorish
culture of his day a sense of order and system.

He dealt exclusively with the Halachah, or practical contents of
the Rabbinic law, and the guide which he compiled to the Talmud soon
superseded all previous works of its kind.

Solomon, the son of Isaac, best known as Rabbi Shelomo Izchaki (Rashi), was born in 1040, and
died in 1105, in Troyes, in Champagne. From his mother, who came of a family of poets, he inherited
his warm humanity, his love for Judaism. From his father, he drew his Talmudical knowledge, his
keen intellect. His youth was a hard one.

In accordance with medieval custom, he was married as a boy, and
then left his home in search of knowledge rather than of bread.

Of bread he had little, but, starved and straitened in circumstances though he was, he became
an eager student at the Jewish schools which then were dotted along the Rhine, residing now
at Mainz, now at Speyer, now at Worms.

In 1064 he settled finally in Troyes.

Here he was at once hailed as a new light in Israel. His spotless character and his unique
reputation as a teacher attracted a vast number of eager students.

Of Rashi's Commentary on the Talmud something has already been said. As to his exposition of the
Bible, it soon acquired the widest popularity.

It was inferior to his work on the Talmud, for, as he himself admitted
in later life, he had relied too much on the Midrash, and had attended
too little to evolving the literal meaning of the text of Scripture.

But this is the charm of his book, and it is fortunate that he did not actually attempt to recast his
commentary. There is a quaintness and fascination about it which are lacking in the pedantic sobriety
of Ibn Ezra and the grammatical exactness of Kimchi. But he did himself less than justice when
he asserted that he had given insufficient heed to the Peshat (literal
meaning).

Rashi often quotes the grammatical works of Menachem and Dunash.

He often translates the Hebrew into French, showing a very exact
knowledge of both languages.

Besides, when he cites the Midrash, he, as it were, constructs a Peshat out of it, and this method,
original to himself, found no capable imitators.

Through the fame of Rashi, France took the leadership in matters Talmudical. Blessed with a progeny
of famous men, Rashi's influence was carried on and increased by the work of his sons-in-law
and grandsons. Of these, Samuel ben Meir (Rashbam, 1100-1160) was
the most renowned.

The devoted attention to the literature of Judaism in the Rhinelands
came in the nick of time.

It was a firm rock against the storm which was about to break.

The Crusades crushed out from the Jews of France all hope of temporal
happiness.

When Alfassi died in 1103 and Rashi in 1105, the first Crusade had
barely spent its force.

The Jewish schools in France were destroyed, the teachers and scholars
massacred or exiled. But the spirit lived on. Their literature was
life to the Jews, who had no other life. His body bent over Rashi's
illuminating expositions of the Talmud and the Bible, the medieval
Jew felt his soul raised above the miseries of the present to a world
of peace and righteousness, where the wicked ceased from troubling,
and the weary were at rest.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

ALFASSI AND RASHI.

Graetz.--III,
p. 285 [292] seq.

ALFASSI.

I.H. Weiss.--J.Q.R., I, p. 290.

RASHI.

Schiller-Szinessy.--Encycl.
Brit., Vol. XX, p. 284.

CHAPTER XII

THE SPANISH-JEWISH POETS (II)

Jehuda
Halevi.--Charizi.

Turning once more to the brighter condition of
Jewish literature in Spain, we reach a man upon whom the whole vocabulary
of praise and affection has been exhausted; a man of magnetic attractiveness,
whom contemporaries and successors have agreed to admire and to love.
Jehuda Halevi was born in Toledo about 1085, the year in which Alfonso
VI recaptured the city from the Moors. It was a fit birth-place for
the greatest Jewish poet since Bible times. East and West met in Toledo.
The science of the East there found Western Christians to cultivate
it. Jew, Moor, and Christian displayed there mutual toleration which
existed nowhere else. In the midst of this favorable environment Jehuda
Halevi grew to early maturity. As a boy he won more than local fame
as a versifier. At all festive occasions his verses were in demand.
He wrote wedding odes, elegies on great men, eulogies of the living.
His love poems, serenades, epigrams of this period, all display taste,
elegance, and passion.

The second period of Jehuda Halevi's literary
career was devoted to serious pursuits, to thoughts about life, and
to practical work. He wrote his far-famed philosophical dialogue,
the Cuzari, and earned his living as a physician. He was not an enthusiastic
devotee to medicine, however. "Toledo is large," he wrote to a friend,
"and my patients are hard masters. I, their slave, spend my days in
serving their will, and consume my years in healing their infirmities."
Before making up a prescription, he, like Sir Thomas Browne, used
to say a prayer in which he confessed that he had no great faith in
the healing powers of his art. Jehuda Halevi was, indeed, dissatisfied
with his life altogether. "My heart is in the East, but I am sunk
in the West," he lamented. He was unhappy because his beloved was
far from him; his lady-love was beyond the reach of his earnest gaze.
In Heine's oft-quoted words,

She for whom the Rabbi languished Was
a woe-begone poor darling, Desolation's very image, And her name--Jerusalem.

The
eager passion for one sight of Jerusalem grew on him, and dominated
the third portion of his life. At length nothing could restrain him;
go he would, though he die in the effort. And go he did, and die he
did in the effort. The news of his determination spread through Spain,
and everywhere hands were held out to restrain him. But his heart
lightened as the day of departure came. His poems written at this
time are hopeful and full of cheery feeling. In Egypt, a determined
attempt was made by the Jews to keep him among them. But it was vain.
Onward to Jerusalem: this was his one thought. I have thought much about it, and I'm sure you
will not oppose me when I am doing what I think to be my duty."

"No, mamma; I won't oppose you, certainly."

"Since Mr Crosbie's conduct was made known to you, I have mentioned his name in your hearing
very seldom."

"No, mamma, you have not. And I have loved you so dearly for your goodness to me. Do not think
that I have not understood and known how generous you have been. No other mother ever was so
good as you have been. I have known it all, and thought of it every day of my life, and thanked
you in my heart for your trusting silence. Of course, I understand your feelings. You think
him bad and you hate him for what he has done."

"I would not willingly hate any one, Lily."

"Ah, but you do hate him. If I were you, I should hate him; but I am not you, and I love him.
I pray for his happiness every night and morning, and for hers. I have forgiven him altogether,
and I think that he was right. When I am old enough to do so without being wrong, I will go
to him and tell him so. I should like to hear of all his doings and all his success, if it
were only possible. How, then, can you and I talk about him? It is impossible. You have been
silent and I have been silent;--let us remain silent."

"It is not about Mr Crosbie that I wish to speak. But I think you ought to understand that
conduct such as his will be rebuked by all the world. You may forgive him, but you should acknowledge--"

"Mamma, I don't want to acknowledge anything;--not about him. There are things as to which
a person cannot argue." Mrs Dale felt that this present matter was one as to which she could
not argue. "Of course, mamma," continued Lily, "I don't want to oppose you in anything, but
I think we had better be silent about this."

"Of course I am thinking only of your future happiness."

"I know you are; but pray believe me that you need not be alarmed. I do not mean to be unhappy.
Indeed, I think I may say I am not unhappy; of course I have been unhappy,--very unhappy. I
did think that my heart would break. But that has passed away, and I believe I can be as happy
as my neighbours. We're all of us sure to have some troubles, as you used to tell us when we
were children."

Mrs Dale felt that she had begun wrong, and that she would have been able to make better progress
had she omitted all mention of Crosbie's name. She knew exactly what it was that she wished
to say,--what were the arguments which she desired to expound before her daughter; but she
did not know what language to use, or how she might best put her thoughts into words. She paused
for a while, and Lily went on with her work as though the conversation was over. But the conversation
was not over.

"It was about John Eames, and not about Mr Crosbie, that I wished to speak to you."

"Oh, mamma!"

"My dear, you must not hinder me in doing what I think to be a duty. I heard what he said to
you and what you replied, and of course I cannot but have my mind full of the subject. Why
should you set yourself against him in so fixed a manner?"

"Because I love another man." These words she spoke out loud, in a steady, almost dogged tone,
with a certain show of audacity,--as though aware that the declaration was unseemly, but resolved
that, though unseemly, it must be made.

"But, Lily, that love, from its very nature, must cease; or, rather, such love is not the same
as that you felt when you thought that you were to be his wife."

"Yes, it is. If she died, and he came to me in five years time, I would still take him. I should
think myself constrained to take him."

"But she is not dead, nor likely to die."

"That makes no difference. You don't understand me, mamma."

"I think I do, and I want you to understand me also. I know how difficult is your position;
I know what your feelings are; but I know this also, that if you could reason with yourself,
and bring yourself in time to receive John Eames as a dear friend--"

"I did receive him as a dear friend. Why not? He is a dear friend. I love him heartily,--as
you do."

"You know what I mean?"

"Yes, I do; and I tell you it is impossible."

"If you would make the attempt, all this misery would soon be forgotten. If once you could
bring yourself to regard him as a friend, who might become your husband, all this would be
changed,--and I should see you happy!"

"You are strangely anxious to be rid of me, mamma!"

"Yes, Lily;--to be rid of you in that way. If I could see you put your hand in his as his promised
wife, I think that I should be the happiest woman in the world."

"Mamma, I cannot make you happy in that way. If you really understood my feelings, my doing
as you propose would make you very unhappy. I should commit a great sin,--the sin against which
women should be more guarded than against any other. In my heart I am married to that other
man. I gave myself to him, and loved him, and rejoiced in his love. When he kissed me I kissed
him again, and I longed for his kisses. I seemed to live only that he might caress me. All
that time I never felt myself to be wrong,--because he was all in all to me. I was his own.
That has been changed,--to my great misfortune; but it cannot be undone or forgotten. I cannot
be the girl I was before he came here. There are things that will not have themselves buried
and put out of sight, as though they had never been. I am as you are, mamma,--widowed. But
you have your daughter, and I have my mother. If you will be contented, so will I." Then she
got up and threw herself on her mother's neck.

Mrs Dale's argument was over now. To such an appeal as that last made by Lily no rejoinder
on her part was possible. After that she was driven to acknowledge to herself that she must
be silent. Years as they rolled on might make a change, but no reasoning could be of avail.
She embraced her daughter, weeping over her,--whereas Lily's eyes were dry. "It shall be as
you will," Mrs Dale murmured.

"Yes, as I will. I shall have my own way; shall I not? That is all I want; to be a tyrant over
you, and make you do my bidding in everything, as a well-behaved mother should do. But I won't
be stern in my orderings. If you will only be obedient, I will be so gracious to you! There's
Hopkins again. I wonder whether he has come to knock us down and trample upon us with another
speech."

Hopkins knew very well to which window he must come, as only one of the rooms was at the present
time habitable. He came up to the dining-room, and almost flattened his nose against the glass.

"Well, Hopkins," said Lily, "here we are." Mrs Dale had turned her face away, for she knew
that the tears were still on her cheek.

"Yes, miss, I see you. I want to speak to your mamma, miss."

"Come round," said Lily, anxious to spare her mother the necessity of showing herself at once.
"It's too cold to open the window; come round, and I'll open the door."

"Too cold!" muttered Hopkins, as he went. "They'll find it a deal colder in lodgings at Guestwick."
However, he went round through the kitchen, and Lily met him in the hall.

"Well, Hopkins, what is it? Mamma has got a headache."

"Got a headache, has she? I won't make her headache no worse. It's my opinion that there's
nothing for a headache so good as fresh air. Only some people can't abear to be blowed upon,
not for a minute. If you don't let down the lights in a greenhouse more or less every day,
you'll never get any plants,--never;--and it's just the same with the grapes. Is I to go back
and say as how I couldn't see her?"

"You can come in if you like; only be quiet, you know."

"Ain't I ollays quiet, miss? Did anybody ever hear me rampage? If you please, ma'am, the squire's
come home."

"What, home from Guestwick? Has he brought Miss Bell?"

"He ain't brought none but hisself, 'cause he come on horseback; and it's my belief he's going
back almost immediate. But he wants you to come to him, Mrs Dale."

"Oh, yes, I'll come at once."

"He bade me say with his kind love. I don't know whether that makes any difference."

"At any rate, I'll come, Hopkins."

"And I ain't to say nothing about the headache?"

"About what?" said Mrs Dale.

"No, no, no," said Lily. "Mamma will be there at once. Go and tell my uncle, there's a good
man," and she put up her hand and backed him out of the room.

"I don't believe she's got no headache at all," said Hopkins, grumbling, as he returned through
the back premises. "What lies gentlefolks do tell! If I said I'd a headache when I ought to
be out among the things, what would they say to me? But a poor man mustn't never lie, nor yet
drink, nor yet do nothing." And so he went back with his message.

"What can have brought your uncle home?" said Mrs Dale.

"Just to look after the cattle, and to see that the pigs are not all dead. My wonder is that
he should ever have gone away."

"I must go up to him at once."

"Oh, yes, of course."

"And what shall I say about the house?"

"It's not about that,--at least I think not. I don't think he'll speak about that again till
you speak to him."

"But if he does?"

"You must put your trust in Providence. Declare you've got a bad headache, as I told Hopkins
just now; only you would throw me over by not understanding. I'll walk with you down to the
bridge." So they went off together across the lawn.

But Lily was soon left alone, and continued her walk, waiting for her mother's return. As she
went round and round the gravel paths, she thought of the words that she had said to her mother.
She had declared that she also was widowed. "And so it should be," she said, debating the matter
with herself. "What can a heart be worth if it can be transferred hither and thither as circumstances
and convenience and comfort may require? When he held me here in his arms"--and, as the thoughts
ran through her brain, she remembered the very spot on which they had stood--"oh, my love!"
she had said to him then as she returned his kisses--"oh, my love, my love, my love!" "When
he held me here in his arms, I told myself that it was right, because he was my husband. He
has changed, but I have not. It might be that I should have ceased to love him, and then I
should have told him so. I should have done as he did." But, as she came to this, she shuddered,
thinking of the Lady Alexandrina. "It was very quick," she said, still speaking to herself;
"very, very. But then men are not the same as women." And she walked on eagerly, hardly remembering
where she was, thinking over it all, as she did daily; remembering every little thought and
word of those few eventful months in which she had learned to regard Crosbie as her husband
and master. She had declared that she had conquered her unhappiness; but there were moments
in which she was almost wild with misery. "Tell me to forget him!" she said. "It is the one
thing which will never be forgotten."

At last she heard her mother's step coming down across the squire's garden, and she took up
her post at the bridge.

"Stand and deliver," she said, as her mother put her foot upon the plank. "That is, if you've
got anything worth delivering. Is anything settled?"

"Come up to the house," said Mrs Dale, "and I'll tell you all."

CHAPTER LVIII

The Fate of the Small House

There was something in the tone of Mrs Dale's voice, as she desired her daughter to come up
to the house, and declared that her budget of news should be opened there, which at once silenced
Lily's assumed pleasantry. Her mother had been away fully two hours, during which Lily had
still continued her walk round the garden, till at last she had become impatient for her mother's
footstep. Something serious must have been said between her uncle and her mother during those
long two hours. The interviews to which Mrs Dale was occasionally summoned at the Great House
did not usually exceed twenty minutes, and the upshot would be communicated to the girls in
a turn or two round the garden; but in the present instance Mrs Dale positively declined to
speak till she was seated within the house.

"Did he come over on purpose to see you, mamma?"

"Yes, my dear, I believe so. He wished to see you, too; but I asked his permission to postpone
that till after I had talked to you."

"To see me, mamma? About what?"

"To kiss you, and bid you love him; solely for that. He has not a word to say to you that will
vex you."

"Then I will kiss him, and love him, too."

"Yes, you will when I have told you all. I have promised him solemnly to give up all idea of
going to Guestwick. So that is over."

"Oh, oh! And we may begin to unpack at once? What an episode in one's life!"

"We may certainly unpack, for I have pledged myself to him; and he is to go into Guestwick
himself and arrange about the lodgings."

"Does Hopkins know it?"

"I should think not yet."

"Nor Mrs Boyce! Mamma, I don't believe I shall be able to survive this next week. We shall
look such fools! I'll tell you what we'll do;--it will be the only comfort I can have;--we'll
go to work and get everything back into its place before Bell comes home, so as to surprise her."

"What! in two days?"

"Why not? I'll make Hopkins come and help, and then he'll not be so bad. I'll begin at once
and go to the blankets and beds, because I can undo them myself."

"But I haven't half told you all; and, indeed, I don't know how to make you understand what
passed between us. He is very unhappy about Bernard; Bernard has determined to go abroad, and
may be away for years."

"One can hardly blame a man for following up his profession."

"There was no blaming. He only said that it was very sad for him that, in his old age, he should
be left alone. This was before there was any talk about our remaining. Indeed he seemed determined
not to ask that again as a favour. I could see that in his eye, and I understood it from his
tone. He went on to speak of you and Bell, saying how well he loved you both; but that, unfortunately,
his hopes regarding you had not been fulfilled."

"Ah, but he shouldn't have had hopes of that sort."

"Listen, my dear, and I think that you will not feel angry with him. He said that he felt his
house had never been pleasant to you. Then there followed words which I could not repeat, even
if I could remember them. He said much about myself, regretting that the feeling between us
had not been more kindly. 'But my heart,' he said, 'has ever been kinder than my words.' Then
I got up from where I was seated, and going over to him, I told him that we would remain here."

"And what did he say?"

"I don't know what he said. I know that I was crying, and that he kissed me. It was the first
time in his life. I know that he was pleased,--beyond measure pleased. After a while he became
animated, and talked of doing ever so many things. He promised that very painting of which
you spoke."

"Ah, yes, I knew it; and Hopkins will be here with the peas before dinner-time to-morrow, and
Dingles with his shoulders smothered with rabbits. And then Mrs Boyce! Mamma, he didn't think
of Mrs Boyce; or, in very charity of heart, he would still have maintained his sadness."

"Then he did not think of her; for when I left him he was not at all sad. But I haven't told
you half yet."

"Dear me, mamma; was there more than that?"

"And I've told it all wrong; for what I've got to tell now was said before a word was spoken
about the house. He brought it in just after what he said about Bernard. He said that Bernard
would, of course, be his heir."

"Of course he will."

"And that he should think it wrong to encumber the property with any charges for you girls."

"Mamma, did any one ever--"

"Stop, Lily, stop; and make your heart kinder towards him if you can."

"It is kind; only I hate to be told that I'm not to have a lot of money, as though I had ever
shown a desire for it. I have never envied Bernard his man-servant, or his maid-servant, or
his ox, or his ass, or anything that is his. To tell the truth I didn't even wish it to be
Bell's, because I knew well that there was somebody she would like a great deal better than
ever she could like Bernard."

"I shall never get to the end of my story."

"Yes, you will, mamma, if you persevere."

"The long and the short of it is this, that he has given Bell three thousand pounds, and has
given you three thousand also."

"But why me, mamma?" said Lily, and the colour of her cheeks became red as she spoke. There
should if possible be nothing more said about John Eames; but whatever might or might not be
the necessity of speaking, at any rate, let there be no mistake. "But why me, mamma?"

"Because, as he explained to me, he thinks it right to do the same by each of you. The money
is yours at this moment,--to buy hair-pins with, if you please. I had no idea that he could
command so large a sum."

"Three thousand pounds! The last money he gave me was half-a-crown, and I thought that he was
so stingy! I particularly wanted ten shillings. I should have liked it so much better now if
he had given me a nice new five-pound note."

"You'd better tell him so."

"No; because then he'd give me that too. But with five pounds I should have the feeling that
I might do what I liked with it;--buy a dressing-case, and a thing for a squirrel to run round
in. But nobody ever gives girls money like that, so that they can enjoy it."

"Oh, Lily; you ungrateful child!"

"No, I deny it. I'm not ungrateful. I'm very grateful, because his heart was softened,--and
because he cried and kissed you. I'll be ever so good to him! But how I'm to thank him for
giving me three thousand pounds, I cannot think. It's a sort of thing altogether beyond my
line of life. It sounds like something that's to come to me in another world, but which I don't
want quite yet. I am grateful, but with a misty, hazy sort of gratitude. Can you tell me how
soon I shall have a new pair of Balmoral boots because of this money? If that were brought
home to me I think it would enliven my gratitude."

The squire, as he rode back to Guestwick, fell again from that animation, which Mrs Dale had
described, into his natural sombre mood. He thought much of his past life, declaring to himself
the truth of those words in which he had told his sister-in-law that his heart had ever been
kinder than his words. But the world, and all those nearest to him in the world, had judged
him always by his words rather than by his heart. They had taken the appearance, which he could
not command or alter, rather than the facts, of which he had been the master. Had he not been
good to all his relations?--and yet was there one among them that cared for him? "I'm almost
sorry that they are going to stay," he said to himself;--"I know that I shall disappoint them."
Yet when he met Bell at the Manor House he accosted her cheerily, telling her with much appearance
of satisfaction that that flitting into Guestwick was not to be accomplished.

"I am so glad," said she. "It is long since I wished it."

"And I do not think your mother wishes it now."

"I am sure she does not. It was all a misunderstanding from the first. When some of us could
not do all that you wished, we thought it better--" Then Bell paused, finding that she would
get herself into a mess if she persevered.

"We will not say any more about it," said the squire. "The thing is over, and I am very glad
that it should be so pleasantly settled. I was talking to Dr Crofts yesterday."

"Were you, uncle?"

"Yes; and he is to come and stay with me the day before he is married. We have arranged it
all. And we'll have the breakfast up at the Great House. Only you must fix the day. I should
say some time in May. And, my dear, you'll want to make yourself fine; here's a little money
for you. You are to spend that before your marriage, you know." Then he shambled away, and
as soon as he was alone, again became sad and despondent. He was a man for whom we may predicate
some gentle sadness and continued despondency to the end of his life's chapter.

We left John Eames in the custody of Lady Julia, who had overtaken him in the act of erasing
Lily's name from the railing which ran across the brook. He had been premeditating an escape
home to his mother's house in Guestwick, and thence hack to London, without making any further
appearance at the Manor House. But as soon as he heard Lady Julia's step, and saw her figure
close upon him, he knew that his retreat was cut off from him. So he allowed himself to be
led away quietly up to the house. With Lady Julia herself he openly discussed the whole matter,--telling
her that his hopes were over, his happiness gone, and his heart half-broken. Though he would
perhaps have cared but little for her congratulations in success, he could make himself more
amenable to consolation and sympathy from her than from any other inmate in the earl's house.
"I don't know what I shall say to your brother," he whispered to her, as they approached the
side door at which she intended to enter.

"Will you let me break it to him? After that he will say a few words to you of course, but
you need not be afraid of him."

"And Mr Dale?" said Johnny. "Everybody has heard about it. Everybody will know what a fool
I have made myself." She suggested that the earl should speak to the squire, assured him that
nobody would think him at all foolish, and then left him to make his way up to his own bedroom.
When there he found a letter from Cradell, which had been delivered in his absence; but the
contents of that letter may best be deferred to the next chapter. They were not of a nature
to give him comfort or to add to his sorrow.

About an hour before dinner there was a knock at his door, and the earl himself, when summoned,
made his appearance in the room. He was dressed in his usual farming attire, having been caught
by Lady Julia on his first approach to the house, and had come away direct to his young friend,
after having been duly trained in what he ought to say by his kind-hearted sister. I am not,
however, prepared to declare that he strictly followed his sister's teaching in all that he
said upon the occasion.

"Well, my boy," he began, "so the young lady has been perverse."

"Yes, my lord. That is, I don't know about being perverse. It is all over."

"That's as may be, Johnny. As far as I know, not half of them accept their lovers the first
time of asking."

"I shall not ask her again."

"Oh, yes, you will. You don't mean to say you are angry with her for refusing you."

"Not in the least. I have no right to be angry. I am only angry with myself for being such
a fool, Lord De Guest. I wish I had been dead before I came down here on this errand. Now I
think of it, I know there are so many things which ought to have made me sure how it would be."

"I don't see that at all. You come down again,--let me see,--it's May now. Say you come when
the shooting begins in September. If we can't get you leave of absence in any other way, we'll
make old Buffle come too. Only, by George, I believe he'd shoot us all. But never mind; we'll
manage that. You keep up your spirits till September, and then we'll fight the battle in another
way. The squire shall get up a little party for the bride, and my lady Lily must go then. You
shall meet her so; and then we'll shoot over the squire's land. We'll bring you together so;
you see if we don't. Lord bless me! Refused once! My belief is, that in these days a girl thinks
nothing of a man till she has refused him half-a-dozen times."

"I don't think Lily is at all like that."

"Look here, Johnny. I have not a word to say against Miss Lily. I like her very much, and think
her one of the nicest girls I know. When she's your wife, I'll love her dearly, if she'll let
me. But she's made of the same stuff as other girls, and will act in the same way. Things have
gone a little astray among you, and they won't right themselves all in a minute. She knows
now what your feelings are, and she'll go on thinking of it, till at last you'll be in her
thoughts more than that other fellow. Don't tell me about her becoming an old maid, because
at her time of life she has been so unfortunate as to come across a false-hearted man like
that. It may take a little time; but if you'll carry on and not be down-hearted, you'll find
it will all come right in the end. Everybody doesn't get all that they want in a minute. How
I shall quiz you about all this when you have been two or three years married!"

"I don't think I shall ever be able to ask her again; and I feel sure, if I do, that her answer
will be the same. She told me in so many words; but never mind, I cannot repeat her words."

"I don't want you to repeat them; nor yet to heed them beyond their worth. Lily Dale is a very
pretty girl; clever, too, I believe, and good, I'm sure; but her words are not more sacred
than those of other men or women. What she has said to you now, she means, no doubt; but the
minds of men and women are prone to change, especially when such changes are conducive to their
own happiness."

"At any rate I'll never forget your kindness, Lord De Guest."

"And there is one other thing I want to say to you, Johnny. A man should never allow himself
to be cast down by anything,--not outwardly, to the eyes of other men."

"But how is he to help it?"

"His pluck should prevent him. You were not afraid of a roaring bull, nor yet of that man when
you thrashed him at the railway station. You've pluck enough of that kind. You must now show
that you've that other kind of pluck. You know the story of the boy who would not cry though
the wolf was gnawing him underneath his frock. Most of us have some wolf to gnaw us somewhere;
but we are generally gnawed beneath our clothes, so that the world doesn't see; and it behoves
us so to bear it that the world shall not suspect. The man who goes about declaring himself
to be miserable will be not only miserable, but contemptible as well."

"But the wolf hasn't gnawed me beneath my clothes; everybody knows it."

"Then let those who do know it learn that you are able to bear such wounds without outward
complaint. I tell you fairly that I cannot sympathise with a lackadaisical lover."

"I know that I have made myself ridiculous to everybody. I wish I had never come here. I wish
you had never seen me."

"Don't say that, my dear boy; but take my advice for what it is worth. And remember what it
is that I say; with your grief I do sympathise, but not with any outward expression of it;--not
with melancholy looks, and a sad voice, and an unhappy gait. A man should always be able to
drink his wine and seem to enjoy it. If he can't, he is so much less of a man than he would
be otherwise,--not so much more, as some people seem to think. Now get yourself dressed, my
dear fellow, and come down to dinner as though nothing had happened to you."

As soon as the earl was gone John looked at his watch and saw that it still wanted some forty
minutes to dinner. Fifteen minutes would suffice for him to dress, and therefore there was
time sufficient for him to seat himself in his arm-chair and think over it all. He had for
a moment been very angry when his friend had told him that he could not sympathise with a lackadaisical
lover. It was an ill-natured word. He felt it to be so when he heard it, and so he continued
to think during the whole of the half-hour that he sat in that chair. But it probably did him
more good than any word that the earl had ever spoken to him,--or any other word that he could
have used. "Lackadaisical! I'm not lackadaisical," he said to himself, jumping up from his
chair, and instantly sitting down again. "I didn't say anything to him. I didn't tell him.
Why did he come to me?" And yet, though he endeavoured to abuse Lord De Guest in his thoughts,
he knew that Lord De Guest was right, and that he was wrong. He knew that he had been lackadaisical,
and was ashamed of himself; and at once resolved that he would henceforth demean himself as
though no calamity had happened to him. "I've a good mind to take him at his word, and drink
wine till I'm drunk." Then he strove to get up his courage by a song.

   If she be not fair for me,
   What care I how--

"But I do care. What stuff it is a man writing poetry and putting into it such lies as that!
Everybody knows that he did care,--that is, if he wasn't a heartless beast."

But nevertheless, when the time came for him to go down into the drawing-room he did make the
effort which his friend had counselled, and walked into the room with less of that hang-dog
look than the earl and Lady Julia had expected. They were both there, as was also the squire,
and Bell followed him in less than a minute.

"You haven't seen Crofts to-day, John, have you?" said the earl.

"No; I haven't been anywhere his way!"

"His way! His ways are every way, I take it. I wanted him to come and dine, but he seemed to
think it improper to eat two dinners in the same house two days running. Isn't that his theory,
Miss Dale?"

"I'm sure I don't know, Lord De Guest. At any rate, it isn't mine."

So they went to their feast, and before his last chance was over John Eames found himself able
to go through the pretence of enjoying his roast mutton.

There can, I think, be no doubt that in all such calamities as that which he was now suffering,
the agony of the misfortune is much increased by the conviction that the facts of the case
are known to those round about the sufferer. A most warm-hearted and intensely-feeling young
gentleman might, no doubt, eat an excellent dinner after being refused by the girl of his devotions,
provided that he had reason to believe that none of those in whose company he ate it knew anything
of his rejection. But the same warm-hearted and intensely-feeling young gentleman would find
it very difficult to go through the ceremony with any appearance of true appetite or gastronomic
enjoyment, if he were aware that all his convives knew all the facts of his little misfortune.
Generally, we may suppose, a man in such condition goes to his club for his dinner, or seeks
consolation in the shades of some adjacent Richmond or Hampton Court. There he meditates on
his condition in silence, and does ultimately enjoy his little plate of whitebait, his cutlet
and his moderate pint of sherry. He probably goes alone to the theatre, and, in his stall,
speculates with a somewhat bitter sarcasm on the vanity of the world. Then he returns home,
sad indeed, but with a moderated sadness, and as he puffs out the smoke of his cigar at the
open window,--with perhaps the comfort of a little brandy-and-water at his elbow,--swears to
himself that, "By Jove, he'll have another try for it." Alone, a man may console himself, or
among a crowd of unconscious mortals; but it must be admitted that the position of John Eames
was severe. He had been invited down there to woo Lily Dale, and the squire and Bell had been
asked to be present at the wooing. Had it all gone well, nothing could have been nicer. He
would have been the hero of the hour, and everybody would have sung for him his song of triumph.
But everything had not gone well, and he found it very difficult to carry himself otherwise
than lackadaisically. On the whole, however, his effort was such that the earl gave him credit
for his demeanour, and told him when parting with him for the night that he was a fine fellow,
and that everything should go right with him yet.

"And you mustn't be angry with me for speaking harshly to you," he said.

"I wasn't a bit angry."

"Yes, you were; and I rather meant that you should be. But you mustn't go away in dudgeon."

He stayed at the Manor House one day longer, and then he returned to his room at the Income-tax
Office, to the disagreeable sound of Sir Raffle's little bell, and the much more disagreeable
sound of Sir Raffle's big voice.

CHAPTER LIX

John Eames Becomes a Man

Eames, when he was half way up to London in the railway carriage, took out from his pocket
a letter and read it. During the former portion of his journey he had been thinking of other
things; but gradually he had resolved that it would be better for him not to think more of
those other things for the present, and therefore he had recourse to his letter by way of dissipating
his thoughts. It was from Cradell, and ran as follows:--

   INCOME-TAX OFFICE, May, 186--.

   MY DEAR JOHN,--

   I hope the tidings which I have to give you will not make
   you angry, and that you will not think I am untrue to the
   great friendship which I have for you because of that which
   I am now going to tell you. There is no man--[and the
   word "man" was underscored]--there is no man whose regard
   I value so highly as I do yours; and though I feel that you
   can have no just ground to be displeased with me after all
   that I have heard you say on many occasions, nevertheless,
   in matters of the heart it is very hard for one person
   to understand the sentiments of another, and when the
   affections of a lady are concerned, I know that quarrels
   will sometimes arise.

Eames, when he had got so far as this, on the first perusal of the letter, knew well what was
to follow. "Poor Caudle!" he said to himself; "he's hooked, and he'll never get himself off
the hook again."

   But let that be as it may, the matter has now gone too far
   for any alteration to be made by me; nor would any mere
   earthly inducement suffice to change me. The claims
   of friendship are very strong, but those of love are
   paramount. Of course I know all that has passed
   between you and Amelia Roper. Much of this I had heard from
   you before, but the rest she has now told me with that
   pure-minded honesty which is the most remarkable feature
   in her character. She has confessed that at one time she
   felt attached to you, and that she was induced by your
   perseverance to allow you to regard her as your fiancy.
   [Fancy-girl he probably conceived to be the vulgar English
   for the elegant term which he used.] But all that must be
   over between you now. Amelia has promised to be mine--
   [this also was underscored]--and mine I intend that she
   shall be. That you may find in the kind smiles of L. D.
   consolation for any disappointment which this may occasion
   you, is the ardent wish of your true friend,

   JOSEPH CRADELL.

   P.S.--Perhaps I had better tell you the whole. Mrs Roper
   has been in some trouble about her house. She is a little
   in arrears with her rent, and some bills have not been
   paid. As she explained that she has been brought into this
   by those dreadful Lupexes, I have consented to take the
   house into my own hands, and have given bills to one or
   two tradesmen for small amounts. Of course she will take
   them up, but it was the credit that was wanting. She
   will carry on the house, but I shall, in fact, be the
   proprietor. I suppose it will not suit you now to remain
   here, but don't you think I might make it comfortable
   enough for some of our fellows; say half-a-dozen, or so?
   That is Mrs Roper's idea, and I certainly think it is not
   a bad one. Our first efforts must be to get rid of the
   Lupexes. Miss Spruce goes next week. In the meantime we
   are all taking our meals up in our own rooms, so that
   there is nothing for the Lupexes to eat. But they don't
   seem to mind that, and still keep the sitting-room and best
   bedroom. We mean to lock them out after Tuesday, and send
   all their boxes to the public-house.

Poor Cradell! Eames, as he threw himself back upon his seat and contemplated the depth of misfortune
into which his friend had fallen, began to be almost in love with his own position. He himself
was, no doubt, a very miserable fellow. There was only one thing in life worth living for,
and that he could not get. He had been thinking for the last three days of throwing himself
before a locomotive steam-engine, and was not quite sure that he would not do it yet; but,
nevertheless, his place was a place among the gods as compared to that which poor Cradell had
selected for himself. To be not only the husband of Amelia Roper, but to have been driven to
take upon himself as his bride's fortune the whole of his future mother-in-law's debts! To
find himself the owner of a very indifferent lodging-house--the owner as regarded all responsibility,
though not the owner as regarded any possible profit! And then, above and almost worse than
all the rest, to find himself saddled with the Lupexes in the beginning of his career! Poor
Cradell indeed!

Eames had not taken his things away from the lodging-house before he left London, and therefore
determined to drive to Burton Crescent immediately on his arrival, not with the intention of
remaining there, even for a night, but that he might bid them farewell, speak his congratulations
to Amelia, and arrange for his final settlement with Mrs Roper. It should have been explained
in the last chapter that the earl had told him before parting with him that his want of success
with Lily would make no difference as regarded money. John had, of course, expostulated, saying
that he did not want anything, and would not, under his existing circumstances, accept anything;
but the earl was a man who knew how to have his own way, and in this matter did have it. Our
friend, therefore, was a man of wealth when he returned to London, and could tell Mrs Roper
that he would send her a cheque for her little balance as soon as he reached his office.

He arrived in the middle of the day,--not timing his return at all after the usual manner of
Government clerks, who generally manage to reach the metropolis not more than half an hour
before the moment at which they are bound to show themselves in their seats. But he had come
back two days before he was due, and had run away from the country as though London in May
to him were much pleasanter than the woods and fields. But neither had London nor the woods
and fields any influence on his return. He had gone down that he might throw himself at the
feet of Lily Dale,--gone down, as he now confessed to himself, with hopes almost triumphant,
and he had returned because Lily Dale would not have him at her feet. "I loved him,--him, Crosbie,--better
than all the world besides. It is still the same. I still love him better than all the world."
Those were the words which had driven him back to London; and having been sent away with such
words as those, it was little matter to him whether he reached his office a day or two sooner
or later. The little room in the city, even with the accompaniment of Sir Raffle's bell and
Sir Raffle's voice, would be now more congenial to him than Lady Julia's drawing-room. He would
therefore present himself to Sir Raffle on that very afternoon, and expel some interloper from
his seat. But he would first call in Burton Crescent and say farewell to the Ropers.

The door was opened for him by the faithful Jemima. "Mr Heames, Mr Heames! ho dear, ho dear!"
and the poor girl, who had always taken his side in the adventures of the lodging-house, raised
her hands on high and lamented the fate which had separated her favourite from its fortunes.
"I suppose you knows it all, Mister Johnny?" Mister Johnny said that he believed he did know
it all, and asked for the mistress of the house. "Yes, sure enough, she's at home. She don't
dare stir out much, 'cause of them Lupexes. Ain't this a pretty game? No dinner and no nothink!
Them boxes is Miss Spruce's. She's agoing now, this minute. You'll find 'em all upstairs in
the drawen-room." So upstairs into the drawing-room he went, and there he found the mother
and daughter, and with them Miss Spruce, tightly packed up in her bonnet and shawl. "Don't,
mother," Amelia was saying; "what's the good of going on in that way? If she chooses to go,
let her go."

"But she's been with me now so many years," said Mrs Roper, sobbing; "and I've always done
everything for her! Haven't I, now, Sally Spruce?" It struck Eames immediately that, though
he had been an inmate in the house for two years, he had never before heard that maiden lady's
Christian name. Miss Spruce was the first to see Eames as he entered the room. It is probable
that Mrs Roper's pathos might have produced some answering pathos on her part had she remained
unobserved, but the sight of a young man brought her back to her usual state of quiescence.
"I'm only an old woman," said she; "and here's Mr Eames come back again."

"How d'ye do, Mrs Roper? how d'ye do, Amelia?--how d'ye do, Miss Spruce?" and he shook hands
with them all.

"Oh, laws," said Mrs Roper, "you have given me such a start!"

"Dear me, Mr Eames; only think of your coming back in that way," said Amelia.

"Well, what way should I come back? You didn't hear me knock at the door, that's all. So Miss
Spruce is really going to leave you?"

"Isn't it dreadful, Mr Eames? Nineteen years we've been together;--taking both houses together,
Miss Spruce, we have, indeed." Miss Spruce, at this point, struggled very hard to convince
John Eames that the period in question had in truth extended over only eighteen years, but
Mrs Roper was authoritative, and would not permit it. "It's nineteen years if it's a day. No
one ought to know dates if I don't, and there isn't one in the world understands her ways unless
it's me. Haven't I been up to your bedroom every night, and with my own hand given you--" But
she stopped herself, and was too good a woman to declare before a young man what had been the
nature of her nightly ministrations to her guest.

"I don't think you'll be so comfortable anywhere else, Miss Spruce," said Eames.

"Comfortable! of course she won't," said Amelia. "But if I was mother I wouldn't have any more
words about it."

"It isn't the money I'm thinking of, but the feeling of it," said Mrs Roper. "The house will
be so lonely like. I shan't know myself; that I shan't. And now that things are all settled
so pleasantly, and that the Lupexes must go on Tuesday--I'll tell you what, Sally; I'll pay
for the cab myself, and I'll start off to Dulwich by the omnibus to-morrow, and settle it all
out of my own pocket. I will indeed. Come; there's the cab. Let me go down, and send him away."

"I'll do that," said Eames. "It's only sixpence, off the stand," Mrs Roper called to him as
he left the room. But the cabman got a shilling, and John, as he returned, found Jemima in
the act of carrying Miss Spruce's boxes back to her room. "So much the better for poor Caudle,"
said he to himself. "As he has gone into the trade it's well that he should have somebody that
will pay him."

Mrs Roper followed Miss Spruce up the stairs and Johnny was left with Amelia. "He's written
to you, I know," said she, with her face turned a little away from him. She was certainly very
handsome, but there was a hard, cross, almost sullen look about her, which robbed her countenance
of all its pleasantness. And yet she had no intention of being sullen with him.

"Yes," said John. "He has told me how it's all going to be."

"Well?" she said.

"Well?" said he.

"Is that all you've got to say?"

"I'll congratulate you, if you'll let me."

"Psha;--congratulations! I hate such humbug. If you've no feelings about it, I'm sure that
I've none. Indeed I don't know what's the good of feelings. They never did me any good. Are
you engaged to marry L. D.?"

"No, I am not."

"And you've nothing else to say to me?"

"Nothing,--except my hopes for your happiness. What else can I say? You are engaged to marry
my friend Cradell, and I think it will be a happy match."

She turned away her face further from him, and the look of it became even more sullen. Could
it be possible that at such a moment she still had a hope that he might come back to her?

"Good-bye, Amelia," he said, putting out his hand to her.

"And this is to be the last of you in this house!"

"Well, I don't know about that. I'll come and call upon you, if you'll let me, when you're
married."

"Yes," she said, "that there may be rows in the house, and noise, and jealousy,--as there have
been with that wicked woman upstairs. Not if I know it, you won't! John Eames, I wish I'd never
seen you. I wish we might have both fallen dead when we first met. I didn't think ever to have
cared for a man as I have cared for you. It's all trash and nonsense and foolery; I know that.
It's all very well for young ladies as can sit in drawing-rooms all their lives, but when a
woman has her way to make in the world it's all foolery. And such a hard way too to make as
mine is!"

"But it won't be hard now."

"Won't it? But I think it will. I wish you would try it. Not that I'm going to complain. I
never minded work, and as for company, I can put up with anybody. The world's not to be all
dancing and fiddling for the likes of me. I know that well enough. But--" and then she paused.

"What's the 'but' about, Amelia?"

"It's like you to ask me; isn't it?" To tell the truth he should not have asked her. "Never
mind. I'm not going to have any words with you. If you've been a knave I've been a fool, and
that's worse."

"But I don't think I have been a knave."

"I've been both," said the girl; "and both for nothing. After that you may go. I've told you
what I am, and I'll leave you to name yourself. I didn't think it was in me to have been such
a fool. It's that that frets me. Never mind, sir; it's all over now, and I wish you good-bye."

I do not think that there was the slightest reason why John should have again kissed her at
parting, but he did so. She bore it, not struggling with him; but she took his caress with
sullen endurance. "It'll be the last," she said. "Good-bye, John Eames."

"Good-bye, Amelia. Try to make him a good wife and then you'll be happy." She turned up her
nose at this, assuming a look of unutterable scorn. But she said nothing further, and then
he left the room. At the parlour door he met Mrs Roper, and had his parting words with her.

"I am so glad you came," said she. "It was just that word you said that made Miss Spruce stay.
Her money is so ready, you know! And so you've had it all out with her about Cradell. She'll
make him a good wife, she will indeed;--much better than you've been giving her credit for."

"I don't doubt she'll be a very good wife."

"You see, Mr Eames, it's all over now, and we understand each other; don't we? It made me very
unhappy when she was setting her cap at you; it did indeed. She is my own daughter, and I couldn't
go against her;--could I? But I knew it wasn't in any way suiting. Laws, I know the difference.
She's good enough for him any day of the week, Mr Eames."

"That she is,--Saturdays or Sundays," said Johnny, not knowing exactly what he ought to say.

"So she is; and if he does his duty by her she won't go astray in hers by him. And as for you,
Mr Eames, I am sure I've always felt it an honour and a pleasure to have you in the house;
and if ever you could use a good word in sending to me any of your young men, I'd do by them
as a mother should; I would indeed. I know I've been to blame about those Lupexes, but haven't
I suffered for it, Mr Eames? And it was difficult to know at first; wasn't it? And as to you
and Amelia, if you would send any of your young men to try, there couldn't be anything more
of that kind, could there? I know it hasn't all been just as it should have been--that is as
regards you; but I should like to hear you say that you've found me honest before you went.
I have tried to be honest, I have indeed."

Eames assured her that he was convinced of her honesty, and that he had never thought of impugning
her character either in regard to those unfortunate people, the Lupexes, or in reference to
other matters. "He did not think," he said, "that any young men would consult him as to their
lodgings; but if he could be of any service to her, he would." Then he bade her good-bye, and
having bestowed half-a-sovereign on the faithful Jemima, he took a long farewell of Burton
Crescent. Amelia had told him not to come and see her when she should be married, and he had
resolved that he would take her at her word. So he walked off from the Crescent, not exactly
shaking the dust from his feet, but resolving that he would know no more either of its dust
or of its dirt. Dirt enough he had encountered there certainly, and he was now old enough to
feel that the inmates of Mrs Roper's house had not been those among whom a resting-place for
his early years should judiciously have been sought. But he had come out of the fire comparatively
unharmed, and I regret to say that he felt but little for the terrible scorchings to which
his friend had been subjected and was about to subject himself. He was quite content to look
at the matter exactly as it was looked at by Mrs Roper. Amelia was good enough for Joseph Cradell--any
day of the week. Poor Cradell, of whom in these pages after this notice no more will be heard!
I cannot but think that a hard measure of justice was meted out to him, in proportion to the
extent of his sins. More weak and foolish than our friend and hero he had been, but not to
my knowledge more wicked. But it is to the vain and foolish that the punishments fall;--and
to them they fall so thickly and constantly that the thinker is driven to think that vanity
and folly are of all sins those which may be the least forgiven. As for Cradell I may declare
that he did marry Amelia, that he did, with some pride, take the place of master of the house
at the bottom of Mrs Roper's table, and that he did make himself responsible for all Mrs Roper's
debts. Of his future fortunes there is not space to speak in these pages.

Going away from the Crescent, Eames had himself driven to his office, which he reached just
as the men were leaving it, at four o'clock. Cradell was gone, so that he did not see him on
that afternoon; but he had an opportunity of shaking hands with Mr Love, who treated him with
all the smiling courtesy due to an official bigwig,--for a private secretary, if not absolutely
a big-wig, is semi-big, and entitled to a certain amount of reverence;--and he passed Mr Kissing
in the passage, hurrying along as usual with a huge book under his arm. Mr Kissing, hurried
as he was, stopped his shuffling feet; but Eames only looked at him, hardly honouring him with
the acknowledgment of a nod of his head. Mr Kissing, however, was not offended; he knew that
the private secretary of the First Commissioner had been the guest of an earl; and what more
than a nod could be expected from him? After that John made his way into the august presence
of Sir Raffle, and found that great man putting on his shoes in the presence of FitzHoward.
FitzHoward blushed; but the shoes had not been touched by him, as he took occasion afterwards
to inform John Eames.

Sir Raffle was all smiles and civility. "Delighted to see you back, Eames: am, upon my word;
though I and FitzHoward have got on capitally in your absence; haven't we, FitzHoward?"

"Oh, yes," drawled FitzHoward. "I haven't minded it for a time, just while Eames has been away."

"You're much too idle to keep at it, I know; but your bread will be buttered for you elsewhere,
so it doesn't signify. My compliments to the duchess when you see her." Then FitzHoward went.
"And how's my dear old friend?" asked Sir Raffle, as though of all men living Lord De Guest
were the one for whom he had the strongest and the oldest love. And yet he must have known
that John Eames knew as much about it as he did himself. But there are men who have the most
lively gratification in calling lords and marquises their friends, though they know that nobody
believes a word of what they say,--even though they know how great is the odium they incur,
and how lasting is the ridicule which their vanity produces. It is a gentle insanity which
prevails in the outer courts of every aristocracy; and as it brings with itself considerable
annoyance and but a lukewarm pleasure, it should not be treated with too keen a severity.

"And how's my dear old friend?" Eames assured him that his dear old friend was all right, that
Lady Julia was all right, that the dear old place was all right. Sir Raffle now spoke as though
the "dear old place" were quite well known to him. "Was the game doing pretty well? Was there
a promise of birds?" Sir Raffle's anxiety was quite intense, and expressed with almost familiar
affection. "And, by-the-by, Eames, where are you living at present?"

"Well, I'm not settled. I'm at the Great Western Railway Hotel at this moment."

"Capital house, very; only it's expensive if you stay there the whole season." Johnny had no
idea of remaining there beyond one night, but he said nothing as to this. "By-the-by, you might
as well come and dine with us to-morrow. Lady Buffle is most anxious to know you. There'll
be one or two with us. I did ask my friend Dumbello, but there's some nonsense going on in
the House, and he thinks that he can't get away." Johnny was more gracious than Lord Dumbello,
and accepted the invitation. "I wonder what Lady Buffle will be like?" he said to himself,
as he walked away from the office.

He had turned into the Great Western Hotel, not as yet knowing where to look for a home; and
there we will leave him, eating his solitary mutton-chop at one of those tables which are so
comfortable to the eye, but which are so comfortless in reality. I speak not now with reference
to the excellent establishment which has been named, but to the nature of such tables in general.
A solitary mutton-chop in an hotel coffee-room is not a banquet to be envied by any god; and
if the mutton-chop be converted into soup, fish, little dishes, big dishes, and the rest, the
matter becomes worse and not better. What comfort are you to have, seated alone on that horsehair
chair, staring into the room and watching the waiters as they whisk about their towels? No
one but an Englishman has ever yet thought of subjecting himself to such a position as that!
But here we will leave John Eames, and in doing so I must be allowed to declare that only now,
at this moment, has he entered on his manhood. Hitherto he has been a hobbledehoy,--a calf,
as it were, who had carried his calfishness later into life than is common with calves; but
who did not, perhaps, on that account, give promise of making a worse ox than the rest of them.
His life hitherto, as recorded in these pages, had afforded him no brilliant success, had hardly
qualified him for the role of hero which he has been made to play. I feel that I have been
in fault in giving such prominence to a hobbledehoy, and that I should have told my story better
had I brought Mr Crosbie more conspicuously forward on my canvas. He at any rate has gotten
to himself a wife--as a hero always should do; whereas I must leave my poor friend Johnny without
any matrimonial prospects.

It was thus that he thought of himself as he sat moping over his solitary table in the hotel
coffee-room. He acknowledged to himself that he had not hitherto been a man; but at the same
time he made some resolution which, I trust, may assist him in commencing his manhood from
this date.

CHAPTER LX

Conclusion

It was early in June that Lily went up to her uncle at the Great House, pleading for Hopkins,--pleading
that to Hopkins might be restored all the privileges of head gardener at the Great House. There
was some absurdity in this, seeing that he had never really relinquished his privileges; but
the manner of the quarrel had been in this wise.

There was in those days, and had been for years, a vexed question between Hopkins and Jolliffe
the bailiff on the matter of stable manure. Hopkins had pretended to the right of taking what
he required from the farmyard, without asking leave of any one. Jolliffe in return had hinted,
that if this were so, Hopkins would take it all. "But I can't eat it," Hopkins had said. Jolliffe
merely grunted, signifying by the grunt, as Hopkins thought, that though a gardener couldn't
eat a mountain of manure fifty feet long and fifteen high,--couldn't eat in the body,--he might
convert it into things edible for his own personal use. And so there had been a great feud.
The unfortunate squire had of course been called on to arbitrate, and having postponed his
decision by every contrivance possible to him, had at last been driven by Jolliffe to declare
that Hopkins should take nothing that was not assigned to him. Hopkins, when the decision was
made known to him by his master, bit his old lips, and turned round upon his old heel, speechless.
"You'll find it's so at all other places," said the squire, apologetically. "Other places!"
sneered Hopkins. Where would he find other gardeners like himself? It is hardly necessary to
declare that from that moment he resolved that he would abide by no such order. Jolliffe on
the next morning informed the squire that the order had been broken, and the squire fretted
and fumed, wishing that Jolliffe were well buried under the mountain in question. "If they
all is to do as they like," said Jolliffe, "then nobody won't care for nobody." The squire
understood than an order if given must be obeyed, and therefore, with many inner groanings
of the spirit, resolved that war must be waged against Hopkins.

On the following morning he found the old man himself wheeling a huge barrow of manure round
from the yard into the kitchen-garden. Now, on ordinary occasions, Hopkins was not required
to do with his own hands work of that description. He had a man under him who hewed wood, and
carried water, and wheeled barrows,--one man always, and often two. The squire knew when he
saw him that he was sinning, and bade him stop upon his road.

"Hopkins," he said, "why didn't you ask for what you wanted, before you took it?" The old man
put down the barrow on the ground, looked up in his master's face, spat into his hands, and
then again resumed his barrow. "Hopkins, that won't do," said the squire. "Stop where you are."

"What won't do?" said Hopkins, still holding the barrow from the ground, but not as yet progressing.

"Put it down, Hopkins," and Hopkins did put it down. "Don't you know that you are flatly disobeying
my orders?"

"Squire, I've been here about this place going on nigh seventy years."

"If you've been going on a hundred and seventy it wouldn't do that there should be more than
one master. I'm the master here, and I intend to be so to the end. Take that manure back into
the yard."

"Back into the yard?" said Hopkins, very slowly.

"Yes; back into the yard."

"What,--afore all their faces?"

"Yes; you've disobeyed me before all their faces?"

Hopkins paused a moment, looking away from the squire, and shaking his head as though he had
need of deep thought, but by the aid of deep thought had come at last to a right conclusion.
Then he resumed the barrow, and putting himself almost into a trot, carried away his prize
into the kitchen-garden. At the pace which he went it would have been beyond the squire's power
to stop him, nor would Mr Dale have wished to come to a personal encounter with his servant.
But he called after the man in dire wrath that if he were not obeyed the disobedient servant
should rue the consequences for ever. Hopkins, equal to the occasion, shook his head as he
trotted on, deposited his load at the foot of the cucumber-frames, and then at once returning
to his master, tendered to him the key of the greenhouse.

"Master," said Hopkins, speaking as best he could with his scanty breath, "there it is;--there's
the key; of course I don't want no warning, and doesn't care about my week's wages. I'll be
out of the cottage afore night, and as for the work'us, I suppose they'll let me in at once,
if your honour'll give 'em a line."

Now as Hopkins was well known by the squire to be the owner of three or four hundred pounds,
the hint about the workhouse must be allowed to have been melodramatic.

"Don't be a fool," said the squire, almost gnashing his teeth.

"I know I've been a fool," said Hopkins, "about that 'ere doong; my feelings has been too much
for me. When a man's feelings has been too much for him, he'd better just take hisself off,
and lie in the work'us till he dies." And then he again tendered the key. But the squire did
not take the key, and so Hopkins went on. "I s'pose I'd better just see to the lights and the
like of that, till you've suited yourself, Mr Dale. It 'ud be a pity all them grapes should
go off, and they, as you may say, all one as fit for the table. It's a long way the best crop
I ever see on 'em. I've been that careful with 'em that I haven't had a natural night's rest,
not since February. There ain't nobody about this place as understands grapes, nor yet anywhere
nigh that could be got at. My lord's head man is wery ignorant; but even if he knew ever so,
of course he couldn't come here. I suppose I'd better keep the key till you're suited, Mr Dale."

Then for a fortnight there was an interregnum in the gardens, terrible in the annals of Allington.
Hopkins lived in his cottage indeed, and looked most sedulously after the grapes. In looking
after the grapes, too, he took the greenhouses under his care; but he would have nothing to
do with the outer gardens, took no wages, returning the amount sent to him back to the squire,
and insisted with everybody that he had been dismissed. He went about with some terrible horticultural
implement always in his hand, with which it was said that he intended to attack Jolliffe; but
Jolliffe prudently kept out of his way.

As soon as it had been resolved by Mrs Dale and Lily that the flitting from the Small House
at Allington was not to be accomplished, Lily communicated the fact to Hopkins.

"Miss," said he, "when I said them few words to you and your mamma, I knew that you would listen
to reason."

This was no more than Lily had expected; that Hopkins should claim the honour of having prevailed
by his arguments was a matter of course.

"Yes," said Lily; "we've made up our minds to stay. Uncle wishes it."

"Wishes it! Laws, miss; it ain't only wishes. And we all wishes it. Why, now, look at the reason
of the thing. Here's this here house--"

"But, Hopkins, it's decided. We're going to stay. What I want to know is this; can you come
at once and help me to unpack?"

"What! this very evening, as is--"

"Yes, now; we want to have the things about again before they come back from Guestwick."

Hopkins scratched his head and hesitated, not wishing to yield to any proposition that could
be considered as childish; but he gave way at last, feeling that the work itself was a good
work. Mrs Dale also assented, laughing at Lily for her folly as she did so, and in this way
the things were unpacked very quickly, and the alliance between Lily and Hopkins became, for
the time, very close. This work of unpacking and resettling was not yet over, when the battle
of the manure broke out, and therefore it was that Hopkins, when his feelings had become altogether
too much for him "about the doong," came at last to Lily, and laying down at her feet all the
weight and all the glory of his sixty odd years of life, implored her to make matters straight
for him. "It's been a killing me, miss, so it has; to see the way they've been a cutting that
'sparagus. It ain't cutting at all. It's just hocking it up;--what is fit, and what isn't,
all together. And they've been a-putting the plants in where I didn't mean 'em, though they
know'd I didn't mean 'em. I've stood by, miss, and said never a word. I'd a died sooner. But,
Miss Lily, what my sufferings have been, 'cause of my feelings getting the better of me about
that--you know, miss--nobody will ever tell;--nobody--nobody--nobody." Then Hopkins turned
away and wept.

"Uncle," said Lily, creeping close up against his chair, "I want to ask you a great favour."

"A great favour. Well, I don't think I shall refuse you anything at present. It isn't to ask
another earl to the house,--is it?"

"Another earl!" said Lily.

"Yes; haven't you heard? Miss Bell has been here this morning, insisting that I should have
over Lord De Guest and his sister for the marriage. It seems that there was some scheming between
Bell and Lady Julia."

"Of course you'll ask them."

"Of course I must. I've no way out of it. It'll be all very well for Bell, who'll be off to
Wales with her lover; but what am I to do with the earl and Lady Julia, when they're gone?
Will you come and help me?"

In answer to this, Lily of course promised that she would come and help. "Indeed," said she,
"I thought we were all asked up for the day. And now for my favour. Uncle, you must forgive
poor Hopkins."

"Forgive a fiddlestick!" said the squire.

"No, but you must. You can't think how unhappy he is."

"How can I forgive a man who won't forgive me. He goes prowling about the place doing nothing;
and he sends me back his wages, and he looks as though he were going to murder some one; and
all because he wouldn't do as he was told. How am I to forgive such a man as that?"

"But, uncle, why not?"

"It would be his forgiving me. He knows very well that he may come back whenever he pleases;
and, indeed, for the matter of that he has never gone away."

"But he is so very unhappy."

"What can I do to make him happier?"

"Just go down to his cottage and tell him that you forgive him."

"Then he'll argue with me."

"No; I don't think he will. He is too much down in the world for arguing now."

"Ah! you don't know him as I do. All the misfortunes in the world wouldn't stop that man's
conceit. Of course I'll go if you ask me, but it seems to me that I'm made to knock under to
everybody. I hear a great deal about other people's feelings, but I don't know that mine are
very much thought of." He was not altogether in a happy mood, and Lily almost regretted that
she had persevered; but she did succeed in carrying him off across the garden to the cottage,
and as they went together she promised him that she would think of him always,--always. The
scene with Hopkins cannot be described now, as it would take too many of our few remaining
pages. It resulted, I am afraid I must confess, in nothing more triumphant to the squire than
a treaty of mutual forgiveness. Hopkins acknowledged, with much self-reproach, that his feelings
had been too many for him; but then, look at his provocation! He could not keep his tongue
from that matter, and certainly said as much in his own defence as he did in confession of
his sins. The substantial triumph was altogether his, for nobody again ever dared to interfere
with his operations in the farmyard. He showed his submission to his master mainly by consenting
to receive his wages for the two weeks which he had passed in idleness.

Owing to this little accident, Lily was not so much oppressed by Hopkins as she had expected
to be in that matter of their altered plans; but this salvation did not extend to Mrs Hearn,
to Mrs Crump, or, above all, to Mrs Boyce. They, all of them, took an interest more or less
strong in the Hopkins controversy; but their interest in the occupation of the Small House
was much stronger, and it was found useless to put Mrs Hearn off with the gardener's persistent
refusal of his wages, when she was big with inquiry whether the house was to be painted inside,
as well as out. "Ah," said she, "I think I'll go and look at lodgings at Guestwick myself,
and pack up some of my beds." Lily made no answer to this, feeling that it was a part of that
punishment which she had expected. "Dear, dear," said Mrs Crump to the two girls; "well, to
be sure, we should 'a been 'lone without 'ee, and mayhap we might 'a got worse in your place;
but why did 'ee go and fasten up all your things in them big boxes, just to unfasten 'em all
again?"

"We changed our minds, Mrs Crump," said Bell, with some severity.

"Yees, I know ye changed your mindses. Well, it's all right for loiks o' ye, no doubt; but
if we changes our mindses, we hears of it."

"So, it seems, do we!" said Lily. "But never mind, Mrs Crump. Do you send us our letters up
early, and then we won't quarrel."

"Oh, letters! Drat them for letters. I wish there weren't no sich things. There was a man here
yesterday with his imperence. I don't know where he come from,--down from Lun'on, I b'leeve:
and this was wrong, and that was wrong, and everything was wrong; and then he said he'd have
me discharged the sarvice."

"Dear me, Mrs Crump; that wouldn't do at all."

"Discharged the sarvice! Tuppence farden a day. So I told 'un to discharge hisself, and take
all the old bundles and things away upon his shoulders. Letters indeed! What business have
they with post-missusses, if they cannot pay 'em better nor tuppence farden a day?" And in
this way, under the shelter of Mrs Crump's storm of wrath against the inspector who had visited
her, Lily and Bell escaped much that would have fallen upon their own heads; but Mrs Boyce
still remained. I may here add, in order that Mrs Crump's history may be carried on to the
farthest possible point, that she was not "discharged the sarvice," and that she still receives
her twopence farthing a day from the Crown. "That's a bitter old lady," said the inspector
to the man who was driving him. "Yes, sir; they all says the same about she. There ain't none
of 'em get much change out of Mrs Crump."

Bell and Lily went together also to Mrs Boyce's. "If she makes herself very disagreeable, I
shall insist upon talking of your marriage," said Lily.

"I've not the slightest objection," said Bell; "only I don't know what there can be to say
about it. Marrying the doctor is such a very commonplace sort of thing."

"Not a bit more commonplace than marrying the parson," said Lily.

"Oh, yes, it is. Parsons' marriages are often very grand affairs. They come in among county
people. That's their luck in life. Doctors never do; nor lawyers. I don't think lawyers ever
get married in the country. They're supposed to do it up in London. But a country doctor's
wedding is not a thing to be talked about much."

Mrs Boyce probably agreed in this view of the matter, seeing that she did not choose the coming
marriage as her first subject of conversation. As soon as the two girls were seated she flew
away immediately to the house, and began to express her very great surprise,--her surprise
and her joy also,--at the sudden change which had been made in their plans. "It is so much
nicer, you know," said she, "that things should be pleasant among relatives."

"Things always have been tolerably pleasant with us," said Bell.

"Oh, yes; I'm sure of that. I've always said it was quite a pleasure to see you and your uncle
together. And when we heard about your all having to leave--"

"But we didn't have to leave, Mrs Boyce. We were going to leave because we thought mamma would
be more comfortable in Guestwick; and now we're not going to leave, because we've all 'changed
our mindses,' as Mrs Crump calls it."

"And is it true the house is going to be painted?" asked Mrs Boyce.

"I believe it is true," said Lily.

"Inside and out?"

"It must be done some day," said Bell.

"Yes, to be sure; but I must say it is generous of the squire. There's such a deal of wood-work
about your house. I know I wish the Ecclesiastical Commissioners would paint ours; but nobody
ever does anything for the clergy. I'm sure I'm delighted you're going to stay. As I said to
Mr Boyce, what should we ever have done without you? I believe the squire had made up his mind
that he would not let the place."

"I don't think he ever has let it."

"And if there was nobody in it, it would all go to rack and ruin; wouldn't it? Had your mamma
to pay anything for the lodgings she engaged at Guestwick?"

"Upon my word, I don't know. Bell can tell you better about that than I, as Dr Crofts settled
it. I suppose Dr Crofts tells her everything." And so the conversation was changed, and Mrs
Boyce was made to understand that whatever further mystery there might be, it would not be
unravelled on that occasion.

It was settled that Dr Crofts and Bell should be married about the middle of June, and the
squire determined to give what grace he could to the ceremony by opening his own house on the
occasion. Lord De Guest and Lady Julia were invited by special arrangement between her ladyship
and Bell, as has been before explained. The colonel also with Lady Fanny came up from Torquay
on the occasion, this being the first visit made by the colonel to his paternal roof for many
years. Bernard did not accompany his father. He had not yet gone abroad, but there were circumstances
which made him feel that he would not find himself comfortable at the wedding. The service
was performed by Mr Boyce, assisted, as the County Chronicle very fully remarked, by the Reverend
John Joseph Jones, M.A., late of Jesus College, Cambridge, and curate of St. Peter's, Northgate,
Guestwick; the fault of which little advertisement was this,--that as none of the readers of
the paper had patience to get beyond the Reverend John Joseph Jones, the fact of Bell's marriage
with Dr Crofts was not disseminated as widely as might have been wished.

The marriage went off very nicely. The squire was upon his very best behaviour, and welcomed
his guests as though he really enjoyed their presence there in his halls. Hopkins, who was
quite aware that he had been triumphant, decorated the old rooms with mingled flowers and greenery
with an assiduous care which pleased the two girls mightily. And during this work of wreathing
and decking there was one little morsel of feeling displayed which may as well be told in these
last lines. Lily had been encouraging the old man while Bell for a moment had been absent.

"I wish it had been for thee, my darling!" he said; "I wish it had been for thee!"

"It is much better as it is, Hopkins," she answered, solemnly.

"Not with him, though," he went on, "not with him. I wouldn't 'a hung a bough for him. But
with t'other one."

Lily said no word further. She knew that the man was expressing the wishes of all around her.
She said no word further, and then Bell returned to them.

But no one at the wedding was so gay as Lily,--so gay, so bright, and so wedding-like. She
flirted with the old earl till he declared that he would marry her himself. No one seeing her
that evening, and knowing nothing of her immediate history, would have imagined that she herself
had been cruelly jilted some six or eight months ago. And those who did know her could not
imagine that what she then suffered had hit her so hard, that no recovery seemed possible for
her. But though no recovery, as she herself believed, was possible for her--though she was
as a man whose right arm had been taken from him in the battle, still all the world had not
gone with that right arm. In these men depth of learning was associated with width of culture.
Others, such as Moses and Judah Minz, Jacob Weil, and Israel Isserlein, whose influence was
paramount in Germany in the fifteenth century, were less cultivated, but their learning was associated
with a geniality and sense of humor that make their "Responses" very human and very entertaining.
There is the same homely, affectionate air in the collection of Minhagim, or Customs, known
as the Maharil, which belongs to the same period. "You're a dear good man, and I know you'll be good to her," she said to Crofts just
as he was about to start with his bride.

"I'll try, at any rate," he answered.

"And I shall expect you to be good to me too. Remember you have married the whole family; and,
sir, you mustn't believe a word of what that bad man says in his novels about mothers-in-law.
He has done a great deal of harm, and shut half the ladies in England out of their daughters'
houses."

"He shan't shut Mrs Dale out of mine."

"Remember he doesn't. Now, good-bye." So the bride and bridegroom went off, and Lily was left
to flirt with Lord De Guest.

Of whom else is it necessary that a word or two should be said before I allow the weary pen
to fall from my hand? The squire, after much inward struggling on the subject, had acknowledged
to himself that his sister-in-law had not received from him that kindness which she had deserved.
He had acknowledged this, purporting to do his best to amend his past errors; and I think I
may say that his efforts in that line would not be received ungraciously by Mrs Dale. I am
inclined, therefore, to think that life at Allington, both at the Great House and at the Small,
would soon become pleasanter than it used to be in former days. Lily soon got the Balmoral
boots, or, at least, soon learned that the power of getting them as she pleased had devolved
upon her from her uncle's gift; so that she talked even of buying the squirrel's cage; but
I am not aware that her extravagance led her as far as that.

Lord de Courcy we left suffering dreadfully from gout and ill-temper at Courcy Castle. Yes,
indeed! To him in his latter days life did not seem to offer much that was comfortable. His
wife had now gone from him, and declared positively to her son-in-law that no earthly consideration
should ever induce her to go back again;--"not if I were to starve!" she said. By which she
intended to signify that she would be firm in her resolve, even though she should thereby lose
her carriage and horses. In one sense it is an encyclopedia, but it is an encyclopedia written
with style. For its power to grapple with vast materials, this code has few rivals and no
superiors in other literatures. Maimonides completed its compilation
in 1180, having spent ten years over it.

As regards Crosbie, I am inclined to believe that he did again recover his power at his office.
He was Mr Butterwell's master, and the master also of Mr Optimist, and the major. He knew his
business, and could do it, which was more, perhaps, than might fairly be said of any of the
other three. Under such circumstances he was sure to get in his hand, and lead again. But elsewhere
his star did not recover its ascendancy. He dined at his club almost daily, and there were
those with whom he habitually formed some little circle. But he was not the Crosbie of former
days,--the Crosbie known in Belgravia and in St. James's Street. He had taken his little vessel
bravely out into the deep waters, and had sailed her well while fortune stuck close to him.
But he had forgotten his nautical rules, and success had made him idle. His plummet and lead
had not been used, and he had kept no look-out ahead. Therefore the first rock he met shivered
his bark to pieces. His wife, the Lady Alexandrina, is to be seen in the one-horse carriage
with her mother at Baden-Baden.