Guilt and fear were the emotions that had driven Hamlin to this rather hysterical threat. Lawler
resisted an impulse to laugh, though he felt a pulse of grim humor shoot through him.

To his knowledge--excepting Hamlin's predilection to rustle cattle--the man was harmless. He
never had been known to draw a gun, even in self-defense, and Lawler was convinced that there
was not sufficient provocation for him to break one of the rules that had governed him until
now. Hamlin might be goaded, or frightened, into using the rifle, but Lawler had no intention
of goading or frightening him. In fact, being aware of the reason for Hamlin's belligerence,
he had no intention of acquainting the man with the knowledge of what had happened the night
before. At least, not at this instant.

Lawler's lips wore a shadowy smile.

"I reckon you don't know me, Hamlin?" he said.

"I know you mighty well, Lawler," snapped Hamlin; "you heard me mention your name!"

"Then you've got a new way of greeting your friends, eh--with a rifle. Well, put it down and
open the door. There's some things I want to say to you."

"What about?" asked Hamlin, suspiciously. Overwhelming every other thought in his mind was
the conviction that Davies and Harris had apprised Lawler of what had happened the night before,
and that Lawler had come to capture him, single-handed.

"About Ruth."

The wild gleam in Hamlin's eyes began to dull. However, he was still suspicious.

"You seen any of your men this mornin'--Davies or Harris?" he asked.

"Davies and Harris went to town last night. I reckon they didn't get back yet. What's Davies
and Harris got to do with me visiting you?"

"Nothin'." There was relief in Hamlin's voice. The muzzle of the rifle wavered; the weapon
was withdrawn and the slide closed. Then the door slowly opened, and Hamlin appeared in it,
a six-shooter in hand.

"If you're foolin' me, Kane Lawler, I'll sure bore you a-plenty!" he threatened.

"Shucks!" Lawler advanced to the door, ignoring the heavy pistol, which was shoved close to
his body as he walked into the cabin, Hamlin retreating before him.

"Hamlin, you're losing whatever sense you had," said Lawler as he halted near the center of
the big room. There were three rooms, their doors opening from the one in which Lawler and
Hamlin stood.

"Meanin' what?" demanded Hamlin, nervously fingering the six-shooter.

It was clear that Hamlin was impressed with the repressed force that he could see in Lawler;
with the slumbering energy that Lawler's lithe, sinewy body suggested; with the man's complete
lack of fear and with the cold confidence that swam in his steady eyes.

Hamlin did not know at this minute whether or not he had meant to shoot Lawler. He believed
that if Lawler had told him he had come to take him for blotting out the Circle L brand in
the arroyo the preceding night he would have killed Lawler. But he was not sure. Something
about Lawler made the thought of shooting him seem ridiculous. It would take a lot of provocation
for any man to kill Lawler, for something about Lawler seemed to hint that it couldn't be done.

"Meaning that you are old enough to know that you can't keep on rustling my cattle without
getting in trouble."

"Ah!" exclaimed Hamlin, his breath hissing through his teeth as he sucked it in with a gasp;
"you sneaked on me, damn you!"

He threw the muzzle of the pistol up, his body stiffening, his eyes glittering with the malignance
that had been in them when he had been looking out at Lawler through the aperture in the door.

"You know about that deal, an' you've come for me. You tried to fool me, eh--tellin' me that
you didn't see Davies an' Harris. Well, damn your hide you ain't goin' to take me; I'll blow
you to hell first!"

Lawler's eyes were steady and unblinking as he watched Hamlin; they bored into Hamlin's with
a compelling intensity, that brought a conviction of futility into Hamlin's soul. They were
cold eyes--cold as icebergs, Hamlin thought as he watched them; but they seemed to flame also,
to flame with a fire that was cold as the ice in them.

The terrible power of them, and the promise of volcanic action back in them; the awful confidence
that shone in them; the threat compelling Hamlin against his will, deadening his muscles, jumbling
his thoughts--brought chaos into the man's brain, and he stood, his mouth agape with wonder
over the thing that was happening to him, as Lawler walked steadily to him. He made no resistance
as Lawler deliberately wrenched the pistol from his hand and as deliberately walked to a side
wall and placed it upon a shelf.

Hamlin stood, nerveless and pallid, for an instant, watching Lawler's movements--until Lawler
turned and faced him again. Then he staggered to a chair and dropped into it, lowering his
head dejectedly, sitting with his hands folded, completely subjected.

Lawler would hang him, now. Lawler would take him to the Circle L and turn him over to Blackburn
and the other men of the outfit. And Blackburn would hang him, for Blackburn had told him he
would. Or, if Lawler didn't take him to Blackburn he would take him to the sheriff. He would
be hanged then, but he would go to the new prison at the capital, and Ruth would have to stay
on here to do the real suffering for his misdeeds.

"You damned fool!" came Lawler's voice into the vacuumlike stillness of the cabin. "You haven't
got nerve enough to shoot a coyote!"

Hamlin knew it; he knew, now, at least, that he hadn't had nerve enough to shoot Lawler. He
cringed under Lawler's contemptuous tone. And then he became aware that Lawler was speaking again.

"I'm giving you another chance. I'm letting you off, clean. For Ruth's sake.

"Look here, Hamlin!"

Hamlin's chin was caught in an iron grasp and he found himself looking into the terrible eyes.
He saw grim pity in the eyes and he shuddered.

"Ruth knows you're stealing cattle. Everybody knows it, now. Who is buying them?"

"Singleton."

"Singleton!" Lawler's voice snapped with astonishment. "Dave Singleton, Lefingwell's old range
boss?"

Hamlin nodded. And then the grip of Lawler's fingers on his chin relaxed. He heard Lawler step
back, but he did not lift his head for a few minutes, during which a strained silence descended
upon the room. Then he covertly raised his head, to see Lawler standing with his arms folded
over his chest, watching him.

Lawler had not suspected Singleton. Between himself and Singleton there had always been a lack
of ordinary cordiality, a constraint closely approaching dislike; but Lawler had never entertained
a suspicion that Lefingwell's range boss was dishonest.

Hamlin was a moral weakling, he knew. Everybody in the Wolf River section knew it. Hamlin was
lazy and shiftless, seemingly contented to drift along in an aimless way, regardless of what
happened to him. There was at Hamlin's feet some of the wealth that other cattlemen of the
district were gaining. He had proved on a quarter-section of good grass land amid plenty of
water, and yet he chose to steal cattle rather than raise them.

Lawler's pity for the man was stronger than the resentment he felt. Hamlin was Ruth's father,
though looking at him as he sat dejectedly in the chair, Lawler found it hard to discern the
relationship.

"How long has Singleton been buying cattle from you?"

"About a year. I sold him what stock I had, before--before I got to runnin' my brand on other
folks' stock, an' he hinted he wasn't particular whose cattle I got, long as he could get 'em
under the market price."

"Does Singleton come here?"

"Sometimes--mostly nights."

Lawler's quick conclusion was that Ruth must have seen Singleton at the cabin, must have noted
that the visits seemed surreptitious. Perhaps she had watched, convincing herself of her father's
guilt. Lawler had wondered how she had gained the knowledge she seemed to have, and Singleton's
visits must be the explanation.

Hamlin had bowed his head again after a swift glance at Lawler. He stiffened when he felt Lawler
at his side again, for there had come into the atmosphere of the cabin a premonitory chill
which warned him that Lawler was on the verge of action.

But he was not prepared for what happened.

Lawler's sinewy hands fell on his shoulders. The fingers bit deeply into the flesh, drawing
a groan of pain from Hamlin. He was lifted to his feet--off his feet, so that he dangled in
the air like a pendulum. He was suspended by the shoulders, Lawler's fingers gripping him like
iron hooks; he was shaken until his feet, powerless to retard the movement, were flopping back
and forth wildly, and his teeth rattled despite his efforts to clench them. It seemed to him
that Lawler would snap his head from his shoulders, so viciously did Lawler shake him. Then
suddenly the terrible fingers relaxed, and Hamlin reeled and swayed, dizzy and weak from the
violence of movement. He was trying to keep his feet solidly on the floor when he felt Lawler's
fingers at his throat.

To his astonishment, the fingers did not sink into the flesh. They touched his throat lightly,
and he dazedly met Lawler's eyes, burning, with a passion he never had seen in them before.
And Lawler's voice was dry and light, but steady--so steady and cold that Hamlin realized that
only the man's complete mastery of himself had kept him from committing murder.

"Hamlin, I ought to kill you. I'm letting you off on one condition--that you break off with
Singleton, and that you keep silent about the things we both know. If you confess to Ruth that
you've been rustling cattle, or if you tell her--or hint of it--that I know you've been rustling--I'll
tear you apart!

"You're like a lot of other damned, weak-kneed polecats. You've got a girl who is good as gold,
and you're making a regular hell for her. She's wise to what you've been doing--she suspects
you. And from now on you're going to show her that she was wrong--that you're straight and square.

"There's a job for you over at the Circle L--if you want it. I'll throw things in your way;
I'll put you on your feet again--give you stock and tools, and pretend I've sold them to you.
I'll do anything to keep you square. But if you tell Ruth, I'll kill you as sure as my name
is Lawler!"

"I'm agreein'," said Hamlin, thickly. "I ain't wanted to do the things I've been doin'. But
things didn't go right, an' Singleton--damn it, Lawler; I never liked the man, an' I don't
know why I've been doin' what I have been doin'. But I've wanted to do somethin' for Ruth--so's
she could quit teachin' an' live like a lady. I thought if I could get a bunch of coin together
that mebbe she'd have----"

"She'd see you dead before she'd touch it," scoffed Lawler.

"Mebbe I'd be better off if I was dead," said Hamlin, glumly.

"You'll die, right enough, if you don't keep your word to me," grimly declared Lawler.

He strode to the door, leaped upon Red King and rode away.

Inside the cabin, Hamlin got to his feet and swayed toward the door, reaching it and looking
out, to see Lawler riding rapidly toward Willets.

CHAPTER III

A WOMAN'S EYES

There had been a day when Willets was but a name, designating a water tank and a railroad siding
where panting locomotives, hot and dry from a long run through an arid, sandy desert that stretched
westward from the shores of civilization, rested, while begrimed, overalled men adjusted a
metal spout which poured refreshing water into gaping reservoirs.

In that day Willets sat in the center of a dead, dry section, swathed in isolation so profound
that passengers in the coaches turned to one another with awe in their voices and spoke of
God and the insignificance of life.

But there was a small river near the water tank--the headwaters of the Wolf--or there had been
no tank. And a prophet of Business, noting certain natural advantages, had influenced the railroad
company to build a corral and a station.

From that day Willets became assured of a future. Cattlemen in the Wolf River section began
to ship stock from the new station, rather than drive to Red Rock--another shipping point five
hundred miles east.

From the first it became evident that Willets would not be a boom town. It grew slowly and
steadily until its fame began to trickle through to the outside world--though it was a cattle
town in the beginning, and a cattle town it would remain all its days.

Therefore, because of its slow growth, there were old buildings in Willets. The frame station
had an ancient appearance. Its roof sagged in the center, its walls were bulging with weakness.
But it stood defiantly flaunting its crimson paint above the wooden platform, a hardy pioneer
among the moderns.

Business had strayed from the railroad track; it had left the station, the freighthouse, the
company corral, and some open sheds, to establish its enterprises one block southward. There,
fringing a wide, unpaved street that ran east and west, parallel with the gleaming steel rails,
Business reared its citadels.

Willets buildings were not imposing. One-story frames predominated, with here and there a two-storied
structure, or a brick aristocrat seeming to call attention to its substantial solidity.

Willets had plenty of space in which to grow, and the location of the buildings on their sites,
seemed to indicate that their builders appreciated the fact that there was no need for crowding.
Between each building was space, suggestive of the unending plains that surrounded the town.
Willets sat, serene in its space and solitude, unhurried, uncramped, sprawling over a stretch
of grass level--a dingy, dirty, inglorious Willets, shamed by its fringe of tin cans, empty
bottles, and other refuse--and by the clean sweep of sand and sage and grass that stretched
to its very doors. For Willets was man-made.

From the second story of a brick building that stood on the southern side of the street, facing
the station, Gary Warden could look past the red station into the empty corrals beside the
railroad track. Jim Lefingwell, Warden's predecessor, had usually smiled when he saw the corral
comfortably filled with steers. But Gary Warden smiled because the corral was empty.

Warden was standing beside a flat-topped desk at one of his office windows. Warden was big,
though not massive. He seemed to have the frame of a tall, slender man, and had he stayed slender
he might have carried his flesh gracefully. But Warden had lived well, denying himself nothing,
and the flesh which had been added had formed in flabby bunches, drooping his shoulders, sagging
his jaws, swelling the back of his neck.

And yet Warden was not old; he had told some new-made friends in Willets that he was thirty-five.
But he looked older, for a certain blasé sophistication that shone from his eyes and sat on
the curves of his lips, did much to create the impression of past maturity.

Warden dressed well. He was coatless, but he wore a shirt of some soft, striped material, with
a loose, comfortable-looking collar and a neat bow tie. His hair was short, with bristles in
the roll of fat at the back of his neck; while at his forehead it was punctiliously parted,
and plastered down with precision.

Warden was not alone. At another window, her elbows on the sill, her hands crossed, her chin
resting on the knuckles of the upper one, sat a woman.

She was young, slender, lissom. There was grace in every line of her, and witchery in the eyes
that watched Warden with a steady gaze. She too, was hatless, seemingly conscious of the beauty
of her hair, which was looped and twisted into glistening strands that fell over her temples
and the back of her neck.

As she watched Warden, who was smiling at the empty corral, she withdrew her elbows from the
window-sill, twisted around, so that she faced Warden, and idly twirled the felt hat that she
took from her lap.

"Does something please you, Gary?" she asked with slight, bantering emphasis.

Warden's smile broadened. "Well, I'm not exactly displeased."

"With Willets--and the rest of it?"

"With that corral--over there." He pointed.

"Why, it's empty!"

"That's why."

"Why you are pleased! That is odd. As a buyer, I should think you would be more pleased if
the corral were full--had cows in it. That is what you are here for, isn't it?"

"Yes," grinned Warden; "to keep it empty until it is filled with steers at my price."

"Oh, bother!" The woman yawned. "I am glad it is you and not I who is to deal with these clod-hoppers.
I should turn sour--or laugh myself to death."

"Getting tired of it already, Della?"

"Dreadfully tired, Gary. If I could see one interesting person, or a good-looking man with
whom I could flirt----"

"Don't forget our engagement, Della," warned Warden.

She laughed, shooting a mischievous glance at him. "Oh, it would be harmless, I assure you--mere
moral exercise. Do you imagine I could lose my heart to one of these sagebrush denizens?"

"Not you, Della," grinned Warden; "that isn't your style."

The girl yawned again, and got to her feet, smoothing her ruffled skirts. Then she walked to
a mirror on a wall near the door, and spent some time placing the felt hat on her head at a
precise angle, making certain that the coils of hair under it were arranged in the most effective
manner. She tucked a stray wisp into the mass at the nape of her neck, patted the glistening
coils so that they bulged a little more--smiling with smooth serenity at the reflection in
the glass.

"Well, good-bye, Gary. I left Aunt Hannah at Corwin's store. She'll be afraid I've eloped with
you. No," she added, as Warden advanced toward her; "no kisses now. I'll look in again before
we leave town."

She opened the door, and as it closed she flashed a smile at Warden. Then he heard her descending
the stairs. He watched the closed door for an instant, frowning disappointedly; then he strode
again to one of the front windows, grinning as his gaze rested on the empty corral.

CHAPTER IV

REBELLION

Accident or design had placed the schoolhouse at the eastern edge of town. The invisible power
which creates the schoolhouse seemingly takes no account of time or place. It comes, unheralded,
unsung, and squats in the place where the invisible power has placed it, and instantly becomes
as indispensable as the ungainly youth that occupies it.

All youth is not ungainly. Ruth Hamlin was considering the negative proposition as she stood
on the little platform in front of the blackboard just before noon, calmly scrutinizing the
faces of the score of pupils who composed her "class."

About half of her pupils, she decided, were worthy of the affection she had bestowed upon them.
The remainder were ungrateful, incorrigible hoodlums. There had been times when Ruth wondered
if the task of teaching was worth while.

A good teacher must not be vindictive; and Ruth was trying her best to keep alive the spark
of mercy and compassion that threatened to burn itself out.

Despite her apparent calm--the outward sign of cold self-control--Ruth's face revealed indications
of the terrific struggle that was going on within her. Her face was pale, and though her eyes
seemed to smile, there was a gleam far back in them that suggested thoughts of force, instant,
vicious. Also there was wrath in them--wrath that threatened to break with volcanic fury.

The girl was of medium height, and yet she seemed to be almost tall as she stood on the platform.
She was erect, her head was held high. She was slender, with a gracefully rounded figure, but
as she stood there, her muscles straining, her chest swelling with the passion she was trying
to suppress, she must have appeared Amazonic to the culprits whose crimes had goaded her to
thoughts of corporal punishment.

It was not difficult to single out the culprits. There were two, and they sat defiantly in
their seats, sneering their contempt of the teacher's wrath, advertising their entire disregard
for the restraining influence of rules.

Both were boys. The larger, freckle-faced, with an uptilted nose and belligerent eyes, was
fully as tall as Ruth. He was broad and muscular, and it was evident that consideration for
his size was one influence that had thus far delayed the punishment he no doubt merited.

It was evident, too, that the culprit suspected this, for as Ruth's hesitation continued he
grew bolder and more contemptuous. And now, having divined that Ruth would not attempt to inflict
the punishment she meditated, the young man guffawed loudly.

"Shucks," he sneered, winking piratically at his brother-culprit; "she's tryin' to run a whizzer
in on us. She ain't goin' to do nuthin'!"

"Jimmy Singleton; you advance to the platform!" Ruth's voice came sharply, quavering with the
passion she had been suppressing until now.

She stood rigid until "Jimmy" got out of his seat with elephantine deliberation, and shuffled
to the edge of the platform, where he stood, grinning defiantly.

Ruth raised the lid of her desk and took out a formidable willow branch, which she had cut
only the day before from a tree that grew beside the Wolf near her cabin, in anticipation of
the present incident.

She had known for many days that she would have to punish Jimmy Singleton, for Jimmy had been
growing daily less amenable to discipline. But she had hoped that she would not be compelled
to punish him--she had escaped that disagreeable task so far.

But there was no alternative, and though she grew deadly white and her legs grew weak as she
drew out the willow switch, she advanced on Jimmy, her eyes flaming with desperate resolution.

As she reached Jimmy's side, he lunged toward her. He struck viciously at her with his fist,
the blow landing on her shoulder near the neck. It had been aimed at her face, but she had
somehow dodged it. The force of the blow brought Jimmy against her, and he seized her around
the waist and attempted to throw her. She brought the switch down sharply on Jimmy's legs as
they struggled, and the sting of the blow enraged the boy. He deliberately wrenched himself
loose; then leaped forward, swinging his arms viciously.

He had not struck the girl fairly, but she was in a daze from the rapid movement, and she was
not aware of what was going on around her, centering all her energy in an attempt to keep the
boy from striking her face.

But she suddenly became conscious that a big form had loomed close to her; she heard a deep,
angry voice saying:

"I'll attend to you--you young pirate!"

And then Jimmy was jerked backward, away from her; and she saw Kane Lawler standing not more
than two or three paces from her. His right hand was twisted in Jimmy's collar; and there was
an expression of cold rage on his face--despite the smile he gave her when she looked at him--that
chilled her.

But she made no objection when Lawler walked to a chair that stood on the platform, dragging
the now protesting Jimmy after him by the scruff of the neck. There was something of majestic
deliberation in Lawler's movements, she thought, as he seated himself in the chair and placed
the struggling Jimmy across his knees.

