THE AMOURS OF ZEOKINIZUL, KING OF THE KOFIRANS.

Translated from the Arabic of the famous Traveller Krinelbol.

With a Key.

London: Printed for G. Smith, near Temple-Bar. 1749. [Price One Shilling and Sixpence.]

PREFACE.

The Bookseller, who has taken upon him to print this little Work, having absolutely insisted
upon my introducing it with a Preface, I was unwilling to refuse him so easy a Matter; and
the rather as the Omission might greatly prejudice it. He urged his Request, by saying, that
a Preface was no less essential to a Book, than an Exordium to a Sermon. As few read the one,
as listen to the other; however, if either be wanting, the Performance is defective, and, is
not so much as thought worthy to be read in order to be censured. Nevertheless, what can be
said with Regard to a useless Discourse? Why, really, I think, it is best to say nothing at
all. This little Work places Truth in so just a Light, that no Characters are wanting to point
it out. But perhaps, the real Truth may be amplified in it, and there may be Applications made
of it as false as injurious. This is what ought strongly to be guarded against; and to this
Purpose I sincerely declare, that I have intermix'd nothing of my own in the Amours of Zeokinizul:
But, like a faithful Translator, I have constantly kept close to Krinelbol's Manuscript. I
have related the Facts just as he himself says they were told him by the Kofiran Nobility.
This sincere Protestation, is all that I can do, In order to remove any Suspicion of Interpolations.
The Arabian Manuscript is still in my Possession, and if desired, shall be printed. But I own,
with Concern, that it is quite beyond my Power, to procure such a Number of Types as will be
requisite to give this Satisfaction; therefore, let those who are willing and equal to such
an Expence, set the Printer to work. I promise to deliver him the Manuscript on Demand. I cannot
help thinking, but that the Malice of the World is at its highest Pitch. Formerly People were
overjoy'd at the Certainty of the Antipodes; and to hear that the Inhabitants of those Climates
came nearest to us in Industry, and the Love of Arts and Sciences; and that the Sun approached
to, and receded from them, as it does with Regard to us. In fine, that their Temperature, their
Seasons, their Manners, and Inclinations, were the same as our own. Yet, in this my Endeavour
to verify such a Resemblance, by Proofs extracted from their own History, demonstrating by
notorious and certain Facts that they think and act just like ourselves, I shall be branded
for an Imposture; or some, who affect to be more sharp-sighted, will suspect that under fictitious
Names, I have represented Persons for whom my Heart is filled with the most respectful Sentiments.
Let this suffice, as the shorter a Preface is the better it is liked.

THE AMOURS OF ZEOKINIZUL,

King of the Kofirans.

After all the Labours and Attention of our best Academicians to form just Plans, and draw complete
Maps of the whole Terraqueous Globe, there are many large Empires and powerful Nations, which
their Enquiries have not reached; so that they are not only ignorant of their Position, but
even of their Existence. Of this Number are the vast Dominions of the King of the Kofirans,
of which hitherto we have had not the least Idea; and which probably would ever have continued
unknown to us had not an Arabic Manuscript of the famous Traveller Krinelbol luckily fallen
into my Hands.

This illustrious Enquirer, of whom we have several Works, which ostentatious Translators, on
Account of their Excellency, have published as their own, that he might not be misled by the
various geographical Descriptions of the Globe, determined to ground his Knowledge upon his
own Experience. With this rational View he left Arabia Felix, his native Country, and travelled
all over both Asia and Africa. Always careful to take an accurate View of every Thing which
was worth being seen or known, and making a judicious Collection of what was most remarkable
in the Customs and History of the Countries which he visited. But a very small Part of his
Collection has reached us. That we are so unhappy as to have only mutilated and unsatisfactory
Fragments of an Author of such Veracity, and in such curious Matters, must be imputed to the
want of Printing in most of the eastern Nations, and the Ignorance of this Traveller's Heirs.

An Acquaintance of mine, who is extremely fond of Travelling, thinking it would be a very acceptable
Present, brought me these Sheets from Ispahan, where they cost him twelve Tomans, that is between
twenty and thirty Pounds Sterling. I have translated it without either diminishing, augmenting,
or altering it in any one Particular. Only, for the Reader's Convenience, I have expressed
the Names of Posts and Dignities in our Language, which in the Original were in Arabic, keeping
to it in the Appellations of Persons and Nations, out of regard to historical Exactness. I
do not in the least claim any Thanks or Acknowledgements for my Trouble; the several Works
of this Nature which I have published producing in me an habitual Pleasure of employing my
Pen, for the Instruction and Entertainment of polite Readers.

Possibly the whole Universe could not afford a more tranquil, happy Kingdom than that of the
Kofirans, would their Princes equitably sit down contented with the Honours and Prerogatives
with which they were invested at their Institution, and not falsly imagine, that their Grandeur
and Glory consist in the Oppression of their Subjects; and would they be watchful to entail
the Harmony and due Subordination betwixt the several Orders in their Government. Whereas for
several Centuries past, they have been labouring to erect an Arbitrary Power; and the two last
have taken large Steps towards this execrable End.

Zeoteirizul, the First of the Two, was Son to the greatest King that ever govern'd the Kofirans.
Being scarcely eight Years old when the Crown devolv'd to him by his Father's Death, his Mother
seiz'd the Reins of Government. This Princess who was a Neitilene by Birth, was related to
the King of Jerebi. Secret History relates that, prompted by her Ambition, she entered into
a private Treaty with her Relation, her Husband's most inveterate Enemy, and contrived his
Murder, which was unfortunately executed, to the great Loss and Grief of all true Kofirans.
What aggravates the Guilt is, that this worthy Prince was stabb'd on the very Day of her Coronation,
at a Juncture when he was giving this flagitious Wretch the highest Mark of his Affection.

No sooner was the Queen declared Regent of the Kingdom, but she bent all her Endeavours to
establish her Power by protracting the King's Minority, as long as possible. She constantly
amused the young Prince with Toys and Triffles; she kept him in such Awe that he trembled at
her Appearance, and durst not refuse paying a blind Obedience to those whom she had placed
near him. But so short-sighted is human Artifice, that what she imagined would be the Basis
of her Power, was the very Thing which overthrew it. A crafty Mollak having insinuated himself
into her Confidence, made Use of it to gain that of the young King; and being too sagacious
a Politician not to foresee what he had to fear from this enraged Woman, if he left her any
Degree of Power or Opportunity of hurting him, he compelled her to leave the Kingdom in a disgraceful
Manner; and by this successful Boldness, he became Master of the young King, and the Depository
of his Authority. His Pride, the general Vice of his Order, made him take a Pleasure in humbling
the Nobility. He brought all Employments to depend upon the Court, and by this Means the Persons
of Quality to court the Minister's Favour, which effectually exalted the Sovereign as much
above them as he himself affected in all Things to appear beneath him.

This Management soon brought upon him the Hatred of the whole Nation; but notwithstanding such
a declared and general Hatred, he was succeeded by another Mollak. He had the same Views as
his Predecessor, tho' he acted on different Maxims. And the former having succeeded in reducing
the first Order nearer the second, he was for bringing them both to an Equality, and raising
the third to a Level with them, by making all Employments and Dignities venial; and, without
any Regard to Merit, constantly bestowing them on the highest Bidder. Thus, as the same Posts
and Honours were equally attainable by the Citizen and Gentleman, there was no material Distinction
betwixt them. The Government which had flourished as Monarchical, was become an absolute Despotism.
And whereas the King in all important Transactions, was dependant on the Assembly of the States,
who were look'd upon as the Defenders and Interpreters of the Laws; both Laws and States were
now only mere Phantoms, which he could raise or annihilate at his Pleasure. It is true, that
this has made the King of the Kofirans the most powerful Monarch in the Universe; but perhaps,
it also makes the People the most miserable; tho' an abject Veneration for their Kings will
not permit them to own their Slavery, or lament their Grievances.

In order to the better Understanding of what I shall relate concerning this Monarchy, it will
not be an useless Digression to say something of its Foundation, and gradual Increase to that
Pitch of Glory to which it was raised by the King who proceeded Zeokinizul.

I am apt to believe, that when the divine Missionary offered up Paradise to Men, as the Reward
of their Belief and Obedience, he drew his Idea from the Country of the Kofirans. The many
Rivers which intermix their Streams, maintain a perpetual Verdure in the Meadows; the Soil
produces all Sorts of Corn, useful Herbs and Fruits; and is so well cultivated, that there
are no more Woods than are necessary for Fewel and other Uses. Its exquisite Wines, are little
inferior to those of Ghinoer; if it has but few Gold or Silver Mines, the Defect is abundantly
compensated by those of Iron, Copper, Tin, and the valuable Quarries of Porcelaine, which abound
throughout almost all the Provinces of this delicious Kingdom. The Women are sprightly, witty,
and chearful. The Men, brave, industrious, laborious and addicted to Learning. Its Situation
is so very advantageous, that it is reckoned one of Nature's Master-pieces. Its steep and lofty
Clefts towards the Sea, secure this charming Country from the Invasions of the King of the
Island Alniob. Its Ports are numerous, but so well fortified, as to be of the greatest Advantage
to the Kofirans. Another Side of this Country has inaccessible Mountains, as a Fence against
the King of Jerebi, and the Kam of Vosaïe. The River Nhir is its Barrier against the formidable
Power of the Emperor of the Maregins. And, lastly, many Cities of almost impregnable Strength,
seem to defy the Attacks of the Junes Provinces, and the Bapasis. Such is the Situation and
Quality of the Kingdom of the Kofirans, being also blessed with a temperate Climate, and an
healthful Air.

The People who are at present seated in this luxuriant Country, are not its original Possessors.
The first Colony settled here after the Deluge, were so contented with the spontaneous Produce
of its Fertility, that they forbore to cultivate and improve it. This Moderation which, since
the Sin of Sultan Adam, has ceased to be a Virtue, so enervated their Courage, that they became
slothful and timorous. The Manoris, tho' their own Country, wanted for nothing, envied the
more fruitful Possessions of their Neighbours, and invaded them Sword in Hand. The Goilaus,
who at that Time inhabited it, and whose Pleasures were heightened by Liberty, made some Efforts
to preserve that valuable Blessing; but being not so vigorous as the Juncture required, they
were unsuccessful, and the Consequence of their Inactivity was Slavery. After some Shews of
Resistance, in which their Multitudes were easily defeated by an handful of Manoris, they underwent
the Fate of several other Nations, whom this fierce People had reduced.

However, by an Intercourse with the Manoris, they became sensible of their wretched and disgraceful
Condition. After they had been conquer'd, they learned the Art of War from their Conquerors;
who, also in a short Time, declined from the Love of Glory, and a martial Spirit, that they
were no longer formidable but by their Numbers. They grew intoxicated with Luxury, and run
into Extremes opposite to their original Ferosity, so as to become more despicable than those
they had conquered.

It was at this Time, that the Nodais, the Guernonies, the Duesois, and the Sokans issuing from
the North of Africa, over-run their finest Provinces. A Body of these Barbarians fell upon
the Territories of the Goilaus, and having forced them to share this delightful Country, settled
themselves there under the Name of Kranfs. These new Conquerors were for some Time molested
by the Manoris, but as Luxury had brought their flourishing Empire to Decay, the Kranfs forced
them to desist, and remained in quiet Possession of the Goilaus:

I shall omit the first rude Ages, when these Conquerors train'd up to the Licentiousness of
War, were under no Regulation or Law, and whose Towns, like those of other Nations, were only
a confused Assemblage of Huts. It is true, that there were Kings among them from their first
Settlement, but the Men thus dignified, were in Reality only Generals elected out of the Troops,
and whose Prerogative was limited to Military Affairs. These Chiefs, whose Savageness was rather
augmented by the Power with which they were invested, made no Scruple to dispatch a neighbouring
Competitor with the Sword or Poison, and their History is full of unnatural Instances, of Brothers
stabbing Brothers, Subjects poisoning their Sovereigns to usurp their dangerous Stations.

The Religion of Suesi, which the fifth of their Kings embraced, tho' its Maxims are far from
countenancing Ambition and Murder, but entirely adapted to the Welfare of Society; yet have
been so perverted by the Depravity of the Faquirs and the Imans, as to be alledged in Vindication
of them, and have besides, set on Foot so many Cheats and Errors, that the holy Books, Bileb
and Liegnelau in their Purity, as dictated by the divine Spirit to the Legislators, has been
treated by them with Contempt, as mutilated and inconsistent. In Defence of their respective
Notions, these People have engaged in furious Wars with each other, and out of a Zeal for Religion,
have assassinated several of their Kings. The Times seem now more tranquil, and without any
Apprehension of such shocking Crimes. Their Faith is very different from what it was, and the
lower Sort of People, who alone adhere to the Tenets of Suesi, are entirely recovered from
that stupid Obedience formerly paid to the Pepa, who, having made the World believe, that the
Keys of Paradise were in his Hands, required an implicit Compliance with his Decrees, and be
ready to second any Scheme of his Revenge or Ambition, with their Lives and Fortunes.

The Destruction of the Empire of the Kofirans, seems morally impossible in its present confirm'd
State. It has hitherto withstood several violent Shocks from the Kings of Jerebi and Alniob,
and the Emperor of the Maregins, who were all its professed Enemies. Especially the King of
Alniob, who, taking Advantage of the Frenzy of one of its Sovereigns, made such a Progress,
as to wrest the Sceptre out of his Hands; but the great Zokitarezoul, having compelled him
to renounce even the very Title, has brought all the others into Subjection so as to acknowledge
his Superiority over all the Sovereigns of Africa. It is to this illustrious Monarch, that
the Kingdom of the Kofirans owes its unparalleled Riches and Grandeur. His Courage and good
Fortune have reduced all his Enemies, his Liberality and Wisdom has established Commerce, his
good Sense has civilized it, and his Successors must attribute the ardent Loyalty and Love
of the Kofirans towards them, to the Plans and Labours of this Prince for the Happiness and
Glory of his Subjects. After having driven from the Throne of Jerebi, a Family which had been
an Enemy to his, placing one of his Grandsons on it, he died covered with Glory, and left the
Crown to his great Grandson Zeokinizul, who is the particular Hero of this History.

This young Prince being the only Remains of a numerous Royal Family, was the Darling of the
great Zokitarezoul, who apprehending that he might fall a Victim to the same untimely Fate
which had laid so many of his Descendants in their Graves, was not wanting to secure him by
all possible Precautions. Being persuaded, that the People loved him too well to suffer any
Infractions of his last Disposals, he made a Will; in which he deprived the Kam of Anserol,
his Nephew, whose Ambition he dreaded, of the Regency, in Favour of the Kam of Meani, his natural
Son. The Kam of Anserol was highly exasperated at the Injury done him; but being the greatest
Politician of his Time, he took Care that nothing should escape him at such a Crisis, which
might increase the Suspicions, and consequently the Precautions of his Enemies. It was not
till after the Death of Zokitarezoul, that he asserted his Claim. Attended by a Multitude of
his Adherents, he went to the Pemenralt, which is a Phantom of the antient States. There feigning
to submit his Destiny to the Arbitration of that illustrious Senate, he set forth, and urged
his Claim with such a persuasive Eloquence, that the whole Assembly unanimously annulled a
Will, which deprived him of an Honour that was his incontestable Right, and of a Trust for
which he was unexceptionably qualified. This so enraged his Enemies, that they forged the vilest
Scandals, in order to render him odious. They gave out, that after having poisoned the chief
Persons of the royal Blood, his chief Aim was to take off his Pupil. Under pretence of such
an Apprehension, they proposed that the Lady of the Bassa of Ourtavan should take care of the
King, and taste of every kind of Food which was brought to his Table. And soon after they were
not wanting to alarm the People with Reports, that his Victuals had been several Times poisoned.
The great Men of the Kingdom, whose Abilities the Regent never consulted, as being himself
equal to all the Difficulties of Government, enter'd into a League against him, under Pretence
of Concern for Zeokinizul, whose Life they declar'd was in Danger. But the Kam of Anserol,
who was too vigilant to be surprized, soon discovered the Plot, and having secur'd the Leaders,
he quench'd the Rebellion in the Blood of its Contrivers.

He did not give himself the Trouble of verbally refuting the Calumnies, and Invectives, with
which he was daily loaded, but took Care to disprove them by his Conduct. The publick Finances
had been quite exhausted, during the last Years of the great Zokitarezoul, and he took upon
himself to restore them. It is true, that his Scheme ruined some Families; but besides that
their Number was but small, and their Ruin rather owing to their inconsiderate Greediness,
such a desperate Distemper could not have been well removed by a softer Remedy.

No sooner was Zeokinizul of Age, but the Kam delivered up to him the Government of the Kingdom,
which by his Care and Munificence, was the Abode of the polite Arts, of which he had declared
himself the Protector. Nay more, he induced the young King to chuse himself a Consort; and
thus he refuted the base Views which his Enemies had fathered on him.

Scarce was this important Affair finished, when the Kam of Anserol, as if this World could
afford no Addition to his Glory, died suddenly, as he had always desired. His Enemies laid
hold of this Circumstance, to revile him, even in his Grave. They spread a Report, that his
Intention was to poison the King, by a Liquor which he was to drink along with him, but that
by a fortunate Mistake of the Cups, he had fallen the Victim of his own Contrivance. The young
King could not hear such atrocious Insults without Horror. He threatened the severest Punishments
to any one who should dare to blacken the Character of this great Prince, and he himself never
mentioned his Name but with Words of the highest Esteem, and the warmest Acknowledgment.

The joyful Kofirans promised themselves, from the hopeful Inclinations of Zeokinizul, a Reign
no less happy than the preceding; but by a Fatality, not uncommon amongst them, the young Monarch
was so fond of an old Mollak, formerly his Tutor, of a very insinuating but hypocritical Humility,
that he entirely remitted to him the whole Management of his Kingdom. This old Wretch, whose
predominate Passion was Avarice, loaded the People with Taxes. And as a War would not allow
him to embezzle at will the public Treasures, he never would enter into one unless utterly
impossible to be avoided. And then, with so much Niggardliness, and so little Conduct, that
he became the Scorn both of the Generals and the Officers of State. Happy if he could have
saved those vast Sums, or have expended them in a manner suitable to the Honour of the Prince,
and the unbounded Zeal of his Subjects. But they were all in a short Time squandered away,
among Foreigners, who made him their constant Dupe. Indeed, the best Schemes miscarried thro'
his Sordidness, and yet with all these Faults, he maintain'd his Ascendency over the Prince,
so that no Courtier dared utter any Complaint against him.

Zeokinizul, whose whole Life was devoted to his Consort and his Hunting, of both which he was
equally fond, had only the Title and Pomp of a King, for the Mollak Jeflur had engrossed all
the Authority, by which Means he aggrandized his Family, promoted and enriched his Creatures,
and supplied the enormous Profusion of his Mistress the Princess of Ginarkan, Spouse to a Prince
of the Blood of Vosaïe.

His selfish Love of Peace, could not, however, hinder his being involved in an unavoidable War.

Sicidem, grand Kam of Katenos, among the Provinces of the Neitilanes, dying without Issue,
the Emperor of the Maregins laid Claim to his Succession. This Prince was already too powerful
for the King of the Kofirans not to oppose this Addition to his Greatness. And thus this ecclesiastical
Statesman Jeflur, was brought under a Necessity of employing his Master's Troops, in order
to deprive him of so rich an Inheritance. About this Time also, the Throne of Goplone, of which
his Father-in-Law had been dispossess'd, became vacant, and Zeokinizul's Honour required, that
he should lay hold of this Opportunity to restore him. After a fruitless Trial of all the peaceable
Ways of Bribery and Negotiation to compass his End, the Mollak was at last oblig'd to order
the Kofiran Troops to march. The first Body marched towards the Nhir, to oppose the Emperor
of the Maregins, the second towards the Kingdom of Goplone, to impose upon them their former
Sovereign, and the third hastened into the Provinces of the Neitilanes, to make sure of the
Dominions of Sicidem.

As this War was carried on only in Zeokinizul's Name, and he did not personally act in it,
I shall omit its various Events, in Order to come the sooner to what immediately relates to
this young King. After the loss of two Battles, and a strong City taken by the Kofirans, the
Emperor of the Maregins was very glad to accept of a Peace, upon such Conditions as were alone
detrimental to his Allies. As a Satisfaction to Zeokinizul's Father-in-law for his Kingdom,
which he relinquish'd to another, he was allowed to retain the Title of King, and was made
actual Sovereign of the Province of Reinarol, which after his Death, was by the Treaty to be
annexed to the Kingdom of the Kofirans, and the Kam in exchange for this Cession, was invested
with the Dominions of Sicidem. Tho' this was an advantageous Peace to the Conquerors, yet it
was very short of what they might reasonably have expected, or at least, if Zeokinizul was
so moderate as to be contented with such small Matters, it behov'd his Minister to insist upon
more important and honourable Terms. However, the Glory of his Arms, was the continual Topic
to him; and this Prince by hearing of the Exploits of his Soldiers so frequently extoll'd,
began to give Signs of a martial Disposition. His Genius now display'd itself, and instead
of reigning ingloriously only by a Minister, he shewed, that he would be in all Respects the
King. His Courtiers, who had always with Reluctance paid Obedience to the Order of the haughty
Mollak, applauded this generous Resolution, while the crafty Jeflur had the Mortification to
see, that his Ministry was going to be overturned, by the very Thing which he fancied would
have prolonged it.

As this was a fatal Blow, so was he not wanting in his Endeavours to ward it off. Accordingly
he set all his Springs at Work, nor minded the Guilt of any Measure if it had a promising Aspect.
I question if an Instance of such an hellish Contrivance, and so detestable a Scandal, can
be found in any History. A Man to whom a whole Kingdom had committed its only Hope, a Man who
had been chosen to rectify and refine the Morals of its King, endeavours by all Means to corrupt
them; and, as a Return for the vast Favours received from him, he draws him in to forfeit his
Innocence, the Love of his Consort, and the Esteem of his Subjects.

Zeokinizul, as has been said, was passionately fond of the Queen his Spouse, which guarded
him against those Irregularities which stain'd the Memory of the preceding Kings of the Kofirans.
Yet these People being of a volatile and fickle Humour, could not think, that a settled Love
afforded any Pleasure, and were continually wishing that their Sovereign would commence an
Intrigue with some Court Beauty. This unbecoming Wish was pretended to proceed from a Regard
for the Welfare and Glory of the Nation. What, says they, shall our King always be tutor'd
by Mollaks? What signifies this Peace, which is only owing to the Weakness and Pusillanimity
of this set of Men, for we are oppressed with Taxes as much as if we were engaged in a War
with all the Powers of Africa? When you receive this letter your poor brother will be dead. 7. There
is a good deal more I could say to you, but I have no time. 8. Tell them that he fell from the
top of a cliff, or else that he was drowned whilst skating. 9. I beg your pardon for all the
trouble I am giving you. 10.

When you come to the bridge, apply to the first person you meet. 11. The usher walked up and down
until everybody was asleep. 12. Some one was stealing slowly along under cover of the walls.
13. A moonbeam was shining full upon the big iron ring. 14. I have been doing nothing but think
of it for hours. 15. Taking the old stool, he got up on it and made a slip knot.

XIX (pp. 91—95)

1. That’s a queer idea, to practise on the trapeze at this time of night! 2. Come up to my
rooms; there is a fire there, and it is very comfortable. 3. My friend has been dismissed, which,
by the way, is a great stroke of luck for him. 4. If you take my advice, you will start at once, without
waiting till your week’s notice is up. 5. I myself will lend you the money that you wanted to
borrow from that scoundrel. 6. Now not one word more! I do not want you to thank me. 7. “How
comfortable I am here!” he said, opening his eyes. 8. As soon as I began to thank him, he literally
turned me out of doors. 9. The boys were not yet in the playground by the time I was already working
hard in my room. 10. The good man was busy counting gold coins, which he carefully put in a row
in little heaps. 11. My brother has not to draw lots for six years, and who knows what may happen
between now and then? 12.

I am much afraid you will be a child all your life. 13. What confidence can you have in him, half
mad as he is? 14. Have you not your seat to book? Make haste, or you will be late. 15. The abbé
could not help casting a glance round the room, and what he saw made him shudder.

XX (pp. 96—103)

1. I really thought that they were going to seize me by the throat. 2. The two scowling faces cheered
up as if by magic. 3. When they had pocketed my money, they launched out into protestations of
friendship. 4. Do not allow yourself to be taken in by those compliments. 5. The more affable
they showed themselves, the more they disgusted me. 6. What a pity you did not arrive in time
to see them! 7. Those who are not satisfied will only have to come and tell me. 8. I looked
around me for a long time, as if to carry away in my mind the image of the place I was never
to see again. 9. Drawing the keys out from under my coat, I threw them down the well with all
my might. 10. I should have liked to enjoy the sight a little longer, but I did not want the coach
to start without me. 11. It is still too early for you to receive an answer. 12. For about
twenty years he had been spending his time colouring illustrated newspapers. 13. Ah! the old fool!
You should have seen with what a confident look he used to say that! 14. All these details
about his uncle I only learnt afterwards. 15. As soon as I went into the house, I saw that,
whatever she might say, my mother was not happy. 16. On hearing that I had a good situation,
he opened his eyes wide. 17. The joy of seeing her son again had taken away the poor woman’s
appetite. 18. It is said that they have barely enough to live upon. 19. If only (do not use
‘seulement’) I could have spoken to him unreservedly! but we were not left alone one minute. 20.
The moment for his departure came without their having been able to say anything to each other.

IV. PASSAGES FOR TRANSLATION INTO FRENCH

I

When I think over my own expensive education, I can see quite clearly
that the years which came between my departure from the school-room
at home and the time I got into the top form at school were elaborately
wasted. My time was mainly taken up with grammar, endless Latin proses,
and verses that were not poetry; none of which exercises did me the
slightest good. I forgot the grammar as soon as I conveniently could;
I could never do Latin prose till I had read great chunks of Latin
authors, or verses till I had studied the poets; and these accomplishments
came to me by imitation and not by rules. Mean-while my imagination
was simply starved. And yet there is so much in English literature
to stimulate the imagination of children!—I know that from my pre-school
experience; and I believe nearly all children have some imagination
to start with, before it is smothered under the verbs in -μι.

The young King who had been extremely uneasy for some Days at this misterious Behaviour, grew
highly offended, when upon asking the Queen to comply with his Affection, he was repulsed,
under the Pretence of imaginary Dispositions, from which she was known to be entirely free.
However, so far from taking the Denial, it only made him more urgent; at which the Queen to
free herself from what she call'd her Consort's Importunities, sent him Word, and confirm'd
it herself, that an incurable Disorder had rendered her unfit for the conjugal Functions.

The Monarch was Thunderstruck at this. It threw him into such a Melancholy, that he kept his
Chamber for three Days. Even Hunting, which had always been his favourite Diversion, seem'd
to be banished from his Thoughts. He never appeared in the Drawing-Room, and the most distinguished
Courtiers were oblig'd to put on a sorrowful Appearance whenever they approached him. Jeflur
exulted at the Success of his Scheme. He brib'd one of the Lords of the Bed-Chamber, whom the
King honoured with a particular Confidence, and having inform'd him what the Arrow was which
had pierced the King's Heart, he made him large Promises if he could pluck it out.

Kelirieu, for so was this Lord called, readily embraced the Proposal, and sought for an Opportunity
of being alone with his Master. Nor was he long without it. One Day as Zeokinizul was negligently
leaning upon a Sopha, involv'd in melancholy Thoughts on the Alteration of his Spouse, the
Lord came towards him, throwing himself at his Feet.

Permit, said he, a faithful Subject, to presume to enquire into the Secrets of your Highness.
You know, Sire, my respectful Attachment to your august Person. You also know, that your Glory
and Satisfaction are dearer to me than my very Life. Vouchsafe then, Sire, to disclose to me
the Cause of that Sorrow which incessantly preys upon you. Let the Heart of a faithful Servant
be the Depository of all your Disquietudes. Possibly Means may be discover'd to mitigate them.--Kelirieu,
perceiving that his Discourse made no Impression upon the King, who indeed continued in the
same Posture, without seeming to give the least Attention to it, proceeded thus. But, Sire,
I see my Presumption offends you. I have lost the Confidence of my Sovereign. It is enough,
let your Highness speak, and decide the Fate of a Subject, who is become hateful to himself,
by being hateful to you.

The Firmness with which Kelirieu pronounced these last Words, roused the King from his Lethargy.
No, my dear Friend, said he, raising him up, I still love you, and the only Reason why I do
not impart my Sorrows to you, is, because they are without Remedy, and you would only have
the Trouble of knowing them, without the Power of redressing them.--The Queen.--Ah! enquire
no farther? I must either forfeit my everlasting Happiness, or lose the Esteem of my Subjects.
But I am fully determined, there is no room for Hesitation, for I am unalterably fixed in my
Choice. Withdraw, and leave me to strengthen my Resolutions.

Kelirieu insisted no farther, but hastened to acquaint the Mollak, that he had already search'd
the King's Wound. And since, added he, I have drawn out of his Heart the fatal Secret which
was lodg'd in it, I flatter myself, that in a short Time, I shall entirely complete the Cure.
'Tis a good Step, replied Jeflur, to have comforted Zeokinizul, but that is not enough. You
must still induce him to bestow his Heart upon the Person I shall name to you. Carry but this
Point, and I promise you a thousand Tomans as the first Token of my Acknowledgement.

The King, in the mean Time, felt some Relief from the Confidence which he had placed in Kelirieu.
He looked for him all the Remainder of the Day. But this Artful Mediator found Means to avoid
a private Meeting. Nor did he appear before his Master till after some Days, and the King was
obliged to send for him, and demand his immediate Attendance. No sooner were they alone, but
the King said, did I not tell you, my dear Kelirieu, that my Sufferings were past Remedy, and
that you would only have the Grief of hearing them without having the Power of relieving them?
Sire, interrupted the crafty Courtier, with a bashful Air, I know a Remedy, but I dare not
mention it, and yet it is the only one practicable. Ah! said the King, eagerly embracing him,
declare it, and tho' I should refuse to make use of it, yet I shall always acknowledge myself
oblig'd to your Zeal for the Discovery. Sire, replied Kelirieu, one Woman is the Cause of your
Highness's Melancholy, and another Woman must be the Remedy. How dost thou dare to offer me
such infamous Advice, answer'd Zeokinizul in a Rage, when I have already told you, that I had
rather perish than lose the Esteem of my Subjects? Must I, being the Interpreter, and Protector
of the Laws, only make a Parade of my Prerogative, by licentiously violating them?

I beseech your Highness to hear me, replied Kelirieu, not in the least daunted at the King's
Anger, I swear by your royal Head, that it was not my Intention to offend you. But a too precipitate
Construction of my Advice has led you to resent it as base and criminal. But, Sire, can your
Highness harbour a Suspicion that Kelirieu would offer to eclipse your Glory? No, Heaven is
my Witness, that I would rather die a thousand Deaths. When I intimated to your Highness, that
the Remedy of your Sorrows was too be found only in the Conversation of Women, I meant no other
than what the Laws both human and divine admit of. And that as Solitude only serves to augment
your Grief, the entertaining Wit and Sprightliness of the Fair Sex, in their Conversations,
was the only Antidote against your growing Affliction, in which a whole Nation participates.

There may be Danger in such a Step, replied the King, when once a Woman has charmed the Mind,
she soon makes her Way to the Heart, and since the Queen has been pleased to return me mine,
which I had so affectionately given her, I will be always upon my Guard to keep it free and
insensible.

And at the same Time he changed the Discourse, and soon after dismissed his Confident, who
was impatient till he had related his Progress to Jeflur. The Mollak, embracing him a thousand
Times, cried, thy Services are inestimable, neither shall I be ungrateful. Liamil, Wife to
the Bassa of the same Name, is she whom you are to propose to Zeokinizul. Kelirieu could not
conceal his Surprise at her Name.

How, says he to the Minister, can you conceive that he is to be captivated by a Person of her
Age? Would your Holiness but reflect on the Nature of Zeokinizul's Scruples. It must be some
enchanting Beauty which can transport him to commit an Infidelity which he accounts no small
Crime. And you are for seducing him by Liamil, who has as few Charms as any Court Lady, and
who, besides, is under conjugal Engagements. How shocking will the Idea of this complicated
Guilt appear to the Prince, who cannot bear the Thoughts of a single Infidelity? Ah! learned
Mollak, you require of me what is beyond my Power, and out of the Course of Nature. Furnish
me with a proper Instrument, let the Person to be recommended be young, gay, handsome, and
artful, and then I will be answerable for the Success.

Surely you must be very little acquainted with Zeokinizul, interrupted the Minister, is it
not apparent that this Prince, who has been used to an antiquated Beauty, and was so excessively
fond of her, will think nothing lovely but as it resembles his Spouse? Besides, he will have
no Time to attend to the Suggestions of his Scruples. And Liamil's small Share of Beauty will
prevent any Mistrust in him. I rely more upon her Wit than on her personal Charms, in which
she has few Equals, and that is the Talent by which I suppose she shall commence the Intrigue;
Opportunity will forward it. Besides, do you think that I am so blind to mine own Interest,
as to provide Zeokinizul with a young ambitious Mistress, who will be for monopolizing the
royal Favour, and never be satisfied till she has grasp'd the Disposal of all Offices and Honours?
No, no, my dear Kelirieu, Liamil is the Woman for the King, 'tis she whom you must bring him
to like, if you value my Friendship, and whose Friendship can equal mine? Any other than she
would give me too much Umbrage for me to bear with it long. There is a Bill for a Thousand
Tomans, go and receive them at the Treasury. A thousand more shall recompense your Success.

Jeflur was quite void of true Liberality, but this Matter concerned him too nearly to lose
such a dexterous Manager, who had taken it into his Hands, by an unseasonable Parsimony. Kelirieu
appear'd the next Day at the King's Levee, who took him into his Closet, and renewing their
last Conversation; what a feeble Remedy, says he, do you propose for my violent Agitations!
Such Sufferings as mine require something more than Words. I know a Person, replied Kelirieu,
whose Conversation is so charming, that I am sure your Highness upon a Tryal, will be so delighted
with it, that it would recover your former Chearfulness. The King seeming to question it, the
Lord flew away to the Queen's Apartment, to tell Liamil, that the King had sent for her.

Liamil, full of Joy, as having already been instructed, made no less Haste thither. But how
was she surprised and mortified, when Zeokinizul, having ask'd her what she wanted, view'd
her for some Time without speaking a Word more. Tho' she was prepared to act her Part, she
could not forbear blushing, tho' more out of Spite than Bashfulness. And as she could not presume
to speak first, after staying about a Quarter of an Hour in the Apartment, she made a low Courtesy,
and withdrew, full of Confusion and Rancour.

The Mollak, who was waiting for her Return, used his utmost to appease her. Believe me, says
he to her, Zeokinizul is smitten, only allow him Time to get the better of some troublesome
Scruples, and every Thing will be according to our Desires. And indeed, she was scarce out
of Sight, but Zeokinizul was sorry for the cold Reception he had given her. He blamed himself
for his Incivility; and, to make her some Amends, he went to the Queen's Apartment. Now was
the critical Instant, the decisive Moment for this Princess. Could she have suspended her excessive
Devotion to receive the King her Husband in a becoming Manner, there had been an End of all
Jeflur's Schemes, and Kelirieu's thousand Tomans had been saved to the Treasury; but her sending
him Word, that she begg'd his Highness would suffer her to finish her Devotion before she waited
on him, gave him Time enough to talk to Liamil, who did not fail of exerting all her Talents,
which charm'd the King to that Degree, that he thought Kelirieu had not exceeded in his high
Enconiums, the Wit and agreeable Qualities of this Lady. And under Pretence of being extremely
taken with her Conversation, he desired her Company in his Closet that very Evening.

Jeflur's Exultations at hearing this News from Liamil, were beyond all Description. He made
her repeat the Oath, which she had at first swore, never to require the Rights of the Favorite
Sultana, but be satisfied with the Honours of the Handkerchief. He drew her a Plan for her
Rule of Life, regulated her Behaviour to the Queen, and instructed her in the King's Temper.
In fine, he imitated the fond Mother, who, upon her Daughters being soon to be delivered up
to a Bridegroom, prepares her for the Conflict, represents to her the Pleasures and Sorrows
attendant on the Marriage State, and instructs her how to heighten the one, and alleviate the
other. When he came to be alone, he applauded his happy Choice, and really he never could have
met with a Person so fit for the Purpose, nor who would have submitted to his Directions with
less Ambition, and more Pliantness and Punctuality.

Besides, her singular Wit, Liamil had a Serenity of Temper which excited Love, though she was
in her thirty sixth Year. The Minister before this, was under no Apprehension that she would
fail in her Aim at Zeokinizul's Heart. The artificial Charms with which she concealed the Loss,
or want of natural ones, the exquisite Neatness and Elegancy of her Dress, with the Gracefulness
of her Deportment, rendered the Conquest certain. Besides, it was no Novelty for a Kofiran
King to keep a Mistress older than himself, and some have been even known to retain the Affections
from Father to Son, to the third Generation.

Liamil did not fail to keep so promising an Appointment. She found Zeokinizul expecting her,
and tho' this Prince had prepared himself to see her, he was as much disordered at the Sight
of her, as he had been in the Morning. Liamil was oblig'd to furnish Talk, for Zeokinizul went
no further than a reserv'd Complaisance; and after being a full Hour by themselves, upon the
Prince's signifying that he would be alone, she left him, having only receiv'd eight or ten
Answers, and those rather civil than gallant. Who can conceive the Anguish of Liamil, when
she return'd to Jeflur? Wretch that I am, cried she, throwing herself upon a Sopha, here her
Sighs stopp'd her Voice, that she could not proceed. Jeflur was struck with Amazement, and
knew not what to think of such Emotions. He dried her Tears, he inlarged his Promises, and
particularly vowed he would make her rich Amends for the Vexation she suffered on his Account.
Let me alone, said she, at last, was it not enough to make me marry a Man whom I hate, but
must you also draw me to love one who slights me? Yes, the King, with whose Love you flatter'd
me, slights me; I am come directly from his Closet, where I was with him above an Hour; and
so far from making Love to me, that he did not say the least soft Thing. Is not this Coldness?
Is not this slighting? Is this all that raises such a Storm in this poor Bosom, replied Jeflur?
Did not I forewarn you, that Zeokinizul's deep Sense of his Duty, would make him be greatly
upon the Reserve with you? And that you would think him insensible, tho' he was only immerst
in Thought? Why did not you intice him? Come, come, be easy, I will engage to procure you another
private Meeting; but take Care not to act the Prude again so unseasonably. Ply him with every
alluring Art, and even make Use of a fond Violence to make him yield. He is not to be treated
like common Lovers. These Injunctions cannot be disagreeable to you. Zeokinizul is perfectly
handsome, and in the Prime of Life. You love him, and therefore must leave no Means untry'd
to secure his.

Liamil relish'd this judicious Lesson, and impatiently waited the Performance of Jeflur's Promise;
and being resolv'd to make the utmost Efforts to seduce Zeokinizul, she promised herself, that
at the next Meeting she should beat down all Resistance, and allure the King to gratify her
Desires. Kelirieu soon brought it about, for the King seeing nothing dangerous to his Freedom
in Liamil, was easily prevailed upon by the Entreaties of his Confident, to admit of another
Visit from her. Accordingly he sent her a Message to come in the Evening to a certain Chamber
in the Palace. It is easy to conceive how welcome this Message was to her. She was there some
Time before the King appeared. The Apartment had but a dim Light; however, this rather favoured
than prejudiced Liamil, as her Wit was to kindle the first Desires in Zeokinizul. Their Conversation
must however, remain a Secret, as neither of them has reveal'd it to any one. What is certain,
and also more important, is, that Liamil so charm'd the King by her lively Flights of Wit,
heightened by an expressive Air, that he heard her with more Pleasure than he had imagined,
that the Inticements of this Woman were too strong for his Virtue, and that at last, she gradually
drew him to a Couch, where he gave her the Pledges of his Love, satisfied her longing Desires,
and completed the Mollak's Stratagem.

This first Step, at once put an End to all the King's Remorse and Disquietude. He repeated
several Times the Pleasure which his experienced Mistress enhanced in such a Manner as his
devout Consort was a Stranger to, and at last left this fatal Chamber in such a Temper as Jeflur
and Kelirieu had been contriving; that is, passionately in Love. Their Meetings were for some
Times a Secret, but Passion soon grew too vehement to be concealed. It became the common Talk
of the Courtiers, and at last it reached the Queen's Ear. But she, instead of endeavouring
to reclaim her Spouse by an endearing Carriage, and the Ascendency which she had over him,
gave herself up to a fruitless Lamentation for his Misfortune, at the Feet of an Image of Suesi,
and this unseasonable Devotion deprived her of all Hopes of ever regaining her Consort's Heart.
Liamil's Husband took upon him to resent his Wife's Infidelity, upon which he receiv'd an Order
never to have any Commerce with her. Her Father, who was one of the most eminent Bassas in
the Kingdom, began also to exclaim against it; but a Quantity of Tomans which he greatly wanted,
effectually silenced him. Even Jeflur himself, in order to avoid Suspicion, openly censured
the King's Behaviour. The Monarch was offended at his Representations on so delicate a Point,
and sharply said, I have indeed made you Master of my Kingdom, but I expect to be Master of
myself. This Answer completed the Mollak's Design, and he took Care that it should not be lost
to the People. The general Displeasure which it gave, is hardly to be imagined. The King's
Amour, which had been so greatly desired, appearing to settle Jeflur's Power, was look'd upon
in a very different Light. It was look'd upon as an odious Adultery, an impious Commerce, which
would pull down divine Vengeance upon the Kingdom. Satires and Lampoons flew about every where,
in which both Lover and Mistress were so openly exposed, that any one who was a Stranger to
their Fickleness, and how suddenly they pass from one Extreme to the other, would have been
apprehensive that the most dangerous Commotions were at hand. However, Zeokinizul was so charmed
with Liamil, that he was continually with her. He pitched upon the House of an old Bassa of
the first Rank, for the more peaceable and secure Enjoyment of the Delights of his new Mistress.
All the Inventions of the most refined Luxury, were employed to add new Incentives to Wantonness.
The House seemed the very Residence of Love and Delight. Every Thing in it declar'd the Elegance
of the Mistress, and the Magnificence of the Lover. Each succeeding Day brought with it the
most ravishing Scenes, without any Alarm or Disturbance. The old Bassa and his Family saw no
more than the Prologue, only some few Spectators of approved Discretion and Secrecy, were admitted
to be present at the Plot of the Play, but for the Conclusion, it was privately transacted
between the two chief Actors.

It is a Saying of a great Kofiran Poet, that Virtue is like a steep Island, there is no setting
Foot on it again when once one is out of it. Zeokinizul was a sad Instance of this. In the
midst of these delightful Meetings, which consisted entirely of Confidence, Liamil obtain'd
Leave for one of her Sisters to be admitted. Imprudent Creature! not to see that after she
herself had stifled all Remorse in her Lover's Heart, their being so nearly related would not
be Proof against Love, nor hinder her from becoming her Rival. In order to create Jack he left
the Nabab, which he had already begun, and wrote in less than a year that book which is at the
same time tender and cruel, but in which cruelty is only another form of tenderness, and which
so oppressed the heart of George Sand that after reading it she, the indefatigable worker, remained
for three whole days without being able to produce anything at all.—From PELLISSIER, Le Mouvement
littéraire au XIXe siècle.

VII

It was not very large certainly, being about six feet long by four broad. It could not be called
light, as there were bars and a grating to the window. But it was uncommonly comfortable to look
at.

VIII

Daudet’s imagination does not consist in the invention of facts or characters: he pictures to
himself with extraordinary vividness what has passed before his eyes. Though they are marvellously
real, his scenes have not that precise and strict perfection which Flaubert used to give to his.
He catches in mid-flight the faintest details and holds fast their very movement. The vibration
is still there, and one can feel the tremor in the air and the play of the light.

As to his human figures, I question whether Daudet has ever had his equal in the picturesque
truthfulness of his portraits, in the capacity of reproducing the expression of a face, an
attitude or dress. And it does not follow that, as certain “psychological” writers have hinted,
Daudet was deficient in “psychology.” We cannot find in him that
cold, pedantic psychology which consists of the authors’s own reflections;
and if, to be a “psychologist,” it is necessary to explain minutely
every step and every gesture, or to put wearisome commentaries in
the place of action, Daudet does not deserve the name.

But perhaps there is a distinction to be made between a novel and an anatomical treatise. —From
PETIT DE JULLEVILLE, Hist. de la litt. fr. vol. viii.

IX

The founders and arbiters of the public-school system who ordained
that life in these institutions should be one incessant round of activity
from the beginning of term to its end have perhaps proved to be the
children of wisdom.

To a healthy boy who can manage to keep his place in the crowd without undue straining, there
is a tonic effect in the absence of leisure; and the sense of being
a lively part in a great and ever-moving body is an admirable enemy
to stagnation of mind. It is only the special case, the variant from
the type, who suffers when he is included in masses that move by rule;
and if we are inclined to admit the dangerous premise that any suffering
can be good for a young soul, we may cheerfully conclude that the
rough process is justified if it turns the variant into a solid, ordinary
person; or, if he is a hopeless rebel, at least teaches him that the
thorns of life are not tender to him who kicks. —From The First Round,
by ST. JOHN LUCAS.

X

Much of the influence he gained over his scholars
was attributable to his knowledge of the individual characteristics
of boys. She
was seiz'd with violent Pains in her Breast, which were followed with such terrible Convulsions,
as, in a few Hours proved the Death of this unfortunate Mother; nor could the Physicians, or
at least they would not, declare the real Cause of it. Zeokinizul was so afflicted at this
unexpected Loss, that he intermitted every Pleasure and Diversion. Liamil seemed to indulge
an excessive Grief on a double Account, and so artfully concealed her Joy for her Rival's Death,
that the compassionate King dismist his Sorrows to put an End to hers. This Shew of Sympathy
and Tenderness in Liamil, imposed on many, and reunited Zeokinizul to her with more Fondness
and Attachment than ever.

Though he had a very important War upon his Hands, it did not divert him from the Gratifications
of Love; he left the entire Management of every Thing to the Mollak Jeflur. The Welfare of
his Troops and Glory of his Arms were to depend on Generals of the Minister's Appointment,
whose Weakness and sordid Parsimony, occasioned several very ignominious Miscarriages to the
Kofirans. Zeokinizul had such a paternal Love for his People, that the Loss of a hundred thousand
brave Soldiers, and above seven Millions of Tomans would have greatly afflicted him, had his
Passion for Liamil left him any Freedom of Thought, but in her Company, he was insensible to
every other Concern. The disinterested Fondness of this Favourite, who only loved the Lover
in the King, must have made her the happiest that ever was, if relying less on her Merit, or
warned by a recent Experience, she had guarded against some of her own Sex, whom she must think
envied her Elevation, and watch'd her Ruin; but as an illusory Conceit that a Passion which
had subsisted for many Years, would never be extinguished, brought her into the very Misfortune
from which Leutinemil's Death had delivered her.

She had three Sisters still remaining, who all longed impatiently to show themselves to their
Sovereign, though they were none of Nature's Master-pieces. Coquetry and something worse had
always been hereditary in this Family, who yet seem to have bewitch'd Zeokinizul. The eldest
of these three Sisters, was the Widow of a Bassa of the second Rank, she expected the Precedence
as being a little more sprightly than the others; and full of a high Conceit of her Desert,
she depended on keeping her Station long enough to put the others out of all Hopes. She had
a great deal of Leutinemil's Temper, only still more Ambition. There had formerly been a very
close Intimacy betwixt her and Kelirieu, and it is thought, that he espoused her Interests
as much through Gratitude, as Envy and Revenge to displace Liamil.

Her continued Familiarity with Zeokinizul, had worn away even that little Modesty which the
most abandoned Prostitutes are seen to retain; and having been long in Possession of his Spouse's
Rights, she came to look upon herself as such; and made no Scruple of seeing Company when she
was just coming from her Lover's Arms, and her Face full of the Marks of his eager Caresses.
I have been assured by several Noblemen, that one Day she threw herself out of an Arbour, under
Pretence of avoiding Zeokinizul's Embraces with her bare Breast and loose Hair, and said to
them, very unconcernedly, for God's Sake see how this Fornicator has handled me. She had now
lost all Relish for these delightful Parties of Pleasure, whilst they were to be in private,
and was continually importuning her Lover to chuse a Set of Associates. Kelirieu, to compass
his own Aim, seconded the Favorite's Desire with such flattering Stories, that his Master recommended
to him the Care of finding out some Persons of both Sexes who were fit to bear a Part in these
Festivals of Bacchus, and the Cytherean Deity. The Confident laid hold of this Opportunity
at length, to gratify Lenertoula's Impatience to be introduced to the King. Her Sister Liamil,
who had entertained no Suspicion at her Punctuality in shewing herself at Court, was as easy
with Regard to her being admitted as one of the Guests. But Zeokinizul was not so indifferent
about her, for he fell violently in Love with her at her first Appearance. Lenertoula observed
him very attentively, and artfully avoided any Steps which might give him Reason to conclude,
that she was his own. The Monarch was caught in the Snare, and when she perceived the Force
of his Love was equal to her Wish, she declar'd to him the Conditions on which alone she would
yield herself up to his Embraces. Zeokinizul could refuse her nothing. Rank, Titles, Riches,
all was laid at her Feet; and Lenertoula being now in no Danger of Disappointments, or at least
in a Condition to support them, was under no Apprehension of her Intrigues becoming publick.

This second Act of Perfidiousness in her Sisters, fill'd Liamil with Rage. As she had imagined
the King's Heart to be her Property by right of Prescription, she bitterly reproach'd him for
his Inconstancy. But her Reign was over, for Zeokinizul dismissed her coldly, without so much
as even debating the Matter with her, and within a few Hours, he notified to her by one of
his Eunuchs, that she should immediately leave the Court. This was a Step of Lenertoula's Policy.
This new Favourite, fearing lest her Sister, than whom none better knew the King's Temper,
might lay hold of one of his soft Moments, when he could refuse nothing, to recover her Property.
She objected some religious Scruples which could not be satisfied but by removing Liamil. This
unfortunate Creature, who, after so long a Continuance in so high Favour, had nothing left
but the Sorrow for losing it, and the Shame of having purchased it at the Price of her Honour,
retired into a Mosque, where she is said to have spent the Remainder of her Life in penitential
Devotions. I must, for my Part, be of Opinion, that her Grief was much greater for the Loss
of her Lover, than for having ever enjoy'd him. However, tho' she had lost Zeokinizul's Love,
she felt his Generosity; for he order'd all her Debts to be discharg'd, and settled on her
a very large Annuity. Lenertoula was so fully satisfied by such evident Proofs of her Sovereign's
Love, that she now consented to make him happy. The Monarch's Desires were heightened by Enjoyment,
which was recompenced with the Power of disposing, according to her Fancy, Titles, Posts, and
Monies; so that she greatly exceeded all her Predecessors in an unbounded Authority. Jeflur
was now no longer in a Condition to contrive her Fall, as he had that of Leutinemil. He was
too much shock'd at the Sight of his approaching End; for a few Days more were to terminate
his Greatness. He employed them in salutary Counsels to his Master in Relation to the Government
of his Dominions. Yet he persisted in his Perfidy and Ingratitude towards his best Friends,
even till his last Moments, by alienating the King from a Mollak, whom he had often promised
to recommend for his Successor. This old Minister died unlamented by all but the King, who
being ignorant of his Incapacity and Mismanagement, especially in the last three Years of his
Life, shewed a sincere Sorrow for him, and ordered a stately Monument to be erected to his
Memory, in the royal Mosque of the Capital of the Kingdom. But when after having declared,
that he would admit of no prime Minister, and began to govern himself, he plainly saw how unworthy
Jeflur had been of the great Trust reposed in him, he no longer lamented him; but not to carry
his Resentment too far, he only countermanded his Orders for the Monument, and left the Ashes
of his ignorant and treacherous Visier, to remain in the obscure Corner where they had been
deposited.

The Death of his Minister soon changed the Face of the whole Court. Zeokinizul, who hitherto
could not bear the least Application to Business, now regularly shut himself up every Day for
some Hours, in order to consult Means to repair the Losses of the Nation, and retrieve its
Strength and Character. Now all Remembrance of its many disheartening Miscarriages was soon
lost in the Glory of his Conquests. The chief Motive of this War, was to lessen the vast Acquisitions
of the Emperor of the Maregins. His Daughter the Queen of Ghinoer, who was an aspiring, lofty,
and resolute Princess, in contempt of the many Treaties made to prevent it, insisted that her
Sex did not exclude her from inheriting all her Father's Dominions. Besides, an Army of tried
Veterans which had served the late Emperor with so much Honour, her heroic Courage, together
with her extraordinary Beauty so universally engaged the Hearts of her Subjects, that to a
Man they offered to inlist and support her Claim at all Events. Zeokinizul, very well knew,
that the Efforts of his whole Power would be requisite to humble such a formidable Enemy; yet,
had he not exerted himself above common Measures, all would have been feeble and insufficient,
on Account of the Emptyness of the Treasury, the Decay of Trade, the Scarcity of Men, and the
Discontent of the People. To regain the Esteem of the Kofirans, whom his Indolence, and the
weak and wicked Ministration of Jeflur had alienated, he caused it to be declared, that he
was resolved to head his Army in Person: Surprising Turn, fortunate Instance of the Easiness
and Loyalty of his Subjects. All the King's Deviations, though of such bad Consequences, were
instantly forgotten. He had now been on the Throne near thirty Years, yet they made this generous
Change the Æra of his Inauguration. Not a Murmur was heard, there was no longer any Appearance,
at least any Complaint of Distress. Old Noblemen came with Pride from the farthest Provinces,
to place their Sons in their Sovereign's Houshold Troops. Farmers freely parted from their
lusty Children, though the helpful Companions of their Labours, and a part of their last Farewel,
was to fight manfully in the Presence of their King, who so nobly would share in the Danger,
for the Honour of the Nation. In fine, Zeokinizul's Amours, which had so greatly disgusted
the Kofirans, because they had been disappointed in the Effect they wish'd and expected from
them, were indifferent Matters to them, now he manifested a Genius for Glory; instead of Ridicule
and Invective about his Irregularities, War was all the Subject of Discourse, and every one
according to the Fertility of his Invention, laid magnificent Schemes to raise their King to
an unparallell'd Glory. This general Complacency and Zeal were duly reported to the King, who
was not wanting to encourage so good a Disposition; prompted by the Importance of answering
their endearing Idea of him, and verifying their Wishes, he shewed himself such as really he
was, but hitherto restrained and seduced by his crafty Visier. Yet amidst these mighty Affairs,
he was not totally diverted from Love; for it never was held to be incompatible with the Desire
of Glory, and he always allotted his Time so properly, that neither of these Passions encroached
upon the other. His Fondness for Lenertoula did not slacken his Pursuit of Glory, it rather
tended to animate and increase it, she being exorbitantly ambitious, and esteeming her Lover's
Laurels her own; upon a Persuasion that her Grandeur would increase with the King's Power;
then her Pride could not bear the Thought that the Queen of Ghinoer and her Allies should prescribe
Laws to a Prince, whom she would have under no Controul but her own.

The Magazines being at last formed, the Plan for the Campaign determined, and the Troops at
the general Rendezvous, Zeokinizul set out for the Army, which was to act against the Bapasis.
Never did a saved People shew greater Marks of Gratitude to a brave Father of his Country at
his Return from a dangerous War, than were shewn by the affectionate Kofirans to Zeokinizul,
wherever he came. Lenertoula's accompanying him to the Army, seemed not to be minded. The King,
the King, was the Cry, and they would see nothing but the King.

This Ardour induced the King unalterably to persevere in his Resolution of committing the Welfare
of so loyal a People to none but himself, and during the Remainder of his Reign, whenever he
has been advised to ease himself of the Fatigue of Government, by deputing some faithful and
able Minister, this has always been his generous Answer, "The Kofirans Love me so as to shed
their Blood in my Cause, and they are so dear to me, that I cannot do less in Return than to
watch myself over their Welfare." There was not, among all the Generals of the Age, one of
more Bravery and Experience than he whom Zeokinizul had appointed to serve under him. Tho'
he was a Foreigner, he was not the less belov'd by the Kofirans; for as he was perfectly acquainted
with their Customs and Temper, he modell'd his Behaviour accordingly. This great Man was famous
for Military Qualifications, only, if so noble an Excess may be term'd a Fault, he was perhaps
too brave. But this Intrepidity, which in any other Country would have hindered his Preferment,
promoted it among the Kofirans, and raised his Character with that People, who are all Fire
and Spirit. His Name was Vameric. He has been reproached with interrupting the Actions of this
Campaign, which was not so glorious as its Opening had promised. It is certain, that this General,
to make Zeokinizul more in Love with War, and to animate him by great Successes, had weakened
the other Armies, the better to enable that under his Command to perform some signal Exploits,
which gave the Enemy an Opportunity to make an unexpected Irruption. A strong Army of the Queen
of Ghinoer, forced the Passes of the Nhir, and penetrated into a Province of the Kofirans.
This Misfortune stopp'd Zeokinizul in the midst of his rapid Conquests. He chose about twenty
eight, or thirty thousand of his best Troops, which he would lead in Person, to reinforce a
small Number, who, being far inferior to the Enemy, had been obliged to shelter themselves
under a Fortress. To encourage these brave Men in their long and painful Marches, he travelled
at their Rate; but he had no sooner reached a Town near the Place appointed for the Junction
of his Forces, when he was seized with a Distemper which had a fatal Appearance.

Lenertoula, who never would leave the Prince, was the Cause of it; for how contrary to all
Reason is it to attribute it to the Fatigue of the March, Zeokinizul having been inured to
much greater in his continual Huntings. As all the Courtiers in this Kingdom are Officers,
and as the Expedition these thirty thousand Soldiers were upon, required all their Precaution
and Activity, none but the Favourite was left for the Monarch to divert himself with. But Conversation
between two Lovers, who are continually together, would soon become insipid, if they confined
themselves to common Topics. These Lovers were not so Phlegmatic, they ardently repeated their
Protestations to love each other with an eternal Constancy. They mutually urged that the present
Vehemence of their Passions, was a Pledge of its unalterable Permanency. Then they proceeded
to sensible Proofs, and demonstrated, that the Conjunction of two Bodies is an Emblem of the
inseperable Union of two Souls. With mutual Ardour, they repeated the Demonstration; till at
last the Demonstrator quite spent, sunk under the Fatigue of the Arguments. In this Manner
Zeokinizul and Lenertoula amused themselves, when he was informed of the Barbarity with which
his Enemies carried on the War in his Country, at which he was deeply affected. The Impossibility
of quickly meeting them, made him very impatient; the Account of their Forces added to this
Uneasiness; in fine, Joy, Grief, Hope and Fear, distracted his Heart, and the Shock of such
opposite Motions was too strong for his attenuated Body. A violent Disorder seiz'd upon his
whole Constitution, which was succeeded by such a Fever, whose first Symptoms seem'd to presage
Death.

This melancholy News was soon spread over the whole Kingdom. The Kofirans seem'd quite stupified
at it; they fell into an inexpressible Grief and Consternation at the Thoughts of losing such
a Sovereign, and at such a Juncture. The Queen, who by this Time had seen her Folly, and heartily
repented of the superstitious Credulity, by which she had lost the Embraces of a real Husband
in seeking those of an imaginary one, left her Palace, and, prompted by Grief and Love, flew
to the sick King. She was still in Hopes, that the Deity meant only to alarm the Nation; and
therefore she was for forwarding by her Presence, and deserving by her kind Offices, the happy
Return of his Affection, which she did not doubt would be the Effect of this Correction. All
the People used to gather about the Governor of Kofir's House, and flock to the Palace, where
Expresses arriv'd every Hour, shewing such Concern, that their Fate seem'd to depend on the
Death or Recovery of Zeokinizul. Never was there such an universal Affliction; never was a
Father more lamented by affectionate Children. They looked at each other with Tears in their
Eyes, and could not speak for sighing. Paleness and Dejection sat on every Countenance. The
Artificers had no Heart to work. All Diversions and Shews were suspended, and that vast and
splendid City, which seemed the Center of Gaiety and Pleasure, was now changed into a general
Scene of Silence and Melancholy. Yet it was observed, that the Imans and Dervises did not in
the least sympathize with this publick Consternation. Some will be apt to imagine, that these
pious Men had a divine Intimation that the King would not die. But whoever knows them, will
much rather conclude, that, like Physicians who are never better pleased than in Times of general
Sickness, they only concealed a selfish Joy under the Mask of an affected Calmness; and it
is really scarce credible what Advantage they drew from this public Calamity. The King, being
given over by the Physicians, seemed to be lost without miraculous Relief from Heaven, and
as the meanest of his Subjects was not wanting in his Endeavours to procure it, so that Sesems,
which in that Country are Devotions of about a Quarter of an Hour, perform'd by the Imans,
are known to have risen to such an Extortion, as not to be said under two Tomans each.

During the first Days of his Illness, Lenertoula never left the royal Patient's Bed, who also
protested, that Death had nothing bitter to him, but the leaving his Mistress and his Subjects.
But no sooner was the Monarch sensible of his desperate Condition, than a Cloud of awful Ideas
broke in upon his Mind. The Principles he had imbibed by Education, revived in his Conscience.
He reflected on all his Conduct to the present Time, and the Thoughts of his being on the Point
of passing into another Life, impress'd on him strongly the Conditions on which his Religion
offers eternal Happiness. All Kelirieu's Care to conceal these penitential Dispositions, could
not hinder their being known among the Courtiers. The Kam Kertras, Grandson to the Kam of Anserol,
late Regent, at the Instance of his Father, who was a very religious Prince, resolv'd to make
Use of them, in order to restore the Queen to her Rights, and deprive the wicked Lenertoula
of her Usurpations. Taking with him a Mollak, equally venerable for his Birth and Piety, he
went to the sick King's Apartment. Kelirieu knowing how much it concerned both him and her
whom he served to hinder this Visit, dared to refuse them Admittance, under Pretence that the
King was going to sleep, and would see no Body. Although the Kam and the Mollak plainly saw
through the Deceit, yet Regard to the melancholy Juncture, made them quietly withdraw, in Hopes
of a more lucky Opportunity, which yet they never would have found, had they contented themselves
with such Excuses. They returned the same Day, and Kelirieu gave them the same Answer, which
provoked the young Duke beyond Measure, being naturally very fiery. What, said he, with a threatning
Air, shall you, who are no better than a Lacquey, dare to deny Admittance to your Master's
nearest Relation? and at once kick'd open the Door, and went forward into the Apartment, followed
by the Mollak.

Upon Zeokinizul's asking the Meaning of that Noise and Bustle, Kelirieu, who had acted without
any such Orders from him, durst not make any Answer, but the young Kam, whose Heat was not
over, gave the King such an Account of it, as made him very angry; for he not only condescended
to ask the Kam's Pardon, but forbad Kelirieu his Presence. The judicious Mollak laid hold of
that Instant to discourse of the Concerns of his Conscience to the dying Monarch; and as his
own Reflections, had beforehand suggested preparative Ideas of it, he was the sooner brought
to the wished for Contrition and Repentance.

The Behaviour of the Mollak is certainly very praise-worthy, but it would have been much more
so, if after having, with a truly Apostolic Zeal, pathetically represented to the Sovereign
the Enormity of his Crimes, the Certainty of his Death, and the Punishments to be dreaded after
such a licentious Life, he had stopp'd at bringing him to a due Sense of Things, and strengthening
him in such a pious Disposition, but he shewed more Zeal than Discretion, for his Devotion
being sharpened with Resentment, made him imagine, that he was ruining Lenertoula beyond Retrieve;
whereas he was, in Reality, doing nothing less than paving the Way for her greater Exaltation,
in Case the King recovered.

Thus, under a Pretence that true Repentance required more than a Detestation of what was past,
and guarding against future Relapses, he signified to Zeokinizul, that it was still his farther
Duty to make some signal Satisfaction for the Offence which he had given to the whole Kingdom.
That in order thereto, he must disapprove and abrogate all his Grants and Favours to Lenertoula.
Zeokinizul, who now was intent only upon dying in the Religion of his Ancestors, pleasing his
People, and carrying their Esteem as well as their Grief with him to the Grave, complied with
all the Mollak's Injunctions, ordered Lenertoula to be immediately dismissed the Court, with
a Prohibition from ever appearing in his Presence.

Having thus settled all the Affairs of his Conscience, Zeokinizul became senseless, so that
he was thought dead by all his Attendants. But this sudden Alteration was the happy Crisis
which saved his Life. During this Interval of Inanition, the Mind recover'd its former Situation,
and freed itself from all its Anxieties. The Body performed its Functions, and the Passages
which all the Art of the Physicians could not relax, opened of themselves, which was followed
by such copious Evacuations as saved the Patient. This joyful News spread itself rather quicker
than the other, so that it was as soon known at Kofir that the King was out of Danger, as that
there was no Hopes of his Recovery.

In the mean Time, the Queen arrived. She made Use of the Mollak's pious Impressions, and tho'
her Austerities and Vexations, together with her advanced Age, had rendered her no tempting
Spouse, yet the kind and grateful Monarch was so taken with her Tenderness and Diligence, that
he vowed, that from this Time his Heart should be her's, and her's alone. But that Man knows
himself but very little, when he is in Danger; and that the Assurances of Amendment which he
then makes, are weak and transitory when he has recover'd his Health, is what the Sequel of
this History will abundantly demonstrate.

Zeokinizul was soon perfectly recovered, and then his Generals whose Ardour had been restrain'd
by Fear and Grief, soon made their Enemies feel, that their King was restored to them, for
they forced them to repass the Nhir with considerable Loss; and the most Skilful in Military
Affairs do not scruple to affirm, than if the Kofirans had not been headed by a General prudent
even to a Fault, not so much as a single Soldier would have been left to have given the Queen
of Ghinoer an Account of their Expedition. This General so deficient in the ardent Bravery
of his Country, was call'd Leosanil; he was afterwards disgraced, and though his Age was still
fit for Military Functions, he was taken into the Cabinet, which was a fitter Theatre for his
Abilities; for there being out of the Reach of Swords and Guns, and left to undisturbed Reflection,
his Advice and Schemes were of excellent Service. I now shall leave Zeokinizul in the pure
Embraces of his Consort, and preparing to besiege a Place of Strength, to follow Lenertoula
in her Disgrace.

She did not betray any great Confusion, when Zeokinizul's harsh Order was notified to her;
but she little knew what she was to go through upon the Road. She took a travelling Chariot,
accompanied by her Sister, and followed by a few Domestics. Here was an Instance of such Strokes
with which Fortune now and then seems to warn the Insolent and Ambitious. After having led
her Favorites to the Altars to be worshipped like petty Deities, she afterwards drags them
thither to be sacrificed like fatened Victims.

This Woman, who lately saw the most illustrious among the Kofirans cringe at her Feet, and
practise the basest Submission to obtain only a single Look, now sees herself exposed to the
contemptuous Insults of the very Meanest; the whole Nation combining to plant Daggers in her
Heart by their Reproaches and Shouts at her Downfal. It having been whispered among the Country
Folks, that Lenertoula had occasioned the King's Illness, and they being possess'd of a Notion,
propagated by her Enemies, that she had been bribed to poison the King, crowded all the Roads
in her Way, loading her with Curses and Invectives, threatning to tear her to Pieces, had they
not thought it would be a more galling Punishment to her Pride, to let her pass on amidst the
same Hisses and Outrages of their Fellows, for above eighty Leagues successively. It was next
to a Miracle that she escaped with her Life, for she was put to all Manner of Shifts and Precautions
to deceive these furious Clowns who vowed to revenge their King; whenever she came near any
Town, she stopp'd above half a League off, whilst one of her Out-riders went before to take
fresh Horses, and observe the Bye-roads, that thus she might avoid the Tumults of the Inhabitants.
At last she reach'd Kofir, which she found disposed to receive her in the same rough Manner
as the Country had done. The whole Nation appeared determined against her. One Day she happened,
a little indiscretely, to take the Air in her Chariot, while the Streets were full of People,
who were celebrating the happy Recovery of their King with all Kinds of Sports and Rejoicings.
Possibly she might flatter herself, that the easy Kofirans seeing her appear Abroad to join
in the publick Festivity, would relinquish the Suspicions they had harbour'd against her. But
they were too inveterate, and the Event was quite different, for had it not been for the Dexterity
of her Coachman, and the Swiftness of her Horses, she had infallibly fallen a Victim to the
Fury of the Populace. This hazardous Experience of their Malice, brought her to lead a Life
at Kofir very different to her Inclinations, being ashamed to shew herself in any Assembly,
where she must have been their Jest and Scorn, and much less daring to appear in the public
Walks. When she was not shut up in her Palace, she used to amuse herself for a while in a Garden,
which, tho' one of the finest in all Kofir was the least frequented. Here it was that such
a mortifying Accident befel her, as exceeded all the rest, and which sensibly shewed her how
low she was fallen from her former Grandeur.

It was as follows: An Officer who, tho' her Relation, had not felt the happy Influences of
her Favour, because he never made himself known to her, which renders his Impoliteness, I may
even say, his Brutality inexcusable, resolving to give the finishing Stroke to her Anguish.

According to the gallant Custom of the Kofirans, he politely approached towards Lenertoula,
who was taking an Evening Walk, in Company with her melancholy Sister, and wished for nothing
more than for a third Person to join them, whose Chearfulness might help to dissipate the continual
Gloominess of her Temper. After the first Compliments, which are not short among this ceremonious
People, the Gentleman entertain'd the Ladies with the most refined Gallantry. He expressed
himself in so graceful and charming a Manner, that they were both infinitely taken with his
Conversation. Lenertoula, that he might talk more at Ease, desired him to sit down by her upon
a Bank of Turf, and after some Questions on the Condition of his Fortune, offered him her Services,
if needful, for its Improvement. This Person, of all Men the most rude and brutish, for he
was insulting over the Disgrace of an unfortunate Woman, who was extremely desirous of obliging
him, and had made him an Offer of an unusual Generosity. He gave her a full Answer to the first
Article. "I was a general Officer in the King's Army, said he to her, where I served honourably
for twenty Years. But having been injured by the Ministry, I retired to my Estate, with which
and some small Marks of Distinction, which could not be denied my long Services, I live contented."
"But my Lord," interrupted Lenertoula, who was for knowing how she stood in the Thoughts of
People of Quality, "I am surprized that you never address'd yourself to the Favourite, in order
to obtain, by Means of her Interests, the just Reward of your Services. She took a Pleasure
in countenancing Merit, and certainly such as yours would have engag'd her Favour." "I, Madam,"
replied the Officer, with Indignation, "should I make a Prostitute my Refuge? I am her Relation,
and it is the only Blot that I know of in our Family. I am too tender in Point of Honour, to
hold any Thing from the Hands of a Woman, who has so notoriously trampled it under her Feet."
At this Lenertoula was indeed as one thunder-struck. She endeavoured several Times to make
some Reply to this ungrateful Officer; but her Voice failed her. He left them, and her Sister
was obliged to call her Slaves to lead her to her Chariot, in order to carry her back to her
Palace.

Zeokinizul, in the mean Time, had crowned his Campaign, by taking the important Fortress he
had besieged. His Soldiers encouraged by his Presence, had at once surmounted Nature, Art,
a severe Season, and the Efforts of a numerous and brave Garison. Having now nothing to do
but repose himself under his Laurels, he returned towards his Capital. Then it was that his
Subjects, in an Extacy of Loyalty, were seen to prepare him a Reception answerable to their
Love, and present the most affecting and pleasing Sight to the Eyes of a Monarch, who aimed
more at reigning over their Hearts, than subduing them by Fear. If the News of his Sickness
had dispirited them, the News of his Approach rejoiced them. But when they came to see him,
their Transports were beyond all Description, their Eyes overflowed with Tears of Joy and Affection,
whilst the Sky rung with their Acclamations. How happy is such a King amidst such a People,
and how formidable when he heads them against their Enemies! Zeokinizul stayed three Days at
Kofir, as a Testimony of his Regard for this cordial People, who also to shew their Sense of
so much Condescension, and to celebrate his Return, invented Variety of polite Entertainments.
The King and People seemed to strive who should be kindest, for he gave Orders, that all the
Inhabitants without Exception, should have Admittance into his Presence, that they might feast
themselves with the delightful Sight which they had so affectionately desired. It is affirmed,
that the Idea of his late Danger, from which he was often told, that nothing less than a Miracle
delivered him, being still strong upon his Mind, he had a real Tenderness for the Queen, whom
he had restored to all her Rights. They were more than once surprized in such Attitudes as
clearly shewed their Reconciliation.

But how frail are Vows drawn from us only by Danger, how soon effaced by Safety and Temptation!
Scarce was Zeokinizul returned to the Hurry, Brilliancy, and Diversions of the Court, but those
Impressions which it was hoped would be as lasting as they were salutary, were by Degrees soon
dissipated. His Love for Lenertoula appear'd to have been like a sudden Fire, ready to burst
out with greater Vehemence. At first he was sorry for his using her so abruptly; than he began
to frown on the Advisers of her disgraceful Removal, and recall'd Kelirieu and others who had
sided with his injured Favorite. Kalontil, Governor to the Prince, the presumptive Heir of
the Crown, was banished from Court, for Reasons which were never thought fit to be made publick.
Some imputed it to his endangering his Pupil, by having brought him to his sick Father, without
any such order, and without Attendance. Others charge him with a Project for aggrandizing himself
upon the King's Death. But the most knowing conclude, that he must have spoken ill of the Favorite,
in order to set the young Prince against her. Zeokinizul seemed afterwards mightily to affect
Solitude, nor did even Hunting itself please him, unless when he went without Company; which
gave Occasion to suspect, that there were some private Meetings carried on in order to a Reconciliation
with the Favourite, and to which Kelirieu was only privy. At last, weary of constraining his
Temper, he complained openly of the Abuse put upon him at a Time when he was incapable of Reflection,
and of the Indignity offered to his Honour, in urging him with terrible Threatnings to disgracefully
remove, and expose to Contempt and Violences, a Person whose only Fault towards him was an
Excess of Love. He restored her to her Rank, Titles, and Privileges; but openly declaring,
that all this was only to prevent her former Commerce with him proving her utter Ruin; for
that he was determined not to keep her any longer as a Mistress. Yet notwithstanding these
Protestations, private Measures were forming in order to procure as fond a Reconciliation as
ever. The Reality of these Assurances were soon illustrated, when he broke the solemn Promise
he had made to the Mollak, and recall'd his dear Lenertoula. But this was too slender a Reparation
for what she had suffered. She required of Zeokinizul, a more complete and signal Triumph.
Immediately the pious, but over-zealous Mollak was dismissed the Court, and ordered to his
Mosque. A Visier also whom the Favourite particularly hated, having always opposed her Amour,
was ordered personally to declare to her, that Zeokinizul again acknowledged her Mistress of
his Heart, and only waited her Orders, and a List of her Enemies, in order to revenge her to
the utmost. The Visier obeyed; but at the same Time he took secure Measures that he might not
be upon the fatal List, and to prevent this imperious Woman from abusing the King's Weakness,
an infallible Poison which he found Means to have given her, worked at the very Instant that
he went to perform his Commission. As she was soon violently seiz'd with the Approaches of
Death, it was believed by the Generality, who had no Notion of foul Play, that Lenertoula had
been overcome by an Excess of Joy, which is always more forcible than that of Grief, especially
in Women. Upon this Notion, a Kofiran Wit made four Verses, which may be thus rendered in English.

    'Tis needless now my famous Blood to name,
    This Act alone will immortalize my Fame.
    My King, on gaining Life, return'd my Pow'r,
    For which I dy'd his Glory to restore.

It was thought for a long Time, that this would prove an inconsolable Loss to Zeokinizul. He
seemed to have no Ease, no Satisfaction, but in heaping Gifts and Favours on all Lenertoula's
Relations, to manifest how dear she was to him. However, the Marriage of his only Son, to a
Daughter of the King of Jerebi, his Relation, the Magnificence and Diversions at the Celebration
of the Ceremony, and the Congratulations from all Parts, at last gave a chearful Turn to his
Disposition; and he wisely began to think, that the Honours he conferr'd on the Sister of his
dear Mistress, besides sixteen thousand Tomans which he gave to her Husband; together with
a tender Remembrance, which he vow'd always to retain for her Ashes, was amply fulfilling all
that the most tender Passion could require. His Courtiers, who were surprised to see his Heart
continue for a Time disengag'd and inaccessible to any new Passion, were in daily Expectation
of seeing the Liberty which he had so happily recovered, offered up to some youthful Beauty.
But the Court Ladies strove so eagerly for this Prize, that their over Forwardness made him
averse to having an Intrigue with any. They were ignorant that Resistance inflames Desire,
and he at that Time scorned Enjoyments too easily procured. Kelirieu in the mean Time grew
uneasy at his Master's Indifference, as it deprived him of the most substantial Emoluments
of his Post. He saw his Favours entirely depended on his being subservient to the King's Pleasures,
so that he spared for nothing in order to restore that Employment which he had executed so
much to his Master's Satisfaction, and his own Advantage. The Nuptials of the young Prince
opened a Way to it. Nothing can equal the Joy, Magnificence, and Splendour, which appeared
on that Occasion. The City of Kofir distinguished itself above all others in the Kingdom; for
as it has not its equal for Largeness and Riches, so it surpassed them all in the Eclat of
its Zeal and Affection for the Royal Family. In twelve of the most remarkable Parts of the
City, there were large and superb Saloons, where all without Distinction, were admitted to
dance. There was a Profusion of Refreshments of all Kinds. The best Musicians had Orders to
attend. The Sound of such an infinite Number of Instruments, accompanied with harmonious Voices,
added to the Murmurs of the Fountains of Wine which were playing every where, inspired such
a rapturous Gaiety to numberless Crouds of People, that no Stranger, however, acquainted with
the Affairs of this Kingdom, could, at that Time of excessive Mirth, have imagined, that it
had for many Years been involved in a bloody and expensive War.

This Season of universal Joy, Love chose to captivate again Zeokinizul, after such an Interval
of boasted Liberty. The chief Inhabitants of Kofir, who are a distinct Body from the Nobility,
the Magistracy, and the Citizens, had decorated in the most superb Manner the Sessions House
for a Ball, to which they invited the King and royal Pair. Every one was admitted in their
Mask Habits, to give the Citizens an Opportunity of shewing their Wives the Magnificence, Gallantries,
and Diversions of the Court, which at other Times is out of their Power. Accordingly Zeokinizul,
attended by all his Courtiers, came to this Ball, in Habits as strange as they were elegant.
The Sight of such a beautiful Assembly, struck him with a delightful Surprise. Here was no
painted Allurements, no artificial Charms, such as he was daily conversant with in his Palace.
All here was pure Nature, which seem'd to have chosen this Day to present him with a Sight
of her most beautiful Productions. The Beauty, the Air, the Motion, and Youth of these lovely
Objects was so enchanting, that they looked like the heavenly Houris. Zeokinizul was enchanted
at the Sight of such a brilliant Assembly, his Eyes wandered from Beauty to Beauty, till they
seemed at once to fix on a young Lady of a distinguished Appearance. She was in the Habit of
an Amazon, with her Bow and Quiver hanging at her Shoulders. Her flaxen Hair, which shone with
Diamonds, floated in Ringlets, and her charming Breast half naked, ravish'd the Sight. "Lovely
Huntress," said the Monarch, "unhappy those whom your Arrows pierce, their Wounds are Mortal."----
This Speech gave the Charmer a fair Field for returning such an Answer as might inflame Zeokinizul;
but whether she did not dream of such a Conquest, or Presence of Mind failed her, she ran and
hid herself among the Maskers. This Disappointment was in some Measure relieved by a Company
of twenty young Persons, who began a Dance, which was much in Vogue at that Time, but first
invented in the King of Alniob's Country. They perform'd it so gracefully, that he stood like
a Man deprived of his Senses. The Charms of each of these beautiful Dancers, threw him into
his first Hesitation, which would soon have been ended, had any one of them uncovered her Face.
It is past all Doubt, that the Heart of Zeokinizul, which longed for an Object, would have
received the Impression with Transport. He went to one of the Ends of the Saloon, where Women
of an ordinary Rank were seated in a Kind of Amphitheatre. Their Dress was in nothing inferior
to those of a higher Rank; and besides, they had those fresh healthful Countenances, which
being the Result of Temperance, and a plain Way of living, was not to be found among the Quality.
Zeokinizul stood viewing them, but his Hour was come. Love waited for him under a Mask, and
she who wore it was now going to let this mischievous Deity fly into Zeokinizul's Heart. She
was a young Woman, of a brown Complexion, lately married to a freedman, who having deserv'd
his Master's Favour by nocturnal Services, had, together with his Liberty, obtained a Post
among those who robb'd the Prince, and plunder'd the People. They are called Omeriserufs, or
Rogues of the second Class. She, whom Love had already appointed for Favourite, under Pretence
of pulling something out of her Pocket, dropt her Handkerchief, and as it is said, purposely.
Zeokinizul hastily took it up; and, as he could not reach her Seat, he toss'd it to her in
the most polite Manner. A confused Murmur immediately spread thro' the Saloon, with these Words,
The Handkerchief is thrown. The King was too much taken up with viewing the Person to whom
he had been so complaisant, to take any Notice of such Whisperings. The Charms she display'd
in taking off her Mask, and her genteel Manner of her thanking him for the Honour, fill'd him
with such passionate Love, that he even there gave her some Intimations how much he was taken
with her Beauty. After this Declaration, he soon left the Ball, for having received such a
Wound, he wanted to be in private with his Confident, in order to consult about his new Love.
Kelirieu had already prevented his Master's Orders, for as he narrowly watched him, he perceived
which of the Company had captivated him, and immediately informed himself of her Rank and Condition.

Zeokinizul was transported with Joy at Kelirieu's Report of his Enquiries. He made himself
sure, that the Husband of this young Person, being one of those Set of Men, who Mind nothing
but Riches, would not only resign his conjugal Rights, but would even be brought to sollicit
his Spouse to resign herself up to the King's Embraces, and herein he was not mistaken. But
the Difficulty was to induce the Seller's Wife to be a Party in such a scandalous Contract;
for tho' she was of low Extraction, she had an Elevation of Mind, a Purity of Virtue, which
would have done Honour to the highest. She could not indeed help being inwardly pleased that
she had tried her Charms with such Success upon her Sovereign, and the dazzling Idea of beholding
Zeokinizul laying at her Feet, all his Greatness and Power, her Husband made a Bassa of the
second Rank, her Name exchanged for one of the most illustrious, were Circumstances which the
natural Desires in Women of shining even in the smallest Matters, would not allow her to be
insensible; yet this Sensibility did not greatly hasten the Lover's Happiness; for, as her
Duty united her to a Husband, from whom her Inclinations alienated her, she was for distinguishing
herself from all that had gone before her, and reducing the Monarch to go through the entire
Play of Love. But such a formal Method was insupportable to him, for being used to conquer
upon the very first Appearance of his Desire, his Heart was for some Time distracted with strong
Conflicts between Love and Resentment, without a decisive Victory on either Side. Sometimes
he looked upon the Resistance of his new Mistress, as an insolent Affront to Majesty; at other
Times this same Resistance inflamed him the more, and he pleased himself with the Thoughts
of subduing that obstinate Virtue which she affected. All Kelirieu's Artifices were at an End,
and when he was passionately urg'd by the King, he was at a Loss for any farther Expedient.
However, in such a critical Juncture, he determined to make one last Effort, in order to bring
the beautiful Vorompdap to his Lure, and if he fail'd, to engage Zeokinizul to forget her in
the Arms of another, who knew the true Value of a Monarch's Affections.

Being persuaded that every Woman who has once listened to a Lover, cannot bear the Thoughts
of losing him, but makes Use of every Art in order to fix his Constancy, he waited upon her
in Person, and said, with an Air of Concern, At last, charming Kismare, your Rigour has disgusted
the Sultan, so as to make him give over his Addresses. Weary of the Delays and Obstacles you
was constantly raising against his Passion, he has offered it to another, notwithstanding all
my Endeavours to secure him, by the highest Praises of your Charms, and making your very Resistance,
a Motive for his farther Pursuits. A Person, not indeed of your perfect Beauty, but of a more
indulgent Temper, captivates this Monarch, and I apprehend, that her obliging and artful Behaviour
to her Lover, will for ever deprive you of a Heart which you might have kept at your Devotion.
Kelirieu, whilst he was speaking, did not fail to observe the young Vorompdap's Countenance,
and had the Pleasure of discerning the Vexation which she strove in vain to conceal. She was
some Time without returning an Answer, but after composing herself, and putting a good Air
upon the Confusion which the Thoughts of a Rival had excited, I could never have imagined,
said she, with an affected Indifference, which, however, could not deceive the artful Kelirieu,
No, I never could have imagined, that after so many Marks and Protestations of a sincere Affection,
Zeokinizul, could have deceived me in such a Manner. However, I am free from the Reproaches
of a criminal Uneasiness to gratify his Desires. Charming Kismare, replied Kelirieu, had you
shewed the Compliance which is due to a Monarch's Love, I presume to swear by his Head, that
he would never have proved inconstant. But no Lover, and especially a King, will ever be satisfied
with an ideal Love. Kindness cherishes the Flame, but Unkindness quenches it. But if you have
still any Value for Zeokinizul's Heart, you still may avert the Blow which seems to trouble
you. I, replied she, smartly, I, troubled at the King's Alteration! very far from it. On the
contrary, I bless interposing Heaven, that it happened before Gratitude had prevail'd upon
me to make him a Sacrifice of my Person, and, what is still dearer, my Virtue. Alas! added
she, sheding some Tears, which flowed in Spite of her, that fatal Instant was drawing near.
If it be so, replied Kelirieu, I pity you for having undesignedly lost an Enjoyment so necessary
to your own Repose. For, added he, softly, I can discover through all your Affectations, that
you really love the King. Your Heart is wounded, and only with-held by airy and unseasonable
Scruples. Well, yes, answered she, I do love him. I do not endeavour to conceal it from you.
Good God! what Woman in my Place could forbear. But, how can I commit such a publick Adultery.
A publick Adultery, replied Kelirieu, with a seeming Amazement, what Blockhead has put such
Fancies into your Head. But this Crime so justly condemned both by divine and human Laws, consists
in the Injury done to a Man, whose Wife against his Will, or without his Knowledge, admits
a Gallant to her Embraces? But, lovely Kismare, how different is your Case! Will not your Husband
quit all Pretentions to your Person? Has he not releas'd you from the Vow of being only his?
Since his Consent could unite you to him, shall his positive Order be of less Validity to separate
you from him, and unite you to another; and that upon such an important Occasion, when Riches,
Titles, and Power are to reward his Cession, and your Acquiescence? Believe me, charming Vorompdap,
our Imans have adapted our Religion to their own Views and Passions, without Regard to that
genuine and perfect Model, the Will of God. The Vow of Celibacy, upon which they value themselves,
as renouncing Marriage, would be an insupportable Yoke to them, it would be soon shaken of,
were it not for their Hopes, which indeed are too often verified, of taking Advantage of the
Misunderstandings betwixt the Husband and Wife, whose Bands they are taught to believe indissoluble.
It is on this Account, that they are constantly magnifying Conjugal Duties, and lay so much
Stress on their punctual Observation. Consider only what is done in other Nations, no less
wise and religious than ourselves. Divorces among them are permitted, as frequently essential
to the well being of Society. That sacred Book the Liegnelau, cannot be supposed to contradict
and overthrow the Bileb, of which it is in a great Measure the Accomplishment, and Suesi whom
you worship, being the Messenger of the great God, would not offer to abrogate his Institutions.
Thus the Point is clear, and now look upon yourself as a Woman who is about forming a second
Contract, being legally, religiously, and honourably discharged from the former. Zeokinizul
is equally at Liberty, for the State and Temper of the Queen invalidate their Marriage. So,
that only a few Formalities are wanting for your Union with the King, and you know, Formalities
among the more understanding Part of the World, are often dispensed with, as tiresome rather
than necessary. The Consent of both Parties has always been the only Point insisted on as essential.

These Proofs, which in the Mouth of a Mollak, would have been laugh'd at, produced the designed
Effect from Kelirieu. The young Kismare was shaken, but not overthrown by them; she still insisted
against plunging herself into such shocking Scandal. This seemed a very slender Objection to
Kelirieu, who immediately replyed to it. Consider, says he, the Kams of Meani and Tesoulou,
do they bear any Marks of their Mother's Scandal? Was a great Monarch's Love accounted a Disgrace
to a beautiful Lady? If you was acquainted with the first Ages of our Monarchy, you would be
satisfied, that they never made any Difference between the Children of Love, and those born
in lawful Marriage, as the Imans are pleased to call it. A King at your Feet, Courtiers waiting
respectfully on your Orders, a Nation's Treasure at your Disposal, can there be Contempt and
Scandal amid such Advantages? Do not alarm your Mind with Monsters of your own forming, only
for the Sake of opposing them. Consent to make Zeokinizul happy, and I will lay him at your
Feet, more deeply in Love than ever. These Representations made a strong Impression upon the
young Favourite, whom the Eloquence of her own Heart had already half convinced. She still
stood upon some Punctilio's; but when Kelirieu, which was his last Resource, intimated to her
the Danger which might accrue to her Husband from her Obstinacy, this drew from her an absolute
Consent. This last Circumstance was certainly the best adapted to fix her; for the new Kismare,
like all the rest of his Fraternity, was making the most of his Time in the Management of the
Finances, and relying on his Spouse's Favour, he was above taking proper Precautions to conceal
or palliate his Imbezzlements. Kelirieu took Care to fill Vorompdap with Apprehensions, that
Zeokinizul would infallibly call him to an Account, the most favourable Consequence whereof,
would be a Confiscation of all his Substance. It was then high Time to come to a Resolution.
Thus Kelirieu happily completed his Negotiation. And having appointed the Time and Place for
the first Interview, he hastened, flushed with Joy, to congratulate his Master on this Victory,
which was the more delightful, as it had been attended with such a Train of Difficulties.

In the mean Time this new Intrigue, no more than the former, could not diminish Zeokinizul's
strict Attention to the several Exigencies of the State. His wise Orders had been so exactly
executed throughout his Empire, that his Armies were fit for Action even before the Spring.
He headed in Person the most considerable, which was destined for the Conquest of the Bapasis,
being still commanded by the brave Vameric, whose prudent Conduct towards the End of the last
Campaign had been admired by his very Enemies. The Favourite followed the King as Lenertoula
had done, whom she certainly equalled both in Love and Honour. The Campaign was opened with
the Siege of a Town which the great Zeokitarezul had fortified at a prodigious Expence, which,
besides a strong regular Wall and Outworks, had a Citadel which was accounted by the Connoisseurs,
a Master-piece of Fortification. It must have been even an unsurmountable Barrier to the Kofirans,
in case they reduced the City. With this View their Attacks were carried on with all imaginary
Vigour. On the other Hand, this Place being as it were the Key of the Country, the Keeping
of it was of such Importance to the Enemies of Zeokinizul, that they resolv'd to hazard every
Thing in order to its Relief. The King of Alniob, the Provinces Junet, and the Queen of Ghinoer,
Sovereign of the Bapasis, joined all their Forces, of which the chief Command was conferr'd
on the Kam of Lundamberk, youngest Son to the King of Alniob, a Prince of a martial Disposition,
and of the greatest Bravery. His Ardour for Glory made him long to encounter the King of the
Kofirans, and his only Son, a young Prince of the greatest Expectations, who could forsake
the Embraces of a youthful Bride, to attend his Father, and learn the Art of War under Vameric,
in the midst of Fatigues and Dangers. The Impetuosity of the Kam of Lundamberk, would not allow
him to conform to the wise Counsels of the experienced Generals of his Army, who were for delaying
the Battle 'till he had got the Advantage of the Ground, as he was inferiour to them in Numbers.
He would not be ruled by their Representations, but, led on by his evil Genius, he came and
offered Battle to Zeokinizul, whose Forces were already come out of their Lines, and drawn
up in order to receive him.

As these Sheets bear the Title of the Amours of Zeokinizul, I may perhaps be censured for giving
a Detail of a Battle which seems quite foreign to this Work; but as it occasioned several Vexations
to the Favourite, and having been omitted by every other Writer, I believe the Reader will
not be displeased at my relating such Particulars as have come to my Knowledge.

There was great Fault found with Vameric's Dispositions. It was reported, that he was so full
of the Victory, that he took not the least Care to secure a Retreat. Behind his Lines was a
large River call'd the Tueska, over which he had laid but one Bridge, which, in Case of a Defeat,
must infallibly have broken down with the Weight of the flying Troops; the Consequence of which
must have been their total Destruction. All this is a known and undeniable Truth. But Vameric
was acquainted with the Spirit of the Nation which he commanded. He knew that they would not
fly before all the Forces in the World, when they were fighting in their King's Presence. Then,
what Occasion was there for Bridges to favour a Retreat, when every single Man was resolv'd
to die, or conquer? Besides in one Night's Time he had cast up three Trenches, of which the
two first were sufficient to defend them against the first Attack of the Enemy, which is always
the most violent. The third would be an impenetrable Defence against their weak and broken
Forces. Another considerable Advantage was, the dividing the Army into small Bodies, which
must extremely harass the Enemy, as they must be under a Necessity of attacking but one at
a Time. Whatever Confidence Zeokinizul reposed in Vameric, he would share both in the Command
and Danger. This hazardous Circumstance threw the Favourite into inexpressible Agonies. But
neither her Tears nor her Intreaties, so prevalent at all other Times, were unable to restrain
the resolute Monarch. He and his Son were present during the whole Action, and in so much Danger,
that several were killed near them. At last, Victory declared itself in his Favour, and the
young Prince of Alniob, tho' he exerted the utmost Courage and was seconded with an intrepid
Valour, by his Soldiers, who loved him entirely, was obliged to retreat. But tho' this young
Lion was defeated, he still struck his Enemies with Terror, for after such an Experience of
his Valour, they apprehended that he would next Day renew the Action, which he certainly would
have done, had it not been for the Opposition of his Generals.

Zeokinizul, after the Victory, applied himself to shew the Conquered how highly he esteemed
their Courage. It was ordered, that the same Care should be taken of their wounded, as of his
own Soldiers. The imprudent and scandalous Report of some barbarous Orders issued by the Prince
of Alniob, in Case of his Success, made not the least Impression on this magnanimous King,
and all Africa joined in owning that the Kam of Lundamberk and his Allies, could not have a
more worthy Conqueror than Zeokinizul. The Congratulations of his dear Kismare were still wanting,
to complete the Joy and Honours of this Victory. He hastened, transported with Love, to lay
his Laurels at her Feet, and tell her that he was animated by her charming Idea, in the midst
of all the Horrors of the Battle. Here was a fresh and very worthy Motive to increase her Tenderness
towards him. But, who can know a Woman? This Instant was to be the Period of it, or at least
to put it to a severe Trial.

A young Prisoner, one of the most illustrious of the Nobility of Alniob, having desired Admittance
to Zeokinizul, was introduced to him in his Tent, where he was sitting with the Favourite.
She was struck at the Sight of him, as indeed there never was any Man fitter to make a Woman
unfaithful, and justify her Infidelity. His Mein and Air spoke the Hero, and his Address to
the Monarch declared, that his Sentiments were answerable. "Sire, said he, all our Efforts
have not hindered Victory from declaring itself for you. Tho' I can no longer continue fighting
with my brave Fellow-Soldiers, I could wish not to remain among mine Enemies. Your Highness
is no Stranger to Love, and it is that which calls me back to my own Country. Be pleased therefore,
to grant me Permission to return, which will not a little augment your Glory, that I shall
there appear in Chains instead of those Trophies which I hop'd to have adorn'd my Return."
The majestic Air with which this young Warriour delivered himself, moved Zeokinizul, who immediately
answered, "You are at full Liberty to depart, and may Love do you more Justice than Fortune."
This Generosity of Zeokinizul, was planting a Dagger in the Favourite's Heart, who had already
conceived too great a Passion for the Prisoner, to consent so readily to his Departure. Her
Passion hindered her from reflecting on the Consequences which might flow from it, and turning
towards the Monarch, she said, "Sire, let not your extreme Generosity betray your Interest.
When this young Warriour is again among his Countrymen, he may engage them to come and attack
you a second Time. He has seen"---- "Be it so, Madam," interrupted Zeokinizul, "I can never
have too many Opportunities of making Heroes." She blush'd at this Answer, and Kelirieu, who
perceived it, readily guessing that the Departure of this young Prisoner was not agreeable
to her Inclinations, laid hold of the Opportunity of Zeokinizul's going out to give some Orders,
of offering her his Service. "Madam, said he, if I am not mistaken, I apprehend this young
Prisoner has renewed in your Mind some painful Idea; be pleased to disclose the Secret to me,
you shall find I will prove a faithful Servant, devoted to all your Views and Inclinations.
Is it your Pleasure that this Prisoner should go or Stay? I will find a Method of making him
consent to either, as you shall direct." "Ah, let him go replied she, my dear Kelirieu, let
him go, his Presence is so dangerous, that any longer Stay would, I fear, make me become ungrateful
and faithless to my generous Prince. How charming he is! did you ever before see so graceful
a Person? How serene and noble is his Deportment, in the midst of Misfortunes! However, possibly
as a Prisoner, he may stand in need of Money, go and offer him these two hundred Pieces of
Gold, that he may return to his Country in a Manner suitable to his Rank and Merit, and bring
me back an Account in what Manner he received them."

Kelirieu was of such a restless Vivacity, that he could not be contented without Intrigues,
which made him eagerly apply himself to forming another. Having found out the fortunate Prisoner,
he put the Purse into his Hands with these Words. "Virtue, my Lord, is equally cherished by
both Sexes among us, and as a Proof of it, here are two hundred Pieces of Gold, which you are
desired to accept of from a very beautiful Lady." "I should be unworthy the least of her Thoughts,
replied the Prisoner, were I to refuse her Favour, which this Juncture has render'd necessary.
If her Name be not a Secret, I would beg the Favour of you, my Lord, to introduce me, that
I might pay my Acknowledgements to this generous Lady." "She would, perhaps ask you for something
more, replied Kelirieu." "Ah, returned the Stranger, that is not in my Power to grant. As I
have not seen her, I can, without the least Affront to her Beauty, preserve my Heart for the
present dear Possessour of it. Be pleased then, my Lord, to tell her, that I depart full of
the warmest Gratitude; and, since I am so fortunate as to have the illustrious Kam of Kelirieu
in my Interest, I beg him to be assured, that upon my Return into my Country, as it is my highest
Duty, so it shall be my first Care, to make suitable Returns for his Generosity to a Stranger,
whom his polite Behaviour entirely frees from the Meanness of receiving a Favour, which he
would have refused from any other Hand." Kelirieu, perceiving he entirely mistook his Intentions,
did not think proper to explain himself, and after taking his Leave, he returned to make a
Report to the Favourite of his unlucky Commission. SENTENCES ON SYNTAX AND IDIOMS FOR VIVA VOCE
PRACTICE… 156

IV. PASSAGES FOR TRANSLATION INTO FRENCH… 169

V. SUJETS DE RÉDACTION… 177

INTRODUCTION

Alphonse Daudet was born at Nîmes on May 13, 1840. The Daudets were of lowly origin. Alphonse’s
grandfather, a simple peasant, had in 1789 settled at Nîmes as a weaver. His business prospered
so much that he died leaving a small fortune; Vincent Daudet, his fourth son, and a young man
of great ambition, was determined to rise out of the class in which
he was born and acquire for himself and family a high social status.

In 1830 he married, greatly against the wishes of her parents, Adeline Reynaud, whose father
owned the largest silk manufactory in the town.

His affairs were fairly flourishing when he was suddenly ruined by the Revolution of 1848. Unable to
meet his liabilities, he sold his business and removed to Lyons with his wife and children. He
was, however, anxious that his sons, of whom Alphonse was the third, should have the best education
his scanty means would allow, and Alphonse and his elder brother Ernest—the “mère Jacques” of
Le Petit Chose and his lifelong companion—were first sent to the monastic school of St. Pierre,
and then to the Lyons Lycée.

Young Alphonse, who from his birth had been rather delicate, was not a model boy. He loved
to play truant, and it was only through his brother Ernest, who, to get him out of many a scrape,
wrote notes to his teacher signed in his father’s name, that he escaped
punishment.

But he showed signs of great promise. He learned his lessons in half the time that his school-fellows
did, was always at the top of his class, and was gifted with a marvellous power of observation.
He composed several poems— amongst others La Vierge à la Crèche and Les Petits Enfants,— also a
novel, all of which were declared by his master to have been amazing productions for a boy
of his age.

But Fortune did not smile on the Daudet family at Lyons any more than at Nîmes. After ten years
of hard and bitter struggles, the home was broken up. M. Daudet became traveller for a firm of wine-merchants
in the North, his wife and daughter remained in the South. Ernest—who had on leaving school acted
as bookkeeper to his father, then as a receiver of pledges in a pawnbroker’s shop, and lastly
as a clerk in a forwarding office—went to Paris to try his fortune in the world of letters, whilst
Alphonse was sent as an usher to a college at Alais, for his father was unable to pay the fees
for his final school examination.

The year that he spent at Alais was the unhappiest in his life. His small stature, his youth—he was
now only fifteen years old—his “gauche” appearance, were not calculated to inspire the boys with any
respect for him. They played him all sorts of tricks, and the masters refused to uphold his
authority. Often, in order to escape his tormentors, he would rush up to his bed-room and there give
vent to his despair by shedding floods of tears, lying awake at night and biting the bedclothes
to choke his sobs. Yet, brave philosopher that he was, Le Petit Chose never lost heart. The
dream of his life was to retrieve the family fortunes, a dream which one day was to be fully realized.
At last, however, at the end of his tether, he wrote to Ernest telling him all his troubles,
and great was his joy when he received a letter back, asking him to come at once to Paris.

On a cold, grey, foggy November morning Alphonse Daudet arrived in Paris, with only two francs in his
pocket. His railway fare had been lent him by one of the masters at Alais, and he had had nothing
to eat or drink on the journey, which had taken forty-eight hours,
except a little brandy and water kindly offered by some sailors who
travelled with him. He had not dared to spend the little he had left
after buying his ticket, for he thought it better to go without food
than reach Paris penniless. His brother met him and took him to his
lodgings in the “Quartier Latin.”

Ernest, who had come to Paris with
introductions, had obtained a post on the staff of an Orleanist newspaper,
Le Spectateur, at a salary of £2 a week. Thus at the age of eighteen
did Daudet make his debut in the literary world. The first rung was
reached in the ladder of fame, and success was not long in coming.
He became a regular contributor to the Figaro. One of his poems, Les
Frunes, was recited at the Tuileries before the Empress Eugénie. She
liked it so much that she was led to inquire who the author was. On
being told he was a poor man starving in a garret, she at once requested
the Duc de Moray, President of the Corps Législatif, to offer him
a post as secretary in his department, a sinecure, with a handsome
salary attached. At hearing of the Bassa's Departure, her Heart immediately became
a Prey to Grief, Jealousy and Resentment; and imputing his Conduct to his Indifference, she
resolv'd to banish him from her Remembrance, or if this was impossible, yet, at least, she
would appear to have done so. Zeokinizul, was soon informed of the disorder'd State of her
Mind. Few Confidents are to be found, who can withstand the Solicitations of a King. She whom
Nasica had chosen, was one of the weakest. She discover'd to the King, the Rise, Increase,
and several other Circumstances of her Mistress's Love for the young Bassa, and gave him a
full Account of the Grief and Resentment she had shewn at his unexpected Departure.

In order to give these Emotions Time to arrive at such a Height, as to subdue Love, Zeokinizul
very carefully avoided speaking one Word to Nasica of his Passion for her. However, as often
as he happen'd to see her, he never fail'd passing a Compliment upon her Beauty, but it was
always with such Calmness and Moderation, as was so far from being thought to proceed from
Love, that it was only accounted a proper Complaisance in the Prince, who was willing to do
Justice to such a celebrated Beauty. The young Bassa, being ignorant that his Letters were
intercepted, had wrote several in so soft and persuasive a Style, as to alarm Zeokinizul, and
make him redouble his Precautions to prevent any of them from falling into the Hands of those
to whom they were directed. But the Confidence he had of his Mistress's Affection, not allowing
him to suspect that Nasica could prove faithless, began to think that some third Person interposed
in their Correspondence. After having long consider'd who could be this jealous Rival who thus
deprived him of his only remaining Comfort, his Suspicions fell upon his Master. When he called
to Mind the Suddenness of his being sent away in an Affair which required no such Haste, it
was but too evident, and his Doubts increased to a Certainty. His whole Dangers and Misfortunes
immediately presented themselves to his View. He was not ignorant that it was an unpardonable
Crime to be a Rival to his Monarch, had his Love been unsuccessful; what then could be expected,
when his Happiness was the sole Obstacle to his Sovereign's Love? However, not valuing his
Disgrace, provided his Mistress continued faithful, he wrote her a Letter in the most moving
Terms, representing to her, that a Crown ought to come in no Competition with Love; that it
was the Heart only which ought to engage a Lady, who has a true Sense of that delicate Passion;
that upon this Principle he yielded the Preference to Zeokinizul, if his Love was more pure,
more respectful, or more perfect than his own. This Letter was committed to an old Servant,
in whom he placed the greatest Confidence; but the Misfortune was, that this Slave's good Qualities
were mixed with several Vices, and particularly Drunkenness. Being come to a Place where he
was to change his Horse, he resolved to rest himself a while, and empty some Bottles. This
was the very Place where the Spies of his Master's Rival used to intercept his Letters. They
knew by his Habit, that he belonged to the young Bassa, which was enough to make them mistrust
him. They went up to him, and after some Excuses for their Freedom, invited him to drink of
their Liquor. One of them offer'd to bear him Company as far as Kofir, as he was going to that
City. The Slave overjoy'd at meeting with a Fellow Traveller, and relying on the Swiftness
of his Horse, staid here longer than he ought. The Wine overpower'd him, and his artful Companion
plying him with Bumpers, soon disabled him from going any farther. The Sot fell asleep, his
Pockets were searched, and the Letter was known by the Direction to be one of those which they
were order'd to intercept. One of them immediately set out to carry it to him who had appointed
the Ambuscade, and he flew to deliver it to Zeokinizul. As the young Bassa appeared to know
who was his Rival, suitable Measures were to be taken, and such an Answer sent to him as might
throw him into Despair, and make him abandon a Passion which was now become dangerous. That
it might have the better Effect, Nasica's Hand was exactly imitated, and every discouraging
Argument forcibly urged. This counterfeited Letter gave him to understand, in the Name of his
Mistress, that a crowned Lover being more acceptable to her than a private Subject, she strictly
commanded him never to write, or speak one Word more of his presumptuous Passion.

This little Artifice proved of very happy Consequence to Zeokinizul. The young Bassa, who had
a most respectful Regard for him, thought it became him to return Contempt for Contempt. His
Answer was carefully deliver'd to the King, who could not but be highly pleased that the Credulity
of his Rival should promote his Love. To complete his Satisfaction, he ordered a Letter to
be writ to Nasica, in which her Lover freely exhorts her to take him for a Patern, and make
another Choice. All these Batteries being so well disposed, Zeokinizul began to think of disclosing
himself. He gave a Ball to his whole Court, in order to favour his Design, at which all the
Ladies having an Opportunity of entertaining themselves with their favourite Diversions were
highly delighted, and full of Gaiety. Nasica alone, seem'd insensible in the midst of all these
Entertainments. She retired at a Distance to avoid the Conversation of the gallant Nobility.
The soft Languor of her Eyes sufficiently declar'd the Sorrow of her Heart, and that the proper
Person was wanting to dissipate it. Zeokinizul, chose this Time to begin his Addresses. Charming
Nasica, says he, his Eyes sparkling with Love, what Disquietudes are those to which you seem
to abandon yourself. Is there any Mortal so happy as to cause them? I do not think, Sire, return'd
she, that what your Highness calls Disquietudes in me, can Interest you so far as to ask me
the Occasion of them.---- Ah, Gods! not be interested, replied the transported Monarch, can
you doubt of it, have not my Countenance, my Eyes, even my very Silence, which I have respectfully
observ'd till now, have not all these informed you, that my Happiness entirely depends on your
Repose and Contentment. Let not the charming Nasica be angry, continued he, perceiving, that
she heard him with Resentment, I love you indeed, but my Passion is so pure, so submissive,
that it can give no just Offence to your severe Vertue. I little imagined, interrupted she,
that all these splendid Entertainments of the Court concealed any Design of throwing me into
such alarming Apprehensions. Alarming Apprehensions! replied the King, is it then Matter of
Grief to the loveliest Person now present, that her Charms have captivated her Sovereign? Yes,
Sire, replied Nasica, resolutely, your Highness can only offer me a guilty Passion, and I would
incur your utmost Displeasure, I would die, rather than condescend to it. Judge yourself, Sire,
whether I have not Cause to be alarmed. But no, my Fears are too hasty. The great Zeokinizul
is too just and generous to harbour a Thought of disgracing a Family which has always served
him with Zeal and Honour, and it was merely to try his Subject, that he has demean'd himself
to offer such Discourse to her. Immediately making a respectful Courtesy, she returned to the
Circle of the Ladies.

Zeokinizul, was not a little piqued at the Manner in which Nasica had received the Declaration
of his Love. He expected that Modesty and Reservedness would have been her only Defence, and
that, at least, she would have spared reproaching him with such disagreeable Truths. After
having for a long Time watched all Opportunities of seeing and speaking to her, finding himself
disappointed and rejected, he lost all Patience, so as not to care whether his Addresses to
her were heard by the whole Court, or not. One Day, as she was talking with the Ladies of Honour
in the Queen's Anti-Chamber, he came to her. A proper Respect made them all withdraw, and the
Monarch laid hold of this Occasion to renew his Protestations. But all his ardent Entreaties
had no more Success than his first Declaration. Nasica's Modesty disengaged her with Honour
from so delicate a Situation. Zeokinizul admired her Constancy, and tho' he despair'd of ever
gaining her, yet he could not prevail upon himself to give over seeing her.

In the mean Time, the young Bassa's Resentment began to subside, and he became sensible, that
what he had mistaken for Indifference, was only Love disguised and agitated with the most cruel
Disquietude for the Fate of his dear Nasica. This State of Anxiety grew insupportable, he would
be informed of the Truth at any Rate, and being at a Loss whom to trust, since the most faithful
of his Slaves had fail'd of reaching Nasica's House, he resolv'd to go thither in Person. All
the Dangers which he ran in disobeying his Sovereign's Orders, were too weak a Check for his
Passion, and he set out with a Willingness to perish, provided he could once more throw himself
at the Feet of the Object of his Love. After many Hazards of being known and stopp'd, tho'
under a Disguise, he happily arrived at Kofir. Ten years before his death—which was tragic in
its suddenness when it did come—a severe illness overtook him, and slowly but surely his iron
will broke down under the physical and mental strain which its ravages had brought on him. One
evening, sitting at supper with his family, he had scarcely begun to eat when he fell from
his chair. His wife and son ran to his assistance, but saw at once
that the end had come. He died in Paris on December 18, 1897.

Daudet
was a thorough Méridional. He stood upon his Defence,
but being over-power'd, he was carried to one of the Court Prisons. Zeokinizul, whose Passion
had stifled his natural Sentiments of Humanity, was pleased to hear that his Rival lay in Chains.
His Disobedience to the Royal Orders afforded a specious Pretence for putting him to Death,
and the King's Heart was immediately inclined to such a cruel Expedient; but how was he struck,
when Nasica, being inform'd of the dreadful Condition of her Lover, threw herself at his Feet
all in Tears, conjuring him that the same Stroke might put an End to both their unfortunate
Lives. Let him live, Sire, cried she, mournfully, or order that Death may unite us both in
the Grave. If your Highness be offended at the Refusal of my Heart, it was no longer mine,
Love having disposed of it in Favour of the unhappy Bassa, who is now to fall your Victim.
But his Views were honourable, nor were mine less innocent. Let your Highness pronounce the
Decree of his Destiny, mine is inseperably annexed to it whatever it be.

Zeokinizul was moved with such exalted Virtue, and being naturally tender and compassionate,
he was grieved at seeing the Afflictions of two Lovers whom he himself had render'd unhappy.
A Ray of Wisdom opened his Eyes, and restored him to himself. He raised up Nasica, and gave
Orders himself for the Preparations of her Marriage with the young Bassa, who afterwards became
one of his chief Favourites.

So difficult an Act of Justice against himself, is one of the most glorious Periods of this
Monarch's Reign. His Love for Nasica settled in a tender Friendship for this virtuous Lady,
and soon after taking a Disgust at the Commerce of Women, he fixed a Resolution to abandon
it entirely. His People became his whole Care. They adored him for the Wisdom and Goodness
of his Administration during the Remainder of his Reign, which was much shorter than they desired.
He endeavoured by his Instructions and Examples, to leave in his Son a worthy Successor, whose
Virtues might keep up a lasting Idea of him. Such noble Cares were not disappointed, for the
Name of the great Zeokinizul, and the illustrious Heir of his Crown, will be held in immortal
Remembrance among the grateful Kofirans.

A KEY

For the better understanding the Amours of Zeokinizul.

Anagrams.            French.                     English.

Africa               Europe                      Europe
Alniob               Albion ou Angleterre      Albion or England
Alnobiens            Albioniens ou Anglois     Albionians or English
Anserol (Kam)      Duc d'Orleans               Duke of Orleans
Bapasis              Païs-Bas                    Low Countries. Out-and-out
pessimists accuse him of distorting
human nature by attributing to it imaginary graces and
virtues: but does not their unbending pessimism distort
it in another direction by showing
to us, under the pretext of being truthful, only its meannesses
and its horrors?—From PELLISSIER, Le Mouvement littéraire
au XIXe siècle. —From DICKENS’S David Copperfield.

IV

His style, created from moment to moment, subordinates the
form of the language to the need of expressing the immediate sensation
in its original vividness. He
multiplies ellipses, anastrophes, words unexpectedly connected;
he takes from every vocabulary its most expressive terms;
he models himself upon the very
appearance of things as they
are; he knows no other rhythm
than that of successive impressions. He is perpetually on
the move. His agility occasionally seems a little feverish.
We feel some anxiety; we are
afraid that the sentence may not find its balance. A few
lines from his works can be recognized at a glance, for
he has only had clumsy imitators,
his style being, moreover, in
the language of Montaigne, of one
substance with the author,
being the author himself. And yet one could hardly say that
this style breaks with tradition.

V

But
the pupils — the young noblemen!

VI

  It is not only his nerves which are sensitive, it is also his heart,
and the keenness of his sensations is equalled by that of his sympathies.
He is interested in his characters, and it is by loving them that
he makes us love them.
Another Mollak,      le Card. Mazarin
  p. 5.
An old Mollak,       le Card. Fleury
  pag. 13.
Mollak,              l'Evêque de Soissons        the Bishop of Soissons
  p. 49, and 50.
Mosque               Couvent                     Convent
Neitilane            Italienne                   Italian
Nhir                 Rhin                        Rhine
Nodais               Danois                      Danes
Omeriseroufs         Sousfermiers
d'Ourtavan           Vantadour
Pamenralt            Parlement
Pepa                 le Pape                     the Pope
Reinarol             Lorraine
Sesems               Messes                      Masses
Sicidem              Medicis
Sokans               Saxons
Suesi                Jesus
Tesoulou             Toulouse
Vameric              Maurice, Comte de Saxe
A Visir, p. 9.       le Comte de Maurepas
Vorompdap            Pompadour
Vosaïe               Savoïe                      Savoy
Zeoteirizul          Louis treize                Lewis the XIII.
Zokitarezoul         Louis quatorze              Lewis the XIV.
Zeokinizul           Louis quinze                Lewis the XV.

FINIS.

