According to the Roman expression, the magistrate has the power of a king; but this power is
brief and divided. The magistrate is elected for but one year and he has a colleague who has
the same power as himself. There are at once in Rome two consuls who govern the people and
command the armies, and several prætors to serve as subordinate governors or commanders and
to pronounce judgment. There are other magistrates, besides--two censors, four ædiles to supervise
the public ways and the markets, ten tribunes of the plebs, and quæstors to care for the state
treasure.

=The Censors.=--The highest of all the magistrates are the censors. They are charged with taking
the census every five years, that is to say, the enumeration of the Roman people. All the citizens
appear before them to declare under oath their name, the number of their children and their
slaves, the amount of their fortune; all this is inscribed on the registers. It is their duty,
too, to draw up the list of the senators, of the knights, and of the citizens, assigning to
each his proper rank in the city. They are charged as a result with making the lustrum, a great
ceremony of purification which occurs every five years.[122]

On that day all the citizens are assembled on the Campus Martius arranged in order of battle;
thrice there are led around the assembly three expiatory victims, a bull, a ram, and a swine;
these are killed and their blood sprinkled on the people; the city is purified and reconciled
with the gods.

The censors are the masters of the registration and they rank each as they please; they may
degrade a senator by striking him from the senate-list, a knight by not registering him among
the knights, and a citizen by not placing his name on the registers of the tribes. It is for
them an easy means of punishing those whom they regard at fault and of reaching those whom
the law does not condemn. They have been known to degrade citizens for poor tillage of the
soil and for having too costly an equipage, a senator because he possessed ten pounds of silver,
another for having repudiated his wife. It is this overweening power that the Romans call the
supervision of morals. It makes the censors the masters of the city.

=The Senate.=--The Senate is composed of about 300 persons appointed by the censor. But the
censor does not appoint at random; he chooses only rich citizens respected and of high family,
the majority of them former magistrates. Almost always he appoints those who are already members
of the Senate, so that ordinarily one remains a senator for life. The Senate is an assembly
of the principal men of Rome, hence its authority. As soon as business is presented, one of
the magistrates convokes the senators in a temple, lays the question before them, and then
asks "what they think concerning this matter." The senators reply one by one, following the
order of dignity. This is what they call "consulting the Senate," and the judgment of the majority
is a senatus consultum (decree of the Senate). This conclusion is only advisory as the Senate
has no power to make laws; but Rome obeys this advice as if it were a law. The people have
confidence in the senators, knowing that they have more experience than themselves; the magistrates
do not dare to resist an assembly composed of nobles who are their peers. And so the Senate
regulates all public business: it declares war and determines the number of the armies; it
receives ambassadors and makes peace; it fixes the revenues and the expenses. The people ratify
these measures and the magistrates execute them. In 200 B.C. the Senate decided on war with
the king of Macedon, but the people in terror refused to approve it: the Senate then ordered
a magistrate to convoke the comitia anew and to adopt a more persuasive speech. This time the
people voted for the war. In Rome it was the people who reigned, just as is the case with the
king in England, but it was the Senate that governed.

=The Offices.=--Being magistrate or senator in Rome is not a profession. Magistrates or senators
spend their time and their money without receiving any salary. A magistracy in Rome is before
all an honor. Entrance to it is to nobles, at most to knights, but always to the rich; but
these come to the highest magistracies only after they have occupied all the others. The man
who aims one day to govern Rome must serve in the army during ten campaigns. Then he may be
elected quæstor and he receives the administration of the state treasury. After this he becomes
ædile, charged with the policing of the city and with the provision of the corn supply. Later
he is elected prætor and gives judgment in the courts. Later yet, elected consul, he commands
an army and presides over the assemblies. Then only may he aspire to the censorship. This is
the highest round of the ladder and may be reached hardly before one's fiftieth year. The same
man has therefore, been financier, administrator, judge, general, and governor before arriving
at this original function of censor, the political distribution of the Roman people. This series
of offices is what is called the "order of the honors." Each of these functions lasts but one
year, and to rise to the one next higher a new election is necessary. In the year which precedes
the voting one must show one's self continually in the streets, "circulate" as the Romans say
(ambire: hence the word "ambition"), to solicit the suffrages of the people. For all this time
it is the custom to wear a white toga, the very sense of the word "candidate" (white garment).

FOOTNOTES:

[117] Probably some of the plebeians originated in non-noble Roman families.--ED.

[118] We know the story of this contest only through Livy and Dionysius of Halicarnassus; their
very dramatic account has become celebrated, but it is only a legend frequently altered by
falsifiers.

[119] The pontificate was opened to the plebeians by the Ogulnian Law of 300 B.C. The first
plebeian pontifex maximus was in 254 B.C. Livy, Epitome, xviii.--ED.

[120] This qualification was set in the last century of the republic.--ED.

[121] He cites several of their old proverbs: "A bad farmer is one who buys what his land can
raise." "It is bad economy to do in the day what can be done at night."

[122] After the completion of the census.--ED. It is necessary to have enough wealth to equip
one's self at one's own expense, for the state furnishes no arms to its soldiers; down to 402
B.C. it did not even pay them. And so only those citizens are enrolled who are provided with
at least a small fortune. The poor (called the proletariat) are exempt from service, or rather,
they have no right to serve. Every citizen who is rich enough to be admitted to the army owes
the state twenty campaigns; until these are completed the man remains at the disposition of
the consul and this from the age of seventeen to forty-six. In Rome, as in the Greek cities,
every man is at once citizen and soldier. The Romans are a people of small proprietors disciplined
in war.

=The Levy.=--When there was need of soldiers, the consul ordered all the citizens qualified
for service to assemble at the Capitol. There the officers elected by the people chose as many
men as were necessary to form the army. This was the enrolment (the Romans called it the Choice);
then came the military oath. The officers first took the oath, and then the rank and file;
they swore to obey their general, to follow him wherever he led them and to remain under the
standards until he released them from their oath. One man pronounced the formula and each in
turn advanced and said, "I also." From this time the army was bound to the general by the bonds
of religion.

=Legions and Allies.=--The Roman army was at first called the Legion (levy). When the people
increased in number, instead of one legion, several were formed.

The legion was a body of 4,200 to 5,000 men, all Roman citizens. The smallest army had always
at least one legion, every army commanded by a consul had at least two. But the legions constituted
hardly a half of the Roman army. All the subject peoples in Italy were required to send troops,
and these soldiers, who were called allies, were placed under the orders of Roman officers.
In a Roman army the allies were always a little more numerous than the citizens of the legions.
Ordinarily with four legions (16,800 men) there were enrolled 20,000 archers and 40,000 horse
from the allies. In the Second Punic War, in 218 B.C., 26,000 citizens and 45,000 allies were
drawn for service. Thus the Roman people, in making war, made use of its subjects as well as
of its citizens.

=Military Exercises.=--Rome had no gymnasium; the future soldiers exercised themselves on the
parade-ground, the Campus Martius, on the other side of the Tiber. There the young man marched,
ran, leaped under the weight of his arms, fenced with his sword, hurled the javelin, wielded
the mattock, and then, covered with dust and with perspiration, swam across the Tiber. Often
the older men, sometimes even the generals, mingled with the young men, for the Roman never
ceased to exercise. Even in the campaign the rule was not to allow the men to be unoccupied;
once a day, at least, they were required to take exercise, and when there was neither enemy
to fight nor intrenchment to erect, they were employed in building roads, bridges, and aqueducts.

=The Camp.=--The Roman soldier carried a heavy burden--his arms, his utensils, rations for
seventeen days, and a stake, in all sixty Roman pounds. The army moved more rapidly as it was
not encumbered with baggage. Every time that a Roman army halted for camp, a surveyor traced
a square enclosure, and along its lines the soldiers dug a deep ditch; the earth which was
excavated, thrown inside, formed a bank which they fortified with stakes. The camp was thus
defended by a ditch and a palisade. In this improvised fortress the soldiers erected their
tents, and in the middle was set the Prætorium, the tent of the general. Sentinels mounted
guard throughout the night, and so prevented the army from being surprised.

=The Order of Battle.=--In the presence of the enemy the soldiers did not form in a solid mass,
as did the Greeks. The legion was divided into small bodies of 120 men, called maniples because
they had for standards bundles of hay.[123] The maniples were ranged in quincunx form in three
lines, each separated from the neighboring maniple in such a way as to manœuvre separately.
The soldiers of the maniples of the first line hurled their javelins, grasped their swords,
and began the battle. If they were repulsed, they withdrew to the rear through the vacant spaces.
The second line of the maniples then in turn marched to the combat. If it was repulsed, it
fell back on the third line. The third line was composed of the best men of the legion and
was equipped with lances. They received the others into their ranks and threw themselves on
the enemy. The army was no longer a single mass incapable of manœuvring; the general could
form his lines according to the nature of the ground. At Cynoscephalæ, where for the first
time the two most renowned armies of antiquity met, the Roman legion and the Macedonian phalanx,
the ground was bristling with hills; on this rugged ground the 16,000 Macedonion hoplites could
not remain in order, their ranks were opened, and the Roman platoons threw themselves into
the gaps and demolished the phalanx.

=Discipline.=--The Roman army obeyed a rude discipline. The general had the right of life and
death over all his men. The soldier who quitted his post or deserted in battle was condemned
to death; the lictors bound him to a post, beat him with rods, and cut off his head; or the
soldiers may have killed him with blows of their staves. When an entire body of troops mutinied,
the general separated the guilty into groups of ten and drew by lot one from every group to
be executed. This was called decimation (from decimus, the tenth). The others were placed on
a diet of barley-bread and made to camp outside the lines, always in danger of surprise from
the enemy. The Romans never admitted that their soldiers were conquered or taken prisoners:
after the battle of Cannæ the 3,000 soldiers who escaped the carnage were sent by the senate
to serve in Sicily without pay and without honors until the enemy should be expelled from Italy;
the 8,000 left in the camp were taken by Hannibal who offered to return them for a small ransom,
but the senate refused to purchase them.

=Colonies and Military Roads.=--In the countries that were still only partially subject, Rome
established a small garrison. This body of soldiers founded a town which served as a fortress,
and around about it the lands were cut into small domains and distributed to the soldiers.
This is what they called a Colony. The colonists continued to be Roman citizens and obeyed
all commands from Rome. Quite different from a Greek colony which emancipated itself even to
the point of making war on its mother city, the Roman colony remained a docile daughter. It
was only a Roman garrison posted in the midst of the enemy. Almost all these military posts
were in Italy, but there were others besides; Narbonne and Lyons were once Roman colonies.

To hold these places and to send their armies to a distance the Romans built military roads.
These were causeways constructed in a straight line, of limestone, stone, and sand. The Romans
covered their empire with them. In a land like France there is no part where one does not find
traces of the Roman roads.

CHARACTER OF THE CONQUEST

=War.=--There was at Rome a temple consecrated to the god Janus whose gates remained open while
the Roman people continued at war. For the five hundred years of the republic this temple was
closed but once and that for only a few years. Rome, then, lived in a state of war. As it had
the strongest army of the time, it finished by conquering all the other peoples and by overcoming
the ancient world.

=Conquest of Italy.=--Rome began by subjecting her neighbors, the Latins, first, then the little
peoples of the south, the Volscians, the Æquians, the Hernicans, later the Etruscans and the
Samnites, and finally the Greek cities. This was the hardest and slowest of their conquests:
beginning with the time of the kings, it did not terminate until 266, after four centuries
of strife.[124]

The Romans had to fight against peoples of the same race as themselves, as vigorous and as
brave as they. Some who were not content to obey they exterminated. The rich plains of the
Volscians became a swampy wilderness, uninhabitable even to the present time, the gloomy region
of the Pontine marshes.

In the land of the Samnites there were still recognizable, three hundred years after the war,
the forty-five camps of Decius and the eighty-six of Fabius, less apparent by the traces of
their intrenchments than by the solitude of the neighborhood.

=The Punic Wars.=--Come into Sicily, Rome antagonized Carthage. Then began the Punic wars (that
is to say, against the Phœnicians). There were three of these wars. The first, from 264 to
241, was determined by naval battles; Rome became mistress of Sicily. It was related that Rome
had never had any war-ships, that she took as a model a Carthaginian galley cast ashore by
accident on her coast and began by exercising her oarsmen in rowing on the land. This legend
is without foundation for the Roman navy had long endured. This is the Roman account of this
war: the Roman consul Duillius had vanquished the Carthaginian fleet at Mylæ (260); a Roman
army had disembarked in Africa under the lead of Regulus, had been attacked and destroyed (255);
Regulus was sent as a prisoner to Rome to conclude a peace, but persuading the Senate to reject
it, he returned to Carthage where he perished by torture. The war was concentrated in Sicily
where the Carthaginian fleet, at first victorious at Drepana, was defeated at the Ægates Islands;
Hamilcar, besieged on Mount Eryx, signed the peace.

The second war (from 218 to 201) was the work of Hannibal.

The third war was a war of extermination: the Romans took Carthage by assault, razed it, and
conquered Africa.

These wars had long made Rome tremble. Carthage had the better navy, but its warriors were
armed adventurers fighting not for country but for pay, lawless, terrible under a general like
Hannibal.

=Hannibal.=--Hannibal, who directed the whole of the second war and almost captured Rome, was
of the powerful family of the Barcas. His father Hamilcar had commanded a Carthaginian army
in the first Punic war and had afterwards been charged with the conquest of Spain. Hannibal
was then but a child, but his father took him with him. The departure of an army was always
accompanied by sacrifices to the gods of the country; it was said that Hamilcar after the sacrifice
made his infant son swear eternal enmity to Rome.

Hannibal, brought up in the company of the soldiers, became the best horseman and the best
archer of the army. War was his only aim in life; his only needs, therefore, were a horse and
arms. He had made himself so popular that at the death of Hasdrubal who was in the command
of the army, the soldiers elected him general without waiting for orders from the Carthaginian
senate. Thus Hannibal found himself at the age of twenty-one at the head of an army which was
obedient only to himself. He began war, regardless of the senate at Carthage, by advancing
to the siege of Saguntum, a Greek colony allied with Rome; he took this and destroyed it.

The glory of Hannibal was that he did not wait for the Romans, but had the audacity to march
into Italy to attack them. As he had no fleet, he resolved to advance by land, through the
Pyrenees, crossing the Rhone and the Alps. He made sure of the alliance of the Gallic peoples
and penetrated the Pyrenees with an army of 60,000 men, African and Spanish mercenaries, and
with 37 war-elephants. A Gallic people wished to stop him at the Rhone, but he sent a detachment
to pass the river some leagues farther up the stream and to attack the Gauls in the rear; the
mass of the army crossed the river in boats, the elephants on great rafts.

He next ascended the valley of the Isère and arrived at the Alps at the end of October; he
crossed them regardless of the snow and the attacks of the mountaineers; many men and horses
rolled down the precipices. But nine days were consumed in attaining the summits of the Alps.
The descent was very difficult; the pass by which he had to go was covered with ice and he
was compelled to cut a road out of the rock. When he arrived in the plain, the army was reduced
to half its former number.

Hannibal met three Roman armies in succession, first at the Ticinus, next on the banks of the
Trebia, and last near Lake Trasimenus in Etruria. He routed all of them. As he advanced, his
army increased in number; the warriors of Cisalpine Gaul (northern Italy) joined him against
the Romans. He took up position beyond Rome in Apulia, and it was here that the Roman army
came to attack him. Hannibal had an army only half as large as theirs, but he had African cavalrymen
mounted on swift horses; he formed his lines in the plain of Cannæ so that the Romans had the
sun in their face and the dust driven by the wind against them; the Roman army was surrounded
and almost annihilated (216). It was thought that Hannibal would march on Rome, but he did
not consider himself strong enough to do it. The Carthaginian senate sent him no reënforcements.
Hannibal endeavored to take Naples and to have Rome attacked by the king of Macedon; he succeeded
only in gaining some towns which Rome besieged and destroyed. Hannibal remained nine years
in south Italy; at last his brother Hasdrubal started with the army of Spain to assist him,
and made his way almost to central Italy. The two Carthaginian armies marched to unite their
forces, each opposed by a Roman army under the command of a consul. Nero, facing Hannibal,
had the audacity to traverse central Italy and to unite with his colleague who was intrenched
against Hasdrubal. One morning Hasdrubal heard the trumpets sounding twice in the camp of the
Romans, a sign that there were two consuls in the camp. He believed his brother was conquered
and so retreated; the Romans pursued him, he was killed and his entire army massacred. Then
Nero rejoined the army which he had left before Hannibal and threw the head of Hasdrubal into
the Carthaginian camp (207). Hannibal, reduced to his own troops, remained in Calabria for
five years longer. The descent of a Roman army on Africa compelled him to leave Italy; he massacred
the Italian soldiers who refused to accompany him and embarked for Carthage (203). The battle
of Zama (202) terminated the war. Hannibal had counted as usual on drawing the Romans within
his lines and surrounding them; but Scipio, the Roman general, kept his troops in order and
on a second attack threw the enemy's army into rout. Carthage was obliged to treat for peace;
she relinquished everything she possessed outside of Africa, ceding Spain to the Romans. She
bound herself further to surrender her navy and the elephants, to pay over $10,000,000 and
to agree not to make war without the permission of Rome.

Hannibal reorganized Carthage for a new war. The Romans, disturbed at this, demanded that the
Carthaginians put him to death. Hannibal fled to Antiochus, king of Syria, and proposed to
him to incite a revolt in Italy against Rome; but Antiochus, following the counsel of his courtiers,
distrusted Hannibal and invaded Greece, where his army was captured. Hannibal withdrew to the
king of Bithynia. The Romans sent Flamininus thither to take him, but Hannibal, seeing his
house surrounded, took the poison which he always had by him (183).

=Conquests of the Orient.=--The Greek kings, successors of the generals of Alexander, divided
the Orient among themselves. The most powerful of these took up war against Rome; but they
were defeated--Philip, the king of Macedon, in 197, his son Perseus in 168, Antiochus, the
king of Syria, in 190. The Romans, having from this time a free field, conquered one by one
all the lands which they found of use to them: Macedon (148), the kingdom of Pergamum (129),
the rest of Asia (from 74 to 64) after the defeat of Mithradates, and Egypt (30).

With the exception of the Macedonians, the Orient opposed the Romans with mercenaries only
or with undisciplined barbarians who fled at the first onset. In the great victory over Antiochus
at Magnesia there were only 350 Romans killed. At Chæronea, Sulla was victorious with the loss
of but twelve men. The other kings, now terrified, obeyed the Senate without resistance.

