That is all of the battle that John Barclay ever remembered. After that it seemed to end, though
the histories say that it lasted all the long day, and that the fire of the invaders was so
heavy that no one from the Ridge dared venture to the Barclay home. The boy saw his mother
lay the unconscious man on the floor, while she opened the back door, and without saying a
word, stepped to the spring, which was hidden from the road. She put her knee, her broad chest,
and her strong red hand to the rock and shoved until her back bowed and the cords stood out
on her neck; then slowly the rock moved till she could see inside the cave, could put her leg
in, could squirm her body in. The morning light flooded in after her, and in the instant that
she stood there she saw dimly a great room, through which the spring trickled. There were hay
inside, and candles and saddles; in another minute she had the wounded man in the cave and
was washing the dirt from him. A bullet had ploughed its way along his scalp, his body was
pierced through the shoulder, and his leg was broken by a horse's hoof. She did what she could
while the shooting went on outside, and then slipped out, tugged at the great rock again until
it fell back in its place, and knowing that Philemon Ward was safe from the Missourians if
they should win the day, she came into the house. Then as the mocking clouds of the summer
drouth rolled up at night, and belched forth their thunder in a tempest of wind, the besiegers
passed as a dream in the night. And in the morning they were not.

CHAPTER II

And so on the night of the battle of Sycamore Ridge, John Barclay closed the door of his childhood
and became a boy. He did not remember how Ward's wounds were dressed, nor how the town made
a hero of the man; but he did remember Watts McHurdie and Martin Culpepper and the Hendricks
boys tramping through the cave that night with torches, and he was the hero of that occasion
because he was the smallest boy there and they put him up through the crack in the head of
the cave, and he saw the stars under the elm tree far above the town, where he and his mother
had spent a Sunday afternoon three years before. He called to the men below and told them where
he was, and slipped down through, the hole again with an elm sprout in his hand to prove that
he had been under the elm tree at the spring. But he remembered nothing of the night--how the
men picketed the town; how he sat up with them along with the other boys; how the women, under
his mother's direction and Miss Lucy's, cared for the wounded man, who lapsed into delirium
as the night wore on, and gibbered of liberty and freedom as another man would go over his
accounts in his dreams.

His mother and Miss Lucy took turns nursing Ward night after night during the hot dry summer.
As the sick man grew better, many men came to the house, and great plans were afloat. Philemon
Ward, sitting up in bed waiting for his leg to heal, talked much of the cave as a refuge for
fugitive slaves. There was some kind of a military organization; all the men in town were enlisted,
and Ward was their captain, drums were rattling and men were drilling; the dust clouds rose
as they marched across the drouth-blighted fields. One night they marched up to the Barclay
home, and Ward with a crutch under his arm, and with Mrs. Barclay and Miss Lucy beside him,
stood in the door and made a speech to the men. And then there were songs. Watts McHurdie threw
back his head and sang "Scots wha ha' wi' Wallace bled," following it with some words of his
own denouncing slavery and calling down curses upon the slaveholders; so withal it was a martial
occasion, and the boy's heart swelled with patriotic pride. But for a vague feeling that Miss
Lucy was neglecting him for her patient, John would have begun making a hero of Philemon R.
Ward. As it was, the boy merely tolerated the man and silently suspected him of intentions
and designs.

But when school opened, Philemon Ward left Sycamore Ridge and John Barclay made an important
discovery. It was that Ellen Culpepper had eyes. In Sycamore Ridge with its three hundred souls,
only fifteen of them were children, and five of them were ten years old, and John had played
with those five nearly all his life. But at ten sometimes the scales drop from one's eyes,
and a ribbon or a bead or a pair of new red striped yarn stockings or any other of the embellishments
which nature teaches little girls to wear casts a sheen over all the world for a boy. The magic
bundle that charmed John Barclay was a scarlet dress, "made over," that came in an "aid box"
from the Culpeppers in Virginia. And when the other children in Miss Lucy's school made fun
of John and his amour, the boy fought his way through it all--where fighting was the better
part of valour--and made horsehair chains for Ellen and cut lockets for her out of coffee beans,
and with a red-hot poker made a ring for her from a rubber button as a return for the smile
he got at the sly twist he gave her hair as he passed her desk on his way to the spelling class.
As for Miss Lucy, who saw herself displaced, she wrote to Philemon Ward, and told him of her
jilting, and railed at the fickleness and frailty of the sex.

And by that token an envelope in Ward's handwriting came to Miss Lucy every week, and Postmaster
Martin Culpepper and Mrs. Martin Culpepper and all Sycamore Ridge knew it. And loyal Southerner
though he was, Martin Culpepper's interest in the affair between Ward and Miss Lucy was greater
than his indignation over the fact that Ward had carried his campaign even into Virginia; nothing
would have tempted him to disclose to his political friends at home the postmarks of Ward's
letters. That was the year of the great drouth of '60, remembered all over the plains. And
as the winter deepened and the people of Sycamore Ridge were without crops, and without money
to buy food, they bundled up Martin Culpepper and sent him back to Ohio seeking aid. He was
a handsome figure the day he took the stage in his high hat and his ruffled shirt and broad
coat tails, a straight lean figure of a man in his early thirties, with fine black eyes and
a shocky head of hair, and when he pictured the sufferings of the Kansas pioneers to the people
of the East, the state was flooded with beans and flour, and sheeted in white muslin. For Martin
Culpepper was an orator, and though he is in his grave now, the picture he painted of bleeding
Kansas nearly fifty years ago still hangs in many an old man's memory. And after all, it was
only a picture. For they were all young out here then, and through all the drouth and the hardship
that followed--and the hardship was real--there was always the gayety of youth. The dances
on Deer Creek and at Minneola did not stop for the drouth, and many's the night that Mrs. Mason,
the tall raw-boned wife of Lycurgus, wrapped little Jane in a quilt and came over to the Ridge
from Minneola to take part in some social affair. And while Martin Culpepper was telling of
the anguish of the famine, Watts McHurdie and his accordion and Ezra Lane's fiddle were agitating
the heels of the populace. And even those pioneers who were moved to come into the wilderness
by a great purpose--and they were moved so--to come into the new territory and make it free,
nevertheless capered and romped through the drouth of '60 in the cast-off garments of their
kinsmen and were happy; for there were buffalo meat and beans for the needy, the aid room had
flour, and God gave them youth.

Not drouth, nor famine, nor suffering, nor zeal of a great purpose can burn out the sparkle
of youth in the heart. Only time can do that, and so John Barclay remembered the famous drouth
of '60, not by his mother's tears, which came as she bent over his little clothes, before the
aid box came from Haverhill, not by the long days of waiting for the rain that never came,
not even by the sun that lapped up the swimming hole before fall, and left no river to freeze
for their winter's skating, not even by his mother's anguish when she had to go to the aid
store for flour and beans, though that must have been a sorry day for a Thatcher; but he remembers
the great drouth by Ellen Culpepper's party, where they had a frosted cake and played kissing
games, and--well, fifty years is along time for two brown eyes to shine in the heart of a boy
and a man. It is strange that they should glow there, and all memory of the runaway slaves
who were sheltered in the cave by the sycamore tree should fade, and be only as a tale that
is told. Yet, so memory served the boy, and he knew only at second hand how his mother gave
her widow's mite to the cause for which she had crossed the prairies as of old her "fathers
crossed the sea."

Before the rain came in the spring of '61 Martin Culpepper came back from the East an orator
of established reputation. The town was proud of him, and he addressed the multitude on various
occasions and wept many tears over the sad state of the country. For in the nation, as well
as in Sycamore Ridge, great things were stirring. Watts McHurdie filled Freedom's Banner with
incendiary verse, always giving the name of the tune at the beginning of each contribution,
by which it might be sung, and the way he clanked Slavery's chains and made love to Freedom
was highly disconcerting; but the town liked it.

In April Philemon R. Ward came back to Sycamore Ridge, and there was a great gathering to hear
his speech. Ward's soul was aflame with anger. There were no Greek gods and Roman deities in
what Ward said, as there were in Martin Culpepper's addresses. Ward used no figures of speech
and exercised no rhetorical charms; but he talked with passion in his voice and the frenzy
of a cause in his eyes. Martin Culpepper was in the crowd, and as Ward lashed the South, every
heart turned in interrogation to Culpepper. They knew what his education had been. They understood
his sentiments; and yet because he was one of them, because he had endured with them and suffered
with them and ministered to them, the town set him apart from its hatred. And Martin Culpepper
was sensitive enough to feel this. It came over him with a wave of joy, and as Ward talked,
Culpepper expanded. Ward closed in a low tone, and his face was white with pent-up zeal as
he asked some one to pray. There was a silence, and then a woman's voice, trembling and passionate,
arose, and Sycamore Ridge knew that Mrs. Barclay, the widow of the Westport martyr, was giving
sound to a voice that had long been still. It was a simple halting prayer, and not all those
in the room heard it clearly. The words were not always fitly chosen; but as the prayer neared
its close,--and it was a short prayer at the most,--there came strength and courage into the
voice as it asked for grace for "the brother among us who has shared our sufferings and lightened
our burdens, and who has cleaved to us as a brother, but whose heart is drawn away from us
by ties of blood and kinship"; and then the voice sank lower and lower as though in shame at
its boldness, and hushed in a tremulous Amen.

No one spoke for a moment, and as Sycamore Ridge looked up from the floor, its eyes turned
instinctively toward Martin Culpepper. He felt the question that was in the hearts about him,
and slowly, to the wonder of all, he rose. He had a beautiful deep purring voice, and when
he opened his eyes, they seemed to look into every pair of eyes in the throng. There were tears
on his face and in his voice as he spoke. And then he sank to his chair and hid his face, and
for a moment a hundred wet-eyed men were still.

Though John Barclay was at the meeting, he remembered only his mother's prayer, but in his
heart there was always a picture of a little boy trying to walk home with a little girl, and
when he came up with her she darted ahead or dropped back. At the Culpepper gate she stood
waiting fully a minute for him to catch her, and when he came up to her, she laughed, "Huh,
Mr. Smarty, you didn't, did you?" and ran up the walk, scooted into the house, and slammed
the door. But he understood and went leaping down the hill toward home with happiness tingling
in his very finger-tips. He seemed to be flying rather than walking, and his toes touched the
dirt path so lightly that he rounded the corner and ran plump into Miss Lucy and Philemon Ward
standing at the gate. And what he saw surprised him so that he let out a great "haw-haw-haw"
and ran, trying to escape his shame and fear at his behaviour. But the next morning Miss Lucy
smiled so sweetly at him as he came into the schoolroom, that he knew he was forgiven, and
that thrill was lost by the thump of joy that startled his heart when he saw a bunch of dog-tooth
violets in his ink bottle, and in his geography found a candy heart with a motto on it so fervent
that he did not eat it for three long abstemious days of sheer devotion, in which there were
eyes and eyes and eyes from the little girl in the scarlet gown.

It is strange that the boy did not remember how Sycamore Ridge took the call to arms for the
war between the states. All he remembered of the great event in our history as it touched the
town was that one day he heard there was going to be a war. And then everything seemed to change.
A dread came over the people. It fell upon the school, where every child had a father who was
going away.

And it was because Madison Hendricks, the first man to leave for the war, was father of Bob
and Elmer Hendricks that John's first associations of the great Civil War go back to the big
black-bearded man. For Madison Hendricks, who was a graduate of West Point, and a veteran of
the Mexican War, was called to Washington in May, and his boys acquired a prestige that was
not accorded to them by the mere fact that their father was president of the town company,
and was accounted the first citizen of the town. Madison Hendricks, who owned the land on which
the town was built, Madison Hendricks, scholar and gentleman, veteran of the Mexican War, first
mayor of Sycamore Ridge upon its incorporation,--his sons had no standing. But Madison Hendricks,
formally summoned to go to Washington to put down the rebellion, and leaving on the stage with
appropriate ceremonies, --there was a man who could bequeath to his posterity in the boy world
something of his consequence.

So in the pall that came upon the school in Sycamore Ridge that spring of '61, Bob and Elmer
Hendricks were heroes, and their sister--who was their only guardian in their father's absence--had
to put them in her dresses and send them to bed, and punish them in all the shameful ways that
she knew to take what she called "the tuck out of them." And the boy of all the boys who gave
the Hendricks boys most homage was little Johnnie Barclay. There was no dread in his hero-worship.
He had no father to go to the war. But the other children and all the women were under a great
cloud of foreboding, and for them the time was one of tension and hoping against hope that
the war would soon pass.

How the years gild our retrospect. It was in 1903 that Martin Culpepper, a man in his seventies,
collected and published "The Complete Poetical and Philosophical Works of Watts McHurdie, together
with Notes and a Biographical Appreciation by Martin F. Culpepper." One of the earlier chapters,
which tells of the enlistment of the volunteer soldiers for the Civil War in '61, devotes some
space to the recruiting and enlistment in Sycamore Ridge. The chapter bears the heading "The
Large White Plumes," and in his "introductory remarks" the biographer says, "To him who looks
back to those golden days of heroic deeds only the lines of Keats will paint the picture in
his soul:--

"'Lo, I must tell a tale of chivalry, For large white plumes are dancing in mine eyes.'"

And so the "large white plumes" blinded his eyes to the fear and the dread that were in the
hearts of the people, and he tells his readers nothing of the sadness that men felt who put
in crops knowing that their wives must cultivate and harvest them. He sees only the glory of
it; for we read: "Hail to the spirit of mighty Mars. When he strode through our peaceful village,
he awoke many a war song in our breasts. As for our hero, Mars, the war god forged iron reeds
for his lute, and he breathed into it the spirit of the age, and all the valour, all the chivalry
of a golden day came pouring out of his impassioned reeds." Such is the magic of those large
white plumes on Martin Culpepper's memory. Although John Barclay in that latter day bought
a thousand copies of the Biography and sent them to public libraries all over the world, he
smiled as he read that paragraph referring to Watts McHurdie's accordion as the "impassioned
reeds." When he read it, John Barclay, grown to a man of fifty-three, sitting at a great mahogany
table, with a tablet of white paper on a green blotting pad before him, and a gorgeous rose
rising from a tall graceful green vase on the shining table, looked out over a brown wilderness
of roofs and chimneys across a broad river into the hills that were green afar off, and there,
rising out of yesterday, he saw, not the bent little old man in the harness shop with steel-rimmed
spectacles and greasy cap, whom you may see to-day; but instead, the boy in John Barclay's
soul looked through his eyes, and he saw another Watts McHurdie,--a dapper little fellow under
a wide slouch hat, with a rolling Byronic collar, and fancy yellow waistcoat of the period,
in exceedingly tight trousers. And then, flash! the picture changed, and Barclay saw Watts
McHurdie under his mushroom hat; Martin Culpepper in his long-tailed coat; Philemon Ward, tall,
fair-skinned, blue-eyed, slim, and sturdy; skinny, nervous Lycurgus Mason and husky Gabriel
Carnine from Minneola; Jake Dolan in his shirt sleeves, without adornment of any kind, except
the gold horseshoe pinned on his shirt bosom; Daniel Frye, the pride of an admiring family,
in his best home-made clothes; Henry Schnitzler, Oscar Fernald, and nearly a hundred other
men, to the boy's eyes so familiar then, now forgotten, and all their faces blurred in the
crowd that stood about the recruiting officer by the town pump in Sycamore Ridge that summer
day of '61. A score or so of men had passed muster. The line on the post at the wooden awning
in front of Schnitzler's saloon was marked at five feet six. All had stood by it with their
heads above the line. It was Watts McHurdie's turn. He wore high-heeled boots for the occasion,
but strut as he would, his roached hair would not touch the stick that came over the line.
"Stretch your neck--ye bantam," laughed Jake Dolan. "Walk turkey fashion, Watts," cried Henry
Schnitzler, rushing up behind Watts and grabbing his waistband. The crowd roared. Watts looked
imploringly at the recruiting officer and blubbered in wrath: "Yes, damn you--yea; that's right.
Of course; you won't let me die for my bleedin' country because I ain't nine feet tall." And
the little man turned away trying to choke his tears and raging at his failure. And because
the recruiting officer was considerable of a man, Watts McHurdie's name was written in the
muster roll, and he went out.

Many days must have passed between the time when the men were mustered in and the day they
went away to the war. But to the man who saw those times through the memory of the boy in blue
jeans forever playing bugle-calls upon his fife, it was all one day. For that crowd dissolved,
and another picture appeared upon the sensitized plate of his memory. There is a crowd in the
post-office--mostly men who are going away to war. The stage has come in, and a stranger, better
dressed than the men of Sycamore Ridge, is behind the letter-boxes of the post-office. The
boy is watching his box; for it is the day when the Springfield Republican is due. Gradually
the hum in front of the boxes quiets, and two loud voices have risen behind the screen. Then
out walks great Martin Culpepper, white of face, with pent-up fury. His left hand is clutched
like a talon in the shoulder of the stranger, whom Martin is holding before him. "Gentlemen,
your attention," demands Culpepper. The stranger swallows his Adam's apple as if to speak;
Martin turns to him with, "Don't you say that word again, sir, or I'll wring your neck." Then
he proceeds:--

"Gentlemen, this busybody has come all the way from Washington here to tell me I'm a thief.
I wrote to his damn Yankee government that I was needing the money last winter to go East on
the aid committee and would replace it, and now that I'm going out to-morrow to die for his
damn Yankee government, he has the impertinence to come in here and say I stole that money.
Now what I want to ask you, gentlemen, is this: Do I go out to-morrow to die on the field of
glory for my country, or does this here little contemptible whippersnapper take me off to rot
in some Yankee jail? I leave it to you, gentlemen. Settle it for yourselves." And with that
Culpepper throws the man into the crowd and walks behind the screen in solemn state.

The boy never knew how it was settled. But Martin Culpepper went to "the field of glory," and
all the boy knew of the incident is here recorded. However, in the Biography of Watts McHurdie
above-mentioned and aforesaid occur these words, in the same chapter--the one entitled "The
Large White Plumes": "Let memory with gentle hand cover with her black curtain of soft oblivion
all that was painful on that glorious day. Let us not recall the bickerings and the strifes,
let the grass watered by Lethe's sweet spring creep over the scars in the bright prospect which
lies under our loving gaze. Let us hold in our heart the tears in beauty's eyes; the smile
that curls her crimson lips, and the hope that burns upon her brow. Let us fondle the sacred
memory of every warm hand clasp of comrade and take to the silent grave the ever green garland
of love that adorned our hearts that day. For the sordid thorns that pierced our bleeding hearts--what
are they but ashes to-day, blown on the winds of yesterday?"

What indeed, Martin Culpepper--what indeed, smiled John Barclay as he reached for the rose
on his broad mahogany desk across forty long years, and looking through a wide window, saw
on the blank wall of a great hulk of a building half a mile away, the fine strong figure of
a man with black shaggy hair on his young leonine head rise and wave his handkerchief to a
woman with tears running down her face and anguish in her eyes, standing in a swarm of children.
What indeed are sordid thorns when the "large white plumes are dancing"--what indeed?

That was a busy night in Sycamore Ridge--the night before the men left for war in the summer
of '61. And the busiest man in all the town was Philemon R. Ward. Every man in the town was
going, and most of the men were going who lived in the county--an area as large as a New England
state, and yet when they were all gathered in Main Street, there were less than fivescore of
them. They had agreed to elect Ward captain, Martin Culpepper first lieutenant, Jake Dolan
second lieutenant. It was one of the diversions of the occasion to call out "Hello, Cap," when
Ward hustled by a loitering crowd. But his pride was in his work, and before sundown he had
it done. The Yankee in him gave him industry and method and foresight. At sunset the last of
the twenty teams and wagons he had ordered came rattling down the hill west of town, driven
by Gabriel Carnine of Minneola, with Mrs. Lycurgus Mason sitting like a war goddess on the
back seat holding Lycurgus, a spoil of battle, while he held their daughter on his lap, withal
a martial family party. Mrs. Barclay and Miss Lucy went to the aid store-room and worked the
long night through, getting breakfast for the men. Mary Murphy and Nellie Logan came from the
Thayer House to the aid room when the hotel dishes were washed, and helped with the work. And
while they were there the Culpeppers walked in, returning from a neighbourly visit to Miss
Hendricks; John Barclay in an apron, stirring a boiling pot of dried apples, turned his back
on the eyes that charmed him, but when the women sent him for a bucket of water, he shook the
handle at Ellen Culpepper and beckoned her with a finger, and they slipped out into the moonlight
together. She had hold of the handle of the bucket with him, and they pulled and hauled and
laughed as boy and girl will laugh so long as the world turns round. The street was deserted,
and only the bar of light that fell across the sidewalk from Schnitzler's saloon indicated
the presence of human beings in the little low buildings that pent in the highway. The boy
and the girl stood at the pump, and the boy stuck a foot in the horse trough. He made a wet
silhouette of it on the stone beneath him, and reached for the handle of the pump. Then he
said, "I got somepin I won't tell."

"Three little niggers in a peanut shell," replied the girl.

"All right, Miss Cuteness. All right for you; I was going to tell you somepin, but I won't
now." He gave the pump-handle a pull. It was limp and did not respond with water. "Ellen--"
the boy repeated as he worked the handle, "I got somepin to tell you. Honest I have."

"I don't care, Mr. Smarty," the girl replied; she made a motion as if to walk away, but did
not. The boy noticed it and said, "Yes, sir--it's somepin you'd like to know." The girl did
not turn round. The boy, who had been working with the wheezy pump, was holding the handle
up, and water was gurgling down the well. And before she could answer he said, "Say, Ellen--don't
be mad; honest I got somepin."

"Who's it about?" she asked over her shoulder.

"Me."

"That's not much--who else?"

"Elmer Hendricks!"

"Who else?" The girl was halfway turned around when she spoke.

"Bob--Bob Hendricks," replied the boy.

"Aw--Bob Hendricks--" returned the girl, in contempt. Then she faced the boy and said, "What
is it?"

"Come here 'n' I'll tell you."

"I'll come this far." The girl took two steps.

"I got to whisper it, and you can't hear."

"Well, 'tain't much." The girl dangled one bare foot hesitatingly.

"I'll come halfway," she added.

The boy made a mark in the dust of the road a few feet from him with his toe, and said, "Come
to there."

The girl shook her head, and spoke. "Tell me part--'n' I'll see if it's good."

"Me and Elmer an' Bob are goin' to run away!" The girl stepped to the toe mark and cried, "What?"

"Yes, sir--in the mornin'." He caught hold of the girl's arm awkwardly and swung her around
to the opposite side of the pump-handle, and put her hands on it and began to pump. She pumped
with him as he puffed between the strokes, "Um' huh--we're going to hide in the provision wagons,
under some saddles they is there and go--to--war!" The water was pouring into the bucket by
the time he had got this out. Their hands touched on the pump-handle. It was the boy who drew
his hand away. The girl gasped:--

"Why, John Barclay,--it ain't no such thing--does your ma know it?"

He told her that no one knew it but her, and they pumped in silence until the bucket was full,
and walking back carrying the bucket between them, he told her another secret: that Watts McHurdie
had asked John to get his guitar after midnight, and play an accompaniment to the accordion,
and that Watts and Ward and Jake Dolan and Gabriel Carnine were going out serenading. Further
he told her that Watts was going to serenade Nellie Logan at the Thayer House, and that Gabriel
Carnine was going to serenade Mary Murphy, and that Philemon Ward was going to serenade Miss
Lucy, and that he, John Barclay, had suggested that it would be fine to serenade Mrs. Culpepper,
because she was such a nice woman, and they agreed that if he would bring his guitar, they would!

When the boy and girl returned to the store, Ward and Miss Lucy went to the Barclay home for
the guitar. When they came back, Mrs. Barclay noted a pink welt on one of Ward's fingers where
his cameo ring had been, and she observed that from time to time Miss Lucy kept feeling of
her hair as if to smooth it. It was long after midnight before the girls from the hotel went
home, and Miss Lucy and Mrs. Barclay lay on the counter in the store, trying to sleep. They
awoke with the sound of music in their ears, and Miss Lucy said, "It's Captain Ward--and the
other boys, serenading us." They heard the high tenor voice of Watts McHurdie and the strong
clear voice of Ward rising above the accordion and guitar:--

    "For her voice is on the breeze,
      Her spirit comes at will,
    At midnight on the seas
      Her bright smile haunts me still."

And underneath these high voices was the gruff bass voice of Gabriel Carnine and the baritone
of Jake Dolan. And when Mrs. Barclay heard the piping treble of her son, and the tinkle of
his guitar, her eyes filled with tears of pride.

The serenaders waked the chickens, and the crowing roosters roused Mrs. Barclay, and in the
hurry of the hour she forgot to look for her son. As "the gray dawn was breaking," a hundred
men came into the room, and found the smoking breakfast on the table. It was a good breakfast
as breakfasts go when men are hungry. But they sat in silence that morning. The song was all
out of them; the spring of youth was crushed under the weight of great events. And as they
rose--they who had been so merry the day before, and had joked of the things the soldier fears,
they were all but mute, and left their breakfasts scarcely tasted.

The women remember this,--the telltale sign of the untouched breakfast,--and their memory is
better than that of Martin Culpepper, who wrote in that plumy chapter of the Biography, before
mentioned:--

"The soldiers left their homes that beautiful August morning as the sun was kissing the tips
of the sycamore that gave the magnificent little city its name. They had partaken abundantly
of a bountiful breakfast, and as they satisfied their inner man from a table groaning with
good things prepared by the fair hands of the gentler sex, the gallant men rose with song and
cheer, and went on their happy way where duty and honour called them."

But the women who scraped the plates that morning knew the truth. One wonders how much of history
would be thrown out as worthless, like Martin Culpepper's fine writing, if the women who scraped
the plates might testify. For those "large white plumes" do not dance in women's eyes!

After breakfast the men tumbled into the wagons, and as one wagon after another rattled out
of Fernald's feed lot and came down the street, the men waved their hats and the women waved
their aprons, and a great cloud of dust rose on the highway, and as the wagons ducked down
the bank to the river, only the tall figure of Martin Culpepper, waving his handkerchief, rose
above the cloud. At the end of the line was a provision wagon, and on it rode Philemon Ward--Yankee
in his greatest moment, scorning the heroic place in the van, and looking after the substantials.
In the feed lot, just as the reins were in his hands, Ward saw Elmer Hendricks' foot peeping
from under a saddle. Ward dragged the boy out, spanking him as he came over the end gate, and
noted the sheepish smile on his face. Ten days later, as Ward, marching in the infantry, was
going up a hill through the timber at the battle of Wilson's Creek, that same boy rode by with
the cavalry, and seeing Ward, waved a carbine and smiled as he charged the brow of the hill.
That night, going back under the stars, Ward stumbled over a body, and stooping, saw the smile
still on the boy's face, and the carbine clutched in his hand. But for the hole through the
boyish brow, the eyes might still have been laughing.

CHAPTER III

A few years ago, in the room of the great mahogany table, with its clean blotting pad, its
writing tablet, and its superb rose rising from a green vase in the midst of the shining unlittered
expanse, there was a plain, heavy mahogany wainscoting reaching chin-high to the average man.
A few soft-toned pictures adorned the dull gray walls above the wainscoting, and directly over
a massive desk that never was seen open hung a framed letter. The letter was written on blue-lined
paper in red pokeberry ink. At the top of the letter was the advertisement of a hotel, done
in quaint, old-fashioned, fancy script with many curly-cues and printers' ornaments. The advertisement
set forth that the Thayer House at Sycamore Ridge was "First class in every particular," and
that "Especial attention was paid to transient custom." On a line in the right-hand corner
the reader was notified that the tavern was founded by the Emigrant Aid Society, and balancing
this line, in the left-hand corner, were these words: "The only livery-stable west of Lawrence."
John Barclay's eyes have read it a thousand times, and yet he always smiled when he scanned
the letter that followed the advertisement. The letter read:--

"Dear Ma I am going to war. Doan crye. Iff father was here he wood go; so why should not I.
I will be very caerfull not to get hurt & stay by Cap Ward all the time. So godby yours truly
J. Barclay Jr."

It was five hours after the soldiers had gone when Mrs. Barclay came home from her work in
the aid room, and the first thing that attracted her attention was her son's letter, lying
folded on the table. When she read it, she ran with the open letter across the common to the
town. It was a woman's town that morning,--not a man was left in it,--for Ezra Lane, the only
old man living in the Ridge, had left Freedom's Banner to shift for itself while he rode to
Leavenworth with the soldiers to bring back the teams; and when Mrs. Barclay came into the
street, she found some small stir there, made by Miss Hendricks--the only mother the Hendricks
boys remembered--who was inquiring for her lost boys. Mrs. Barclay displayed her note, and
in a moment the whole population of Sycamore Ridge, with hands under its aprons, was standing
in front of the post-office. Then Ellen Culpepper found her tongue, and Mrs. Barclay began
to look for a horse. Elmer Hendricks' pony in the pasture was the only horse Ward had left
within twenty miles. When Ellen Culpepper and her little sister Molly came back from the pasture
and announced that Elmer's pony was gone also, the women surmised that he had taken it with
him, for they could not know that after he was spanked from the provision wagon, he had slipped
out to the pasture and ridden by a circuitous route to the main road.

It was Captain Ward, dismounting from his driver's seat on the provision wagon at noon, who
discovered two boys: a little boy eleven years old in a dead faint, and a bigger boy panting
with the heat. They threw cold spring water on John Barclay's face, and finally his eyes opened,
and he grinned as he whispered, "Hullo, Captain," to the man bending over him. The man held
water to the boy's lips, and he sipped a little and swam out into the blackness again, and
then the man reappeared and the boy tried to smile and whispered, "Aw--I'm all right." They
saw he was coming out of his faint, and one by one the crowd dropped away from him; but Ward
stayed, and when the child could speak, he replied to Ward's question, "'Cause I wanted to."
And then again when the question was repeated, the boy said, "I tell you 'cause I wanted to."
He shook his head feebly and grinned again and tried to rise, but the man gently held him down,
and kept bathing his temples with cold water from the spring beside them. Finally, when the
man seemed a little harsh in his questions, the boy's eyes brimmed and he said: "Whur'd my
pa be if he was alive to-day? I just guess I got as much right here as you have." He made a
funny little picture lying on the lush grass by the spring in the woods; his browned face,
washed clean on the forehead and temples, showed almost white under the dirt. There were tear-stained
rings about the eyes, and his pink shirt and blue trousers were grimy with dust, and the red
clay of the Sycamore still was on the sides of his dust-brown bare feet. Around a big toe was
a rag which showed a woman's tying--neat and firm, but red with clay.

Ward left, and Bob Hendricks came and stood over the prostrate boy. Bob was carrying a bucket
of water to the cook as a peace offering.

"What did they do?" asked the boy on the ground.

"Just shook me--and then said father'd tend to me for this." The boys exchanged comments on
the situation without words, and then Bob said as he drew the dripping bucket from the spring,
"We're going clear on to Leavenworth, and they say then we've got to come back with Ezra Lane
and the teams."

The boy on the ground raised himself by rolling over and catching hold of a sapling. He panted
a moment, and "I'll bet y' I don't." The other boy went away with a weak "Me neither," thrown
over his shoulder.

During that long afternoon, and all the next day and the next, the boys ran from wagon to wagon,
climbing over end gates, wriggling among the men, running with the horses through the shady
woods, paddling in the fords, and only refusing to move when the men got out of the wagons
and walked up the long clay hills that rise above the Kaw River. At night they camped by the
prairie streams, and the men sang and wondered what they were doing at home, and Philemon Ward
took John Barclay out into the silence of the woods and made him say his prayers. And Ward
would look toward the west and say, "Well, Johnnie,--there's home," and once they stood in
an open place in the timber, and Ward gazed at a bright star sinking in the west, and said,
"I guess that's about over Sycamore Ridge." They went on, and the boy, looking back to see
why the man had stopped, caught him throwing a kiss at the star. And they could not know, as
they walked back together through the woods abashed, that two women sitting before a cabin
door under a sycamore tree were looking at an eastern star, and one threw kisses at it unashamed
while the other wept. And on other nights, many other nights, the two, Miss Lucy and Mrs. Barclay,
sat looking at their star while the terror in their hearts made their lips mute. God makes
men brave who stand where bullets fly, yet always they can run away. But God seems to give
no alternative to women at home who have to wait and dread.

Forty years later John Barclay took from a box in a safety vault back of his office in the
city a newspaper. It was the Sycamore Ridge Banner, yellow and creased and pungent with age.
"This," he said to Senator Myton, spreading the wrinkled sheet out on the mahogany table, "this
is my enlistment paper." He smiled as he read aloud:--

"At noon of our first day out we came across two stowaways. Hendricks, aged twelve, son of
our well-known and popular Mayor, and J. Barclay, aged eleven, son of Mrs. M. Barclay, who,
owing to the suddenness of the departure of our troops for the seat of war in Missouri, and
certain business delays made necessary in ye editor's return, were slipped out with our company
rather than left in the rough and uncertain city of Leavenworth. They are called by the boys
of 'C' company respectively 'the little sergeant and the little corporal, Good Luck boys.'"

A little farther down the column was this paragraph:

"Aug. 2nd we went into camp on Sugar Creek, and some sport was had by the men who went in bathing,
taking the horses with them."

"Ever go in swimming with the horses, Senator?" asked Barclay. The senator shook his head doubtfully.

"Well--you haven't. For if you had you'd remember it," answered Barclay, and a hundred naked
young men and two skinny, bony boys splashed and yelled and ducked and wrestled and locked
their strong wet arms about the necks of the plunging horses and dived under them, and rolled
across them and played with them like young satyrs in the cool water under the overhanging
elms with the stars twinkling in the shining mahogany as Barclay folded the paper and put it
away. He thrummed the polished surface a moment and looked back into the past to see Philemon
Ward straight, lean, and glistening like a god standing on a horse ready to dive, and as he
huddled, crouched for the leap, Barclay said, "Well, come on, Senator, we must go to lunch now."

It was late in the afternoon of their third day's journey that the men from Sycamore Ridge
rode in close order, singing, through the streets of Leavenworth. Watts McHurdie was playing
his accordion, and the people turned to look at the uncouth crowd in civilian's clothes that
went bellowing "O My Darling Nellie Gray," across the town and out to the Fort. Ezra Lane promised
to call at the Fort for the two boys and with drivers for the teams early the next morning--but
to Sycamore Ridge, Leavenworth in those days was the great city with its pitfalls, and when
Ezra Lane, grizzled though he was, came to a realizing sense of his responsibilities, the next
day was gone and the third was waning. When he went to the Fort, he found the Sycamore Ridge
men had been hurried into Missouri to meet General Price, who was threatening Springfield,
and no word had been left for him about the boys. As he left the gate at the Fort, a troop
of cavalry rode by gaily, and a boy, a big overgrown fourteen-year-old boy in a blue uniform,
passed and waved his hand at the befuddled old man, and cried, "Good-by, Mr. Lane,--tell 'em
you saw me." He knew the boy was from Sycamore Ridge, but he knew also that he was not one
of the boys who had come with the soldiers; and being an old man, far removed from the boy
world, he could not place the child in his blue uniform, so he drove away puzzled.

The afternoon the men from Sycamore Ridge came to Leavenworth they were hurriedly examined
again, signed the muster rolls, and were sent away without uniforms all in twenty-four hours.
But not before they had found time to have their pictures taken in borrowed regimentals. For
twenty years after the war the daguerreotypes of the soldiers taken at Leavenworth that day
were the proudest adornments of the centre-tables of Sycamore Ridge, and even now on Lincoln
Avenue, in a little white cottage with green blinds, that sits in a broad smooth lawn with
elm trees on it, stands an easel. On the easel is a picture--an enlarged crayon drawing of
a straight, handsome young fellow in a captain's uniform. One hand is in his coat, and the
other at his hip. His head is thrown back with a fierce determination into the photographer's
iron rest and all together the picture is marked with the wrinkled front of war. For over one
corner of the easel hangs a sword with an ivory handle, and upon it is an inscription proclaiming
the fact that the sword was presented to Captain Philemon R. Ward by his company for gallant
conduct on the field of battle on the night of August 4, 1861. Above the easel in the corner
hangs another picture--that of a sweet-faced old man of seventy, beaming rather benignly over
his white lawn necktie. The forty-five years that have passed between the two faces have trimmed
the hair away from the temples and the brow, have softened the mouth, and have put patience
into the eyes--the patience of a great faith often tried but never broken. The five young women
of the household know that the crayon portrait on the bamboo easel is highly improper as a
parlour ornament--for do they not teach school, and do they not take all the educational journals
and the crafty magazines of art? But the hand that put it there was proud of its handiwork,
and she who hung the sword upon the easel is gone away, so the girls smile at the fierce young
boyish face in the picture as they pass it, and throw a kiss at the face above it, and the
easel is not moved.

And the man,--the tall old man with a slight stoop in his shoulders, the old man who wears
the alpaca coat and the white lawn tie seen in the upper picture,--sometimes he wanders into
the stately front room with a finger in a census bulletin as a problem in his head creases
his brow--and the sight of the sword always makes him smile, and sometimes the smile is a chuckle
that stirs the cockles of his heart.

For his mind goes back to that summer night of August 4, 1861, and he sees himself riding on
a horse with a little boy behind with his arms in the soldier's belt. It is dusk, and "C" Company
on foot is filing down a Missouri hill. It is a muddy road, and the men are tired and dirty.
There is no singing now. A man driving an ox team has turned out of the road to let the soldiers
pass. Some one in the line asks the man, "Where's Price?"

"Over the hill yonder," replies the man, pointing with his hickory whip-stock. The word buzzes
up and down the line. The captain on his horse with the boy clutching at his belt does not
hear it. But the line lags and finally halts. The men have been only two days under military
discipline. That day last week Phil Ward--who was he, anyway? Henry Schnitzler and Oscar Fernald
could have bought him and sold him twice over. So the line halted. Then the captain halted.
Then he called Second Lieutenant Dolan and asked to know what was the matter. "They say they
are going to camp," responded Dolan, touching his cap. Captain Ward's face flushed. He told
Dolan to give the order to march. There were shouts and laughter, and Gabriel Carnine cried,
"Say, Phil, this here Missourian we passed says old General Price is over that hill." The boys
laughed again, and Ward saw that trouble was before him. The men stood waiting while he controlled
his rage before he spoke. Dolan said under his breath from the ground beside the horse, "They're
awful tired, Cap, and they don't want to tackle Price's army all by their lonelies." Some one
in the company called out, "We've voted on this thing, Cap. Don't the majority rule in this
country?"

A smile twitched at Ward's mouth and the boy in him pricked a twinkle in his eyes, for he was
only twenty-six, and he laughed--threw his head back and then leaned over and slapped the horse's
neck and finally straightened up and said, "Gentlemen, I bow to the will of the people."

And so it happened that when they drew their first month's pay, Martin Culpepper and Jake Dolan
suggested to the company that they buy Ward a sword to commemorate the victory of the people.
And Martin Culpepper made a great presentation speech in which he said that to the infantry,
cavalry, and artillery arms of military service, "C" Company had added the "vox populi." But
the night after the presentation Oscar Fernald and Watts McHurdie crawled under the captain's
tent and stole the sword and pawned it for beer, and there was a sound of revelry by night.

When they found the great camp near Springfield, it seemed to John Barclay that all the soldiers
in the world were gathered. It is difficult for a boy under a dozen years to remember things
consecutively; because boys do not do things consecutively. They flit around like butterflies,
and so the picture that they make of events jumps from scene to scene. One film on a roll of
John's memory showed a hot August day in the camp of "C" Company; the men are hurrying about
the place. The tents are down; the boys--John and Bob--are kicking around the vacant camp looking
for trophies. But there the film broke and did not record the fact that Captain Ward put Bob
and John on a commissary wagon that stood in a side street as the soldiers moved out. John
remembered looking into a street filled with marching soldiers. First the regulars and the
artillery came swinging down the street. At their head the boy saw General Lyon, the commanding
officer, and around him was a bodyguard whose plumed hats, with the left brim pinned up, caught
the boys' eyes. The regulars marched by silently. It was part of their day's work; but following
them came a detachment of Germans singing "Marchen Rote," and then the battery of six guns
and then the Kansans. Small wonder Captain Gordon Granger told Colonel Mitchel that the Kansas
soldiers were only an armed mob. They filed out of Springfield, some in rags and some in tags
and some in velvet gowns. They carried guns; but they looked like delegates to a convention,
and as the boys saw their own company, they waved their hands, but they were almost ashamed
of the shabby clothes of the men from Sycamore Ridge; for a boy always notices clothes on others.
When the Germans stopped singing "Marchen Rote," the boys heard Watts McHurdie's high tenor
voice start up "The Dutch Companee," and the crowd that was lining the street cheered and cheered.
A Missouri regiment followed and more regulars, and then a battery of four guns passed, and
then came more Kansans still going to that everlasting convention. And a band came roaring
by,--with its crashing brass and rumbling drums,--and then after the band had turned the corner,
came Iowa in gray blouses and such other garments as the clothes-lines of the country afforded.
They were singing as they passed--a song the boy had never heard, being all about the "happy
land of Canaan." And before the sun had set again, after that night, hundreds of those who
sang of the happy land were there. In the rear were the ambulances and the ammunition and the
hospital vans, and the wagon which held the boys wheeled into the line. After they had passed,
the streets were clogged with carts and drays and wagons of all sorts, for the citizens were
moving to places of safety.

As a man, the boy's memory did not tell him how the boys fared, but he does remember that it
was dark in the timber where they camped that night, and that they slipped away into the woods
to lie down together. The chirping of the birds at dawn wakened them, and as John sat up rubbing
his eyes, he heard a rifle's crack. They were at the edge of a field, and half a mile from
him, troops were marching by columns across a clearing. The rifle-shot was followed by another,
and another, and then by a half-dozen. "Wake up, Bob--wake up--they's a battle," he cried,
and the two boys stumbled to their feet. The shots were far in front of the marching soldiers,
and the boys could not make out what the firing meant. The line formed and ran up the hill,
and the boys saw the morning sun flashing on the guns of the enemy. The battery roared, and
the boys were filled with terror. They ran through the woods like dogs until they came to the
soldiers from Sycamore Ridge. The boys crawled on their bellies to their friends, and lay with
their faces all but buried in the ground. The men were lying at the edge of the timber talking,
and Watts McHurdie was on his back.

"What's the matter with you, Watts?" asked Oscar Fernald.

"Os," replied Watts, "I got a presentiment I'm goin' to be shot in the rear. It will kill me
to be shot in the back, and I've got a notion that's how I am goin' to die."

The line laughed. Captain Ward, who was sitting a few paces in the rear of the men, went over
to Watts, and scuffled the man over with his foot. A bullet went through Ward's hat before
he got back to his place. The men were sticking up ramrods and betting on the number of minutes
they would last. No ramrod stood more than ten minutes. Martin Culpepper threw up his hat five
times before a bullet hit it; but he went bareheaded the rest of the day, and John Barclay,
in sheer fear, began to dig a hole under him. After he had been on his belly for an hour, Henry
Schnitzler got tired and rose. The men begged him to lie down. But his only reply when they
told him he was a fool was, "Vell, vot of it?" And when they said he would be shot, he answered
again, "Vell, vot of it?" And when Jake Dolan cried, "You pot-gutted Dutchman, sit down or
there'll be a sauer-kraut shower in hell pretty quick," Henry shook his fat sides a moment
and laughed, "Vell, vot of dot--altzo!" For an hour, that seemed ten, he moved back and forth
on the line, firing and joking, and then the spell broke and a bullet took part of his jaw.
As he dropped to his position, with the blood gushing from his face, his eyes blazed, and he
spat out, "By hell-tam, now I vos mad," and he fought the day out and died that night. But
as he sank to his place when the bullet hit him, Watts McHurdie saw Schnitzler stagger, and
through the smoke, knew that he was wounded. Watts rushed to Schnitzler and bent over him,
when a ball hit Watts and went ripping through the fleshy part of his hip. "Shot in the back--damn
it, shot in the back!" he screamed, as he jumped into the air. "What did I tell you, boys,
I'm shot in the back." And he crawled bleeding to the rear.

All the long forenoon the camp of the enemy continued to belch out men. The battery mowed them
down, and once the Kansans were ordered to charge the hill, and the boys were left alone. It
was there that the two were separated. John saw men sink in awful silence, and the blood ooze
from their heads. He saw men cramp in agony and choke with blood, and he saw Martin Culpepper,
perhaps with the large white plumes still dancing in his eyes, dash out of the line and pick
up a Union banner that Sigel's men had lost, and that the enemy was flaunting just before the
artillery mowed the gray line down. He heard the hoarse men cheer Martin, and as the tall swart
figure came running back waving the flag, the boy prayed to his father's God to save the man.

When the battle lulled, the boy found himself parted from "C" Company, and fled back through
the woods to the rear. There he came upon a smell that was familiar. He had known it in the
slaughter-house at home. It was the smell of fresh blood, and with it came the sickening drone
of flies. In an instant he stood under a tree where men were working smeared with blood. He
stumbled over a little pile of dismembered legs and hands. A man with a bloody knife was bending
over a human form stretched on a bloody and, it seemed to the boy, a greasy table. Another
was helping the big man. They were cutting the bullet out of Watts McHurdie, who was lying
white and unconscious and with flies crawling over him, half naked and blood-smeared, on the
table. The boy screamed, and the man turned his head and snarled through his clenched teeth
that held the knife, "Get out of here--no--go get me a bucket of water from the creek." Some
one handed the boy a bucket, and he ran where he was told to go, with the awful sight burned
on his brain, with the sickening smell in his nose, and with the drone of flies in his ears.
When he came back the firing had begun again. The surgeon was saying, "Well, that's all that's
waiting--now I'm going for a minute." He grabbed a gun standing by the table and ran toward
the front; he did not take off his blood-splotched apron, and the boy fled from the place in
terror. In a few moments the firing ceased; but the boy ran on, hunting for a hiding-place.
He saw a troop of Alabamians plunge over a log in a charge, and roll in an awful, writhing,
screaming pile of dying men and horses, and in the heap he saw the terror-stricken face of
a youth, who was shrieking for help; John carried that fear-distorted face in his memory for
years, until long afterwards it appeared in Sycamore Ridge.

But that day John fled from the death-trap almost mad with fear. Rushing farther into the woods,
he came upon General Lyon and his staff. The plumed hats of the bodyguard told the boy that
the sandy-haired man before him was in command, though the man's face was bloody from a wound
in his head, and though his clothes were stained with blood and he was hatless. He sat upright
on his horse, and as the boy turned, he heard the voices of Captain Ward and his soldiers,
begging to be sent into the fight. It was a clamour fierce and piteous, and the general had
turned his head to the Kansans, when something at the left startled him. There was no firing,
and a column of soldiers was approaching. Doubt paralyzed the group around Lyon for a moment.
The men wore gray blouses strangely like those the Iowans wore. The men might be Sigel's men,
coming back from their artillery duel. The general plainly was puzzled. He rode out from the
bodyguard a few paces. The boy was staring at him, when the bodyguard with their gay plumed
hats came up, and he saw wrath flash into the general's face as he recognized the enemy. "Shoot
them--shoot them--" he shouted. But the gray line vomited its smoke first, and the boy felt
his foot afire. The general dropped from his horse, and as the boy looked down, he saw a red
blot coming out on his instep. In the same instant he saw Captain Ward rush to the falling
general, and saw the bodyguard gather about him, and then the blackness came over the child
and he fell. He did not see them bear General Lyon's body into the brush, nor hear Ward moan
his sorrow. But when Ward returned from the thicket, he saw the child lying limp on the grass.

As Ward ran toward the hospital van carrying the limp little body, he could see that a ball
had pierced the boy's foot. Also he saw the men in retreat who had shot Lyon, and all over
the field the firing had ceased. As he hurried through the underbrush, Ward ran into Bob Hendricks
hiding in the thicket. Ward took the child's hand and he began to sob: "I saw Elmer go up that
hill, Captain; I saw him go up with the horses and he ain't come back." But Ward did not understand
him, and hurried the little fellow along with John to the surgeon.

Then Ward left them, and when John Barclay opened his eyes, Bob Hendricks was sitting beside
him. A great lint bandage was about John's foot, and they were in a wagon jolting over a rutty
road. He did not speak for a long time, and then he asked, "Did we whip 'em?"

And Bob nodded and said, "Cap says so!"

The children clasped hands and talked of many things that passed from the boy's mind. But his
mind recorded that the next day in the hospital Martin Culpepper said, "Bob can't come to-day,
Johnnie; you know he's tendin' Elmer's funeral." The boy must have opened his eyes, for the
man said, "Why, Johnnie, I thought you knew; yes; they found him dead that night--right under
the reb--under the enemies' guns on the brink of the hill."

The child's eyes filled with tears, but he did not cry. His emotion was spent. The two sat
together for a time, and the little boy said, "Why didn't you go, Mr. Culpepper?" And the man
replied: "Me? Oh--why--Oh, yes, I got a little scratch here in my leg, and they won't let me
out of here. There's Watts over there in the next cot; he got a little scratch too--didn't
you, Watts?" Watts and the boy smiled at each other, but John did not see Bob again for years.
Miss Hendricks came and took him to their father's people in Ohio.

One day some one came in the hospital where John and Watts and Martin Culpepper were lying,
and began to call out mail for the men, and the third name the corporal called was "Captain
Martin Culpepper"; and when they brought him a long official envelope with General Frémont's
name on it, Martin Culpepper held it in his hands, looked at the inscription, read the word
"captain" again and again, and could not speak for choked joy. And tears so dimmed his eyes
that he could not see the "large white plumes" of chivalry, but the men in the beds cheered
as they heard the words the corporal read.

With such music as that in his ears, and with his soul stirred by the events about him, Watts
McHurdie, lying in the hospital, wrote the song that made him famous. They know in Sycamore
Ridge that Watts is not much of a poet, that his rhymes are sometimes bad and his metre worse.
But once his heart took fire and burned for a day sheer white, and in that day he wrote words
that a nation sang, and now all the world is singing. And they are proud of him, and when people
come to Sycamore Ridge on pilgrimages to see the author of the song, men do not smile in wonder;
they show the visitors his shop, and point out the bowed little man bending over his bench,
stretching his arms out as he sews, and they point him out with pride. Not even John Barclay
with all his millions, or Bob Hendricks, who once refused a place in the President's cabinet,
are more esteemed in Sycamore Ridge than the little harness maker who set the world to singing.

And curiously enough, John Barclay was with Watts McHurdie when he wrote the song. They brought
him an accordion one day while he was getting well, and the two sat together. Watts droned
along and shut his eyes and mumbled some words, and then burst out with the chorus. Over and
over he sang it and exclaimed between breaths: "Say--ain't that fine? I just made it up." He
was exalted with his performance, and some women came loitering down the corridor where the
wounded man and the boy were lying. The visitors gazed compassionately at them--little Watts
not much larger than the boy. A woman asked, "And where were you wounded, son?" looking at
Watts with his accordion. His face flushed up at the thought of his shame, and he could not
keep back the tears that always betrayed him when he was deeply moved. "Ten--ten miles from
Springfield, madam, ten miles from Springfield." And to hide his embarrassment he began sawing
at his accordion, chanting his famous song. But being only a little boy, John Barclay tittered.

A few days after the battle Captain Ward wrote to Miss Lucy telling her that some soldiers
slightly wounded would go home on a furlough to Lawrence, and that they would take John with
them and put him on the stage at Lawrence for Sycamore Ridge. Then Ward's letter continued:
"It is all so horrible--this curse of war; sometimes I think it is worse than the curse of
slavery. There is no 'pomp and circumstance of glorious war.' Men died screaming in agony,
or dumb with fear. They were covered with dirt, and when they were dead they merged into the
landscape like inanimate things. What vital difference is there between a living man and a
dead man, that one stands out in a scene big and obtrusive, and the other begins to fade into
the earth as soon as death touches the body? The horror of death is upon me, and I cannot shake
it off. It is a fearful thing to see a human soul pass 'in any shape, in any mood.' And I have
seen so many deaths--we lost one man out of every three--that I am all unnerved. I saw General
Lyon die--the only abolitionist in the regular army, they say. He died like a soldier--but
not as the soldiers die in pictures. He sank off his horse so limp, and so like an animal with
its death wound, and gasped so weakly, 'I'm killed--take care of my body,' that when we covered
his face and bore him away, we could not realize we were carrying a man's body. And now, my
dear, if I should go as these men go, I have neither kith nor kin to mourn me--only you, and
you must not mourn, for I shall be near you always and always, without sign or token, and when
you feel my presence near, know that it is real, and not a seeming. For the great force of
life that moves events in this world has but one symbol, but one vital manifestation, and that
is love, and when a soul is touched with that, it is immortal."

But Martin Culpepper, with his dancing plumes, saw things in another light. Perhaps we always
see things in another light when forty years have passed over them. How the day comes back
with all its pageantry, the caparisoned horses, the handsome men stepping to the music of inspiring
melody, the clarion commands of the officers, and the steady rumble of a thousand feet upon
the battle ground, going careless whether to death or immortality in deathless fame."

A curious thing is that deathless fame which Martin speaks of--a passing curious thing; for
when word came of Henry Schnitzler's death, Mary Murphy, of the Thayer House, put off Gabriel
Carnine's ring, and wept many tears in the stage driver's coffee and wore black in her hat
for a year, and when Gabriel came home, she married him and all went as merrily as a wedding-bell.
What covert tenderness or dream of gauzy romance was in her memory, the town could never know;
but the Carnines' first boy was named Henry, and for many years after the war, she was known
among the men, who do not understand a woman's heart, as the "War widow by brevet." Yet that
was Henry's "deathless fame" in Sycamore Ridge, for the town has long since forgotten him,
and even his name means nothing to our children, who see it on the bronze statue set up by
the rich John Barclay to commemorate our soldier dead.

But John was our first war hero. And when he brought his battle scars home that September night
in '61, for hours before the stage drove across Sycamore Creek the boy was filled with a nameless
dread that he might be spanked.

They carried him on a cot to his mother's house, and put him in the great carved four-poster
bed, and in the morning Miss Lucy came and hovered over him, and they talked of Captain Ward
to her heart's content, and the boy told Miss Lucy the gossip of the hospital,--that Captain
Ward was to be made a major,--and she kissed him and petted him until he was glad none of the
boys was around to see the sickening spectacle. And then Miss Lucy and Mrs. Barclay told the
child of their plans,--that Miss Lucy was going to war as a nurse, and that Mrs. Barclay was
to teach the Sycamore Ridge school during the winter. And in a few weeks John was out of the
hero business, working in Culpepper's store after school, and getting used to a limp that stayed
with him all his life.

The next spring he traded a carbine that he brought home from the army for an Indian pony,
and then he began business for himself. He organized the cows of the town into a town herd
and took them every morning to pasture on the prairie. All day he rode in the open air, and
the town boys came out to play with him, and they explored the cave by his mother's house,
and with their sling-shots killed quails and prairie chickens and cooked them, and they played
war through the long summer days. But John did not grow as the other boys grew; he remained
undersized, and his limp put him at a disadvantage; so he had few fights, but he learned cunning,
and got his way by strategy rather than by force--but he always had his way. He was strong;
the memory of what he had seen and what he had been that one awful day in the battle made lines
on his face; sometimes at night he would wake screaming, when he dreamed he was running away
from the surgeon with the bloody knife in his teeth and that the man was going to throw an
arm at him. And when he wished to bring Ellen Culpepper to time he would begin in a low terrorful
voice, "And I saw--the man--take--a--g-r-e-a-t l-o-n-g knife d-r-i-p-p-i-n-g with r-e-d-b-l-o-o-d
out of his t-e-e-t-h and go slish, k-slish," but he never got farther than this, for the girl
would begin shaking, and if they were alone, would run to him and grab him and put her hand
to his mouth to make him stop.

And so his twelfth year passed under the open sky in the sunshine in summer and in winter working
after school in town where men were wanting, and where a boy could always find work. He grew
brown and lean, and as his voice grew squeaky and he sang alto in the school, he became more
and more crafty and masterful. The fact that his mother was the teacher, did not give him more
rights in school than other boys, for she was a sensible woman, but it gave him a prestige
on the playground that he was not slow to take. He was a born trader; and he kept what he got
and got more. His weakness was music. He kept two cows in his herd in the summer time in return
for the use of the melodeon at the Thayer House, and moved it to his own home and put it in
the crowded little room, and practised on it at night when the other boys were loafing at the
town pump. For a consideration in marbles he taught Buck Culpepper the chords in "G" on the
guitar, and for further consideration taught him the chords in "D" and "C," and with the aid
of Jimmy Fernald, aged nine, and Molly Culpepper, aged eleven, one with a triangle and the
other with a pumpkin reed pipe, John organized his Band, which he led with his mouth-organ,
and exhibited in Culpepper's barn, appropriating to himself as the director the pins charged
at the door. Forty years afterward, when Molly called his attention to his failure to divide
with the children, John Barclay smiled as he lifted his lame foot to a fat leather chair in
front of him and said, "That was what we call the promoter's profit." And then the talk ran
to Ellen, and John opened his great desk and from a box without a mark on it he brought out
a tintype picture of Ellen at fourteen, a pink-cheeked child in short sleeves, with the fringe
of her pantalets showing above her red striped stockings and beneath her bulging skirts, and
with a stringy, stiff feather rising from the front of her narrow-rimmed hat.

During the time when he was going to school by day and working evenings and caring for the
town herd through the summer, the war was dragging wearily on. Sometimes a soldier came home
on a furlough and there was news of the Sycamore Ridge men, but oftener it was a season of
waiting and working. The women and children cared for the farms and the stores as best they
could and lived, heaven only knows how, and opened every newspaper with horror and dread, and
glanced down the long list of names of the dead, the missing and the wounded, fearful of what
they might see. Mrs. Barclay heard from Miss Lucy and through her kept track of Philemon Ward,
who was transferred to another regiment after he was made major. And when he was made a colonel
at Shiloh, there were tear blots on Miss Lucy's letter that told of it, and after Appomattox
he was brevetted a general. As for Captain Culpepper, he came home a colonel, and Jake Dolan
came home a first lieutenant. But Watts McHurdie came home with a letter from Lincoln about
his song, and he was the greatest man of all of them.

It is odd that Sycamore Ridge grew during the war. Where the people came from, no one could
say--yet they came, and young Barclay remembered even during the war of playing in the foundations
and running over the rafters of new houses. But when the war closed, the great caravan that
had lagged while the war was raging, began to trail itself steadily in front of Mrs. Barclay's
door, through the streets of Sycamore Ridge and out over the western hills. Soldiers with their
families passed, going to the free homesteads, and the line of movers' wagons began with daybreak
and rumbled by far into the night. But hundreds of wagons stopped in Sycamore Ridge, and the
stage came crowded every night. Brick buildings, the town's mortal pride, began showing their
fronts on Main Street, and other streets in the town began to assert themselves. Mrs. Barclay's
school grew from a score of children in 1864 to three rooms full in '65, and in '66 the whole
town turned out to welcome General and Mrs. Ward, she that was Miss Lucy Barnes, and there
was a reunion of "C" Company that night, and a camp-fire in Culpepper Hall, and the next day
Lige Bemis was painting a sign which read "Philemon R. Ward, Attorney-at-Law, Pension Matters
Promptly Attended To." And the first little Ward was born at the Thayer House and named Eli
Thayer Ward.

The spring that found John Barclay sixteen years old found him a browned, gray-eyed, lumpy
sort of a boy, big at the wrong places, and stunted at the wrong places, with a curious, uneven
sort of an education. He knew all about Walden Pond; and he knew his Emerson--and was mad with
passion to see the man; he had travelled over the world with Scott; had crossed the bridge
with Cæsar in his father's books; had roamed the prairie and the woods with Cooper's Indians;
had gone into the hearts of men with Thackeray and Dickens, holding his mother's hand and listening
to her voice; but he knew algebra only as a name, and rhetoric was a dictionary word with him.
Of earthly possessions he had two horses, a bill of sale for his melodeon, a saddle, a wagon,
a set of harness; four mouth-organs, one each in "A," "D," "E," and "C," all carefully rolled
in Canton flannel on a shelf above his bed; one concertina,--a sort of German accordion,--five
pigs, a cow, and a bull calf. Moreover, there were two rooms in the Barclay home; and the great
rock was gone from the door of the cave, and a wooden door was in its place and the Barclays
were using it for a spring-house. The boy had a milk route and sold butter to the hotel. But
the chiefest treasure of the household was John's new music book. And while he played on his
melodeon, Ellen Culpepper's eyes smiled from the pages and her voice moved in the melodies,
and his heart began to feel the first vague vibration with the great harmony of life. And so
the pimples on his chin reddened, and the squeak in his voice began to squawk, and his big
milky eyes began to see visions wherein a man was walking through this vain world. As for Ellen
Culpepper, her shoe tops were tiptoeing to her skirts, and her eyes were full of dreams of
the warrior bold, "with spurs of gold," who "sang merrily his lay." And rising from these dreams,
she always stepped on her feet. But that was a long time ago, and men and women have been born
and loved, and married and brought children into the world since then. For it was a long time ago.

CHAPTER IV

The changes of time are hard to realize. One knows, of course, that the old man once was young.
One understands that the tree once was a sapling, and conversely we know that the child will
be a man and the gaunt sapling stuck in the earth in time will become a great spreading tree.
But the miracle of growth passes not merely our understanding, but our imagination.

So though men tell us, and grow black in the face with the vehemence of telling, that the Sycamore
Ridge of the sixties--a gray smudge of unpainted wooden houses bordering the Santa Fe trail,
with the street merging into the sunflowers a block either way from the pump,--is the town
that now lies hidden in the elm forest, with its thirty miles of paving and its scores of acres
of wide velvet lawns, with its parks wherein fountains play, guarded by cannon discarded by
the pride of modern war, with the court-house on the brink of the hill that once was far west
of the town and with twenty-two thousand people whizzing around in trolleys, rattling about
in buggies or scooting down the shady avenues in motor-cars--whatever the records may show,
the real truth we know; the towns are not the same; the miracle of growth cannot fool us. And
yet here is the miracle in the making. Always in John Barclay's eyes when he closed them to
think of the first years that followed the war between the states, rose visions of yellow pine
and red bricks and the litter and debris of building; always in his ears as he remembered those
days were the confused noises of wagons whining and groaning under their heavy loads, of gnawing
saws and rattling hammers, of the clink of trowels on stones, of the swish of mortar in boxes,
and of the murmur of the tide of hurrying feet over board sidewalks, ebbing and flowing night
and morning. In those days new boys came to town so rapidly that sometimes John met a boy in
swimming whom he did not know, and, even in 1866, when Ellen and Molly Culpepper were giving
a birthday party for Ellen, she declared that she "simply couldn't have all the new people there."

And so in the sixties the boy and the town went through their raw, gawky, ugly adolescence
together. As streets formed in the town, ideas took shape in the boy's mind. As Lincoln Avenue
was marked out on the hill, where afterward the quality of the town came to live, so in the
boy's heart books that told him of the world outlined vague visions. Boy fashion he wrote to
Bob Hendricks once or twice a month or a season, as the spirit moved him, and measured everything
with the eyes of his absent friend. For he came to idealize Bob, who was out in the wonderful
world, and their letters in those days were curious compositions--full of adventures by field
and wood, and awkward references to proper books to read, and cures for cramps and bashfully
expressed aspirations of the soul. Bob's father had become a general, and when the war closed,
he was sent west to fight the Indians, and he took Lieutenant Jacob Dolan with him, and Bob
sent to John news of the Indian fighting that glorified Bob further.

And when a letter came to the Ridge from Dolan announcing that he and the Hendricks family
were coming back to the Ridge to live,--the general to look after his neglected property, and
Dolan to start a livery-stable,--John heard the news with a throb of great joy. When a letter
from Bob confirmed the news, John began to count the days. For the love of boys is the most
unselfish thing in a selfish world. They met awkwardly and sheepishly at the stage, and greeted
each other with grunts, and became inseparable. Bob came back tall, lanky, grinny, and rather
dumb, and he found John undersized, wiry, masterful, and rather mooney, but strong and purposeful,
for a boy. But each accepted the other as perfect in every detail.

Nothing Bob did changed John's attitude, and nothing John did made Bob waver in his faith in
John. Did the boys come to John with a sickening story that Bob's sister made him bring a towel
to the swimming hole, John glared at them a moment and then waved them aside with, "Well, you
big brutes,--didn't you know what it was for?" When they reported to John that Bob's father
was making him tip his hat to the girls, they got, instead of the outbreak of scorn they expected,
"Well--did the girls tip back?" And when Bob's sister said that the Barclay boy--barefooted,
curly-headed, dusty, and sunburned--looked like something the old cat had dragged into the
house, the boy-was impudent to his sister and took a whipping from his father.

That fall the children of Sycamore Ridge assembled for the first time in their new seven-room
stone schoolhouse, and the two boys were in the high school. The board hired General Philemon
Ward to teach the twenty high school pupils, and it was then he first began to wear the white
neckties which he never afterwards abandoned. Ward's first clash with John Barclay occurred
when Ward organized a military company. John's limp kept him out of it, so he broke up the
company and organized a literary society, of which he was president and Ellen Culpepper secretary,
and a constitution was adopted exempting the president and secretary from work in the society.
It was natural enough that Bob Hendricks should be made treasurer, and that these three officers
should be the programme committee, and then a long line of vice-presidents and assistant secretaries
and treasurers and monitors was elected by the society.

So John became the social leader of the group of boys and girls who were just coming out of
kissing games into dances at one another's homes in the town. John decided who should be in
the "crowd" and who might be invited only when a mixed crowd was expected. Fathers desiring
trade, and mothers faithful to church ties, protested; but John Barclay had his way. It was
his crowd. They called themselves the "Spring Chickens," and as John had money saved to spend
as he pleased, he dictated many things; but he did not spend his money, he lent it, and his
barn was stored with, skates and sleds and broken guns and scrap-iron held as security, while
his pockets bulged with knives taken as interest.

As the winter waned and the Spring Chickens waxed fat in social honours, Bob Hendricks glanced
up from his algebra one day, and discovered that little Molly Culpepper had two red lips and
two pig-tail braids of hair that reached below her waist. Then and there he shot her deftly
with a paper wad, chewed and fired through a cane pipe-stem, and waited till she wiped it off
her cheek with her apron and made a face at him, before he plunged into the mysteries of x2
+ 2xy + y2. And thus another old story began, as new and as fresh as when Adam and Eve walked
together in the garden.

John Barclay was so busy during his last year in the Sycamore Ridge school that he often fancied
afterwards that the houses on Lincoln Avenue in Culpepper addition must have come with the
grass in the spring, for he has no memory of their building. Neither does he remember when
General Madison Hendricks built the brick building on the corner of Main Street and Fifth Avenue,
in which he opened the Exchange National Bank of Sycamore Ridge. Yet John remembered that his
team and wagon were going all winter, hauling stone for the foundation of the Hendricks home
on the hill--a great brick structure, with square towers and square "ells" rambling off on
the prairie, and square turrets with ornate cornice pikes pricking the sky. For years the two
big houses standing side by side--the Hendricks house and the Culpepper house, with its tall
white pillars reaching to the roof, its double door and its two white wings spreading over
the wide green lawn--were the show places of Sycamore Ridge, and the town was always divided
in its admiration for them. John's heart was sadly torn between them. Yet he was secretly glad
to learn from his mother that his Uncle Union's house in Haverhill had tall columns, green
blinds on the white woodwork, and a wide hall running down the centre. For it made him feel
more at home at the Culpeppers'. But when the Hendricks' piano came, after they moved into
the big house, the boy's heart was opened afresh; and he spent hours with Bob Hendricks at
the piano, when he knew he would be welcome at the Culpeppers'. He leased his town herd in
the summer to Jimmie Fernald--giving him the right to take the cows to the commons around town
upon the payment of five dollars a month to John for keeping out of the business, and passing
Jimmie good-will. In the meantime, by day, John worked his team, and hired two others and took
contracts for digging cellars. At nights he went to the country with his concertina and played
for dances, making two dollars a night, and General Hendricks for years pointed with pride
to the fact that when the Exchange National Bank of Sycamore Ridge opened for business the
first morning, standing at the head of the line of depositors was John Barclay, with his concertina
under his arm, just as he had returned from a country dance at daylight, waiting to be first
in line, with $178.53 in his pocket to deposit. That deposit slip, framed, still hangs over
the desk in the office of the president of the bank, and when John Barclay became famous, it
was always a part of the "Art Loan Exhibit," held by the women in Barclay Memorial Hall.

That summer of '67 John capitulated to life, held his hands up for the shackles and put on
shoes in summer for the first time. Also, he only went swimming twice--both times at night,
and he bought his first box of paper collars and his mother tried to make his neckties like
those in Dorman's store; but some way she did not get the hang of it, and John bought a Sunday
necktie of great pride, and he and his mother agreed that it was off the tail of Joseph's coat
of many colours. But he wore it only on state occasions. At work, he made an odd figure limping
over the dirt heaps and into the excavations bossing men old enough to be his father. He wore
a serious face in those days,--for a boy,--and his mouth was almost hard, but something burned
in his eyes that was more than ambition, though that lighted his face like a flame, and he
was always whistling or singing. At night he and Bob Hendricks wandered away together, and
sometimes they walked out under the stars and talked as boys will talk of their little world
and the big world about them, or sometimes they sat reading at one or the other's home, and
one would walk home with the other, and the other walk a piece of the way back. They read poetry
and mooned; "Lalla Rookh" appealed to John because of its music and melody, and both boys devoured
Byron, and gobbled over the "Corsair" and the "Giaour" and "Childe Harold" with the book above
the table, and came back from the barn on Sundays licking their chops after surreptitiously
nibbling "Don Juan." But they had Captain Mayne Reid and Kingsley as an antidote, and they
soon got enough of Byron.

The two boys persuaded each other to go away to school, and John chose the state university
because it was cheap and because he heard he could get work in Lawrence to carry him through.
He did not recollect that his mother had any influence in the matter; but in those days she
always seemed to be sitting by the lamp in their little home, sewing, with his shirts and underwear
strewn about her. She had a permanent place in the town schools, and the Barclay home had grown
to a kitchen and two bedrooms as well as the big room with its fireplace. His mother's hair
was growing gray at the temples, but her clear, firm, unwrinkled skin and strong broad jaw
kept youth in her countenance, and as Martin Culpepper wrote in the Biography, where he names
the pioneers of Sycamore Ridge whose lives influenced Watts McHurdie's, "the three graces,
Faith, Hope, and Charity, were mirrored in her smile."

One night when the boy came in tired after his night's ramble, he left his mother, as he often
did those last nights before he went away to school, bending over her work, humming a low happy-noted
song, even though the hour was late. He lay in his bed beside the open window looking out into
the night, dreaming with open eyes about life. Perhaps he actually dreamed a moment, for he
did not hear her come into the room; but he felt her bend over him, and a tear dropped on his
face from hers. He turned toward her, and she put her arms about his neck. Then she sobbed:
"Oh, good-by, my little boy--good-by. I am coming here to bid you good-by, every night now."
He kissed her hand, and she was silent a moment, and then she spoke: "I know this is the last
of it all, John. You will never come back to me again--not you, but a man. And you will seem
strange, and I will seem strange." She paused a moment to let the cramp in her throat leave,
then she went on: "I was going to say so many things--when this time came, but they're all
gone. But oh, my boy, my little tender-hearted boy--be a good man--just be a good man, John."
And then she sobbed for an unrestrained minute: "O God, when you take my boy away, keep him
clean, and brave, and kind, and--O God, make him--make him a good man." And with a pat and
a kiss she rose and said as she left him, "Now good night, Johnnie, go to sleep."

       *       *       *       *       *

In the Sycamore Ridge Banner for September 12, 1867, appeared some verses by Watts McHurdie,
beginning:--

    "Hail and farewell to thee, friend of my youth,
    Pilgrim who seekest the Fountain of Truth,
    Hail and farewell to thy innocent pranks,
    No more can I send thee for left-handed cranks.
    Farewell, and a tear laves the ink on my pen,
    For ne'er shall I 'noint thee with strap-oil again."

It was a noble effort, and in his notes to the McHurdie poems following the Biography published
over thirty years after those lines were written, Colonel Culpepper writes: "This touching,
though somewhat humorous, poem was written on the occasion of the departure for college of
one who since has become listed with the world's great captains of finance--none other than
Honourable John Barclay, whose fame is too substantial to need encomium in these humble pages.
Suffice it to say that between these two men, our hero, the poet, and the great man of affairs,
there has always remained the closest friendship, and each carries in his bosom, wrapped in
the myrrh of fond memory, the deathless blossom of friendship, that sweetest flower in the
conservatory of the soul."

The day before John left for Lawrence he met Lieutenant Jacob Dolan.

"So ye're going to college--ay, Johnnie?"

"Yes, Mr. Dolan," replied the boy.

"Well, they're all givin' you somethin', Johnnie: Watts here has given a bit of a posey in
verse; and my friend, General Hendricks, I'm told, has given you a hundred-dollar note; and
General Philemon Ward has given you Wendell Phillips' orations; and your sweetheart--God bless
her, whoever she is--will be givin' ye the makins' of a broken heart; and your mother'll be
givin' you her blessin'--and the saints' prayers go with 'em; and me, havin' known your father
before you and the mother that bore you, and seein' her rub the roses off her cheeks tryin'
to keep your ornery little soul in your worthless little body, I'll give you this sentiment
to put in your pipe and smoke: John Barclay, man--if they ever be's a law agin damn fools,
the first raid the officers should make is on the colleges. And now may ye be struck blind
before ye get your education and dumb if it makes a fool of ye." And so slapping the boy on
the back, Jake Dolan went down the street winding in and out among the brick piles and lumber
and mortar boxes, whistling "Tread on the Tail of me Coat."

For life was all so fine and gay with Lieutenant Dolan in those days. And he whistled and sang,
and thought what he pleased, and said what he pleased, and did what he pleased, and if the
world didn't like it, the world could picket its horses and get out of Jacob Dolan's livery
barn. For Mr. Dolan was thinking that from the livery-stable to the office of sheriff is but
a step in this land of the free and home of the brave; so he carried his head back and his
chest out and invited insult in the fond hope of provoking assault. He was the flower of the
times,--effulgent, rather gaudy, and mostly red!

CHAPTER V

Good times came to Sycamore Ridge in the autumn. The dam across the creek was furnishing power
for a flour-mill and a furniture factory. The endless worm of wagons that was wriggling through
the town carrying movers to the West, was sloughing many of its scales in Sycamore Ridge. Martin
Culpepper had been East with circulars describing the town and adjacent country. He had brought
back three stage loads of settlers, and was selling lots in Culpepper's addition faster than
they could be surveyed. The Frye blacksmith shop had become a wagon shop, and then a hardware
store was added; the flag fluttered from the high flagstaff over the Exchange National Bank
building, and all day long farmers were going from the mill to the bank. General Philemon Ward
gave up school-teaching and went back to his law office; but he was apt to take sides with
President Andrew Johnson too vigorously for his own good, and clients often avoided his office
in fear of an argument. Still he was cheerful, and being only in his early thirties, looked
at the green hills afar from his pasture and was happy. The Thayer House was filled with guests,
and the Fernalds had money in the bank; Mary Murphy and Gabriel Carnine were living happily
ever after, and Nellie Logan was clerking in Dorman's Dry Goods store and making Watts McHurdie
understand that she had her choice between a preacher and a drummer. Other girls in the dining
room of the Thayer House were rattling the dinner dishes and singing "Sweet Belle Mahone" and
"Do you love me, Molly Darling?" to ensnare the travelling public that might be tilted back
against the veranda in a mood for romance. And as John and Bob that hot September afternoon
made the round of the stores and offices bidding the town good-by, it seemed to them that perhaps
they were seizing the shadow and letting the substance fade. For it was such a good-natured
busy little place that their hearts were heavy at leaving it.

But that evening John in his gorgeous necktie, his clean paper collar, his new stiff hat, his
first store clothes, wearing proudly his father's silver watch and chain, set out to say good-by
to Ellen Culpepper, and his mother, standing in the doorway of their home, sighed at his limp
and laughed at his strut--the first laugh she had enjoyed in a dozen days.

John and Bob together went up the stone walk leading across a yard, still littered with the
debris of building, to the unboxed steps that climbed to the veranda of the Culpepper house.
There they met Colonel Culpepper in his shirt-sleeves, walking up and down the veranda admiring
the tall white pillars. When he had greeted the boys, he put his thumbs in his vest holes and
continued his parade in some pomp. The boys were used to this attitude of the colonel's toward
themselves and the pillars. It always followed a hearty meal. So they sat respectfully while
he marched before them, pointing occasionally, when he took his cigar from his mouth and a
hand from his vest, to some feature of the landscape in the sunset light that needed emphatic
attention.

"Yes, sir, young gentlemen," expanded the colonel, "you are doing the right and proper thing--the
right and proper thing. Of all the avocations of youth, I conceive the pursuit of the sombre
goddess of learning to be the most profitable--entirely the most profitable. I myself, though
a young man,--being still on the right side of forty,--have reaped the richest harvest from
my labours in the classic shades. Twenty years ago, young gentlemen, I, like you, left my ancestral
estates to sip at the Pierian spring. In point of fact, I attended the institution founded
by Thomas Jefferson, the father of the American democracy--yes, sir." He put his cigar back
in his mouth and added, "Yes, sir, you are certainly taking a wise and, I may say, highly necessary
step--"

Mrs. Culpepper, small, sprightly, blue-eyed, and calm, entered the veranda, and cut the colonel
off with: "Good evening, boys. So you are going away. Well--we'll miss you. The girls will
be right out."

But the colonel would not be quenched; his fires were burning deeply. "As I was saying, Mrs.
Culpepper," he went on, "the classic training obtained from a liberal education such as it
was my fortune--"

Mrs. Culpepper smiled blandly as she put in, "Now, pa, these boys don't care for that."

"But, my dear, let me finish. As I started to say: the flowers of poetry, Keats and his large
white plumes, the contemplation of nature's secrets, the reflective study of--"

"Yes,--here's your coat now, pa," said the wife, returning from a dive into the hall. "John,
how's your ma going to get on without you? And, pa, be sure don't forget the eggs for breakfast.
I declare since we've moved up here so far from the stores, we nearly starve."

The colonel waited a second while a glare melted into a smile, and then backed meekly into
the arms stretched high to hold his alpaca coat. As he turned toward the group, he was beaming.
"If it were not," exclaimed the colonel, addressing the young men with a quizzical smile, "that
there is a lady present--a very important lady in point of fact,--I might be tempted to say,
'I will certainly be damned!'" And with that the colonel lifted Mrs. Culpepper off her feet
and kissed her, then lumbered down the steps and strode away. He paused at the gate to gaze
at the valley and turned to look back at the great unfinished house, then swung into the street
and soon his hat disappeared under the hill.

As he went Mrs. Culpepper said, "Let them say what they will about Mart Culpepper, I always
tell the girls if they get as good a man as their pa, they will be doing mighty well."

Then the girls appeared bulging in hoops, and ruffles, with elbow sleeves, with a hint of their
shoulders showing and with pink ribbons in their hair. Clearly it was a state occasion. The
mother beamed at them a moment, and walked around Molly, saying, "I told you that was all right,"
and tied Ellen's hair ribbon over, while the young people were chattering, and before the boys
knew it, she had faded into the dusk of the hall, and the clattering of dishes came to them
from the rear of the house. John fancied he felt the heavy step of Buchanan Culpepper, and
then he heard: "Don't you talk to me, Buck Culpepper, about woman's work. You'll do what I
tell you, and if I say wipe dishes--" the voice was drowned by the rattle of a passing wagon.
And soon the young people on the front porch were so busy with their affairs that the house
behind them and its affairs dropped to another world. They say, who seem to know, that when
any group of boys and girls meet under twenty-five serious years, the recording angel puts
down his pen with, a sigh and takes a needed nap. But when the group pairs off, then Mr. Recorder
pricks up his ears and works with both hands, one busy taking what the youngsters say, and
the other busy with what they would like to say. And shame be it upon the courage of youth
that what they would like to say fills the larger book. And marvel of marvels, often the book
that holds what the boys would say is merely a copy of what the girls would like to hear, and
so much of the work is saved to the angel.

It was nine o'clock when the limping boy and the slender girl followed the tall youth and the
plump little girl down the walk from the Culpepper home through the gate and into the main
road. And the couple that walked behind took the opposite direction from that which they took
who walked ahead. Yet when John and Ellen reached the river and were seated on the mill-dam,
where the roar of the falling water drowned their voices, Ellen Culpepper spoke first: "That
looks like them over on the bridge. I can see Molly, and Bob's hat about three feet above her."

"I guess so," returned the boy. He was reaching behind him for clods and pebbles to toss into
the white foaming flood below them. The girl reached back and got one, then another, then their
hands met, and she pulled hers away and said, "Get me some stones." He gave her a handful,
and she threw the pebbles away slowly and awkwardly, one at a time. There was a long gap in
their talk while they threw the pebbles. The girl closed it with, "Ma made old Buck wipe the
dishes." Then she giggled, "Poor Buckie."

John managed to say, "Yes, I heard him." Then he added, "What does your mother think of Bob?"

"Oh, she likes him fine. But she's glad you're all going away."

The boy asked why and the girl returned, "Watch me hit that log." She threw, and missed the water.

"Why?" persisted the boy.

The girl was digging in a crevice for a stone and said, "Can you get that out?"

John worked at it a moment and handed it to her with, "Why?"

She threw it, standing up to give her arm strength. She sat down and folded her hands and waited
for another "why." When it came she said, "Oh, you know why." When he protested she answered,
"Ma thinks Molly's too young."

"Too young for what?" demanded the boy, who knew.

"Too young to be going with boys."

There was a long pause, then he managed to say it, "She's no younger than you were--nor half
as old."

"When?" returned the girl, giving him the broadside of her eyes for a second, and letting them
droop. The eyes bewitched the boy, and he could not speak. At length the girl shivered, "It's
getting cold--I must go home."

The boy found voice. "Aw no, Bob and Molly are still up there."

She started to rise, he caught her hand, but she pulled it away and resigned herself for a
moment. Then she looked at him a long second and said, "Do you remember years ago at the Frye
boy's party--when we were little tots, and I chose you?"

The boy nodded his head and turned full toward her with serious eyes. He devoured her feature
by feature with his gaze in the starlight. The moon was just rising at the end of the mill-dam
behind them, and its light fell on her profile. He cried out, "Yes, Ellen, do you--do you?"

She nodded her head and spoke quickly, "That was the time you got your hands stuck in the taffy
and had to be soaked out."

They laughed. John tried to get the moment back. "Do you remember the rubber ring I gave you?"

She grew bold and turned to him with her heart in her face: "Yes--yes, John, and the coffee-bean
locket. I've got them both in a little box at home." Then, scampering back to her reserve,
she added, "You know ma says I'm a regular rat to store things away." She felt that the sudden
reserve chilled him, for in a minute or two she said, looking at the bridge: "They're going
now. We mustn't stay but a minute." She put her hand on the rock between them, and said, "You
remember that night when you went away before?" Before he answered she went on: "I was counting
up this afternoon, and it's six years ago. We were just children then."

Again the boy found his voice: "Ellen Culpepper, we've been going together seven years. Don't
you think that's long enough?"

"We were just children then," she replied.

The boy leaned awkwardly toward her and their hands met on the rock, and he withdrew his as
he asked, "Do you--do you?"

She bent toward him, and looked at him steadily as she nodded her head again and again. She
rose to go, saying, "We mustn't stay here any longer."

He caught her hand to stop her, and said, "Ellen--Ellen, promise me just one thing." She looked
her question. He cried, "That you won't forget--just that you won't forget."

She took his hand and stood before him as he sat, hoping to stay her. She answered: "Not as
long as I live, John Barclay. Oh, not as long as I live." Then she exclaimed: "Now--" and her
voice changed, "we just must go, John; Molly's gone, and it's getting late." She helped him
limp over the rocks and up the steep road, but when they reached the level, she dropped his
hand, and they walked home slowly, looking back at the moon, so that they might not overtake
the other couple. Once or twice they stopped and sat on lumber piles in the street, talking
of nothing, and it was after ten o'clock when they came to the gate. The girl looked anxiously
up the walk toward the house. "They've come and gone," she said. She moved as if to go away.

"I wish you wouldn't go right in," he begged.

"Oh--I ought to," she replied. They were silent. The roar of the water over the dam came to
them on the evening breeze. She put out her hand.

"Well," he sighed as he rested his lame foot, and started, "well--good-by."

She turned to go, and then swiftly stepped toward him, and kissed him, and ran gasping and
laughing up the walk.

The boy gazed after her a moment, wondering if he should follow her, but while he waited she
was gone, and he heard her lock the door after her. Then he limped down the road in a kind
of swoon of joy. Sometimes he tried to whistle--he tried a bar of Schubert's "Serenade," but
consciously stopped. Again and again under his breath as loud as he dared, he called the name
"Ellen" and stood gazing at the moon, and then tried to hippety-hop, but his limp stopped that.
Then he tried whistling the "Miserere," but he pitched it too high, and it ran out, so he sang
as he turned across the commons toward home, and that helped a little; and he opened the door
of his home singing, "How can I leave thee--how can I bear to part?" The light was burning
in the kitchen, and he went to his mother and kissed her. His face was aglow, and she saw what
had happened to him. She put him aside with, "Run on to bed now, sonny; I've got a little work
out here." And he left her. In the sitting room only the moon gave light. He stood at the window
a moment, and then turned to his melodeon. His hands fell on the major chord of "G," and without
knowing what he was playing he began "Largo." He played his soul into his music, and looking
up, whispered the name "Ellen" rapturously over and over, and then as the music mounted to
its climax the whole world's mystery, and his personal thought of the meaning of life revelled
through his brain, and he played on, not stopping at the close but wandering into he knew not
what mazes of harmony. When his hands dropped, he was playing "The Long and Weary Day," and
his mother was standing behind him humming it. When he rose from the bench, she ran her fingers
through his hair and spoke the words of the song, "'My lone watch keeping,' John, 'my lone
watch keeping.' But I think it has been worth while."

Then she left him and he went to bed, with the moon in his room, and the murmur of waters lulling
him to sleep. But he looked out into the sky a long time before his dream came, and then it
slipped in gently through the door of a nameless hope. For he wished to meet her in the moon
that night, but when they did meet, the white veil of the falling waters of the dam blew across
her face and he could not brush it away. For one is bold in dreams.

A little after sunrise the next morning John rode away from his mother's door, on one of his
horses, leading the other one. He was going up the hill to get Bob Hendricks, and the two were
to ride to Lawrence. He had been promised work, carrying newspapers, and the Yankee in him
made him believe he could find work for the other horse. As the boy turned into Main Street
waving his mother good-by, he saw the places where he and Ellen Culpepper had stopped the night
before, and they looked different some way, and he could not realize that he was in the same
street.

As he climbed the hill, he passed General Ward, working in his flower garden, and the man sprang
over the fence and came into the road, and put his hand on the horse's bridle, saying, "Stop
a minute, John: I just wanted to say something." He hesitated a moment before going on: "You
know back where I came from--back in New England--the name of John Barclay stands for a good
deal--more than you can realize, John. Your father was one of the first martyrs of our cause.
I guess your mother never has told you, but I'm going to--your father gave up a business career
for this cause. His father was rich--very rich, and your grandfather was set on your father
going into business." John looked up the hill toward the Hendricks home, and Ward saw it, and
mistook the glance for one of impatience. "Johnnie," said the man, his fine thin, features
glowing with earnestness, "Johnnie--I wish I could get to your heart, boy. I want to make you
hear what I have to say with your soul and not with your ears, and I know youth is so deaf.
Your grandfather was angry when your father entered the ministry and came out here. He thought
it was folly. The old man offered to give fifty thousand dollars to the Kansas-Nebraska cause,
and that would have sent a good many men out here. But your father said no. He said money wouldn't
win this cause. He said personal sacrifice was all that would win it. He said men must give
up themselves, not their money, to make this cause win--and so he came; and there was a terrible
quarrel, and that is why your mother has stayed. She had faith in God, too--faith that her
life some way in His Providence would prove worth something. Your father and mother, John,
believed in God--they believed in a God, not a Moloch; your father's faith has been justified.
The death he died was worth millions to the cause of liberty. It stirred the whole North, as
the miserable little fifty thousand dollars that Abijah Barclay offered never could have done.
But your mother's sacrifice must find its justification in you. And she, not your father, made
the final decision to give up everything for human freedom. She has endured poverty, Johnnie--"
the man's voice was growing tense, and his eyes were ablaze; "you know how she worked, and
if you fail her, if you do not live a consecrated life, John, your mother's life has failed.
I don't mean a pious life; God knows I hate sanctimony. But I mean a life consecrated to some
practical service, to an ideal--to some actual service to your fellows--not money service,
but personal service. Do you understand?" Ward leaned forward and looked into the boy's face.
He took hold of John's arm as he pleaded, "Johnnie--boy--Johnnie, do you understand?"

The boy answered, "Yes, General--I think I get your meaning." He picked up his bridle, and
Ward relaxed his hold on the boy's arm. The man's hand dropped and he sighed, for he saw only
a boy's face, and heard a boy's politeness in the voice that went on, "Thank you, General,
give my love to Miss Lucy." And the youth rode on up the hill.

In a few minutes the boys were riding down the steep clay bank that led to the new iron bridge
across the ford of the Sycamore, and for half an hour they rode chattering through the wood
before they came into the valley and soon were Climbing the bluff which they had seen the night
before from the Culpepper home. On the brow of the bluff Bob said, "Hold on--" He turned his
horse and looked back. The sun was on the town, and across on the opposite hill stood the colonel's
big house with its proud pillars. No trees were about it in those days, and it and the Hendricks
house stood out clearly on the horizon. But on the top of the Culpepper home were two little
figures waving handkerchiefs. The boys waved back, and John thought he could tell Ellen from
her sister, and the night and its joy came back to him, and he was silent.

They had ridden half an hour without speaking when Bob Hendricks said, "Awful fine girls--aren't
they?"

"That's what I've always told you," returned John.

After another quarter of a mile Bob tried it again. "The colonel's a funny old rooster--isn't he?"

"Well, I don't know. That day at the battle of Wilson's Creek when he walked out in front of
a thousand soldiers and got a Union flag and brought it back to the line, he didn't look very
funny. But he's windy all right."

Again, as they crossed a creek and the horses were drinking, Bob said: "Father thinks General
Ward's a crank. He says Ward will keep harping on about those war bonds, and quarrelling because
the soldiers got their pay in paper money and the bondholders in gold, until people will think
every one in high places is a thief."

"Oh, Ward's all right," answered John. "He's just talking; he likes an argument, I guess. He's
kind of built that way."

It was a poor starved-to-death school that the boys found at Lawrence in those days; with half
a dozen instructors--most of whom were still in their twenties; with books lent by the instructors,
and with appliances devised by necessity. But John was happy; he was making money with his
horses, doing chores for his board, and carrying papers night and morning besides. The boy's
industry was the marvel of the town. His limp got him sympathy, and he capitalized the sympathy.
Indeed, he would have capitalized his soul, if it had been necessary. For his Yankee blood
was beginning to come out. Before he had been in school a year he had swapped, traded, and
saved until he had two teams, and was working them with hired drivers on excavation contracts.
In his summer vacations he went to Topeka and worked his two teams, and by some sharp practice
got the title to a third. He was rollicking, noisy, good-natured, but under the boyish veneer
was a hard indomitable nature. He was becoming a stickler for his rights in every transaction.

"John," said Bob, one day after John had cut a particularly lamentable figure, gouging a driver
in a settlement, "don't you know that your rights are often others' wrongs?"

John was silent a moment. He looked at the driver moving away, and then the boy's face set
hard and he said: "Well--what's the use of blubbering over him? If I don't get it, some one
else will. I'm no charitable institution for John Walruff's brewery!" And he snapped the rubber
band on his wallet viciously, and turned to his books.

But on the other hand he wrote every other day to his mother and every other day to Ellen Culpepper
with unwavering precision. He told his mother the news, and he told Ellen Culpepper the news
plus some Emerson, something more of "Faust," with such dashes of Longfellow and Ruskin as
seemed to express his soul. He never wrote to Ellen of money, and so strong was her influence
upon him that when he had written to her after his quarrel with the driver, he went out in
the night, hunted the man up, and paid him the disputed wages. Then he mailed Ellen Culpepper's
letter, and was a lover living in an ethereal world as he walked home babbling her name in
whispers to the stars. Often when this mood was not upon him, and a letter was due to Ellen,
he went downstairs in the house where he lived and played the piano to bring her near to him.
That never failed to change his face as by a miracle. "When John comes upstairs," wrote Bob
Hendricks to Molly, "he is as one in a dream, with the mists of the music in his eyes. I never
bother him then. He will not speak to me, nor do a thing in the world, until that letter is
written, sealed, and stamped. Then he gets up, yawns and smiles sheepishly and perhaps hits
me with a book or punches me with his fist, and then we wrestle over the room and the bed like
bear cubs. After the wrestle he comes back to himself. I wonder why?"

And Ellen Culpepper read those letters from John Barclay over and over, and curiously enough
she understood them; for there is a telepathy between spirits that meet as these two children's
souls had met, and in that concord words drop out and only thoughts are merchandized. Her spirit
grew with his, and so "through all the world she followed him."

But there came a gray dawn of a May morning when John Barclay clutched his bedfellow and whispered,
"Bob, Bob--look, look." When the awakened one saw nothing, John tried to scream, but could
only gasp, "Don't you see Ellen--there--there by the table?" But whatever it was that startled
him fluttered away on a beam of sunrise, and Bob Hendricks rose with the frightened boy, and
went to his work with him.

Two days later a letter came telling him that Ellen Culpepper was dead.

Now death--the vast baffling mystery of death--is Fate's strongest lever to pry men from their
philosophy. And death came into this boy's life before his creed was set and hard, and in those
first days while he walked far afield, he turned his face to the sky in his lonely sorrow,
and when he cried to Heaven there was a silence.

So his heart curdled, and you kind gentlemen of the jury who are to pass on the case of John
Barclay in this story, remember that he was only twenty years old, and that in all his life
there was nothing to symbolize the joy of sacrifice except this young girl. All his boyish
life she had nurtured the other self in his soul,--the self that might have learned to give
and be glad in the giving. And when she went, he closed his Emerson and opened his Trigonometry,
and put money in his purse.[1]

There came a time when Ellen Culpepper was to him as a dream. But she lived in her mother's
eyes, and through all the years that followed the mother watched the little girl grow to maturity
and into middle life with the other girls of her age. And even when the little headstone on
the Hill slanted in sad neglect, Mrs. Culpepper's old eyes still saw Ellen growing old with
her playmates. And she never saw John Barclay that she did not think of Ellen--and and what
she would have made of him.

And what would she have made of him? Maybe a poet, maybe a dreamer of dreams--surely not the
hard, grinding, rich man that he became in this world.

FOOTNOTE:

[1] To the Publisher.--"In returning the Mss. of the life of John
    Barclay, which you sent for my verification as to certain dates and
    incidents, let me first set down, before discussing matters pertaining
    to his later life, my belief that your author has found in the death
    of Ellen Culpepper an incident, humble though it is, that explains
    much in the character of Mr. Barclay. The incident probably produced a
    mental shock like that of a psychological earthquake, literally
    sealing up the spring of his life as it was flowing into consciousness
    at that time, and the John Barclay of his boyhood and youth became
    subterranean, to appear later in life after the weakening of his
    virility under the strain of the crushing events of his fifties. Yet
    the subterranean Barclay often appeared for a moment in his life,
    glowed in some kind act and sank again. Ellen Culpepper explains it
    all. How many of our lives are similarly divided, forced upward or
    downward by events, Heaven only knows. We do not know our own souls. I
    am sure John never knew of the transformation. Surely 'we are
    fearfully and wonderfully made.'... The other dates and incidents are
    as I have indicated.... Allow me to thank you for your kindness in
    sending me the Mss., and permit me to subscribe myself,

                                                 "Yours faithfully,

                                                       "Philemon R. Ward."

CHAPTER VI

John Barclay returned to Sycamore Ridge in 1872 a full-fledged young man. He was of a slight
build and rather pale of face, for five years indoors had rubbed the sunburn off. During the
five years he had been absent from Sycamore Ridge he had acquired a master's degree from the
state university, and a license to practise law. He was distinctly dapper, in the black and
white checked trousers, the flowered cravat, and tight-fitting coat of the period; and the
first Monday after he and his mother went to the Congregational Church, whereat John let out
his baritone voice, he was invited to sing in the choir. Bob Hendricks came home a year before
John, and with Bob and Watts McHurdie singing tenor at one end of the choir, and John and Philemon
Ward holding down the other end of the line, with Mrs. Ward, Nellie Logan, Molly Culpepper,
and Jane Mason of Minneola,--grown up out of short dresses in his absence,--all in gay colours
between the sombre clothes of the men, the choir in the Congregational Church was worth going
miles to see--if not to hear.

Now you know, of course,--or if you do not know, it is high time you were learning,--that when
Fate gives a man who can sing a head of curly hair, the devil, who is after us all, quits worrying
about that young person. For the Old Boy knows that a voice and curly hair are mortgages on
a young man's soul that few young fellows ever pay off. Now there was neither curly head nor
music in all the Barclay tribe, and when John sang "Through the trees the night winds murmur,
murmur low and sweet," his mother could shut her eyes and hear Uncle Leander, the black sheep
of three generations of Thatchers. So that the fact that John had something over a thousand
dollars to put in General Hendricks' bank, and owned half a dozen town lots in the various
additions to the town, made the mother thankful for the Grandfather Barclay's blood in him.
But she saw a soul growing into the boy's face that frightened her. What others admired as
strength she feared, for she knew it was ruthlessness. What others called shrewdness she, remembering
his Grandfather Barclay, knew might grow into blind, cruel greed, and when she thought of his
voice and his curly hair, and recalled Uncle Leander, the curly-headed, singing ne'er-do-well
of her family, and then in the boy's hardening mouth and his canine jaw saw Grandfather Barclay
sneering at her, she was uncertain which blood she feared most. So she managed it that John
should go into partnership with General Ward, and Bob Hendricks managed it that the firm should
have offices over the bank, and also that the firm was made attorneys for the bank,--the highest
mark of distinction that may come to a law firm in a country town. The general realized it
and was proud. But he thought the young man took it too much as a matter of course.

"John," said the general, one day, as they were dividing their first five-hundred-dollar fee,
"you're a lucky dog. Everything comes so easily with you. Let me tell you something; I've figured
this out: if you don't give it back some way--give it back to the world, or society, or your
fellows,--or God, if you like to bunch your good luck under one head,--you're surely going
to suffer for it. There is no come-easy-go-easy in this world. I've learned that much of the
scheme of things."

"You mean that I've got to pay as I go, or Providence will keep books on me and foreclose?"
asked John, as he stood patting the roll of bills in his trousers pocket.

"That's the idea, son," smiled the elder man.

The younger man put his hand to his chin and grinned. "I suppose," he replied, "that's why
so many men keep the title to their religious proclivities in their wife's name." He went out
gayly, and the elder man heard the boyish limp almost tripping down the stairs. Ward walked
to the window, straightening his white tie, and stood looking into the street at the young
man shaking hands and bowing and raising his hat as he went. Ward's hair was graying at the
temples, and his thin smooth face was that of a man who spends many hours considering many
things, and he sighed as he saw John turn a corner and disappear.

"No, Lucy, that's not it exactly," said the general that afternoon, as he brought the sprinkler
full of water to the flower bed for the eighth time, and picketed little Harriet Beecher Ward
out of the watermelon patch, and wheeled the baby's buggy to the four-o'clocks, where Mrs.
Ward was working. "It isn't that he is conceited--the boy isn't that at all. He just seems
to have too little faith in God and too much in the ability of John Barclay. He thinks he can
beat the game--can take out more happiness for himself than he puts in for others."

The wife looked up and put back her sunbonnet as she said, "Yes, I believe his mother thinks
something of the kind."

One of the things that surprised John when he came home from the university was the prominence
of Lige Bemis in the town. When John left Sycamore Ridge to go to school, Bemis was a drunken
sign-painter married to a woman who a few years before had been the scandal of half a dozen
communities. And now though Mrs. Bemis was still queen only of the miserable unpainted Bemis
domicile in the sunflowers at the edge of town, Lige Bemis politically was a potentate of some
power. General Hendricks consulted Bemis about politics. Often he was found in the back room
of the bank, and Colonel Culpepper, although he was an unterrified Democrat, in his campaign
speeches referred to Bemis as "a diamond in the rough." John was sitting on a roll of leather
one day in Watts McHurdie's shop talking of old times when Watts recalled the battle of Sycamore
Ridge, and the time when Bemis came to town with the Red Legs and frightened Mrs. Barclay.

"Yes--and now look at him," exclaimed John, "dressed up like a gambler, and referred to in
the Banner as 'Hon. E. W. Bemis'! How did he do it?"

McHurdie sewed two or three long stitches in silence. He leaned over from his bench to throw
his tobacco quid in the sawdust box under the rusty stove, then the little man scraped his
fuzzy jaw reflectively with his blackened hand as if about to speak, but he thought better
of it and waxed his thread. He showed his yellow teeth in a smile, and motioned John to come
closer. Then he put his head forward, and whispered confidentially:--

"What'd you ruther do or go a-fishing?"

"But why?" persisted the young man.

"Widder who?" returned Watts, grinning and putting his hand to his ear.

When John repeated his question the third time, McHurdie said:--

"I know a way you can get rich mighty quick, sonny." And when the boy refused to "bite," Watts
went on: "If any one asks you what Watts McHurdie thinks about politics so long as he is in
the harness business, you just take the fellow upstairs, and pull down the curtain, and lock
the door, and tell him you don't know, and not to tell a living soul."

With Bob Hendricks, John had little better success in solving the mystery of the rise of Bemis.
"Father says he's effective, and he would rather have him for him than against him," was the
extent of Bob's explanation.

Ward's answer was more to the point. He said: "Lige Bemis is a living example of the power
of soft soap in politics. We know--every man in this county knows--that Lige Bemis was a horse
thief before the war, and that he was a cattle thief and a camp-follower during the war; and
after the war we know what he was--he and the woman he took up with. Yet here he has been a
member of the legislature and is beginning to be a figure in state politics,--at least the
one to whom the governor and all the fellows write when they want information about this county.
Why? I'll tell you: because he's committed every crime and can't denounce one and goes about
the country extenuating things and oiling people up with his palaver. Now he says he is a lawyer--yes,
sir, actually claims to be a lawyer, and brought his diploma into court two years ago, and
they accepted it. But I know, and the court knows, and the bar knows it was forged; it belonged
to his dead brother back in Hornellsville, New York. But Hendricks downstairs said we needed
Lige in the county-seat case, so he is a member of the bar, taking one hundred per cent for
collecting accounts for Eastern people, and giving the country a black eye. A man told me he
was on over fifty notes for people at the bank; he signs with every one, and Hendricks never
bothers him. He managed to get into all the lodges, right after the war when they were reorganized,
and he sits up with the sick, and is pall-bearer--regular professional pall-bearer, and I don't
doubt gets a commission for selling coffins from Livingston." Ward rose from the table his
full six feet and put his hands in his pocket and stretched his legs as he added, "And when
you think how many Bemises in the first, second, or third degree there are in this government,
you wonder if the Democrats weren't right when they declared the war was a failure."

The general spoke as he did to John partly in anger and partly because he thought the youth
needed the lesson he was trying to implant. "You know, Martin," explained the general, a few
days later, to Colonel Culpepper, "John has come home a Barclay--not a Barclay of his father's
stripe. He has taken back, as they say. It's old Abijah--with the mouth and jaw of a wolf.
I caught him palavering with a juror the other day while we had a case trying."

The colonel rested his hands on his knees a moment in meditation and smiled as he replied:
"Still, there's his mother, General. Don't ever forget that the boy's mother is Mary Barclay;
she has bred most of the wolf out of him. And in the end her blood will tell."

And now observe John Barclay laying the footing stones of his fortune. He put every dollar
he could get into town lots, paying for all he bought and avoiding mortgages. Also he joined
Colonel Culpepper in putting the College Heights upon the market. "For what," explained the
colonel, when the propriety of using the name for his addition was questioned, when no college
was there nor any prospect of a college for years to come--"what is plainer to the prophetic
eye than that time will bring to this magnificent city an institution of learning worthy of
our hopes? I have noticed," added the colonel, waving his cigar broadly about him, "that learning
is a shy goddess; she has to be coaxed--hence on these empyrean heights we have provided for
a seat of learning; therefore College Heights. Look at the splendid vista, the entrancing view,
in point of fact." It was the large white plumes dancing in the colonel's prophetic eyes. So
it happened that more real estate buyers than clients came to the office of Ward and Barclay.
But as the general that fall had been out of the office running for Congress on the Greeley
ticket, still protesting against the crime of paying the soldiers in paper and the bondholders
in gold, he did not miss the clients, and as John saw to it that there was enough law business
to keep Mrs. Ward going, the general returned from the canvass overwhelmingly beaten, but not
in the least dismayed; and as Jake Dolan put it, "The general had his say and the people had
their choice--so both are happy."

As the winter deepened John and Colonel Culpepper planted five hundred elm trees on the campus
on College Heights, lining three broad avenues leading from the town to the campus with the
trees. John rode into the woods and picked the trees, and saw that each one was properly set.
And the colonel noticed that the finest trees were on Ellen Avenue and spoke of it to Mrs.
Culpepper, who only said, "Yes, pa--that's just like him." And the colonel looked puzzled.
And when the colonel added, "They say he is shining up to that Mason girl from Minneola, that
comes here with Molly," his wife returned, "Yes, I expected that sooner than now." The colonel
gave the subject up. The ways of women were past his finding out. But Mrs. Culpepper had heard
Jane Mason sing a duet in church with John Barclay, and the elder woman had heard in the big
contralto voice of the girl something not meant for the preacher. And Mrs. Culpepper heard
John answer it, so she knew what he did not know, what Jane Mason did not know, and what only
Molly Culpepper suspected, and Bob Hendricks scoffed at.

As for John, he said to Bob: "I know why you always want me to go over with you and Molly to
get the Mason girl--by cracky, I'm the only fellow in town that will let you and Molly have
the back seat coming home without a fuss! No, Robbie--you don't fool your Uncle John." And
so when there was to be special music at the church, or when any other musical event was expected,
John and Bob would get a two-seated buggy, and drive to Minneola and bring the soloist back
with them. And there would be dances and parties, and coming from Minneola and going back there
would be much singing. "The fox is on the hill, I hear him calling still," was a favourite,
but "Come where the lilies bloom" rent the midnight air between the rival towns many times
that winter and spring of '73. And never once did John try to get the back seat. But there
came a time when Bob Hendricks told him that Molly told him that Jane had said that Molly and
Bob were pigs--never to do any of the driving. And the next time there was a trip to Minneola,
John said as the young people were seated comfortably for the return trip, "Molly, I heard
you said that I was a pig to do all the driving, and not let you and Bob have a chance. Was
that true?"

"No--but do you want to know who did say it?" answered Molly, and Jane Mason looked straight
ahead and cut in with, "Molly Culpepper, if you say another word, I'll never speak to you as
long as I live." But she glanced down at Barclay, who caught her eye and saw the smile she
was swallowing, and he cried: "I don't believe you ever said it, Molly,--it must have been
some one else." And when they had all had their say,--all but Jane Mason,--John saw that she
was crying, and the others had to sing for ten minutes without her, before they could coax
away her temper. And crafty as he was, he did not know it was temper--he thought it was something
entirely different.

For the craft of youth always is clumsy. The business of youth is to fight and to mate. Wherever
there is young blood, there is "boot and horse," and John Barclay in his early twenties felt
in him the call for combat. It came with the events that were forming about him. For the war
between the states had left the men restless and unsatisfied who had come into the plain to
make their homes. They had heard and followed in their youth the call John Barclay was hearing,
and after the war was over, they were still impatient with the obstacles they found in their
paths. So Sycamore Ridge and Minneola, being rival towns, had to fight. The men who made these
towns knew no better settlement than the settlement by force. And even during his first six
months at home from school, when John sniffed the battle from afar, he was glad in his soul
that the fight was coming. Sycamore Ridge had the county-seat; but Minneola, having a majority
of the votes in the county, was trying to get the county-seat, and the situation grew so serious
for Sycamore Ridge that General Hendricks felt it necessary to defeat Philemon Ward for the
state senate so that Sycamore Ridge could get a law passed that would prevent Minneola's majority
from changing the county-seat. This was done by a law which Hendricks secured, giving the county
commissioners the right to build a court-house by direct levy, without a vote of the people,--a
court-house so large that it would settle the county-seat matter out of hand.

The general, however, took no chances even with his commissioners. For he had his son elected
as one, and with the knowledge that John was investing in real estate in the Ridge and had
an eye for the main chance, the general picked John for the other commissioner. The place was
on the firing-line of the battle, and John took it almost greedily. As the spring of '73 opened,
there were alarms and rumours of strife on every breeze, and youth was happy and breathed the
fight into its nostrils like a balsam. For all the world of Sycamore Ridge was young then,
and all the trees were green in the eyes of the men who kept up the town. Each town had its
hired desperadoes, and there were pickets about each village, and drills in the streets of
the two towns, and a martial spirit all over the county. And as John limped about his tasks
in those stirring spring days, he felt that he was coming into his own. But it was all a curious
mock combat,--that between the towns,--for though the pickets drilled, and the bad men swaggered
on the streets, and the bullies roared their anathemas, the social relations between the towns
were not seriously disturbed. Youths and maidens came from Minneola to the Ridge for parties
and dances, and from the Ridge young men went to Minneola to weddings and festivals of a social
nature unmolested, for it takes a real war--and sometimes more than that--to put a bar across
the mating ground of youth. So Bob and Molly and John drove to Minneola time and again for
Jane Mason, and other boys and girls came and went from town to town, while the bitterness
and the bickering and the mimic war between the rival communities went on.

Dolan was made sheriff, and Bemis county attorney, and with those two officers and a majority
of the county commissioners the Ridge had the forces of administration with her. And so one
night Minneola came with her wrinkled front of war; viz., forty fighting men under Gabriel
Carnine and an ox team, prepared to take the county records by force and haul them home by
main strength. But Lycurgus Mason, whose wife had locked him in the cellar that night to keep
him from danger, was the cackling goose that saved Rome; for when, having escaped his wife's
vigilance, he came riding down the wind from Minneola to catch up with his fellow-townsmen,
his clatter aroused the men of the Ridge, and they hurried to the court-house and greeted the
invaders with half a thousand armed men in the court-house yard. And in a crisis where craft
and cunning would not help him, courage came out of John Barclay's soul for the first time
and into his life as he limped through the guns into the open to explain to the men from Minneola
when they finally arrived that Lycurgus Mason had not betrayed them, but had rushed into the
town, thinking his friends were there ahead of him. It was a plucky thing for John to do, considering
that his death would stop the making of the levy for the court-house that was to be recorded
in a few days. But the young man's blood tingled with joy as he jumped the court-house fence
and went back to his men. There was something like a smile from Jane Mason in his joy, but
chiefly it was the joy that youth has in daring, that thrilled him. And the next day, or perhaps
it was the next,--at any rate, it was a Sunday late in June,--when an armed posse from Minneola
came charging down on the town at noon, John ran from his office unseen, over the roofs of
buildings upon which as a boy he had romped, and ducking through a second-story window in Frye's
store, got two kegs of powder, ran out of the back door, under the exposed piling supporting
the building, put the two kegs of powder in a wooden culvert under the ammunition wagons of
the Minneola men, who were battling with the town in the street, and taking a long fuse in
his teeth, crawled back to the alley, lit the fuse, and ran into the street to look into the
revolver of J. Lord Lee--late of the Red Legs--and warn him to run or be blown up with the
wagons. And when the explosion came, knocking him senseless, he woke up a hero, with the town
bending over him, and Minneola's forces gone.

And so John and the town had their fling together. And we who sit among our books or by our
fire--or if not that by our iron radiator exuding its pleasance and comfort--should not sniff
at that day when blood pulsed quicker and joy was keener, and life was more vivid than it is
to-day.

Thirty-five years later--in August, 1908, to be exact--the general, in his late seventies,
sat in McHurdie's harness shop while the poet worked at his bench. On the floor beside the
general was the historical edition of the Sycamore Ridge Banner--rather an elaborate affair,
printed on glossy paper and bedecked with many photogravures of old scenes and old faces. A
page of the paper was devoted to the County Seat War of '73. The general had furnished the
material for most of the article,--though he would not do the writing,--and he held the sheet
with the story upon it in his hand. As he read it in the light of that later day, it seemed
a sordid story of chicanery and violence--the sort of an episode that one would expect to find
following a great war. The general read and reread the old story of the defeat of Minneola,
and folded his paper and rolled it into a wand with which he conjured up his spirit of philosophy.
"Heigh-ho," he sighed. "We don't know much, do we?"

McHurdie made no reply. He bent closely over his work, and the general went on: "I was mighty
mad when Hendricks defeated me for the state senate in '72, just to get that law passed cheating
Minneola out of a fair vote on the court-house question. But it's come out all right."

The harness maker sewed on, and the general reflected. Finally the little man at the bench
turned his big dimmed eyes on his visitor, and asked, "Did you think, General, that you knew
more than the Lord about making things come out right?" There was no reply and McHurdie continued,
"Well, you don't--I've got that settled in my mind."

There was silence for a time, and Ward kept beating his leg with the paper wand in his hand.
"Watts," said the general, finally, "I know what it was--it was youth. John Barclay had to
go through that period. He had to fight and wrangle and grapple with life as he did. Do you
remember that night the Minneola fellows came up with their ox team and their band of killers
to take the county records--" and there was more of it--the old story of the town's wild days
that need not be recorded, and in the end, in answer to some query from the general on John's
courage, Watts replied, "John was always a bold little fice--he never lacked brass."

"Was he going with Jane Mason then, Watts,--I forget?" queried the general.

"Yes--yes," replied McHurdie. "Don't you remember that very next night she sang in the choir--well,
John had brought her over from Minneola two days before, and that Sunday when the little devil
went in the culvert across Main Street and blew up the Minneola wagons, Jane was in town that
day--I remember that; and man--man--I heard her voice say things to him in the duet that night
that she would have been ashamed to put in words."

The two old men were silent. "That was youth, too, Watts,--fighting and loving, and loving
and fighting,--that's youth," sighed the general.

"Well, Johnnie got his belly full of it in his day, as old Shakespeare says, Phil--and in your
day you had yours, too. Every dog, General--every dog--you know." The two voices were silent,
as two old men looked back through the years.

McHurdie put the strap he was working upon in the water, and turned with his spectacles in
his hands to his comrade. "Maybe it's this way: with a man, it's fighting and loving before
we get any sense; and with a town it's the same way, and I guess with the race it's the same
way--fighting and loving and growing sensible after it's over. Maybe so--maybe so, Phil, comrade,
but man, man," he said as he climbed on his bench, "it's fine to be a fool!"

CHAPTER VII

In Sycamore Ridge every one knows Watts McHurdie, and every one takes pride in the fact that
far and wide the Ridge is known as Watts McHurdie's town, and this too in spite of the fact
that from Sycamore Ridge Bob Hendricks gained his national reputation as a reformer and the
further fact that when the Barclays went to New York or Chicago or to California for the winter
in their private car, they always registered from Sycamore Ridge at the great hotels. One would
think that the town would be known more as Hendricks' town or Barclay's town; but no--nothing
of the kind has happened, and when the rich and the great go forth from the Ridge, people say:
"Oh, yes, Sycamore Ridge--that's Watts McHurdie's town, who wrote--" but people from the Ridge
let the inquirers get no farther; they say: "Exactly--it's Watts McHurdie's town--and you ought
to see him ride in the open hack with the proprietor of a circus when it comes to the Ridge
and all the bands and the calliope are playing Watts' song. The way the people cheer shows
that it is really Watts McHurdie's town." So when Colonel Martin Culpepper wrote the "Biography
of Watts McHurdie" which was published together with McHurdie's "Complete Poetical and Philosophical
Works," there was naturally much discussion, and the town was more or less divided as to what
part of the book was the best. But the old settlers,--those who, during the drouth of '60,
ate mince pies with pumpkins as the fruit and rabbit meat as the filling and New Orleans black-strap
as the sweetening, the old settlers who knew Watts before he became famous,--they like best
of all the chapters in the colonel's Biography the one entitled "At Hymen's Altar." And here
is a curious thing about it: in that chapter there is really less of Watts and considerably
more of Colonel Martin Culpepper than in any other chapter.

But the newcomers, those who came in the prosperous days of the 70's or 80's, never could understand
the partiality of the old settlers for the "Hymen's Altar" chapter. Lycurgus Mason also always
took the view that the "Hymen" chapter was drivel.

"Now, John, be sensible--" Lycurgus insisted one night in 1903 when the two were eating supper
in Barclay's private car on a side-track in Arizona; "don't be like my wife--she always drools
over that chapter, too. But you know my wife--" Lycurgus always referred to Mrs. Mason with
a grand gesture as to his dog or his horse, which were especially desirable chattels. "My wife,--it's
just like a woman,--she sits and reads that, and laughs and weeps, and giggles and sniffs,
and I say, 'What's the matter with you, anyway?'"

John Barclay pushed a button. To the porter he said, "Bring me that little red book in my satchel."
The book had been published but a few weeks, and John always carried a copy around with him
in those days to give to a friend. When the porter brought the book, Barclay read aloud, "Ah,
truly hath the poet said, 'Marriages are made in heaven.'"

But Lycurgus Mason pulled his napkin from under his chin and moved back from the table, dusting
the crumbs from his obviously Sunday clothes. "There you go--that's it; 'as the poet says.'
John, if you heard that 'as the poet says' as often as I do--" He could not finish the figure.
But he sniffed out his disgust with "as the poet says." "It wasn't so bad when we were in the
hotel, and she was busy with something else. But now--but now--" he repeated it the third time,
"but now--honest, every time that woman goes to get up a paper for the Hypatia Club, she gets
me in the parlour, and rehearses it to me, and the dad-binged thing is simply packed full of
'as the poet sayses.' And about that marriages being made in heaven, I tell my wife this: I
say, 'Maybe so, but if they are, I know one that was made on a busy day when the angels were
thinking of something else.'"

And John Barclay, who knew Mrs. Mason and knew Lycurgus, knew that he would as soon think of
throwing a bomb at the President as to say such a thing to her; so John asked credulously:
"You did? Well, well! Say, what did she say to that?"

"That's it--" responded Lycurgus. "That's it. What could she say? I had her." He walked the
length of the room proudly, with his hands thrust into his pockets.

Barclay moved his chair to the rear of the car, where he sat smoking and looking into the clear
star-lit heavens above the desert. And his mind went back thirty years to the twilight in June
after he had set off the powder keg in the culvert under Main Street in Sycamore Ridge, and
he tried to remember how Jane Mason got over from Minneola--did he bring her over the day before,
or was she visiting at the Culpeppers', or did she come over that day? It puzzled him, but
he remembered well that in the Congregational choir he and Jane sang a duet in an anthem, "He
giveth his beloved sleep." And he hummed the old aria, a rather melancholy tune, as he sat
on the car platform in Arizona that night, and her voice came back--a deep sweet contralto
that took "G" below middle "C" as clearly as a tenor, and in her lower register there was a
passion and a fire that did not blaze in the higher notes. For those notes were merely girlish
and untrained. That June night in '73 was the first night that he and Jane Mason ever had lagged
behind as they walked up the hill with Bob and Molly. And what curious things stick in the
memory! The man on the rear of the car remembered that as they left the business part of Main
Street behind and walked up the hill, they came to a narrow cross-walk, a single stone in width,
and that they tried to walk upon it together, and that his limp made him jostle her, and she
said, "We mustn't do that."

"What?" he inquired.

"Oh--you know--walk on one stone. You know what it's a sign of."

"Do you believe in signs?" he asked. She kept hold of his arm, and kept him from leaving the
stone. She was taller than he by a head, and he hated himself for it. They managed to keep
together until they crossed the street and came into the broader walk. Then she drew a relieved
breath and answered: "Oh, I don't know. Sometimes I do." They were lagging far behind their
friends, and the girl hummed a tune, then she said, "You know I've always believed in my 'Star
light--star bright--first star I've seen to-night,' just as I believe in my prayers." And she
looked up and said, "Oh, I haven't said it yet." She picked out her star and said the rhyme,
closing with, "I wish I may, I wish I might, have the wish I wish to-night."

And sitting on the car end in Arizona thirty years after, he tried to find her star in the
firmament above him. He was a man in his fifties then, and the night she showed him her star
was more than thirty years gone by. But he remembered. We are curious creatures, we men, and
we remember much more than we pretend to. For our mothers in many cases were women, and we
take after them.

As Barclay stood in the door of his car debating whether or not to go in, the light from the
chimney of the sawmill on the hill attracted his attention, and because he was in a mood for
it, the flying sparks trailing across the night sky reminded him of the fireworks that Fourth
of July in 1873, when he and Jane Mason and Bob and Molly spent the day together, picnicking
down in the timber and coming home to dance on the platform under the cottonwood-bough pavilion
in the evening. It was a riotous day, and Bob and Molly being lovers of long acceptance assumed
a paternal attitude to John and Jane that was charming in the main, but sometimes embarrassing.
And of all the chatter he only remembered that Jane said: "Think how many years these old woods
have been here--how many hundred years--maybe when the mound-builders were here! Don't you
suppose that they are used to--to young people--oh, maybe Indian lovers, and all that, and
don't you suppose the trees see these young people loving and marrying, and growing old and
ugly and unhappy, and that they some way feel that they are just a little tired of it all?"

If any one replied to her, he had no recollection of it, for after that he saw the dance and
heard the music, and then events seemed to slip along without registering in his memory. There
must have been the fifth and the sixth of July in 1873, for certainly there was the seventh,
and that was Sunday; he remembered that well enough, for in the morning there was a council
in his office to discuss ways and means for the week's work in the county-seat trouble. Tuesday
was the day which the new law designated as the one when the levy must be made for the court-house
improvements that would hold the county-seat in Sycamore Ridge. At four o'clock, after the
Sunday council, John and Bob drove out of Sheriff Jake Dolan's stable with his best two-seated
buggy, and told him they would be back from Minneola at midnight or thereabout after taking
Jane Mason home, and the two boys drove down Main Street with the girls, waving to every one
with their hats, while the girls waved their parasols, and the town smiled; for though all
the world loves a lover, in Sycamore Ridge it has been the custom, since the days when Philemon
Ward first took Miss Lucy out to drive, for all the town to jeer at lovers as they pass down
street in buggies and carriages! And so thirty years slipped from Barclay as he stood in the
doorway of his car looking at the Arizona stars. A flicker of light high up in the sky-line
seemed to move. It was the headlight of a train coming over the mountain. A switchman with
a lantern was passing near the car, and Barclay called to him, "Is that headlight No. 2?" And
when the man affirmed Barclay's theory, he asked, "How long does it take it to get down here?"

"Oh, she comes a-humming," replied the man. "If she doesn't jump the track, she'll be down
in eight minutes."

Inside the car Barclay heard a watch snap, and knew that Lycurgus Mason didn't believe anything
of the kind and proposed to get at the facts. So Barclay sat down on the platform; but his
mind went back to the old days, and the ride through the woods along the Sycamore that Sunday
night in July came to him, with all its fragrance and stillness and sweetness. He recalled
that they came into the prairie just as the meadow-lark was crying its last plaintive twilight
trill, and the western sky was glowing with a rim of gold upon the tips of the clouds. The
beauty of the prairie and the sky and the calm of the evening entered into their hearts, and
they were silent. Then they left the prairie and went into the woods again, on the river road.
And before they came out of that road into the upland, Fate turned a screw that changed the
lives of all of them. For in a turn of the road, in a deep cut made by a ravine, Gabriel Carnine,
making the last stand for Minneola, stepped into the path and took the horses by the bridles.
The shock that John felt that night when he realized what had happened came back even across
the years. And as the headlight far up in the mountain above the desert slipped into a tunnel,
though it flashed out again in a few seconds, while it was gone, all the details of the kidnapping
of the young people in the buggy hurried across his mind. Even the old anxiety that he felt
lest Sycamore Ridge would think him a traitor to their cause, when they should find that he
was not there to sign the tax levy and save the court-house and the county-seat, came back
to him as he gazed at the mountain, waiting for the headlight, and he remembered how he made
a paper trail of torn bits from a Congregational hymn-book, left in Bob's pocket from the morning
service, dropping the bits under the buggy wheels in the dust so that the men from the Ridge
would see the trail and follow the captives. In his memory he saw Jake Dolan, who had followed
the trail where it led to Carnine's farm, come stumbling into the farm-house Tuesday where
they were hidden, and John, in memory, heard Jake whisper that he had left his dog with the
rescuing party to lead the rescuers to him if he was on the right trail and did not return.

And then as Barclay's mind went back to the long Tuesday, when he should have been at the Ridge
to sign the tax levy, the headlight flashed out of the tunnel. But these were fading pictures.
The one image that was in his mind--clear through all the years--was of a wood and a tree,--a
great, spreading, low-boughed elm, near Carnine's house where the young people were held prisoners,
and Jane Mason sitting with her back against the tree, and lying on the dry grass at her feet
his own slight figure; sometimes he was looking up at her over his brow, and sometimes his
head rested on the roots of the tree beside her, and she looked down at him and they talked,
and no one was near. For through youth into middle life, and into the dawn of old age, That
Day was marked in his life. The day of the month--he forgot which it was. The day of the week--that
also left him, and there came a time when he had to figure back to recall the year; but for
all that, there was a radiance in his life, an hour of calm joy that never left him, and he
called it only--That Day. That Day is in every heart; in yours, my dear fat Mr. Jones, and
in yours, my good dried-up Mrs. Smith; and in yours, Mrs. Goodman, and in yours, Mr. Badman;
maybe it is upon the sea, or in the woods, or among the noises of some great city--but it is
That Day. And no other day of all the thousands that have come to you is like it.

Why should he remember the ugly farm-yard, the hard faces of the men, the straw-covered frame
they called a barn, and the unpainted house? All these things passed by him unrecorded, as
did the miserable fare of the table, the hard bed at night, and the worry that must have gnawed
at his nerves to know that perhaps the town was thinking him false to it, or that his mother,
guessing the truth, was in pain with terror, or to feel that a rescuing party coming at the
wrong time would bring on a fight in which the girls would be killed. Only the picture of Jane
Mason, fine and lithe and strong, with the pink cheeks of twenty, and the soft curves of childhood
still playing about her chin and throat as he saw it from the ground at her feet,--that picture
was etched into his heart, and with it the recollection of her eyes when she said, "John,--you
don't think I--I knew of this--beforehand, do you?" Just that sentence--those were the only
words left in his memory of a day's happiness. And he never heard a locust whirring in a tree
that it did not bring back the memory of the spreading tree and the touch--the soft, quick,
shy touch of her fingers in his hair, and the fire that was in her eyes.

It was in the dusk of Tuesday evening that Jake Dolan's dog came into the yard where the captives
were, and Jake disowned him, and joined the men who stoned the faithful creature out to the
main road. But the prisoners knew that their rescuers would follow the dog, so at supper the
three men from the Ridge sat together on a bench at the table while Mrs. Carnine and the girls
waited on the men--after the fashion of country places in those days. Dolan managed to say
under his breath to Barclay, "It's all right--but the girls must stay in the house to-night."
And John knew that if he and Bob escaped with horses before ten o'clock, they could reach the
Ridge in time to sign the levy before midnight. Darkness fell at eight, and a screech-owl in
the wood complained to the night. Dolan rose and stretched and yawned, and then began to talk
of going to bed, and Gabriel Carnine, whose turn it was to sleep because he had been up two
nights, shuffled off to the straw-covered stable to lie down with the Texan who was his bunk
mate, leaving half a dozen men to guard the prisoners. An hour later the screech-owl in the
wood murmured again, this time much closer, and Dolan rose and took off his hat and threw it
in the straw beside him. He was looking at the time anxiously toward the wood. But the next
moment from behind the barn in the opposite direction something attracted them. It was a glare
of light, and the guards noticed it at the same time. A last year's straw stack next to the
barn was afire. Jane Mason was standing in the back door of the house, and in the hurried blur
of moving events John divined that she had slipped out and fired the stack. In an instant there
was confusion. The men were on their feet. They must fight fire, or the barn would go. Dolan
ran with the men to the straw stack. "We'll help you," he cried. "I'll wake Gabe." There was
hurrrying for water pails. The women appeared, crying shrilly, and in the glare that reddened
the sky the yard seemed, full of mad men racing heedlessly.

"John," whispered Jane, coming up to him as he drew water from the well, "let me do this. There
are two horses in the pasture. You and Bob go--fly--fly." The Texan came running from the barn,
which was beginning to blaze. Dolan and Carnine still were in it. Then from the wood back of
the camp fifty men appeared, riding at a gallop. Lige Bemis and General Ward rode in front
of the troop of horsemen. Carnine was still in the burning barn asleep, and there was no leader
to give command to the dazed guards. Ward and Bemis ran up, motioning the men back, and Ward
cried, "Shall we help you save your stock and barn, or must we fight?" It was addressed to
the crowd, but before they could answer, Dolan stumbled out of the barn through the smoke and
flames crying, "Boys,--boys,--I can't find him." He saw the rescuing party and shouted, "Boys,--Gabe's
in there asleep and I can't find him." The wind had suddenly veered, and the crackling flames
had reached the straw roof of the barn. The fire was gaining headway, and the three buckets
that were coming from the well had no effect on it. As the last horse was pulled out of the
door, one side of the straw wall of the barn fell away on fire and showed Gabriel Carnine sleeping
not ten feet from the flames. Lige Bemis soused his handkerchief in water, tied it over his
mouth, and ran in. He grabbed the sleeping man and dragged him through, the flames; but both
were afire as they came into the open.

Now in this story Elijah Westlake Bemis is not shown often in a heroic light. Yet he had in
his being the making of a hero, for he was brave. And heroism, after all, is only effective
reliance on some virtue in a crisis, in spite of temptations to do the easy excusable thing.
And when Lige Bemis sneaks through this story in unlovely guise, remember that he has a virtue
that once exalted even him.

"Gabe Carnine," said Ward, as the barn fell and there was nothing more to fear, "we didn't
fire your haystack; I give you my word on that. But we are going to take these boys home now.
And you better let us alone."

That John Barclay remembered, and then he remembered being in the front yard of the farm-house
a moment--alone with Jane Mason, his bridle rein over his arm. Her hair was down, and she looked
wild and beautiful. The straw was still burning back of the house, and the glow was everywhere.
He always remembered that she held his hand and would not let him go, and there two memories
are different; for she always maintained that he did, right there and then, and he recollected
that as he mounted his horse he tried to kiss her and failed. Perhaps both are right--who knows?
But both agree that as he sat there an instant on his horse, she threw kisses at him and he
threw them back. And when the men rode away, she stood in the road, and he could see her in
the light of the waning fire, and thirty years passed and still he saw her.

As the headlight of the train lit up the cinder yard, and brought the glint of the rails out
of the darkness, John Barclay, a thousand miles away and thirty years after, fancied he could
see her there in the railroad yards beside him waving her hands at him, smiling at him with
the new-found joy in her face. For there is no difference between fifty-three and twenty-three
when men are in love, and if they are in love with the same woman in both years, her face will
never change, her smile will always seem the same. And to John Barclay there on the rear platform
of the car, with the crash of the great train in his ears, the same face looked out of the
night at him that he saw back in his twenties, and he knew that the same prayer to the same
God would go up that night for him that went up from the same lips so long ago. The man on
the car platform rose from his chair, and went into the car.

"Well," he said to Lycurgus Mason as the old man reached for his watch, "how about it?"

Lycurgus replied as he put it back in his pocket, "Just seven minutes and a half. She's covered
a lot of track in those seven minutes!"

And John Barclay looked back over the years, and saw a boy riding like the wind through the
night, changing horses every half-hour, and trying to tell time from his watch by a rising
moon, but the moon was blown with clouds like a woman's hair, and he could not see the hands
on the watch face. So as he looked at the old man sitting crooked over in the great leather
chair, John Barclay only grunted, "Yes--she's covered a long stretch of country in those seven
minutes." And he picked the Biography off the table and read to himself: "I sometimes think
that only that part of the soul that loves is saved. The rest is dross and perishes in the
fire. Whether the love be the love of woman or the love of kind, or the love of God that embraces
all, it matters not. That sanctifies; that purifies--that marks the way of the only salvation
the soul can know, and he who does not love with the fervour of a passionate heart some of
God's creatures, cannot love God, and not loving Him, is lost in spite of all his prayers,
in spite of all his aspirations. Therefore, if you would live you must love, for when love
dies the soul shrivels. And if God takes what you love--love on; for only love will make you
immortal, only love will cheat death of its victory."

And looking at Lycurgus Mason fidgeting in his chair, John Barclay wondered when he would die
the kind of a death that had come to the little old man before him, and then he felt the car
move under him, and knew they were going back to Sycamore Ridge.

"Day after to-morrow," said Barclay, meditatively, as he heard the first faint screaming of
the heavily laden wheels under him, "day after to-morrow, Daddy Mason, we will be home with
Colonel Culpepper and his large white plumes."

CHAPTER VIII

This chapter might have had in it "all the quality, pride, pomp, and circumstance of glorious
war" if it had not been for the matters that came up for discussion at the meeting of the Garrison
County Old Settlers' Association this year of our Lord Nineteen Hundred and Eight. For until
that meeting the legend of the last hour of the County-seat War of '73 had flourished unmolested;
but there General Philemon Ward rose and laid an axe at the root of the legend, and while of
course he did not destroy it entirely, he left it scarred and withered on one side and therefore
entirely unfitted for historical purposes. It seems that Gabriel Carnine was assigned by President
John Barclay of the Association to prepare and read a paper on "The Rise, Decline, and Fall
of Minneola." Certainly that was a proper subject considering the fact that corn has been growing
over the site of Minneola for twenty years. And surely Gabriel Carnine, whose black beard has
whitened in thirty years' faithful service to Sycamore Ridge, whose wife lies buried on the
Hill, and whose children read the Sycamore Ridge Banner in the uttermost parts of the earth,--surely
Gabriel Carnine might have been trusted to tell the truth of the conflict waged between the
towns a generation ago. But men have curious works in them, and unless one has that faith in
God that gives him unbounded faith in the goodness of man, one should not open men up in the
back and watch the wheels go 'round. For though men are good, and in the long run what they
do is God's work and is therefore acceptable, no man is perfect. There goes Lige Bemis past
the post-office, now, for instance; when he was in the legislature in the late sixties, every
one knows that Minneola raised twenty thousand dollars in cash and offered it to Lige if he
would pretend to be sick and quit work on the Sycamore Ridge county-seat bill. He could have
fooled us, and could have taken the money, which was certainly more than he could expect to
get from Sycamore Ridge. Did he take it? Not at all. A million would not have tempted him.
He was in that game; yet ten days after he refused the offer of Minneola, he tried to blackmail
his United States senator out of fifty dollars, and sold his vote to a candidate for state
printer for one hundred dollars and flashed the bill around Sycamore Ridge proudly for a week
before spending it.

So Gabriel Carnine must not be blamed if in that paper on Minneola, before the Old Settlers'
Association, he let out the pent-up wrath of thirty years; and also if in the discussion General
Ward unsealed his lips for the first time and blighted the myth that told how a hundred Minneola
men had captured the court-house yard on the night that John Barclay and Bob Hendricks rode
home from their captivity to sign the tax levy. Legend has always said that Lige Bemis, riding
half a mile ahead of the others that night, came to the courtyard; found it guarded by Minneola
men, rode back, met John and Bob and the general crossing the bridge over the old ford of the
Sycamore, and told them that they could not get into the court-house until the men came up
who had ridden out to rescue the commissioners,--perhaps a quarter of an hour behind the others,--and
that even then there must be a fight of doubtful issue; and further that it was after eleven
o'clock, and soon would be too late to sign the levy. The forty thousand people in Garrison
County have believed for thirty years that finding the court-house yard in possession of the
enemy, Bemis suggested going through the cave by the Barclays' home, which had its west opening
in the wall of the basement of the court-house; and furthermore, tradition has said that Bemis
led John and Bob through the cave, and with crowbars and hammers they made a man-sized hole
in the wall, crawled through it, mounted the basement stairs, unlocked the commissioners' room,
held their meeting in darkness, and five minutes before twelve o'clock astonished the invading
forces by lighting a lamp in their room, signing the levy that Bemis, as county attorney, had
prepared the Sunday before, and slipping with it into the basement, through the cave and back
to the troop of horsemen as they were jogging across the bridge on their way back from Carnine's
farm. And here are the marks of General Ward's axe--verified by Gabriel Carnine: first, that
there were no Minneola invaders in possession of the court-house, but only a dozen visitors
loafing about town that night to watch developments; second, that the regular pickets were
out as usual, and an invading force could not have stolen in; and third, that Bemis knew it,
but as his political fortunes were low, he rode ahead of the others, hatched up the cock-and-bull
story about the guarded court-house, and persuaded the boys to let him lead them into a romantic
adventure that would sound well in the campaign and help to insure his reëlection the following
year. In view of the general's remarks and Gabriel Carnine's corroborative statement, and in
view of the bitterness with which Carnine assailed the whole Sycamore Ridge campaign, how can
a truthful chronicler use the episode at all? History is a fickle goddess, and perhaps Pontius
Pilate, being human and used to human errors and human weakness, is not so much to blame for
asking, "What is truth?" and then turning away before he had the answer.

Walking home from the meeting through Mary Barclay Park, Barclay's mind wandered back to the
days when he won his first important lawsuit--the suit brought by Minneola to prevent the collection
of taxes under the midnight levy to build the court-house. It was that lawsuit which brought
him to the attention of the legal department of the Fifth Parallel Railroad Company, and his
employment by that company to defeat the bonds of its narrow-gauged competitor, that was seeking
entrance into Garrison County, was the beginning of his career. And in that fight to defeat
the narrow-gauged railroad, the people of Garrison County learned something of Barclay as well.
He and Bemis went over the county together,--the little fox and the old coyote, the people
called them,--and where men were for sale, Bemis bought them, and where they were timid, John
threatened them, and where they were neither, both John and Bemis fought with a ferocity that
made men hate but respect the pair. And so though the Fifth Parallel Railroad never came to
the Ridge, its successor, the Corn Belt Road, did come, and in '74 John spoke in every schoolhouse
in the county, urging the people to vote the bonds for the Corn Belt Road, and his employment
as local attorney for the company marked his first step into the field of state politics. For
it gave him a railroad pass, and brought him into relations with the men who manipulated state
affairs; also it made him a silent partner of Lige Bemis in Garrison County politics.

But even when he was county commissioner, less than two dozen years old, he was a force in
Sycamore Ridge, and there were days when he had four or five thousand dollars to his credit
in General Hendricks' bank. The general used to look over the daily balances and stroke his
iron-gray beard and say: "Robert, John is doing well to-day. Son, I wish you had the acquisitive
faculty. Why don't you invest something and make something?" But Bob Hendricks was content
to do his work in the bank, and read at home one night and slip over to the Culpeppers' the
next night, and so long as the boy was steady and industrious and careful, his father had no
real cause for complaint, and he knew it. But the town knew that John was getting on in the
world. He owned half of Culpepper's second addition, and his interest in College Heights was
clear; he never dealt in equities, but paid cash and gave warranty deeds for what he sold.
It was believed around the Ridge that he could "clean up," for fifteen or twenty thousand dollars,
and when he called Mrs. Mason of the Mason House, Minneola, into the dining room one afternoon
to talk over a little matter with her, he found her most willing. It was a short session. After
listening and punctuating his remarks with "of courses" and "yeses" and "so's," Mrs. Mason's
reply was:--

"Of course, Mr. Barclay,"--the Mr. Barclay he remembered as the only time in his life he ever
had it from her,--"of course, Mr. Barclay, that is a matter rather for you and Mr. Mason to
settle. You know," she added, folding her hands across her ample waist, "Mr. Mason is the head
of the house!" Then she lifted her voice, perhaps fearing that matters might be delayed. "Oh,
pa!" she cried. "Pa! Come in here, please. There's a gentleman to see you."

Lycurgus Mason came in with a tea towel in his hands and an apron on. He heard John through
in a dazed way, his hollow eyes blinking with evident uncertainty as to what was expected of
him. When Barclay was through, the father looked at the mother for his cue, and did not speak
for a moment. Then he faltered: "Why, yes,--yes,--I see! Well, ma, what--" And at the cloud
on her brow Lycurgus hesitated again, and rolled his apron about his hands nervously and finally
said, "Oh--well--whatever you and her ma think will be all right with me, I guess." And having
been dismissed telepathically, Lycurgus hurried back to his work.

It was when John Barclay was elected President of the Corn Belt Railway, in the early nineties,
that Lycurgus told McHurdie and Ward and Culpepper and Frye, as the graybeards wagged around
the big brown stove in the harness shop one winter day: "You know ma, she never saw much in
him, and when I came in the room she was about to tell him he couldn't have her. Now, isn't
that like a woman?--no sense about men. But I says: 'Ma, John Barclay's got good blood in him.
His grandpa died worth a million,--and that was a pile of money for them days;' so I says,
'If Jane Mason wants him, ma,' I says, 'let her have him. Remember what a fuss your folks made
over me getting you,' I says; 'and see how it's turned out.' Then I turned to John--I can see
the little chap now a-standing there with his dicky hat in his hand and his pipe-stem legs
no bigger than his cane, and his gray eyes lookin' as wistful as a dog's when you got a bone
in your hand, and I says, 'Take her along, John; take her along and good luck go with you,'
I says; 'but,' I says, 'John Barclay, I want you always to remember Jane Mason has got a father.'
Just that way I says. I tell you, gentlemen, there's nothing like having a wife that respects
you." The crowd in the harness shop wagged their heads, and Lycurgus went on: "Now, they ain't
many women that would just let a man stand up like that and, as you may say, give her daughter
right away under her nose. But my wife, she's been well trained."

In the pause that followed, Watts McHurdie's creaking lever was the only sound that broke the
silence. Then Watts, who had been sewing away at his work with waving arms, spoke, after clearing
his throat, "I've heard many say that she was sich." And the old man cackled, and it became
a saying-among them and in the town.

One who goes back over the fifty years that have passed since Sycamore Ridge became a local
habitation and a name finds it difficult to realize that one-third of its life was passed before
the panic of '78, which closed the Hendricks' bank. For those first nineteen years passed as
the life of a child passes, so that they seem only sketched in; yet to those who lived at all,
to those like Watts McHurdie and Philemon Ward, who now pass their happiest moments mooning
over tilted headstones in the cemetery on the Hill, those first nineteen years seem the longest
and the best. And that fateful year of '73 to them seems the most portentous. For then, perhaps
for the first time, they realized the cruel uncertainty of the struggle for existence. With
the terrible drouth of '60 this realization did not come; for the town was young, and the people
were young; only Ezra Lane was a graybeard in all the town in the sixties; and youth is so
sure; there is no hazard under thirty. In the war they fought and marched and sang and starved
and died, and were still young. But when the financial panic of '73 spread its dread and its
trouble over the land, youth in Sycamore Ridge was gone; it was manhood that faced these things
in the Ridge, and manhood had cares, had given hostages to fortune, and life was serious and
hard; and big on the horizon was the fear of failure. General Hendricks swayed in the panic
of '73; and the time marked him, took the best of the light from his eye, and put the slightest
perceptible hobble on his feet. To Martin Culpepper and Watts McHurdie and Philemon Ward and
Jacob Dolan and Oscar Fernald, the panic came in their late thirties and early forties, a flash
of lightning that prophesied the coming of the storm and stress of an inexorable fate.

The wedding of John Barclay and Jane Mason occurred in September, 1873, two days after he had
stood on the high stone steps of the Exchange National Bank and made a speech to the crowd,
telling them he was the largest depositor in the bank, and begging them to stop the run. But
the run did not stop, and the day before John's wedding the bank did not open; the short crop
and the panic in the East were more than Garrison County people could stand. But all the first
day of the bank's closing and all the next day John worked among the people, reassuring them.
So that it was five o'clock in the evening before he could start to Minneola for his wedding.

And such a wedding! One would say that when hard times were staring every one in the face,
social forms would be observed most simply. But one would say so without reckoning with Mrs.
Lycurgus Mason. As the groom and the bridesmaid and best man rode up from Sycamore Valley,
two miles from Minneola, in the early falling dusk that night, the Mason House loomed through
the darkness, lighted up like a steamboat. "You'll have to move along, John," said Bob Hendricks;
"I think I heard her whistle."

On the sidewalk in front of the hotel they met Mrs. Mason in her black silk with a hemstitched
linen apron over it. She ushered them into the house, took them to their rooms, and whirled
John around on a pivot, it seemed to him, with her interminable directions. His mother, who
had come over to Minneola the day before, came to his room and quieted her son, and as he got
ready for what he called the "ordeal," he could hear Mrs. Mason swinging doors below stairs,
walking on her heels through the house, receiving belated guests from Sycamore Ridge and the
country,--for the whole county had been invited,--and he heard her carrying out a dog that
had sneaked into the dining room.

The groom missed the bride, and as he was tying his necktie,--which reminded him of General
Ward by its whiteness,--he wondered why she did not come to him. He did not know that she was
a prisoner in her room, while all the young girls in Sycamore Ridge and Minneola were looking
for pins and hooking her up and stepping on each other's skirts. For one wedding is like all
weddings--whether it be in the Mason House, Minneola, or in Buckingham Palace. And some there
are who marry for love in Minneola, and some for money, and some for a home, and some for Heaven
only knows what, just as they do in the châteaux and palaces and mansions. And the groom is
nobody and the bride is everything, as it was in the beginning and as it shall be ever after.
Probably poor Adam had to stand behind a tree neglected and alone, while Lilith and girls from
the land of Nod bedecked Eve for the festivities. Men are not made for ceremonies. And so at
all the formal occasions of this life--whether it be among the great or among the lowly, in
the East or the West, at weddings, christenings, and funerals--man hides in shame and leaves
the affairs to woman, who leads him as an ox, even a muzzled ox, that treadeth out the corn.
"The doomed man," whispered John to Bob as the two in their black clothes stood at the head
of the stair that led into the parlour of the Mason House that night, waiting for the wedding
march to begin on the cabinet organ, "ate a hearty supper, consisting of beefsteak and eggs,
and after shaking hands with his friends he mounted the gallows with a firm step!"

Then he heard the thud of the music book on the organ, the creak of the treadle,--and when
he returned to consciousness he was Mrs. Mason's son-in-law, and proud of it. And she,--bless
her heart and the hearts of all good women who give up the joy of their lives to us poor unworthy
creatures,--she stood by the wax-flower wreath under the glass case on the whatnot in the corner,
and wept into her real lace handkerchief, and wished with all the earnestness of her soul that
she could think of some way to let John know that his trousers leg was wrinkled over his left
shoe top. But she could not solve the problem, so she gave herself up to the consolation of
her tears. Yet it should be set down to her credit that when the preacher's amen was said,
hers was the first head up, and while the others were rushing for the happy pair she was in
the kitchen with her apron on dishing up the wedding supper. Well might the Sycamore Ridge
Weekly Banner declare that the "tables groaned with good things." There were not merely a little
piddling dish of salad, a bite of cake, and a dab of ice-cream. There were turkey and potatoes
and vegetables and fruit and bread and cake and pudding and pie--four kinds of pie, mark you--and
preserves, and "Won't you please, Mrs. Culpepper, try some of that piccalilli?" and "Oh, Mrs.
Ward, if you just would have a slice of that fruit cake," and "Now, General,--a little more
of the gravy for that turkey dressing--it is such a long ride home," or "Colonel, I know you
like corn bread, and I made this myself as a special compliment to Virginia."

And through it all the bride sat watching the door--looking always through the crowd for some
one. Her face was anxious and her heart was clouded, and when the guests had gone and the house
was empty, she left her husband and slipped out of the back door. There, after the glare of
the lamps had left her eyes, she saw a little man walking with his head down, out near the
barn, and she ran to him and threw her arms about him and kissed him, and when she led Lycurgus
Mason, who was all washed and dressed, back through the kitchen to her husband, John saw that
the man's eyelids were red, and that on the starched cuffs were the marks of tears. For to
him she was only his little girl, and John afterward knew that she was the only friend he had
in the world. "Oh, father, why didn't you come in?" cried the daughter. "I missed you so!"
The man blinked a moment at the lights and looked toward his wife, who was busy at a table,
as he said: "Who? Me?" and then added: "I was just lookin' after their horses. I was coming
in pretty soon. You oughtn't to bother about me. Well, John," he smiled, as he put out his
hand, "the seegars seems to be on you--as the feller says." And John put his arm about Lycurgus
Mason, as they walked out of the kitchen, and Jane reached for her gingham apron. Then life
began for Mr. and Mrs. John Barclay in earnest.

CHAPTER IX

Forty thousand words--and that is the number we have piled up in this story--is a large number
of words to string together without a heroine. That is almost as bad as the dictionary, in
which He and She are always hundreds of pages apart and never meet,--not even in the "Z's"
at the end,--which is why the dictionary is so unpopular, perhaps. But this is the story of
a man, and naturally it must have many heroines. For you know men--they are all alike! First,
Mrs. Mary Barclay was a heroine--you saw her face, strong and clean and sharply chiselled with
a great purpose; then Miss Lucy--black-eyed, red-cheeked, slender little Miss Lucy--was a heroine,
but she married General Ward; and then Ellen Culpepper was a heroine, but she fluttered out
of the book into the sunlight, and was gone; and then came Jane Mason,--and you have seen her
girlish beauty, and you will see it develop into gentle womanhood; but the real heroine,--of
the real story,--you have not seen her face. You have heard her name, and have seen her moving
through these pages with her back consciously turned to you--for being a shy minx, she had
no desire to intrude until she was properly introduced. And now we will whirl her around that
you may have a good look at her.

Let us begin at the ground: as to feet--they are not too small--say three and a half in size.
And they support rather short legs--my goodness, of course she has legs--did you think her
shoes were pinned to her over-skirt? Her legs carry around a plump body,--not fat--why, certainly
not--who ever heard of a fat heroine (the very best a heroine can do for comfort is to be plump)--and
so beginning the sentence over again, being a plump little body, there is a neck to account
for--a neck which we may look at, but which is so exquisite that it would be hardly polite
to consider it in terms of language. Only when we come to the chin that tips the oval of the
face may we descend to language, and even then we must rise and flick the red mouth with, but
a passing word. But this much must be plainly spoken. The nose does turn up--not much--but
a little (Bob used to say, just to be good and out of the way)! That, however, is mere personal
opinion, and of little importance here. But the eyes are brown--reddish brown, with enough
white at the corners to make them seem liquid; only liquid is not the word. For they are radiant--remember
that word, for we may come back to it, after we are done with the brow--a wide brow--low enough
for Dickens and Thackeray and Charlotte Bronte, and for Longfellow and Whittier and Will Carleton
in his day, and high enough for Tennyson at the temples, but not so high but that the gate
of the eyes has to shut wearily when Browning would sail through the current of her soul. As
to hair--Heaven knows there is plenty of that, but it had rather a checkered career. As she
clung to her mother's apron and waved her father away to war, she was a tow-headed little tot,
and when he came back from the field of glory he thought he could detect a tendency to red
in it, but the fire smouldered and went out, and the hair turned brown--a dark brown with the
glint of the quenched fires in it when it blew in the sun. Now frame a glowing young face in
that soft waving hair, and you have a picture that will speak, and if the picture should come
to life and speak as it was in the year of our Lord 1873, the first word of all the words in
the big fat dictionary it would utter would be Bob. And so you may lift up your face and take
your name and place in this story--Molly Culpepper, heroine. And when you lift your face, we
may see something more than its pretty features: we shall see a radiant soul. For scientists
have found out that every material thing in this universe gives off atomic particles of itself,
and some elements are more radiant than others. And there is a paralleling quality in the spiritual
world, and some souls give off more of their colour and substance than others, though what
it is they radiate we do not know. Even the scientists do not know the material things that
the atoms radiate, so why should we be asked to define the essence of souls? Yet from the soul
of Molly Culpepper, in joy and in sorrow, in her moments of usefulness and in her deepest woe,
her soul glowed and shed its glory, and she grew even as she gave her substance to the world
about her. For that is the magic of God's mystery of life.

And now having for the moment finished our discussion on the radio-activity of souls, let us
go back to the story.

Mary Barclay rode home from her son's wedding that night with Bob Hendricks and Molly Culpepper.
They were in a long line of buggies that began to scatter out and roam across fields to escape
the dust of the roads. "Well," said Mrs. Barclay, as they pulled up the bank of the Sycamore
for home, "I suppose it will be you and Molly next, Bob?"

It was Molly who replied: "Yes. It is going to be Thanksgiving."

"Well, why not?" asked Mrs. Barclay.

"Oh--they all seem to think we shouldn't, don't you know, Mrs. Barclay--with all this hard
times--and the bank closing. And hasn't John told you of the plan he's worked out for Bob to
go to New York this winter?"

The buggy was nearing the Barclay home. Mrs. Barclay answered, "No," and the girl went on.

"Well, it's a big wheat land scheme--and Bob's to go East and sell the stock. They worked it
out last night after the bank closed. He'll tell you all about it."

Mrs. Barclay was standing by the buggy when the girl finished. The elder woman bade the young
people good night, and turned and went into the yard and stood a moment looking at the stars
before going into her lonely house. The lovers let the tired horses lag up the hill, and as
they turned into Lincoln Avenue the girl was saying: "A year's so long, Bob,--so long. And
you'll be away, and I'm afraid." He tried to reassure her; but she protested: "You are all
my life,--big boy,--all my life. I was only fourteen, just a little girl, when you came into
my life, and all these long seven years you are the only human being that has been always in
my heart. Oh, Bob, Bob,--always."

What a man says to his sweetheart is of no importance. Men are so circumscribed in their utterances--so
tongue-tied in love. They all say one thing; so it need not be set down here what Bob Hendricks
said. It was what the king said to the queen, the prince to the princess, the duke to the lady,
the gardener to the maid, the troubadour to his dulcinea. And Molly Culpepper replied, "When
are you going, Bob?"

The young man picked up the sagging lines to turn out for Watts McHurdie's buggy. He had just
let Nellie Logan out at the Wards', where she lived. After a "Hello, Watts; getting pretty
late for an old man like you," Hendricks answered: "Well, you know John--when he gets a thing
in his head he's a regular tornado. There was an immense crowd in town to-day--depositors and
all that. And do you know, John went out this afternoon with a paper in his hand, and five
hundred dollars he dug out of his safe over in the office, and he got options to lease their
land for a year signed up by the owners of five thousand acres of the best wheat land in Garrison
County. He wants twenty thousand acres, and pretty well bunched down in Pleasant and Spring
townships, and I'm going in four days." The young man was full of the scheme. He went on: "John's
a wonder, Molly,--a perfect wonder. He's got grit. Father wouldn't have been able to stand
up under this--but John has braced him, and has cheered up the people, and I believe, before
the week is out, we will be able to get nearly all the depositors to agree to leave their money
alone for a year, and then only take it out on thirty days' notice. And if we can get that,
we can open up by the first of the month. But I've got to go on to Washington to see if I can
arrange that with the comptroller of the currency."

They were standing at the Culpepper gate as he spoke. A light in the upper windows showed that
the parents were in. Buchanan came ambling along the walk and went through the gate between
them without speaking. When he had closed the door, the girl came close to her lover. He took
her in his arms, and cried, "Oh, darling,--only four more days together." He paused, and in
the starlight she saw on his face more than words could have told her of his love for her.
He was a silent youth; the spoken word came haltingly to his lips, and as often happens, words
were superfluous to him in his moments of great emotion. He put her hands to his lips, and
moaned, for the hour of parting seemed to be hurrying down upon him. Finally his tongue found
liberty. "Oh, sweetheart--sweetheart," he cried, "always remember that you are bound in my
soul with the iron of youth's first love--my only love. Oh, I never could again, dear,--only
you--only you. After this it would be a sacrilege."

They stood silent in the joy of their ecstacy for a long minute, then he asked gently: "Do
you understand, Molly,--do you understand? this is forever for us, Molly,--forever. When one
loves as we love--with our childhood and youth welded into it all--whom God hath joined--"
he stammered; "oh, Molly, whom God hath joined," he whispered, and his voice trembled as he
sighed again, and kissed her, "whom God hath joined. Oh, God--God, God!" cried the lover, as
he closed his eyes with his lips against her hair.

The restless horses recalled the lovers to the earth. It was Molly who spoke. "Bob--Bob--I
can't let you go!"

Molly Culpepper had no reserves with her lover. She went on whispering, with, her face against
his heart: "Bob--Bob, big boy, I am going to tell you something truthy true, that I never breathed
to any one. At night--to-night, in just a few minutes--when I go up to my room--all alone--I
get your picture and hold it to me close, and holding it right next to my very heart, Bob,
I pray for you." She paused a moment, and then continued, "Oh, and--I pray for us--Bob--I pray
for us." Then she ran up the stone walk, and on the steps she turned to throw kisses at him,
but he did not move until he heard the lock click in the front door.

At the livery-stable he found Watts McHurdie bending over some break in his buggy. They walked
up the street together. At the corner where they were about to part the little man said, as
he looked into the rapturous face of the lanky boy, "Well, Bob,--it's good-by, John, for you,
I suppose?"

"Oh--I don't know," replied the other from his enchanted world and then asked absently, "Why?"

"Well, it's nature, I guess. She'll take all his time now." He rubbed his chin reflectively,
and as Bob turned to go Watts said: "My Heavens, how time does fly! It just seems like yesterday
that all you boys were raking over the scrap-pile back of my shop, and slipping in and nipping
leather strands and braiding them into whips, and I'd have to douse you with water to get rid
of you. I got a quirt hanging up in the shop now that Johnnie Barclay dropped one day when
I got after him with a pan of water. It's a six-sided one, with eight strands down in the round
part. I taught him how to braid it." He chewed a moment and spat before going on: "And now
look at him. He's little, but oh my." Something was working under McHurdie's belt, for Bob
could hear it chuckling as he chewed: "Wasn't she a buster? It's funny, ain't it--the way we
all pick big ones--we sawed-offs"? The laugh came--a quiet, repressed gurgle, and he added:
"Yes--by hen, and you long-shanks always pick little dominickers. Eh?" He chewed a meditative
cud before venturing, "That's what I told her comin' home to-night." Bob knew whom he meant.
The man went on: "But when she saw them--him so little she'll have to shake the sheet to find
him--and her so big and busting, I seen her--you know," he nodded his head wisely to indicate
which "her" he meant. "I saw her a-eying me, out of the corner of her eye, and looking at him,
and then looking at the girl, and looking at herself, and on the way home to-night I'm damned
if I didn't have to put off asking her another six months." He sighed and continued, "And the
first thing I know the drummer or the preacher'll get her." He chewed for a minute in peace
and chuckled, "Well--Bob, I suppose you'll be next?" He did not wait for an answer, but spoke
up quickly, "Well, Bob, good night--good night," and hurried to his shop.

The next day the people that blackened Main Street in Sycamore Ridge talked of two things--the
bank failure and the new Golden Belt Wheat Company. Barclay enlisted Colonel Culpepper, and
promised him two dollars for every hundred-acre option to lease that he secured at three dollars
an acre--the cash on the lease to be paid March first. Barclay's plan was to organize a stock
company and to sell his stock in the East for enough to raise eight dollars an acre for every
acre he secured, and to use the five dollars for making the crop. He believed that with a good
wheat crop the next year he could make money and buy as much land as he needed. But that year
of the panic John capitalized the hardship of his people, and made terms for them, which they
could not refuse. He literally sold them their own want. For the fact that he had a little
ready money and could promise more before harvest upon which the people might live--however
miserably was no concern of his--made it possible for him to drive a bargain little short of
robbery. It was Bob's part of the business to float the stock company in the East among his
father's rich friends. John was to furnish the money to keep Bob in New York, and the Hendricks'
connections in banking circles were to furnish the cash to float the proposition, and the Hendricks'
bank--if John could get it opened again--was to guarantee that the stock subscribed would pay
six per cent interest. So there was no honeymoon for John Barclay. When he dropped the reins
and helped his bride out of the buggy the next morning in front of the Thayer House, he hustled
General Ward's little boy into the seat, told him to drive the team to Dolan's stable, and
waving the new Mrs. Barclay good-by, limped in a trot over to the bank. In five minutes he
was working in the crowd, and by night had the required number of the depositors ready to agree
to let their money lie a year on deposit, and that matter was closed. He was a solemn-faced
youth in those days, with a serious air about him, and something of that superabundance of
dignity little men often think they must assume to hold their own. The town knew him as a trim
little man in a three-buttoned tail-coat, with rather extraordinary neckties, a well-brushed
hat, and shiny shoes. To the country people he was "limping Johnnie," and General Ward, watching
Barclay hustle his way down Main Street Saturday afternoons, when the sidewalk and the streets
were full of people, used to say, "Busier 'n a tin pedler." And he said to Mrs. Ward, "Lucy,
if it's true that old Grandpa Barclay got his start carrying a pack, you can see him cropping
out in John, bigger than a wolf."

But the general had little time to devote to John, for he was state organizer of a movement
that had for its object the abolition of middlemen in trade, and he was travelling most of
the time. The dust gathered on his law-books, and his Sunday suit grew frayed at the edges
and shiny at the elbows, but his heart was in the cause, and his blue eyes burned with joy
when he talked, and he was happy, and had to travel two days and nights when the fourth baby
came, and then was too late to serve on the committee on reception, and had to be satisfied
with a minor place on the committee on entertainment and amusements of which Mrs. Culpepper
was chairman. But John turned in half of a fee that came from the East for a lawsuit that both
he and Ward had forgotten, and Miss Lucy would have named the new baby Mary Ward, but the general
stood firm for Elizabeth Cady Stanton. Sitting at Sunday dinner with the Wards on the occasion
of Elizabeth Cady Stanton Ward's first monthly birthday, John listened to the general's remarks
on the iniquity of the money power, and the wickedness of the national banks, and kept respectful
and attentive silence. The worst the young man did was to wink swiftly across the table at
Watts McHurdie, who had been invited by Mrs. Ward with malice prepense and seated by Nellie
Logan. The wink came just as the general, waving the carving knife, was saying: "Gentlemen,
it's the world-old fight--the fight of might against right. When I was a boy like you, John,
the fight was between brute strength and the oppressed; between slaves and masters. Now it
is between weakness and cunning, between those who would be slaveholders if they could be,
and those who are fighting the shackles." And Mrs. Ward saw the wink, and John saw that she
saw it, and he was ashamed.

So before the afternoon was over, Mr. and Mrs. John Barclay went over to Hendricks's, picking
up Molly Culpepper on the way, and the three spent the evening with the general and Miss Hendricks--a
faded mousy little woman in despairing thirties; and before the open fire they sat and talked,
and John played the piano for an hour, and thought out an extra kink for the Golden Belt Wheat
Company's charter. He jabbered about it to Jane as they walked home, and the next day it became
a fact.

"That boy," said the colonel to his assembled family one evening as they dined on mush and
dried peaches, and coffee made of parched corn, "that John Barclay certainly and surely is
a marvel. Talk about drawing blood from a turnip,--why, he can strike an artery in a pumpkin."
The colonel smiled reflectively as he proceeded: "Chicago lawyer came in on the stage this
afternoon,--kinder getting uneasy about a little interest I owed to an Ohio man on that College
Heights property, and John took that Chicago lawyer up to his office, and talked him into putting
the interest in a second mortgage with all the interest that will fall due till next spring,
and then traded him Golden Belt Wheat Company stock for the mortgage and a thousand dollars
besides."

"Well, did John give you back the mortgage, father?" asked Molly.

"No, sis,--that wouldn't be business," replied the colonel, as he stirred his dried peaches
into his third dish of mush for dessert; "business is business, you know. John took the mortgage
over to the bank and discounted it for some money to buy more options with. John surely does
make things hum."

"Yes, and he's made Bob resign from the board of commissioners, and won't let him come home
Christmas, and keeps him on fifty dollars a month there in New York--all the same," returned
the girl.

The colonel looked at his daughter a moment in sympathetic silence; then he put his thumbs
in the armholes of his vest and tilted back in his chair and answered: "Oh, well, my dear,--when
you are living in a brown-stone house on Fifth Avenue down in New York, stepping on a nigger
every which way you turn, you'll thank John that he did keep Bob at work, and not bring him
back here to pin on a buffalo tail, drink crick water, eat tumble weeds, and run wild. I say,
and I fear no contradiction when I say it, that John Barclay is a marvel--a living wonder in
point of fact. And if Bob Hendricks wants to come back here and live on the succulent and classic
bean and the luscious, and I may say tempting, flapjack, let him come, Molly Farquhar Culpepper,
let him come." The colonel, proud of his language, looked around the family circle. "And we
at our humble board, with our plain though--shall I say nutritive--yes, nutritive and wholesome
fare, should thank our lucky stars that John Barclay keeps the Golden Belt Wheat Company going,
and your husband and father can make a more or less honest dollar now and then to supply your
simple wants."

The colonel had more in his mind, for he rose and began to pace the floor in a fine frenzy.
But Mrs. Culpepper looked up for an instant from her tea, and said, "You know you forgot the
mail to-day, father," and he replied, "Yes, that's so." Then added: "Molly dear, will you bring
me my overcoat--please?"

The girl bundled her father into his threadbare blue army overcoat with the cape. He stood
for a moment absently rattling some dimes in his pocket. Then the faintness of their jingle
must have appealed to him, for he drew a long breath and walked majestically away. He was a
tall stout man in the midst of his forties, with a military goatee and black flowing mustaches,
and he wore his campaign hat pinned up at the side with the brass military pin and swayed with
some show of swagger as he walked. His gift of oratory he did not bring to the flower of its
perfection except at lodge. He was always sent as a delegate to Grand Lodge, and when he came
home men came from all over the county to see the colonel exemplify the work. But as he marched
to funerals under his large white plume and with his sword dangling at his side, Colonel Martin
Culpepper, six feet four one way and four feet two the other, was a regal spectacle, and it
will be many years before the town will see his like again.

The colonel walked over to the post-office box and got his mail, then took a backless chair
and drew it up to the sand box in which the stove sat, and the conversation became general
in its nature, ranging from Emerson's theory of the cosmos and the whiskey ring to the efficacy
of a potato in the pocket for rheumatism. Finally when they had come to their "don't you remembers"
about the battle of Wilson's Creek, General Ward, with his long coat buttoned closely about
him, came shivering into the store to get some camphor gum and stood rubbing his cold hands
by the stove while the clerk was wrapping up the package. His thin nose was red and his eyes
watered, and he had little to say. When he went out the colonel said, "What's he going to run
for this year?"

"Haven't you heard?" replied McHurdie, and to the colonel's negative Watts replied, "Governor--the
uprising's going to nominate him."

"Yes," said Frye, "and he'll go off following that foolishness and leave his wife and children
to John or the neighbours."

"Do you suppose he thinks he'll win?" asked the Colonel.

"Naw," put in McHurdie; "I was talking to him only last week in the shop, and he says, 'Watts,
you boys don't understand me.' He says, 'I don't want their offices. What I want is to make
them think. I'm sowing seed. Some day it will come to a harvest--maybe long after I'm dead
and gone.' I asked him if a little seed wouldn't help out some for breakfast, and he didn't
answer. Then he said: 'Watts--what you need is faith--faith in God and not in money. There
are no Christians; they don't believe in God, or they'd trust Him more. They don't trust God;
they trust money. Yet I tell you it will work. Go ahead--do your work in the world, and you
won't starve nor your children beg in the streets.'" McHurdie stopped a moment to gnaw his
plug of tobacco. "The general's gitting kind of a crank--and I told him so."

"What did he say?" inquired the colonel.

"Oh, he just laughed," replied McHurdie; "he just laughed and said if he was a crank I was
a poet, and neither was much good at the note window of the bank, and we kind of made it up."

And so the winter evening grew old, and one by one the cronies rose and yawned and went their
way. Evening after evening went thus, and was it strange that in the years that came, when
the sunset of life was gilding things for Watts McHurdie, he looked through the golden haze
and saw not the sand in the pit under the stove, not the rows of drugs on the wall, not the
patent medicine bottles in their faded wrappers, but as he wrote many years after in "Autumn
Musing":--

    "Those nights when Wisdom was our guide
      And Friendship was the glow,
    That warmed our souls like living coals,
      Those nights of long ago."

Nor is it strange that Martin Culpepper, his commentator, conning those lines through the snows
of many winters, should be a little misty as to details, and having taken his pen in hand to
write, should set down this note:--

"These lines probably refer to the evenings which the poet passed in a goodly company of choice
spirits during the early seventies. E'en as I write, Memory, with tender hand, pushes back
the sombre curtain, and I see them now--that charmed circle; the poet with the brow of Jove
and Minerva's lips; the rugged warrior at his side, with the dignity of Mars himself; perhaps
some Croesus with his gold, drawn by the spell of Wisdom's enchantment into the magic circle;
and this your humble disciple of Thucydides, sitting spellbound under the drippings of the
sacred font, getting the material for these pages. That was the Golden Age; there were giants
in those days."

And so there were, Colonel Martin Culpepper of the Great Heart and the "large white plumes"--so
there were.

CHAPTER X

It was a cold raw day in March, 1874. Colonel Culpepper was sitting in the office of Ward and
Barclay over the Exchange National Bank waiting for the junior member of the firm to come in;
the senior member of the firm, who had just brought up an arm load of green hickory and dry
hackberry stove wood, was standing beside the box-shaped stove, abstractedly brushing the sawdust
and wormwood from his sleeves and coat front. The colonel was whistling and whittling, and
the general kept on brushing after the last speck of dust had gone from his shiny coat. He
walked to the window and stared into the ugly brown street.

Two or three minutes passed, and Colonel Culpepper, anxious for the society of his kind, spoke.
"Well, General, what's the trouble?"

"Nothing in particular, Martin. I was just questioning the reality of matter and the existence
of the universe as you spoke; but it's not important." The general shivered, and turned his
kind blue eyes on his friend in a smile, and then bethought him to put the wood in the stove.

While he was jamming in a final stick, Colonel Culpepper inquired, "Well, am I an appearance
or an entity?"

The general put the smoking poker on the floor, and turned the damper in the pipe as he answered:
"That's what I can't seem to make out. You know old Emerson says a man doesn't amount to much
as a thinker until he has doubted the existence of matter. And I just got to thinking about
it, and wondering if this was a real world after all--or just my idea of one." The two men
smiled at the notion, and Ward went on: "All right, laugh if you want to, but if this is a
real world, whose world is it, your world or my world? Here is John Barclay, for instance.
Sometimes I get a peek at his world." Ward picked up the poker and sat down and hammered the
toe of a boot with it as he went on: "John's world is the Golden Belt Wheat Company, wheat
pouring a steady stream into boundless bins, and money flowing in golden ripples over it all.
Sometimes Bob Hendricks' head rises above the tide long enough to gasp or cry for help and
beg to come home, but John's golden flood sweeps over him again, and he's gone. And here's
your world, Martin, wherein every one is kind and careless, and generous and good, and full
of smiles and gayety. And there's Lige Bemis' world, full of cunning and hypocrisy, and meanness
and treachery and plotting--a hell of a world it is, with its foundations on hate and deceit--but
it's his world, and he has the same right to it that I have to mine. And there's old Watts'
world--" The general sighted along the poker over his toe to the stove side whereon a cornucopia
wriggled out of nothing and poured its richness of fruit and grain into nothing. "There's Watts'
world, full of stuffed Personifications, Virtue, Pleasure, Happiness, Sin, Sorrow, and God
knows what of demigods, with the hay of his philosophy sticking out of their eyeholes. You
know about his maxims, Mart; he actually lives by 'em, and no matter how common sense yells
at him to get off the track, old Watts just goes on following his maxims, and gets butted into
the middle of next week."

The colonel was making a hole in the stick in his hands, and his attention was fixed on the
whittling, but he added, "And your own world, General--how about your own world?"

"My world," replied the general, as he pulled at the bows of his rather soiled white tie, and
evened them, "My world--" the general jabbed the poker spear-like into the floor, "I guess
I'm a kind of a transcendentalist!"

The colonel blew the chips through the hole in his stick; he bored it round in the pause that
followed before he spoke.

"A transcendentalist, eh? Well, pintedly, General, that is what I may call a soft impeachment,
as the poet says--a mighty soft impeachment. I've heard you called a lot worse names than that--and
I may say," here the crow's-feet began scratching for a smile around the colonel's eyes, "proved,
sir, with you as the prosecuting witness."

The two men chuckled. Then the general, balancing himself, with the poker point on the floor,
as he tilted back went on: "My world, Mart Culpepper, is a world in which the ideal is real--a
world in a state of flux with thoughts of to-day the matter of to-morrow; my world is a world
of faith that God will crystallize to-day's aspirations into to-morrow's justice; my world,"
the general rose and waved his poker as if to beat down the forces of materialism about him,
"my world is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen." He paused.
"As I was saying," he continued at last, "if this is a real world, if matter actually exists
and this world is not a dream of my consciousness, whose world is it, my world, your world,
Watts McHurdie's world, Lige's world, or John's world? It can't be all of 'em." He put the
poker across the stove hearth, and sank his hands deeply into his pockets as he continued:
"The question that philosophy never has answered is this: Am I a spectre and you an essence,
or are you a spectre and am I an essence? Is it your world or mine?"

The two men looked instinctively at the rattling doorknob, and John Barclay limped into the
room. His face was red with the cold and the driving mist. He walked to the stove and unbuttoned
his ulster, while the colonel put the subject of the debate before him. The general amended
the colonel's statement from time to time, but the young man only smiled tolerantly and shook
his head. Then he went to his desk and pulled a letter from a drawer.

"Colonel, I've got a letter here from Bob. The thing doesn't seem to be moving. He only sold
about a thousand dollars' worth of stock last month--a falling off of forty per cent, and we
must have more or we can't take up our leases. He's begging like a dog to come home for a week,
but I can't let him. We need that week." He limped over to the elder and put his hand on the
tall man's arm as he said: "Now, Colonel, that was what I sent for you about. You kind of speak
to Molly and have her write him and tell him to hold on a little while. It's business, you
know, and we can't afford to have sentiment interfere with business."

The colonel, standing by the window, replied, after a pause: "I can see where you are right,
John. Business is business. You got to consider that." He looked into the street below and
saw General Hendricks come shuddering into the cold wind. "How's he getting on?" asked Culpepper,
nodding towards Hendricks, who seemed unequal to the gale.

"Oh, I don't know, Colonel,--times are hard."

"My, how he's aging!" said the colonel, softly.

After a silence Barclay said: "There's one thing sure--I've got it into his hard old head that
Bob is doing something back there, and he couldn't earn his salt here. Besides," added Barclay,
as if to justify himself against an accusing conscience, "the old man does all the work in
the bank now, with time to spare."

It was the day of army overcoats, and the hard times had brought hundreds of them from closets
and trunks. General Hendricks, fluttering down the street in his faded blue, made a rather
pathetic figure. The winter had whitened his hair and withered his ruddy face. His unequal
struggle with the wind seemed some way symbolical of his life, and the two men watched him
out of sight without a word. The colonel turned toward his own blue overcoat which lay sprawling
in a chair, and Barclay said as he helped the elder man squeeze into it, "Don't forget to speak
to Molly, Colonel," and then ushered him to the door. For a moment Colonel Culpepper stood
at the bottom of the stairs, partly hesitating to go into the windy street, and partly trying
to think of some way in which he could get the subject on his mind before his daughter in the
right way. Then as he stood on the threshold with his nose in the storm, he recalled General
Ward's discourse about the different worlds, and he thought of Molly's world of lovers' madness,
and that brought up his own youth and its day-dreams, and Molly flew out of his mind and her
mother came in, and he saw her blue-eyed and fair as she stood before him on their wedding-day.
With that picture in his heart he breasted the storm and went home whistling cheerfully, walking
through his world like a prince.

When the colonel left the office of Ward and Barclay, the partners retired into their respective
worlds and went sailing through space, each world upon its own axis. The general in a desultory
way began writing letters to reformers urging them to prepare for the coming struggle; but
John was head over heels in the business of the Golden Belt Wheat Company, and in an hour had
covered two sheets of foolscap with figures and had written a dozen letters. The scratch, scratch
of his pen was as regular as the swish of a piston. On the other hand, the general often stopped
and looked off into space, and three times he got up to mend the fire. At the end of the afternoon
Mrs. Ward came in, her cheeks pink with the cold; she had left the seven-year-old to care for
the one-year-old, and the five-year-old to look after the three-year-old, and had come scurrying
through the streets in a brown alpaca dress with a waterproof cape over her shoulders. She
and the general spoke for a few moments in their corner, and she hurried out again. The general
finished the letter he was writing and wrote another, and then backed up to the stove with
his coat tails in front of him and stood benignly watching Barclay work. Barclay felt the man's
attention, and whirling about in his chair licking an envelope flap, he said, "Well, General--what's
on your mind?"

"I was just thinking of Lucy--that's all," replied the general. Barclay knew that the Wards
had gone through the winter on less than one hundred dollars, and it occurred to the younger
man that times might be rather hard in the Ward household. So he asked, "Are you worried about
money matters, General?"

The general's smile broadened to a grin. "Well, to be exact, Lucy and I just counted cash--it's
in her pocketbook, and we find our total cash assets are eight dollars and thirty-nine cents,
and it's got to tide us over till grass." He stroked his lean chin, and ran his hands through
his iron-gray hair and went on, "That's plenty, the way we've figured it out--Lucy and I only
eat one meal a day anyway, and the children seem to eat all the time and that averages it up."
He smiled deprecatingly and added: "But Lucy's got her heart set on a little matter, and we've
decided to spend eighty-seven cents, as you might say riotously, and get it. That's what we
were talking about."

Barclay entered into the spirit of Ward's remarks and put in: "But the National debt, General--if
you have all that money to spare, why don't you pay it off? Practise what you preach, General."

The smile faded from Ward's face. He was not a man to joke on what he regarded as sacred things.
He replied: "Yes, yes, that's just it. My share of the interest on that debt this winter was
just seventy-five cents, and if it wasn't for that, we would have had enough to get them; as
it is, we are going to cut out meat for a week--we figured it all out just now--and get them
anyway. She's down at the store buying them."

"Buying what?" asked Barclay.

The general's face lighted up again with a grin, and he replied: "Now laugh--dog-gone you--buying
flower seeds!" They heard a step at the bottom of the stairs, and the general strode to the
door, opened it, and called down, "All right, Lucy--I'm coming," and buttoning up his coat,
he whisked himself from the room, and Barclay, looking out of the window, watched the two forms
as they disappeared in the dusk. But appearances are so deceptive. The truth is that what he
saw was not there at all, but only appeared on his retina; the two forms that he seemed to
see were not shivering through the twilight, but were walking among dahlias and coxcombs and
four-o'clocks and petunias and poppies and hollyhocks on a wide lawn whereon newly set elm
trees were fluttering their faint green foliage in the summer breeze. Yet John Barclay would
have sworn he saw them there in the cold street, with the mist beating upon them, and curiously
corroborative of this impression is a memory he retained of reflecting that since the general's
blue overcoat had disappeared the winter before, he had noticed that little Thayer had a blue
Sunday suit and little Elizabeth Cady Stanton had appeared wrapped in a blue baby coat. But
that only shows how these matter-of-fact people are fooled. For though the little Wards were
caparisoned in blue, and though the general's blue overcoat did disappear about that time,
the general and Lucy Ward have no recollection of shivering home that night, but instead they
know that they walked among the flowers.

And John, looking into the darkening street, must have seen something besides the commonplace
couple that he thought he saw; for as he turned away to light his lamp and go to work again,
he smiled. Surely there was nothing to smile at in the thing he saw. Perhaps God was trying
to make him see the flowers. But he did not see them, and as it was nearly an hour before six
o'clock, he turned to his work under the lamp and finished his letter to Bob Hendricks. When
it was written, he read it over carefully, crossing his "t's" and dotting his "i's," and as
no one was in the room he mumbled it aloud, thus:--

    "DEAR BOB:--Don't get blue; it will be all right. Stick to it. I am
    laying a wire that will get you an audience with Jay Gould. Make the
    talk of your life there. You may be able to interest him--if just
    for a few dollars. Offer him anything. Give him the stock if he will
    let us use his name.

    "Don't get uneasy about Molly, Bob. Jane and I see that she goes to
    everything, and we've scared her up a kind of brevet beau--an old
    rooster named Brownwell--Adrian Pericles Brownwell, who has blown in
    here and bought the Banner from Ezra Lane. Brownwell is from
    Alabama. Do you remember, Bob, that day at Wilson's Creek after we
    got separated in the Battle I ran into a pile of cavalry writhing in
    a road? Well, there was one face in that awful struggling mass that
    I always remembered--and I never expect to see such a look of fear
    on a man's face again--he was a young fellow then, but now he's
    thirty-five or so. Well--that was this man Brownwell. I asked him
    about it the other day. How he ever got out alive, I don't know; but
    the fact that he should turn up here proves that this is a small
    world. Brownwell also is a writer from Writersville. You should see
    the way he paints the lily in the Banner every week. You remember
    old Cap Lee--J. Lord Lee of the Red Legs--and Lady Lee, as they
    called her when she was a sagebrush siren with the 'Army of the
    Border' before the War? Well, read this clipping from the Banner
    of this week: 'The wealth, beauty, and fashion of Minneola--fairest
    village of the plain--were agog this week over the birth of a
    daughter to Lord and Lady Lee, whose prominence in our social
    circles makes the event one of first importance in our week's
    annals. Little Beatrix, for so they have decided to christen her,
    will some day be a notable addition to our refined and gracious
    circles. Welcome to you, little stranger.'

    "Now you know the man! You needn't be jealous of him. However, he
    has frozen to the Culpeppers because they are from the South, and
    clearly he thinks they are the only persons of consequence in town.
    So he beaus Molly around with Jane and me to the concerts and
    sociables and things. He is easily thirty-five, walks with a cane,
    struts like a peacock, and Molly and Jane are having great sport
    with him. Also he is the only man in town with any money. He brought
    five thousand dollars in gold, real money,--his people made it on
    contraband cotton contracts during the War, they say,--and he has
    been the only visible means of support the town has had for three
    months. But in the meantime don't worry about Molly, Bob, she's all
    right, and business is business, you know, and you shouldn't let
    such things interfere with it. But in another six months we'll be
    out of the woods and on our way to big money."

Now another strange thing happened to John Barclay that evening, and this time it was what
he saw, not what he failed to see, that puzzled him. For just as he sealed the letter to his
friend, and thumped his lean fist on it to blot the address on the envelope and press the mucilage
down, he looked around suddenly, though he never knew why, and there, just outside the rim
of light from his lampshade, trembled the image of Ellen Culpepper with her red and black checked
flannel dress at her shoe tops and his rubber button ring upon her finger. She smiled at him
sweetly for a moment and shook her head sadly, and her curls fluttered upon her shoulders,
and then she seemed to fade into the general's desk by the opposite wall. John was pallid and
frightened for a moment; then as he looked at the great pile of letters before him he realized
how tired and worn he was. But the face and the eyes haunted him and brought back old memories,
and that night he and Jane and Molly Culpepper went to Hendricks', and he played the piano
for an hour in the firelight, and dreamed old dreams. And his hands fell into the chords of
a song that he sang as a boy, and Molly came from the fire and stood beside him while they
hummed the words in a low duet:--

    "Let me believe that you love as you loved
    Long, long ago--long ago."

But when he went out into the drizzling night, and he and Jane left Molly at home, he stepped
into the whirling yellow world of gold and grain, and drafts and checks, and leases and mortgages,
and Heaven knows what of plots and schemes and plans. So he did not heed Jane when she said,
"Poor--poor little Molly," but replied as he latched the Culpepper gate, "Oh, Molly'll be all
right. You can't mix business and pleasure, you know. Bob must stay."

And when Molly went into the house, she found her mother waiting for her. The colonel's courage
had failed him. The mother took her daughter's hand, and the two walked up the broad stairs
together.

"Molly," said the mother, as the girl listlessly went about her preparations for bed, "don't
grieve so about Bob. Father and John need him there. It's business, you know."

The daughter answered, "Yes, I know, but I'm so lonesome--so lonesome." Then she sobbed, "You
know he hasn't written for a whole week, and I'm afraid--afraid!"

When the paroxysm had passed, the mother said: "You know, my dear, they need him there a little
longer, and he wants to come back. Your father told me that John sent word to-day that you
must not let him come." The girl's face looked the pain that struck her heart, and she did
not answer. "Molly dear," began the mother again, "can't you write to Bob to-morrow and urge
him to stay--for me? For all of us? It is so much to us now--for a little while--to have Bob
there, sending back money for the company. I don't know what father would do if it wasn't for
the company--and John."

The daughter held her mother's hand, and after gasping down a sob, promised, and then as the
sob kept tilting back in her throat, she cried: "But oh, mother, it's such a big world--so
wide, and I am so afraid--so afraid of something--I don't know what--only that I'm afraid."

But the mother soothed her daughter, and they talked of other things until she was quiet and
drowsy.

But when she went to sleep, she dreamed a strange dream. The next day she could not untangle
it, save that with her for hours as she went about her duties was the odour of lilacs, and
the face of her lover, now a young eager face in pain, and then, by the miracle of dreams,
grown old, bald at the temples and brow, but fine and strong and clean--like a boy's face.
The face soon left her, but the smell of the lilacs was in her heart for days--they were her
lilacs, from the bushes in the garden. As days and weeks passed, the dream blurred into the
gray of her humdrum life and was gone. And so that day and that night dropped from time into
eternity, and who knows of all the millions of stars that swarmed the heavens, what ones held
the wandering souls of the simple people of that bleak Western town as they lay on their pillows
and dreamed. For if our waking hours are passed in worlds so wide apart, who shall know where
we walk in dreams?

It is thirty years and more now since John Barclay dreamed of himself as the Wheat King of
the Sycamore Valley, and in that thirty years he had considerable time to reflect upon the
reasons why pride always goeth before destruction. And he figured it out that in his particular
case he was so deeply engrossed in the money he was going to make that first year, that he
did not study the simple problem of wheat-growing as he should have studied it. In those days
wheat-growing upon the plains had not yet become the science it is to-day, and many Sycamore
Valley farmers planted their wheat in the fall, and failed to make it pay, and many other Sycamore
Valley farmers planted their wheat in the spring, and failed, while many others succeeded.
The land had not been definitely staked off and set apart by experience as a winter wheat country,
and so the farmers operating under the Golden Belt Wheat Company, in the spring of 1874, planted
their wheat in March.

That was a beautiful season on the plains. April rains came, and the great fields glowed green
under the mild spring sun. And Bob Hendricks, collecting the money from his stock subscriptions,
poured it into the treasury of the company, and John Barclay spent the money for seed and land
and men to work the land, and so confident was he of the success of the plan that he borrowed
every dollar he could lay his hands on, and got leases on more land and bought more seed and
hired more men, in the belief that during the summer Hendricks could sell stock enough to pay
back the loans. To Colonel Culpepper, Barclay gave a block of five thousand dollars' worth
of the stock as a bonus in addition to his commission for his work in securing options, and
the colonel, feeling himself something of a capitalist, and being in funds from the spring
sale of lots in College Heights addition, invested in new clothes, bought some farm products
in Missouri, and went up and down the earth proclaiming the glories of the Sycamore Valley,
and in May brought two car-loads of land seekers by stages and wagons and buggies to Sycamore
Ridge, and located them in Garrison County. And in his mail when he came home he found a notice
indicating that he had overdrawn his account in the bank five hundred dollars, and that his
note was due for five hundred more on the second mortgage which he had given the previous fall.

For two days he was plunged in gloom, and Barclay, observing his depression and worming out
of the colonel the cause, persuaded General Hendricks to put the overdraft and the second mortgage
note into one note for a thousand dollars plus the interest for sixty days until the colonel
could make a turn, and after that the colonel was happy again. He forgot for a moment the responsibility
of wealth and engaged himself in the task of making the Memorial Day celebration in Sycamore
Ridge the greatest event in the history of the town. Though there were only five soldiers'
graves to decorate, the longest procession Garrison County had ever known wound up the hill
to the cemetery, and Colonel Martin Culpepper in his red sash, with his Knights Templar hat
on, riding up and down the line on an iron-gray stallion, was easily the most notable figure
in the spectacle. Even General Hendricks, revived by the pomp of the occasion, heading the
troop of ten veterans of the Mexican War, and General Ward, in his regimentals, were inconsequential
compared with the colonel. And his oration at the graves, after the bugles had blown taps,
kept the multitude in tears for half an hour. John Barclay's address at the Opera House that
afternoon--the address on "The Soldier and the Scholar"--was so completely overshadowed by
the colonel's oratorical flight that Jane teased her husband about the eclipse for a month,
and never could make him laugh. Moreover, the Banner that week printed the colonel's oration
in full and referred to John's address as "a few sensible remarks by Hon. John Barclay on the
duty of scholarship in times of peace." But here is the strange thing about it--those who read
the colonel's oration were not moved by it; the charm of the voice and the spell of the tall,
handsome, vigorous man and the emotion of the occasion were needed to make the colonel's oratory
move one. Still, opinions differ even about so palpable a proposition as the ephemeral nature
of the colonel's oratory. For the Banner that week pronounced it one of the classic oratorical
gems of American eloquence, and the editor thereof brought a dozen copies of the paper under
his arm when he climbed the hill to Lincoln Avenue the following Sunday night, and presented
them to the women of the Culpepper household, whom he was punctilious to call "the ladies,"
and he assured Miss Molly and Mistress Culpepper--he was nice about those titles also--that
their father and husband had a great future before him in the forum.

It may be well to pause here and present so punctilious a gentleman as Adrian Pericles Brownwell
to the reader somewhat more formally than he has been introduced. For he will appear in this
story many times. In the first place he wore mustaches--chestnut-coloured mustaches--that drooped
rather gracefully from his lip to his jaw, and thence over his coat lapels; in the second place
he always wore gloves, and never was without a flower in his long frock-coat; and thirdly he
clicked his cane on the sidewalk so regularly that his approach was heralded, and the company
was prepared for the coming of a serious, rather nervous, fiery man, a stickler for his social
dues; and finally in those days, those sombre days of Sycamore Ridge after the panic of '73,
when men had to go to the post-office to get their ten-dollar bills changed, Brownwell had
the money to support the character he assumed. He had come to the Ridge from the South,--from
that part of the South that carried its pistol in its hip pocket and made a large and serious
matter of its honour,--that was obvious; he had paid Ezra Lane two thousand dollars for the
Banner, that was a matter of record; and he had marched with some grandeur into General Hendricks'
bank one Saturday and had clinked out five thousand dollars in gold on the marble slab at the
teller's window, and that was a matter attested to by a crowd of witnesses. Watts McHurdie
used to say that more people saw that deposit than could be packed into the front room of the
bank with a collar stuffer.

But why Adrian Brownwell had come to the Ridge, and where he had made his money--there myth
and fable enter into the composition of the narrative, and one man's opinion is as good as
another's. Curiously enough, all who testify claim that they speak by the authority of Mr.
Brownwell himself. But he was a versatile and obliging gentleman withal, so it is not unlikely
that all those who assembled him from the uttermost parts of the earth into Sycamore Ridge
for all the reasons in the longer catechism, were telling the simple truth as they have reason
to believe it. What men know of a certainty is that he came, that he hired the bridal chamber
of the Thayer House for a year, and that he contested John Barclay's right to be known as the
glass of fashion and the mould of form in Garrison County for thirty long years, and then--but
that is looking in the back of the book, which is manifestly unfair.

It is enough to know now that on that Sunday evening after Memorial Day, in 1874, Adrian P.
Brownwell sat on the veranda of the Culpepper home slapping his lavender gloves on his knee
by way of emphasis, and told the company what he told General Beauregard and what General Beauregard
told him, at the battle of Shiloh; also what his maternal grandfather, Governor Papin, had
said to General Jackson, when his grandmother, then Mademoiselle Dulangpré, youngest daughter
of the refugee duke of that house, had volunteered to nurse the American soldiers in Jackson's
hospital after the battle of New Orleans; also, and with detail, what his father, Congressman
Brownwell, had said on the capitol steps in December, 1860, before leaving for Washington to
resign his seat in Congress; and also with much greater detail he recounted the size of his
ancestral domain, the number of the ancestral slaves and the royal state of the ancestral household,
and then with a grand wave of his gloves, and a shrug of which Madam Papin might well have
been proud, "But 'tis all over; and we are brothers--one country, one flag, one God, one very
kind but very busy God!" And he smiled so graciously through his great mustaches, showing his
fine even teeth, that Mrs. Culpepper, Methodist to the heart, smiled back and was not so badly
shocked as she knew she should have been.

"Is it not so?" he asked with his voice and his hands at once. "Ah," he exclaimed, addressing
Mrs. Culpepper dramatically, "what better proof would you have of our brotherhood than our
common bondage to you? However dark the night of our national discord--to-day, North, South,
East, West, we bask in the sunrise of some woman's eyes." He fluttered his gloves gayly toward
Molly and continued:--

    "'O when did morning ever break,
    And find such beaming eyes awake.'"

And so he rattled on, and the colonel had to poke his words into the conversation in wedge-shaped
queries, and Mrs. Culpepper, being in due and proper awe of so much family and such apparent
consequence, spoke little and smiled many times. And if it was "Miss Molly" this and "Miss
Molly" that, when the colonel went into the house to lock the back doors, and "Miss Molly"
the other when Mrs. Culpepper went in to open the west bedroom windows; and even if it was
"Miss Molly, shall we go down town and refresh ourselves with a dish of ice-cream?" and even
if still further a full-grown man standing at the gate under the May moon deftly nips a rose
from Miss Molly's hair and holds the rose in both hands to his lips as he bows a good night--what
then? What were roses made for and brown eyes and long lashes and moons and May winds heavy
with the odour of flowers and laden with the faint sounds of distant herd bells tinkling upon
the hills? For men are bold at thirty-five, and maidens, the best and sweetest, truest, gentlest
maidens in all the world, are shy at twenty-one, and polite to their elders and betters of
thirty-five--even when those elders and betters forget their years!

As for Adrian P. Brownwell, he went about his daily task, editing the Banner, making it as
luscious and effulgent as a seed catalogue, with rhetorical pictures about as florid and unconvincing.
To him the town was a veritable Troy--full of heroes and demigods, and honourables and persons
of nobility and quality. He used no adjective of praise milder than superb, and on the other
hand, Lige Bemis once complained that the least offensive epithet he saw in the Banner tacked
after his name for two years was miscreant. As for John Barclay, he once told General Ward
that a man could take five dollars in to Brownwell and come out a statesman, a Croesus or a
scholar, as the exigencies of the case demanded, and for ten dollars he could combine the three.

Yet for all that Brownwell ever remained a man apart. No one thought of calling him "Ade."
Sooner would one nickname a gargoyle on a tin cornice. So the editor of the Banner never came
close to the real heart of Sycamore Ridge, and often for months at a time he did not know what
the people were thinking. And that summer when General Hendricks was walking out of the bank
every hour and looking from under his thin, blue-veined hand at the strange cloud of insects
covering the sky, and when Martin Culpepper was predicting that the plague of grasshoppers
would leave the next day, and when John Barclay was getting that deep vertical crease between
his eyes that made him look forty while he was still in his twenties, Adrian P. Brownwell was
chirping cheerfully in the Banner about the "salubrious climate of Garrison County," and writing
articles about "our phenomenal prospects for a bumper crop." And when in the middle of July
the grasshoppers had eaten the wheat to the ground and had left the corn stalks stripped like
beanpoles, and had devoured every green thing in their path, the Banner contained only a five-line
item referring to the plague and calling it a "most curious and unusual visitation." But that
summer the Banner was filled with Brownwell's editorials on "The Tonic Effect of the Prairie
Ozone," "Turn the Rascals Out," "Our Duty to the South," and "The Kingdom of Corn." As a writer
Brownwell was what is called "fluent" and "genial." And he was fond of copying articles from
the Topeka and Kansas City papers about himself, in which he was referred to as "the gallant
and urbane editor of the Banner."

But then we all have our weaknesses, and be it said to the everlasting credit of Adrian Brownwell
that he understood and appreciated Watts McHurdie and Colonel Culpepper better than any other
man in town, and that he printed Watts' poems on all occasions, and never referred to him as
anything less than "our honoured townsman," or as "our talented and distinguished fellow-citizen,"
and he never laughed at General Ward. But the best he could do for John Barclay--even after
John had become one of the world's great captains--was to wave his gloves resignedly and exclaim,
"Industry, thy name is Barclay." And Barclay in return seemed never to warm up to Brownwell.
"Colonel," replied John to some encomium of his old friend's upon the new editor, "I'll say
this much. Certainly your friend is a prosperous talker!"

CHAPTER XI

The twenty-fifth of July, 1874, is a memorable day in the life of John Barclay. For on that
day the grasshoppers which had eaten off the twenty thousand acres of wheat in the fields of
the Golden Belt Wheat Company, as though it had been cropped, rose and left the Missouri Valley.
They will never come back, for they are ploughed under in the larva every year by the Colorado
farmers who have invaded the plains where once the "hoppers" had their nursery; but all this,
even if he had known it, would not have cheered up John that day. For he knew that he owed
one hundred and fifty thousand dollars to Eastern stockholders of the company, and he had not
a dollar to show for it. He had expected to borrow the money needed for the harvesting in the
fall, and over and over and over again he had figured with paper and pencil the amount of his
debt, and again and again he had tried to find some way to pay even the interest on the debt
at six per cent, which the bank had guaranteed. While the locusts were devouring the vegetation,
he walked the hemp carpet that ran diagonally across his office, and chased phantom after phantom
of hope that lured him up to the rim of a solution of the problem, only to push him back into
the abyss. He walked with his hands deep in his trousers pockets and his head down, and as
General Ward was out organizing the farmers in a revolt against the dominant party in the state,
Barclay was alone most of the time. The picture of that barren office, with its insurance chromos,
with its white, cobweb-marked walls, with its dirty floor partly covered with an "X" of red-bordered
hemp carpet reaching from the middle to the four corners, the picture of the four tall unwashed
windows letting in the merciless afternoon sun to fade the grimy black and white lithograph
of William Lloyd Garrison above the general's desk, never left John Barclay's memory. It was
like a cell on a prisoner's mind.

As he paced the room that last day of the visit of the grasshoppers, General Hendricks came
in. His hair had whitened in the summer. The panic and the plague of the locusts had literally
wrung the sap out of his nerves. Old age was pressing inexorably upon him, palsying his hands
on its rack, tripping his feet in its helpless mazes. His dimmed eyes could see only ruin coming,
coming slowly and steadily toward him. In the panic, it came suddenly and inspired fight in
him. But this year there was something diabolical in its resistless approach. So he shrank
from his impending fate as a child trembles at some unknown terror. But Barclay did not swerve.
He knew the affairs of the bank fairly well. He was a director who never signed the quarterly
statement without verifying every item for himself. He had dreaded the general's visit, yet
he knew that it must come, and he pulled toward the general a big hickory chair. The old man
sank into it and looked helplessly into the drawn hard face of the younger man and sighed,
"Well, John?"

