He rose rather late when at the army.  In this situation he wrote his letters, and gave his
morning orders.  Whoever had business with him, general officers and distinguished persons,
could speak to him then.  He had accustomed the army to this infamy.  At the same time he gobbled
his breakfast; and whilst he ate, listened, or gave orders, many spectators always standing
round.... (I must be excused these disgraceful details, in order better to make him known)....
On shaving days he used the same vessel to lather his chin in.  This, according to him, was
a simplicity of manner worthy of the ancient Romans, and which condemned the splendour and
superfluity of the others.  When all was over, he dressed; then played high at piquet or hombre;
or rode out, if it was absolutely necessary.  All was now over for the day.  He supped copiously
with his familiars: was a great eater, of wonderful gluttony; a connoisseur in no dish, liked
fish much, but the stale and stinking better than the good. The meal prolonged itself in theses
and disputes, and above all in praise and flattery.

He would never have forgiven the slightest blame from any one.  He wanted to pass for the first
captain of his age, and spoke with indecent contempt of Prince Eugene and all the others. 
The faintest contradiction would have been a crime.  The soldier and the subaltern adored him
for his familiarity with them, and the licence he allowed in order to gain their hearts; for
all which he made up by excessive haughtiness towards whoever was elevated by rank or birth.

On one occasion the Duke of Parma sent the bishop of that place to negotiate some affair with
him; but M. de Vendome took such disgusting liberties in his presence, that the ecclesiastic,
though without saying a word, returned to Parma, and declared to his master that never would
he undertake such an embassy again.  In his place another envoy was sent, the famous Alberoni.
He was the son of a gardener, who became an Abbe in order to get on.  He was full of buffoonery;
and pleased M. de Parma as might a valet who amused him, but he soon showed talent and capacity
for affairs.  The Duke thought that the night-chair of M. de Vendome required no other ambassador
than Alberoni, who was accordingly sent to conclude what the bishop had left undone.  The Abbe
determined to please, and was not proud.  M. de Vendome exhibited himself as before; and Alberoni,
by an infamous act of personal adoration, gained his heart.  He was thenceforth much with him,
made cheese-soup and other odd messes for him; and finally worked his way.  It is true he was
cudgelled by some one he had offended, for a thousand paces, in sight of the whole army, but
this did not prevent his advancement.  Vendome liked such an unscrupulous flatterer; and yet
as we have seen, he was not in want of praise.  The extraordinary favour shown him by the King--the
credulity with which his accounts of victories were received--showed to every one in what direction
their laudation was to be sent.

Such was the man whom the King and the whole Court hastened to caress and flatter from the
first moment of his arrival amongst us.  There was a terrible hubbub: boys, porters, and valets
rallied round his postchaise when he reached Marly.  Scarcely had he ascended into his chamber,
than everybody, princes, bastards and all the rest, ran after him.  The ministers followed:
so that in a short time nobody was left in the salon but the ladies.  M. de Beauvilliers was
at Vaucresson.  As for me, I remained spectator, and did not go and adore this idol.

In a few minutes Vendome was sent for by the King and Monseigneur.  As soon as he could dress
himself, surrounded as he was by such a crowd, he went to the salon, carried by it rather than
environed.  Monseigneur stopped the music that was playing, in order to embrace him.  The King
left the cabinet where he was at work, and came out to meet him, embracing him several times.
Chamillart on the morrow gave a fete in his honour at L'Etang, which lasted two days.  Following
his example, Pontchartrain, Torcy, and the most distinguished lords of the Court, did the same.
People begged and entreated to give him fetes; people begged and entreated to be invited to
them.  Never was triumph equal to his; each step he took procured him a new one.  It is not
too much to say, that everybody disappeared before him; Princes of the blood, ministers, the
grandest seigneurs, all appeared only to show how high he was above them; even the King seemed
only to remain King to elevate him more.

The people joined in this enthusiasm, both in Versailles and at Paris, where he went under
pretence of going to the opera.  As he passed along the streets crowds collected to cheer him;
they billed him at the doors, and every seat was taken in advance; people pushed and squeezed
everywhere, and the price of admission was doubled, as on the nights of first performances.
Vendome, who received all these homages with extreme ease, was yet internally surprised by
a folly so universal.  He feared that all this heat would not last out even the short stay
he intended to make.  To keep himself more in reserve, he asked and obtained permission to
go to Anet, in the intervals between the journeys to Marly.  All the Court, however, followed
him there, and the King was pleased rather than otherwise, at seeing Versailles half deserted
for Anet, actually asking some if they had been, others, when they intended to go.

It was evident that every one had resolved to raise M. de Vendome to the rank of a hero.  He
determined to profit by the resolution.  If they made him Mars, why should he not act as such?
He claimed to be appointed commander of the Marechals of France, and although the King refused
him this favour, he accorded him one which was but the stepping-stone to it. M. de Vendome
went away towards the middle of March to command the army in Italy, with a letter signed by
the King himself, promising him that if a Marechal of France were sent to Italy, that Marechal
was to take commands from him.  M. de Vendome was content, and determined to obtain all he
asked on a future day.  The disposition of the armies had been arranged just before.  Tesse,
for Catalonia and Spain; Berwick, for the frontier of Portugal; Marechal Villars, for Alsace;
Marsin, for the Moselle; Marechal de Villeroy, for Flanders; and M. de Vendome, as I have said,
for Italy.

Now that I am speaking of the armies, let me give here an account of all our military operations
this year, so as to complete that subject at once.

M. de Vendome commenced his Italian campaign by a victory.  He attacked the troops of Prince
Eugene upon the heights of Calcinato, drove them before him, killed three thousand men, took
twenty standards, ten pieces of cannon, and eight thousand prisoners.  It was a rout rather
than a combat.  The enemy was much inferior in force to us, and was without its general, Prince
Eugene, he not having returned to open the campaign.  He came back, however, the day after
this engagement, soon re-established order among his troops, and M. de Vendome from that time,
far from being able to recommence the attack, was obliged to keep strictly on the defensive
while he remained in Italy.  He did not fail to make the most of his victory, which, however,
to say the truth, led to nothing.

