But after he had been singing awhile, mist and shadows seemed to gather about him, sometimes
coming out of the sea, and sometimes moving upon it. It seemed to him that one of the shadows
was the queen-woman he had seen in her sleep at Slieve Echtge; not in her sleep now, but mocking,
and calling out to them that were behind her: 'He was weak, he was weak, he had no courage.'
And he felt the strands of the rope in his hand yet, and went on twisting it, but it seemed
to him as he twisted, that it had all the sorrows of the world in it. And then it seemed to
him as if the rope had changed in his dream into a great water-worm that came out of the sea,
and that twisted itself about him, and held him closer and closer, and grew from big to bigger
till the whole of the earth and skies were wound up in it, and the stars themselves were but
the shining of the ridges of its skin. And then he got free of it, and went on, shaking and
unsteady, along the edge of the strand, and the grey shapes were flying here and there around
him. And this is what they were saying, 'It is a pity for him that refuses the call of the
daughters of the Sidhe, for he will find no comfort in the love of the women of the earth to
the end of life and time, and the cold of the grave is in his heart for ever. It is death he
has chosen; let him die, let him die, let him die.'

HANRAHAN AND CATHLEEN THE DAUGHTER OF HOOLIHAN.

It was travelling northward Hanrahan was one time, giving a hand to a farmer now and again
in the hurried time of the year, and telling his stories and making his share of songs at wakes
and at weddings.

He chanced one day to overtake on the road to Collooney one Margaret Rooney, a woman he used
to know in Munster when he was a young man. She had no good name at that time, and it was the
priest routed her out of the place at last. He knew her by her walk and by the colour of her
eyes, and by a way she had of putting back the hair off her face with her left hand. She had
been wandering about, she said, selling herrings and the like, and now she was going back to
Sligo, to the place in the Burrough where she was living with another woman, Mary Gillis, who
had much the same story as herself. She would be well pleased, she said, if he would come and
stop in the house with them, and be singing his songs to the bacachs and blind men and fiddlers
of the Burrough. She remembered him well, she said, and had a wish for him; and as to Mary
Gillis, she had some of his songs off by heart, so he need not be afraid of not getting good
treatment, and all the bacachs and poor men that heard him would give him a share of their
own earnings for his stories and his songs while he was with them, and would carry his name
into all the parishes of Ireland.

He was glad enough to go with her, and to find a woman to be listening to the story of his
troubles and to be comforting him. It was at the moment of the fall of day when every man may
pass as handsome and every woman as comely. She put her arm about him when he told her of the
misfortune of the Twisting of the Rope, and in the half light she looked as well as another.

They kept in talk all the way to the Burrough, and as for Mary Gillis, when she saw him and
heard who he was, she went near crying to think of having a man with so great a name in the house.

Hanrahan was well pleased to settle down with them for a while, for he was tired with wandering;
and since the day he found the little cabin fallen in, and Mary Lavelle gone from it, and the
thatch scattered, he had never asked to have any place of his own; and he had never stopped
long enough in any place to see the green leaves come where he had seen the old leaves wither,
or to see the wheat harvested where he had seen it sown. It was a good change to him to have
shelter from the wet, and a fire in the evening time, and his share of food put on the table
without the asking.

He made a good many of his songs while he was living there, so well cared for and so quiet,
The most of them were love songs, but some were songs of repentance, and some were songs about
Ireland and her griefs, under one name or another.

Every evening the bacachs and beggars and blind men and fiddlers would gather into the house
and listen to his songs and his poems, and his stories about the old time of the Fianna, and
they kept them in their memories that were never spoiled with books; and so they brought his
name to every wake and wedding and pattern in the whole of Connaught. He was never so well
off or made so much of as he was at that time.

One evening of December he was singing a little song that he said he had heard from the green
plover of the mountain, about the fair-haired boys that had left Limerick, and that were wandering
and going astray in all parts of the world. There were a good many people in the room that
night, and two or three little lads that had crept in, and sat on the floor near the fire,
and were too busy with the roasting of a potato in the ashes or some such thing to take much
notice of him; but they remembered long afterwards when his name had gone up, the sound of
his voice, and what way he had moved his hand, and the look of him as he sat on the edge of
the bed, with his shadow falling on the whitewashed wall behind him, and as he moved going
up as high as the thatch. And they knew then that they had looked upon a king of the poets
of the Gael, and a maker of the dreams of men.

Of a sudden his singing stopped, and his eyes grew misty as if he was looking at some far thing.

Mary Gillis was pouring whiskey into a mug that stood on a table beside him, and she left off
pouring and said, 'Is it of leaving us you are thinking?'

Margaret Rooney heard what she said, and did not know why she said it, and she took the words
too much in earnest and came over to him, and there was dread in her heart that she was going
to lose so wonderful a poet and so good a comrade, and a man that was thought so much of, and
that brought so many to her house.

'You would not go away from us, my heart?' she said, catching him by the hand.

'It is not of that I am thinking,' he said, 'but of Ireland and the weight of grief that is
on her.' And he leaned his head against his hand, and began to sing these words, and the sound
of his voice was like the wind in a lonely place.

  The old brown thorn trees break in two high over Cummen Strand
  Under a bitter black wind that blows from the left hand;
  Our courage breaks like an old tree in a black wind and dies,
  But we have hidden in our hearts the flame out of the eyes
  Of Cathleen the daughter of Hoolihan.

  The winds was bundled up the clouds high over Knocknarea
  And thrown the thunder on the stones for all that Maeve can say;
  Angers that are like noisy clouds have set our hearts abeat,
  But we have all bent low and low and kissed the quiet feet
  Of Cathleen the daughter of Hoolihan.

  The yellow pool has overflowed high upon Clooth-na-Bare,
  For the wet winds are blowing out of the clinging air;
  Like heavy flooded waters our bodies and our blood,
  But purer than a tall candle before the Holy Rood
  Is Cathleen the daughter of Hoolihan.

While he was singing, his voice began to break, and tears came rolling down his cheeks, and
Margaret Rooney put down her face into her hands and began to cry along with him. Then a blind
beggar by the fire shook his rags with a sob, and after that there was no one of them all but
cried tears down.

RED HANRAHAN'S CURSE.

