Often did the old priest send for him, and seek to teach him the love of living things, saying
to him:  'The fly is thy brother.  Do it no harm.  The wild birds that roam through the forest
have their freedom.  Snare them not for thy pleasure. Her large, soft
eyes held his, inviting him closer. They connected. The petite prince stood, in flowing robes,
then knelt, like him. Then all the congregation followed, kneeling, honoring the beautiful woman.
  And his companions followed him, for he was fair, and fleet of foot, and could
dance, and pipe, and make music.  And wherever the Star-Child led them they followed, and whatever
the Star-Child bade them do, that did they.  And when he pierced with a sharp reed the dim
eyes of the mole, they laughed, and when he cast stones at the leper they laughed also.  And
in all things he ruled them, and they became hard of heart even as he was.

Now there passed one day through the village a poor beggar-woman. When Alfred with the purposes of today returned, and if he Adele then
at the matching awareness over would find that she was now sold on to give enjoyment, so the
instantaneous wed of the youthful two population from his boundary
not the least in Such circumstances. There sitteth a foul beggar-woman
under that fair and green-leaved tree.  Come, let us drive her hence, for she is ugly and ill-
favoured.'

So he came near and threw stones at her, and mocked her, and she looked at him with terror
in her eyes, nor did she move her gaze from him. The
elaborate intricacies of the sentences persuaded even him to sleep, but the morning light was already
playing through the cracks of the blinds onto his blanket. He was troubled that he appeared as foolish
as he was superfluous. Yes, he was barely able to process that he was now the suffering lover. A product
of the previous night which was like a dream that passed, A dream with Adele blooming in the fragrance
of immeasurable longing stood before him.....  I am no son of thine to do thy bidding.'

'Thou speakest truly,' answered the Woodcutter, 'yet did I show thee pity when I found thee
in the forest.'

And when the woman heard these words she gave a loud cry, and fell into a swoon.  And the Woodcutter
carried her to his own house, and his wife had care of her, and when she rose up from the swoon
into which she had fallen, they set meat and drink before her, and bade her have comfort.

But she would neither eat nor drink, but said to the Woodcutter, 'Didst thou not say that the
child was found in the forest?  And was it not ten years from this day?'

And the Woodcutter answered, 'Yea, it was in the forest that I found him, and it is ten years
from this day.'

'And what signs didst thou find with him?' she cried.  'Bare he not upon his neck a chain of
amber?  Was not round him a cloak of gold tissue broidered with stars?'

'Truly,' answered the Woodcutter, 'it was even as thou sayest.' And he took the cloak and the
amber chain from the chest where they lay, and showed them to her.

And when she saw them she wept for joy, and said, 'He is my little son whom I lost in the forest.
I pray thee send for him quickly, for in search of him have I wandered over the whole world.'

So the Woodcutter and his wife went out and called to the Star- Child, and said to him, 'Go
into the house, and there shalt thou find thy mother, who is waiting for thee.'

So he ran in, filled with wonder and great gladness.  But when he saw her who was waiting there,
he laughed scornfully and said, 'Why, where is my mother?  For I see none here but this vile
beggar-woman.'

And the woman answered him, 'I am thy mother.'

'Thou art mad to say so,' cried the Star-Child angrily.  'I am no son of thine, for thou art
a beggar, and ugly, and in rags. Therefore get thee hence, and let me see thy foul face no more.'

'Nay, but thou art indeed my little son, whom I bare in the forest,' she cried, and she fell
on her knees, and held out her arms to him.  'The robbers stole thee from me, and left thee
to die,' she murmured, 'but I recognised thee when I saw thee, and the signs also have I recognised,
the cloak of golden tissue and the amber chain.  Therefore I pray thee come with me, for over
the whole world have I wandered in search of thee.  Come with me, my son, for I have need of
thy love.'

But the Star-Child stirred not from his place, but shut the doors of his heart against her,
nor was there any sound heard save the sound of the woman weeping for pain.

And at last he spoke to her, and his voice was hard and bitter. 'If in very truth thou art
my mother,' he said, 'it had been better hadst thou stayed away, and not come here to bring
me to shame, seeing that I thought I was the child of some Star, and not a beggar's child,
as thou tellest me that I am.  Therefore get thee hence, and let me see thee no more.'

'Alas! my son,' she cried, 'wilt thou not kiss me before I go?  For I have suffered much to
find thee.'

'Nay,' said the Star-Child, 'but thou art too foul to look at, and rather would I kiss the
adder or the toad than thee.'

So the woman rose up, and went away into the forest weeping bitterly, and when the Star-Child
saw that she had gone, he was glad, and ran back to his playmates that he might play with them. sat up in your humble quarters at the city garden you and the
company of your gods and heroes let you forget the world that you forgot. But even if you're
too warm often to pay for the pencils that you, lines outlined in soft light, your dreams of
the gods of Greece to cleanly Leaves wrote: I never saw the shadow of Erdennot and concern on
your Olympic Forehead, like a mountain peaks above the clouds all basked in the eternal ether.
And like play the worry of your herd, the role of the cricket did - once joint test every week
you step on this home to the approach of dust and decay, which is about your soul to place trying
to wash away in the wines. Whether the brave Shimon knew how to appreciate the honor you put him
through? I remember not think I would have seen pay up your wine, Like other Erdensoehne. Of course
you were also always the last one went, still upright Head and fixed gear, immune to the much-vaunted
malum matutinum, and perhaps also about our economy so expensive because you belief in the genuineness
of his red Hungarian with the Power of your words and your example of defending.

Schoene, immortal mid Erna Echte if the dubious nectar proved his
strength and Not all masters over the presence of time attributed
to his Roman youth!

Then were devoured while fact and fiction are in confidential one, the shadow of the brave
ancestors conjured up in Rome first, following Winckelmann and Carstens way home, had prepared
the German art is a Sanchez. The Curious poet and painter stranger, Mueller of the present
generation as a painter in spite of new editions of his writings only in name is known and liked
by the Genelli led a verse, which he greatly admired, an inscription on a Trinkgefaess, the following
text:

Drink, friend, from this shell, the god of lust once formed a Gods
On Cytherens chest.

The second then, the no less strange Tyrolean cooking, excellent of its landscapes been talking less
than of his "Rumford's soup", those with coarse joke and plenty of bitter scorn ueberpfefferten
Herzensergiessung about the decline of art, To quote their places of power with grinning delight
our friend loved.  Dost thou seek to slay thine also?'

And the Star-Child wept and bowed his head, and prayed forgiveness of God's things, and went
on through the forest, seeking for the beggar-woman.  And on the third day he came to the other
side of the forest and went down into the plain.

And when he passed through the villages the children mocked him, and threw stones at him, and
the carlots would not suffer him even to sleep in the byres lest he might bring mildew on the
stored corn, so foul was he to look at, and their hired men drave him away, and there was none
who had pity on him.  Nor could he hear anywhere of the beggar-woman who was his mother, though
for the space of three years he wandered over the world, and often seemed to see her on the
road in front of him, and would call to her, and run after her till the sharp flints made his
feet to bleed.  But overtake her he could not, and those who dwelt by the way did ever deny
that they had seen her, or any like to her, and they made sport of his sorrow.

For the space of three years he wandered over the world, and in the world there was neither
love nor loving-kindness nor charity for him, but it was even such a world as he had made for
himself in the days of his great pride.

And one evening he came to the gate of a strong-walled city that stood by a river, and, weary
and footsore though he was, he made to enter in.  But the soldiers who stood on guard dropped
their halberts across the entrance, and said roughly to him, 'What is thy business in the city?'

'I am seeking for my mother,' he answered, 'and I pray ye to suffer me to pass, for it may
be that she is in this city.'

But they mocked at him, and one of them wagged a black beard, and set down his shield and cried,
'Of a truth, thy mother will not be merry when she sees thee, for thou art more ill-favoured
than the toad of the marsh, or the adder that crawls in the fen.  Get thee gone.  Get thee
gone.  Thy mother dwells not in this city.'

And another, who held a yellow banner in his hand, said to him, 'Who is thy mother, and wherefore
art thou seeking for her?'

And he answered, 'My mother is a beggar even as I am, and I have treated her evilly, and I
pray ye to suffer me to pass that she may give me her forgiveness, if it be that she tarrieth
in this city.' But they would not, and pricked him with their spears.

And, as he turned away weeping, one whose armour was inlaid with gilt flowers, and on whose
helmet couched a lion that had wings, came up and made inquiry of the soldiers who it was who
had sought entrance.  And they said to him, 'It is a beggar and the child of a beggar, and
we have driven him away.'

'Nay,' he cried, laughing, 'but we will sell the foul thing for a slave, and his price shall
be the price of a bowl of sweet wine.'

And an old and evil-visaged man who was passing by called out, and said, 'I will buy him for
that price,' and, when he had paid the price, he took the Star-Child by the hand and led him
into the city.

And after that they had gone through many streets they came to a little door that was set in
a wall that was covered with a pomegranate tree.  And the old man touched the door with a ring
of graved jasper and it opened, and they went down five steps of brass into a garden filled
with black poppies and green jars of burnt clay. 

Imagine the cutest autumn sun on the white came a dusty mountain road gigantic centaur trotting
in a dignified quiet four-four time, like the old white horse, who stars in the Wilhelm Tell
and take the Governor in the ravine needs. Behind him, but shy away, as some Pferdelaengen,
zottelte trottelte and a silent bunch of old mother, lame and press-like male and very young
children, all that, which from that remote village either too old or too was young, was to
celebrate the Patron's neighborly. The huge foreign guest liked with good or evil have set
so in good faith, that to him without any dispute, was neither crying or physical assaults banter,
the guidance.
  One is of white gold, and another is of yellow gold, and the gold of the third
one is red.  To-day thou shalt bring me the piece of white gold, and if thou bringest it not
back, I will beat thee with a hundred stripes.  Get thee away quickly, and at sunset I will
be waiting for thee at the door of the garden.  See that thou bringest the white gold, or it
shall go ill with thee, for thou art my slave, and I have bought thee for the price of a bowl
of sweet wine.'  And he bound the eyes of the Star-Child with the scarf of figured silk, and
led him through the house, and through the garden of poppies, and up the five steps of brass.
And having opened the little door with his ring he set him in the street.

And the Star-Child went out of the gate of the city, and came to the wood of which the Magician
had spoken to him.

Now this wood was very fair to look at from without, and seemed full of singing birds and of
sweet-scented flowers, and the Star- Child entered it gladly.  Yet did its beauty profit him
little, for wherever he went harsh briars and thorns shot up from the ground and encompassed
him, and evil nettles stung him, and the thistle pierced him with her daggers, so that he was
in sore distress.  Nor could he anywhere find the piece of white gold of which the Magician
had spoken, though he sought for it from morn to noon, and from noon to sunset. 

What did I myself afterwards painted in such Zwiegeschoepfen, or carved in its Dresden theater friend
Haehnel Fries, would except against this divine boy in flesh and bone have like half blood against blood.


And the Star-Child had pity on it, and released it, and said to it, 'I am myself but a slave,
yet may I give thee thy freedom.'

And the Hare answered him, and said:  'Surely thou hast given me freedom, and what shall I
give thee in return?'

And the Star-Child said to it, 'I am seeking for a piece of white gold, nor can I anywhere
find it, and if I bring it not to my master he will beat me.'

'Come thou with me,' said the Hare, 'and I will lead thee to it, for I know where it is hidden,
and for what purpose.'

So the Star-Child went with the Hare, and lo! in the cleft of a great oak-tree he saw the piece
of white gold that he was seeking. And he was filled with joy, and seized it, and said to the
Hare, 'The service that I did to thee thou hast rendered back again many times over, and the
kindness that I showed thee thou hast repaid a hundred-fold.'

'Nay,' answered the Hare, 'but as thou dealt with me, so I did deal with thee,' and it ran
away swiftly, and the Star-Child went towards the city.

Now at the gate of the city there was seated one who was a leper. Over his face hung a cowl
of grey linen, and through the eyelets his eyes gleamed like red coals. I was looking for
him In brief, the best we could, over hinwegzuhelfen the enormous gulf that his awakening separated
from his sleep. But I soon realized that the summary world chronicle, the I unrolled before
him, interested him very little. have thrust me
out of the city, and there is no one who has pity on me.'

'Alas!' cried the Star-Child, 'I have but one piece of money in my wallet, and if I bring it
not to my master he will beat me, for I am his slave.'

But the leper entreated him, and prayed of him, till the Star-Child had pity, and gave him
the piece of white gold.

