To cement the hollow reconciliation, Villa Dorta was burnt, after the kindly usage, and the
fleet went prize hunting. Three Spanish ships from the Havannah were captured. The largest,
of 400 tons, was laden with gold, cochineal, indigo, civet, musk, and ambergris, beside many
valuable passengers. Enough of cochineal and indigo was taken 'to be used in this realm for
many years,' according to an official report. Ralegh was its captor. He expressed his pleasure
either magnanimously or contemptuously: 'Although we shall be little the better, the prizes
will in great measure give content to her Majesty, so that there may be no repining against
this poor lord for the expense of the voyage.' They missed forty India-men, which escaped into
the strong harbour of Terceira. The colonels bragged they were ready to storm the forts. Howard
and Ralegh, who thought the enterprise impracticable, offered as a test of the sincerity of
the soldiers to back them with 3000 seamen. Thereupon the project was dropped. At St. Michael's,
Essex, according to Gorges, who it must be remembered was Ralegh's officer, wasted precious
days at Villa Franca. He let his men revel in fruit and wine, and lost the moment for surprising
the capital. Ralegh meanwhile, in the road, took a Brazil ship, which, when sold in England,
paid the wages of the whole of the 400 sailors and soldiers of the Warspright. Through a Dutch
captain's over-haste, an 1800 ton carack 'of infinite wealth, laden with the riches of the
East and West,' eluded him. She ran herself aground, and was burnt by her crew. He in his barge
crossed the furious surf too late to put out the flames. Very speedily she was all over thunder
and lightning. Her ordnance discharged from every port, and the clouds exhaled from her spicy
entrails perfumed the air for many hours. By this time autumn was come. Not too soon, the fleet,
which had assembled off Villa Franca, set sail. The town was spared the customary flames, for
causes unknown to Gorges. After suffering from want of water, and from tempests, in which the
skill of John Davys, Essex's famous pilot, proved inferior to that of Broadbent, who was Ralegh's,
St. Ives was reached. Ralegh's return rejoiced Cornwall, which had been alarmed by descents
of Spanish caravels. The whole tale was set forth vividly by Sir Arthur Gorges in his Relation
of the Island Voyage, written in 1607, and printed, it is said, at the request of Prince Henry.

CHAPTER XIV.

FINAL FEUD WITH ESSEX (1597-1601).

[Sidenote: A Busy Life.]

The Islands Voyage was the last for many years of Ralegh's personal adventures at sea. After
it he found enough, and too much, to occupy him at home. He speaks of himself as 'mad with
intricate affairs and want of means.' As soon as he returned he had to take precautions against
an expected attack on Falmouth by a Spanish fleet of 110 or 160 sail. Only the tempest which
had troubled Essex and him prevented its arrival while he was away. He was arranging for the
journey into Spain of a spy, who had a pass from Philip, whereby he might safely look into
the ports. He was urging on the Council the despatch of light warships against the Spanish
treasure fleet. He represented it as a complement to the preceding expedition, less hazardous
and likely to be much more lucrative. The squadron would be absent only in the dead of winter,
and could be back by spring, 'sufficient timely to answer any attempt from Spain.' He was provisioning
Western ports, paying their garrisons, and reckoning the cost of maintenance of captive Spaniards.
He was scolding a presumptuous nephew, John Gilbert. He was upholding the ancient tenures of
the Duchy of Cornwall, and resisting the exaction of obsolete licences for drying and packing
fish. He was relieving miners from extortions by merchants. He was advocating an Irish policy
of terrorism, in the course perhaps of a visit to Munster, as Mr. Payne Collier has inferred
from the language of his letter itself, rather more confidently than it warrants, though a
current rumour that he was out of heart at the moment with his Court prospects favours the
hypothesis of self-banishment. At any rate, in October, 1598, he was writing to shame-faced
Cecil in defence, it is sad to say, of official connivance at the assassination of Irish rebels:
'It can be no disgrace if it were known that the killing of a rebel were practised. But, for
yourself, you are not to be touched in the matter.' In his History he condemns lying in wait
privily for blood as wilful murder. In return for his activity and his fierceness he was recognised
as both hostile and important enough to be singled out as a mark for the Ultramontane fury
which kindled and fed Irish revolts. That at times assumed strange forms. His name is joined
in 1597 with those of Cecil and the Lord Admiral as among the Englishmen whom Tempest the Jesuit
destined to destruction. The instrument was a poison, for which the sole antidote was the utterance
of the word Eguldarphe three times before drinking. Then the glass would break, or the wine,
if in a silver cup, would froth and fume.

[Sidenote: Counsellor and Debater.]

Public affairs and private affairs, small things and great, filled Ralegh's life to overflowing.
They were all transacted at high pressure. Everything he did he did with his whole might. He
always 'toiled terribly.' He sat in the House of Commons in the winter of 1597-8, and his name
often occurs in reports of debates and committees. He spoke on the infesting of the country
by pretended soldiers and sailors, on the cognate subject of sturdy vagabonds and beggars,
on the fruitful topic of the Queen's debts. He took part in the burning controversy whether
the Lords were entitled to receive, seated, Members sent by the Lower House to confer on a
Bill, instead of coming down to the bar. He was being consulted by the Privy Council on the
right way of dealing with Tyrone's Ulster rising. He was praying a licence for a translation
from the Italian of a history of King Sebastian's and Thomas Stukely's invasion of Morocco,
on the ground that he had perused and corrected something therein. He was soliciting and obtaining
a Governorship. He was seeking the enlargement out of prison of his cousin Henry Carew's 'distressed
son.' He was nursing at Bath his ailments, of which their Lordships of the Council were very
sorry to hear, and wished him speedy recovery. He was, through Cecil, and with the Queen's
leave, applying pressure to Bishop Cotton of Salisbury, at the end of 1598, for the change
of his lease of Sherborne into the fee. He was building there a new mansion. He was playing
primero at the Palace with Lord Southampton, and doubtless as eagerly, though he did not, like
the Peer, threaten to cudgel the Royal Usher who told them they must go to bed. He was exclaiming
at the supineness which suffered Spain to prepare expeditions against Flanders or Ireland,
capture 'our small men-of-war,' and send safe into Amsterdam 'the ship of the South Sea of
Holland, with a lantern of clear gold in her stern, infinite rich--and none of yours stayed her!'

[Sidenote: The Rivalry with Essex.]

[Sidenote: Attempts at Friendship.]

Never was there a busier existence, or one apparently more evenly occupied. But at this period
it had really a single engrossing care, and that was the rivalry with Essex. Once it had looked
as if the two might become friends. Before the Islands Voyage, Essex had been closely allied
both with him and with Cecil. Afterwards, on an alarm of a Spanish invasion in 1596, Essex
and he seem to have been jointly directed to advise on a system of coast defence. Essex drew
up a series of questions, to which Ralegh categorically replied. He expressed an opinion that
it was not worth while to attempt to fortify aught but 'the river of Thames.' He thought it
unwise either to hazard a battle, or to store much ammunition anywhere but in London. His reason
was that 'we have few places guardable, Portsmouth excepted.' Essex and he hoped apparently
to be given another foreign command. In October, 1597, Ralegh was prompt to report to Cecil
the testimony of a Plymouth captain just come from abroad, that 'the Earl our General hath
as much fame and reputation in Spain and Italy as ever, and more than, any of our nation had;
and that for an enemy he is the most honoured man in Europe.' He appeared to nurse no anger
for the reproaches and menaces used at Flores and Fayal. Those were reported by Whyte to Sir
Robert Sidney to have been greatly misliked at Court, where Ralegh was 'happy to have good
and constant friends able by their wisdom and authority to protect and comfort him.' He did
not take advantage of his influence there to direct attention to his commander's blunders at
St. Michael's. On the contrary, he seized every opportunity, with seeming sincerity, of dwelling
upon his courage and capacity. He exhibited friendliness in various ways. In December, 1597,
he had accepted a mission from the Queen to compromise a question of precedence between Essex
and the Lord High Admiral. Towards the beginning of 1598 he, Essex, and Cecil again met often
at Essex House and Cecil House in secret conclave. Cecil in February, 1598, was sent to France
on a mission to dissuade Henry IV from concluding a separate peace with Spain. His journey
was made an occasion for special demonstrations of goodwill among the rival courtiers. Entertainments
were given him in which Ralegh with Lady Ralegh, and members of the Essex party, like Lord
Southampton and Lady Walsingham, equally participated. Essex accepted favours from Ralegh and
Cecil. Ralegh offered him a third of the prizes he had captured. Cecil procured him a grant
of £7000 from the sale of the cochineal belonging to the Crown. He was believed to have reciprocated
the kindness of each by promising Cecil that in his absence nothing disagreeable to him should
be done, and Ralegh, that he would join Cecil in having him appointed a Privy Councillor, if
not Vice-Chamberlain. But the show of cordiality was deceptive, and Essex chose to imagine
himself continually aggrieved. The Islands Voyage had been a failure. The Queen told him it
had been. She blamed him for having accomplished nothing at Ferrol. She reproached him with
the escape of the plate fleet. He was discontented with himself. His flatterers consoled him
by assurances that others were in fault rather than he. They pointed at Ralegh; and the old
jealousy revived with redoubled violence.

[Sidenote: Tolerance of Disappointments.]

Ralegh was no longer an object for generosity. He was become again a power at Court. He was
perpetually consulted on maritime and Irish affairs. Conferences were held between him and
the Council in 1599 concerning Ireland, and his advice for the victualling of the garrisons
was adopted in the January of the same year. His Western command, at a time when Spanish incursions
were from moment to moment possible, brought him into peculiar prominence. When his hopes in
1598 either of the Vice-Chamberlainship, or of a seat at the Privy Council, were frustrated,
he was disappointed; unlike his adversary, he could bear disappointment. He was at once the
most patient and the most impatient of men. His was the healthy form of disappointment, which,
if an outlet in one quarter be closed, incites to the discovery of another. The gossip of the
town reported in October, 1598, that he was meditating a voyage to Guiana in company with Sir
John Gilbert: 'He is discontented he thrives no better.' It was one of a Court life's passing
clouds, and he treated it so that it should pass. To the diseased mind of Essex he appeared
prosperous and triumphant at all points, and beyond all deserving. Even the few laurels of
the late expedition had been gathered by him. When they had been at variance, Ralegh had put
him in the wrong. Ralegh could not tolerate an insolent superior. Essex could endure no equal.
He was ever sulking at Wanstead, or raging. Ralegh's name was the established text for his
outbursts of wrath. An anecdote told by the anonymous author, said to be Lord Clarendon, of
The Difference between George Duke of Buckingham and Robert Earl of Essex, is supposed to illustrate
the humiliations to which his temper exposed him. On the Queen's birthday, November 17, 1598,
the accustomed tournament was being held in the Tilt-yard before her Majesty. Ralegh, not brooding
on late rebuffs, led a gallant retinue in orange-tawny plumes. Essex had heard of Ralegh's
preparations. He entered with his visor down, at the head of a larger and more magnificent
troop flaunting 2000 feathers of the same colour. It must be admitted that, as Horace Walpole
remarks, 'the affront is not very intelligible at present.' Apparently, he wished to produce
an impression by his 'glorious feather triumph' that Ralegh and his followers were a company
of esquires or pages. But the two bodies tilted, and Essex 'ran very ill.'

[Sidenote: Essex in Ireland.]

In chagrin, and almost despair, Essex at the end of March, 1599, went over to Ireland as Lord
Deputy. The vacancy had been a theme of much dispute at Court. In 1598, Ralegh, Sir Robert
Sidney, and Sir Christopher Blount, Essex's step-father, had been mentioned by rumour for the
appointment. In March, Rowland Whyte had written positively to Sir Robert Sidney that it had
been decided to nominate either Sir William Russell or Ralegh, but Russell had absolutely declined,
and 'the other doth little like it.' Perilous as the post was, 'a fair way to destruction,'
as Whyte described it, a refusal of it by Ralegh, had the choice been given him, is incredible.
Essex in any case preserved enough influence to have hindered his nomination. At last, to exclude
others, and to keep himself before the world, Essex consented to be appointed. As soon as he
had landed in Ireland he began to bemoan his 'banishment and proscription into the cursedest
of all islands.' So loud was his discontent as to give rise to extraordinary popular fancies.
London was in the August of 1599 barricaded for a fortnight. A fleet was put in commission
under Lord Thomas Howard as Admiral. Ralegh was Vice-Admiral, and 'took leave at Court of all
the ladies' about August 18. He stayed in the Downs for three weeks or a month. The ostensible,
and doubtless the true, reason was the threat of a Spanish descent upon the Isle of Wight.
But not a few believed that it was a precaution, less against the Spaniard than against an
apprehended invasion by Essex from Ireland. Wild as was the rumour, it was favoured by the
reckless talk of Essex and his companions. Sir Christopher Blount on the scaffold confessed
to Ralegh that some had designed the transport of a choice part of the army of Ireland to Milford,
and a march upon London. In part it may be explained by his knowledge, on which Sir John Pope
Hennessy has laid inordinate stress, that Ralegh was the most strenuous opponent of his Irish
policy. He would detect the voice and hand of Ralegh in all the hindrances to, and in every
criticism upon, his measures. He would imagine he heard him arguing adversely at sittings of
the Council, to which he was informally admitted, and in the Queen's chamber. Sympathy may
reasonably be felt now both with his special difficulties, and with his general tendencies
in Irish administration, rather than with his rival's doctrines. His, however, were only tendencies.
His conduct both in Ireland and in England proves that he thought of Irish administration as
a weapon of combat for Court ascendency, not as a means of correcting the wrongs of ages. The
tone of his tirades upon his condemnation to residence in Ireland is wholly inconsistent with
the romantic theory that he had undertaken the government as a humanitarian mission of peace
and benevolence to the Celt.

[Sidenote: Despair and Cabals.]

His abrupt return was but the climax in a series of extravagances which had terrified the Queen.
He was indignant at any delay in a restoration of the old royal kindness. At first he condescended
to a few overtures for forgiveness. His friends could not believe that he would not be welcomed
back. They were persuaded that, if Elizabeth saw him, all would be as it had been. Leave was
importuned for him to run again in the ring at Whitehall on the Queen's birthday. He was induced
to affect penitence. It was noted hopefully that the royal favour to Ralegh was not without
breaks. He had wished to be a Commissioner for the peace negotiations with Spain at Boulogne.
The Queen refused, as his appointment would have confirmed his title to a Privy Councillorship.
In June he was said to have been scolded worse than cat and dog, and dismissed into the country
bag and baggage. Obediently he went over to his Cork estate, where he aided Carew in his Munster
Presidency with his 'strong counsel' in July. As before, he kept his temper, and the Queen
relented. She sent comforting messages when he fell ill from vexation, as was said, and recalled
him to Court. Essex was not content to work upon her compassion. He grew contemptuously impatient.
He was much more resentful than grateful when his pardon came without a renewal of his farm
of sweet wines. Everybody has heard of his rude taunt thereupon at Elizabeth, that 'her conditions
were as crooked as her carcase.' Ralegh in his Prerogative of Parliaments applies it as an
illustration how 'undutiful words of a subject do often take deeper root than the memory of
ill deeds.' He asserts that the saying 'cost the Earl his head, which his insurrection had
not cost him, but for that speech.' Essex did not stop at sneers. He caballed with persecuted
Papists and Puritans alike, and with various desperados. He alarmed King James with fantastic
accounts of conspiracies for the Infanta's succession. In the plot were, he intimated, Ralegh
potent in the West and Channel Islands; Cobham, Warden of the Cinque Ports; the Lord Treasurer;
the Lord Admiral; Burleigh, Cecil's brother, President of the North; and Carew, President of
Munster. All were persons, he alleged, well affected to the King of Spain. He urged James to
require a public recognition of his title. He 'pretended,' wrote Cecil to Carew, 'an intention
to remove me from the Queen, as one who would sell the kingdom of England to the Infanta of
Spain, with such other hyperbolical inventions.' He desired to replace Ralegh in the Captaincy
of the Guard by Sir William Russell.

[Sidenote: Gorges and Blount.]

On Sunday, Feb. 8, 1601, came the explosion. Very little secrecy had been preserved, and the
guard at Court was doubled. In the morning Ralegh invited Sir Ferdinando Gorges, Governor of
Plymouth Fort, to come by water to him at Durham House. Essex was willing Gorges should meet
Ralegh on conditions: he must take a couple of companions for his protection, and the meeting
must be on the river, not at Ralegh's lodgings. Ralegh consented. Gorges, some time later,
during his confinement at the Gate-house, on June 14, 1601, wrote an account of the interview.
At his examination by several Privy Councillors he had stated that Sir Christopher Blount tried
to persuade him to seize or kill Ralegh. He refused, 'unless Sir Walter had given me the first
occasion by violent deeds or unkind words, for either of which I was both resolved and prepared.'
He admitted the 'intent was particular against Sir Walter Ralegh and others.' He thought this
a proof that 'it was no matter of treason against her Majesty, but rather a manifestation of
the contrary.' Essex gave out that his rising was prompted by a discovery that there was an
ambuscade of musketeers placed upon the water by the device of Lord Cobham and Ralegh, to murder
him in the way as he passed. Blount, at his trial, confessed there was no foundation for the
allegation. In reply to Cecil, who asked if he thought Cobham and Ralegh had projected the
murder of the Earl, he said he did not believe they ever meant any such thing, nor that the
Earl himself feared it; only it was a word cast out to colour other matters. Essex himself
subsequently made a similar admission with respect to his charges against Ralegh and Cobham
of treason to the Queen and State. Blount, it is said, being unable to induce Gorges to commit
the crime, himself from a boat fired four shot at Ralegh. Ralegh was present officially at
his execution, and interposed on his behalf when the Sheriff would have forbidden him to go
on speaking. Blount reciprocated the courtesy by asking Ralegh's forgiveness, 'both for the
wrong done you, and for my particular ill intent towards you.' Ralegh was a witness at the
trial of Essex, on February 19. When he was called, Essex rudely cried: 'What booteth it to
swear this fox!' He insisted upon the oath being administered upon a folio, not upon a small,
Testament. Ralegh was not to be irritated into retorting angrily. He calmly explained that
on the river Gorges said this would be the bloodiest day's work that ever was, and wished Ralegh
would speed to Court for the prevention of it. Gorges admitted the accuracy of the account.
Essex denied its agreement with the report made by Gorges to him at Essex House.

[Sidenote: Ralegh's Demeanour towards Essex.]

Essex was a popular idol. Ralegh, till his fall, never was. A contemporary said that Essex's
reverses endeared him, and Ralegh's successes seemed to deepen the public dislike. The populace
deluded itself with the fancy, absolutely groundless, that Essex's ruin was due to Ralegh,
and that Ralegh must have exulted at it. Malignant anecdotes were current of his demeanour
at his rival's last moments. He was said to have snatched at the pleasure of conveying to the
Lieutenant of the Tower the instructions for the execution. He was described as, on February
25, standing in a window over against the scaffold, and puffing out tobacco smoke in defiance.
After his own death, Sir Lewis Stukely alleged him to have said that the great boy died like
a calf, and like a craven; to have vaunted to one who asked if in the Islands Voyage the Earl
had not brought him to his mercy, that he trusted they were now quits. Against such gross tales
Ralegh needs no defence. He could not have behaved like a boorish ruffian to an adversary in
the death agony. He could not have spoken unmannerly words of his dead Cadiz comrade. He had
been present at the Earl's trial as Captain of the Guard. In spite of taunts, he had given
his evidence with dignity and moderation. As Captain of the Guard he had escorted several of
the insurgents, though not Essex himself, to prison. In his official capacity he carried the
order for the execution. In the same character he was present in the Tower. At first he had
stood near the scaffold, supposing that Essex might wish to speak to him. To avoid misconstruction
by lookers-on he soon withdrew. He stationed himself in the distant Armoury, where he could
see without being seen. Afterwards he was sorry, he said, for it; since he heard that the Earl
had inquired for him, desiring to have been reconciled.

[Sidenote: His Part in the Catastrophe.]

His aspect is reported to have been sad and gloomy, as he was rowed back to Durham House. With
his nature, and his gifts of imagination, he could not but have been awed by the consummation
he had witnessed of a tragic doom. Later he believed he had always lamented the fate of Essex
as the beginning of a new peril to himself from those who before had needed his support against
a powerful rival. He may already have had a presentiment. He could rightly declare that the
death was not his work. Essex was his own undoer. A time had been at which Ralegh would gladly
have become his firm friend. His emphatic concurrence, recorded by Rowland Whyte, with Lady
Ralegh's wish that there were 'love and concord amongst all' was not hypocritical. In all sincerity
he had written twice in that spirit in the spring of 1600 to Lady Essex. He had found it of
no use; and a period came when he rejoiced in an inveterate enemy's discomfiture. It is fanciful
to affirm that he would have been pleased to assist in turning aside the final shock of ruin.
His sentiments towards Essex at the end, unhappily, are too certain for the precise meaning
of his enigmatical undated letter to Cecil, discovered among the Hatfield papers, to be of
much consequence. Of its authenticity there is no real doubt, though Mr. Charles Kingsley,
whose enthusiasm for Ralegh is delightful and unmixed, chooses to question it on the slender
ground that it is signed by initials, and that the style is, to his taste, unlike Ralegh's.
Its exact meaning is much more open to dispute. Humours of men succeed not, but grow by occasions
and accidents of time and power. Somerset made no revenge on the Duke of Northumberland's heirs.
Northumberland, that now is, thinks not of Hatton's issue. Kelloway lives that murdered the
brother of Horsey; and Horsey let him go by all his lifetime. I could name you a thousand of
those; and therefore after-fears are but prophecies, or rather conjectures, from causes remote.
Look to the present, and you do wisely. His son shall be the youngest Earl of England but one,
and if his father be now kept down, Will Cecil shall be able to keep as many men at his heels
as he, and more too. He may also match in a better house than his; and so that fear is not
worth the fearing. But if the father continue, he will be able to break the branches, and pull
up the tree, root and all. Lose not your advantage; if you do, I rede your destiny. Yours to
the end, W.R. Let the Queen hold Bothwell while she hath him. He will ever be the canker of
her estate and safety. Princes are lost by security; and preserved by prevention. I have seen
the last of her good days, and all ours, after his liberty.' By Bothwell is meant Essex. The
real Bothwell was a natural son of James V. of Scotland, who had plotted against the reigning
king, and been pardoned, and had plotted again.

[Sidenote: Difficulties of Construction.]

