XXIII.  REMMIUS PALAEMON [898], of Vicentia [899], the offspring of a bond-woman, acquired
the rudiments of learning, first as the companion of a weaver's, and then of his master's,
son, at school.  Being afterwards made free, he taught at Rome, where he stood highest in the
rank of the grammarians; but he was so infamous for every sort of vice, that Tiberius and his
successor Claudius publicly denounced him as an improper person to have the education of boys
and young men entrusted to him.  Still, his powers of narrative and agreeable style of speaking
made him very popular; besides which, he had the gift of making extempore verses.  He also
wrote a great many in (522) various and uncommon metres.  His insolence was such, that he called
Marcus Varro "a hog;" and bragged that "letters were born and would perish with him;" and that
"his name was not introduced inadvertently in the Bucolics [900], as Virgil divined that a
Palaemon would some day be the judge of all poets and poems."  He also boasted, that having
once fallen into the hands of robbers, they spared him on account of the celebrity his name
had acquired.

He was so luxurious, that he took the bath many times in a day; nor did his means suffice for
his extravagance, although his school brought him in forty thousand sesterces yearly, and he
received not much less from his private estate, which he managed with great care.  He also
kept a broker's shop for the sale of old clothes; and it is well known that a vine [901], he
planted himself, yielded three hundred and fifty bottles of wine.  But the greatest of all
his vices was his unbridled licentiousness in his commerce with women, which he carried to
the utmost pitch of foul indecency [902].  They tell a droll story of some one who met him
in a crowd, and upon his offering to kiss him, could not escape the salute, "Master," said
he, "do you want to mouth every one you meet with in a hurry?"

XXIV.  MARCUS VALERIUS PROBUS, of Berytus [903], after long aspiring to the rank of centurion,
being at last tired of waiting, devoted himself to study.  He had met with some old authors
at a bookseller's shop in the provinces, where the memory of ancient times still lingers, and
is not quite forgotten, as it is at Rome.  Being anxious carefully to reperuse these, and afterwards
to make acquaintance with other works of the same kind, he found himself an object of contempt,
and was laughed (523) at for his lectures, instead of their gaining him fame or profit.  Still,
however, he persisted in his purpose, and employed himself in correcting, illustrating, and
adding notes to many works which he had collected, his labours being confined to the province
of a grammarian, and nothing more. He had, properly speaking, no scholars, but some few followers.
For he never taught in such a way as to maintain the character of a master; but was in the
habit of admitting one or two, perhaps at most three or four, disciples in the afternoon; and
while he lay at ease and chatted freely on ordinary topics, he occasionally read some book
to them, but that did not often happen.  He published a few slight treatises on some subtle
questions, besides which, he left a large collection of observations on the language of the
ancients.

LIVES OF EMINENT RHETORICIANS.  In order to leave no doubt of this, I will subjoin an ancient
decree of the senate, as well as an edict of the censors:--"In the consulship of Caius Fannius
Strabo, and Marcus Palerius Messala [904]: the praetor Marcus Pomponius moved the senate, that
an act be passed respecting Philosophers and Rhetoricians.  In this matter, they have decreed
as follows: 'It shall be lawful for M. Pomponius, the praetor, to take such measures, and make
such provisions, as the good of the Republic, and the duty of his office, require, that no
Philosophers or Rhetoricians be suffered at Rome.'"

After some interval, the censor Cnaeus Domitius Aenobarbus and Lucius Licinius Crassus issued
the following edict upon the same subject: "It is reported to us that certain persons have
instituted a new kind of discipline; that our youth resort to their schools; that they have
assumed the title of Latin Rhetoricians; and that young men waste their time there for whole
days together.  Our ancestors have ordained what instruction it is fitting their children should
receive, and what schools they should attend.  These novelties, contrary to the customs and
instructions of our ancestors, we neither approve, nor do they appear to us good.  Wherefore
it appears to be our duty that we should notify our judgment both to those who keep such schools,
and those who are in the practice of frequenting them, that they meet our disapprobation."

However, by slow degrees, rhetoric manifested itself to be a (525) useful and honourable study,
and many persons devoted themselves to it, both as a means of defence and of acquiring reputation.
Cicero declaimed in Greek until his praetorship, but afterwards, as he grew older, in Latin
also; and even in the consulship of Hirtius and Pansa [905], whom he calls "his great and noble
disciples."  Some historians state that Cneius Pompey resumed the practice of declaiming even
during the civil war, in order to be better prepared to argue against Caius Curio, a young
man of great talents, to whom the defence of Caesar was entrusted.  They say, likewise, that
it was not forgotten by Mark Antony, nor by Augustus, even during the war of Modena.  Nero
also declaimed [906] even after he became emperor, in the first year of his reign, which he
had done before in public but twice.  Many speeches of orators were also published.

But the same mode of teaching was not adopted by all, nor, indeed, did individuals always confine
themselves to the same system, but each varied his plan of teaching according to circumstances.
For they were accustomed, in stating their argument with the utmost clearness, to use figures
and apologies, to put cases, as circumstances required, and to relate facts, sometimes briefly
and succinctly, and, at other times, more at large and with greater feeling.  Nor did they
omit, on occasion, to resort to translations from the Greek, and to expatiate in the praise,
or to launch their censures on the faults, of illustrious men.  They also dealt with matters
connected with every-day life, pointing out such as are useful and necessary, and such as are
hurtful and needless.  They had occasion often to support the authority of fabulous accounts,
and to detract from that of historical narratives, which sort the Greeks call "Propositions,"
"Refutations" and "Corroboration," until by a gradual process they have exhausted these topics,
and arrive at the gist of the argument.

Among the ancients, subjects of controversy were drawn either from history, as indeed some
are even now, or from (526) actual facts, of recent occurrence.  It was, therefore, the custom
to state them precisely, with details of the names of places.  We certainly so find them collected
and published, and it may be well to give one or two of them literally, by way of example:

"A company of young men from the city, having made an excursion to Ostia in the summer season,
and going down to the beach, fell in with some fishermen who were casting their nets in the
sea.  Having bargained with them for the haul, whatever it might turn out to be, for a certain
sum, they paid down the money.  They waited a long time while the nets were being drawn, and
when at last they were dragged on shore, there was no fish in them, but some gold sewn up in
a basket.  The buyers claim the haul as theirs, the fishermen assert that it belongs to them."

Again: "Some dealers having to land from a ship at Brundusium a cargo of slaves, among which
there was a handsome boy of great value, they, in order to deceive the collectors of the customs,
smuggled him ashore in the dress of a freeborn youth, with the bullum [907] hung about his
neck. The fraud easily escaped detection.  They proceed to Rome; the affair becomes the subject
of judicial inquiry; it is alleged that the boy was entitled to his freedom, because his master
had voluntarily treated him as free."

Formerly, they called these by a Greek term, syntaxeis, but of late "controversies;" but they
may be either fictitious cases, or those which come under trial in the courts.  Of the eminent
professors of this science, of whom any memorials are extant, it would not be easy to find
many others than those of whom I shall now proceed to give an account.

II.  LUCIUS PLOTIUS GALLUS.  Of him Marcus Tullius Cicero thus writes to Marcus Titinnius [908]:
"I remember well that when we were boys, one Lucius Plotius first began to teach Latin; and
as great numbers flocked to his school, so that all who were most devoted to study were eager
to take lessons from him, it was a great trouble to me that I too was not allowed to do so. For
one thing it is the only place in England where pictures are hung without any selection being
made. The fate of the Salon d'Automne, formerly the most interesting exhibition in Europe, could
be cited to discredit the jury system, were it not that the system had discredited itself
even more effectually in this country by making it appear that British art had ceased to exist.
No matter how good the intentions of a jury may be, inevitably it comes to be dominated by a clique
of painters who imagine that they are setting a high standard by
rejecting all pictures sufficiently unlike their own.

In France, therefore, "Les Indépendants" have become the representatives of contemporary art, while
English people who hope to discover something vital at home must betake themselves to the Albert
Hall.

But there is more than this to be said for the London Salon: its standard of painting is far
higher than that of the Royal Academy or of the New English Art Club. For this we have chiefly to
thank Mr. Walter Sickert and his pupils. They set the tone. It is extraordinary that any master
should have led so many pupils so far along the road to art.

All have been taken to that point where work ceases to appear utterly negligible. All have been
made to search life for realities, and not for pictures. They have been taught to simplify
and to select; and they have been taught not to select the obvious, the romantic, and the pretty.
They have not been taught, however, to discover and express the profoundly significant, for
that cannot be taught. Even Mr. Sickert cannot turn sincere and intelligent
painters into artists.

Entering the arena, the visitor will probably
turn first to the large picture by Mr. Wyndham Lewis.  This Epidius claimed
to be descended from Epidius Nuncio, who, as (528) ancient traditions assert, fell into the
fountain of the river Sarnus [915] when the streams were overflown, and not being afterwards
found, was reckoned among the number of the gods.

V. SEXTUS CLODIUS, a native of Sicily, a professor both of Greek and Latin eloquence, had bad
eyes and a facetious tongue.  It was a saying of his, that he lost a pair of eyes from his
intimacy with Mark Antony, the triumvir [916].  Of his wife, Fulvia, when there was a swelling
in one of her cheeks, he said that "she tempted the point of his style;" [917] nor did Antony
think any the worse of him for the joke, but quite enjoyed it; and soon afterwards, when Antony
was consul [918], he even made him a large grant of land, which Cicero charges him with in
his Philippics [919].  "You patronize," he said, "a master of the schools for the sake of his
buffoonery, and make a rhetorician one of your pot-companions; allowing him to cut his jokes
on any one he pleased; a witty man, no doubt, but it was an easy matter to say smart things
of such as you and your companions.  But listen, Conscript Fathers, while I tell you what reward
was given to this rhetorician, and let the wounds of the republic be laid bare to view.  You
assigned two thousand acres of the Leontine territory [920] to Sextus Clodius, the rhetorician,
and not content with that, exonerated the estate from all taxes.  Hear this, and learn from
the extravagance of the grant, how little wisdom is displayed in your acts."

VI.  CAIUS ALBUTIUS SILUS, of Novara [921], while, in the execution (529) of the office of
edile in his native place, he was sitting for the administration of justice, was dragged by
the feet from the tribunal by some persons against whom he was pronouncing a decree.  In great
indignation at this usage, he made straight for the gate of the town, and proceeded to Rome.
There he was admitted to fellowship, and lodged, with Plancus the orator [922], whose practice
it was, before he made a speech in public, to set up some one to take the contrary side in
the argument. The office was undertaken by Albutius with such success, that he silenced Plancus,
who did not venture to put himself in competition with him. This bringing him into notice,
he collected an audience of his own, and it was his custom to open the question proposed for
debate, sitting; but as he warmed with the subject, he stood up, and made his peroration in
that posture.  His declamations were of different kinds; sometimes brilliant and polished,
at others, that they might not be thought to savour too much of the schools, he curtailed them
of all ornament, and used only familiar phrases.  He also pleaded causes, but rarely, being
employed in such as were of the highest importance, and in every case undertaking the peroration
only.

In the end, he gave up practising in the forum, partly from shame, partly from fear.  For,
in a certain trial before the court of the One Hundred [923], having lashed the defendant as
a man void of natural affection for his parents, he called upon him by a bold figure of speech,
"to swear by the ashes of his father and mother which lay unburied;" his adversary taking him
up for the suggestion, and the judges frowning upon it, he lost his cause, and was much blamed.
At another time, on a trial for murder at Milan, before Lucius Piso, the proconsul, having
to defend the culprit, he worked himself up to such a pitch of vehemence, that in a crowded
court, who loudly applauded him, notwithstanding all the efforts of the lictor to maintain
order, he broke out into a lamentation on the miserable state of Italy [924], then in danger
of being again reduced, he said, into (530) the form of a province, and turning to the statue
of Marcus Brutus, which stood in the Forum, he invoked him as "the founder and vindicator of
the liberties of the people."  For this he narrowly escaped a prosecution.  Suffering, at an
advanced period of life, from an ulcerated tumour, he returned to Novara, and calling the people
together in a public assembly, addressed them in a set speech, of considerable length, explaining
the reasons which induced him to put an end to existence: and this he did by abstaining from food.

END OF THE LIVES OF GRAMMARIANS AND RHETORICIANS.

FOOTNOTES:

[842]  It will be understood that the terms Grammar and Grammarian have here a more extended
sense than that which they convey in modern use. See the beginning of c. iv.

[843]  Suetonius's account of the rude and unlettered state of society in the early times of
Rome, is consistent with what we might infer, and with the accounts which have come down to
us, of a community composed of the most daring and adventurous spirits thrown off by the neighbouring
tribes, and whose sole occupations were rapine and war.  But Cicero discovers the germs of
mental cultivation among the Romans long before the period assigned to it by Suetonius, tracing
them to the teaching of Pythagoras, who visited the Greek cities on the coast of Italy in the
reign of Tarquinius Superbus.--Tusc. Quaest. iv. 1.

[844]  Livius, whose cognomen Andronicus, intimates his extraction, was born of Greek parents.
He began to teach at Rome in the consulship of Claudius Cento, the son of Appius Caecus, and
Sempronius Tuditanus, A.U.C. 514.  He must not be confounded with Titus Livius, the historian,
who flourished in the Augustan age.

[845]  Ennius was a native of Calabria.  He was born the year after the consulship mentioned
in the preceding note, and lived to see at least his seventy-sixth year, for Gellius informs
us that at that age he wrote the twelfth book of his Annals.

[846]  Porcius Cato found Ennius in Sardinia, when he conquered that island during his praetorship.
He learnt Greek from Ennius there, and brought him to Rome on his return.  Ennius taught Greek
at Rome for a long course of years, having M. Cato among his pupils.

[847]  Mallos was near Tarsus, in Cilicia. Whether, in fact, they succeed in describing anything, and,
if so, whether what they describe is of much consequence, are questions
for the psychologist.

The critic of art has only to note that the forms and colours are in themselves insignificant
and in their relations commonplace; they are also those much affected
of late by the more adventurous students at the École des Beaux-Arts.

Futurism is a negligible accident: the discoveries of Cézanne are safe in the hands of the French
masters, with whose names the catalogue bristles--Gauguin, Van Gogh,
Matisse, Picasso, Marchand, Derain, Marquet, Friesz, Herbin, l'Hote.

Unluckily, the big artists are, for the most part, meagrely represented
by rather unimportant works, of which, by the way, a good many are
already familiar to picture-goers.



[854]  Servius Claudius (also called Clodius) is commended by Cicero, Fam. Epist. ix. 16, and
his singular death mentioned by Pliny, xxv. 4.

[855]  Daphnis, a shepherd, the son of Mercury, was said to have been brought up by Pan.  The
humorous turn given by Lenaeus to Lutatius's cognomen is not very clear.  Daphnides is the
plural of Daphnis; therefore the herd or company, agaema; and Pan was the god of rustics, and
the inventor of the rude music of the reed.

[856]  Oppius Cares is said by Macrobius to have written a book on Forest Trees.

[857]  Quintilian enumerates Bibaculus among the Roman poets in the same line with Catullus
and Horace, Institut. x. 1.  Of Sigida we know nothing; even the name is supposed to be incorrectly
given.  Apuleius mentions a Ticida, who is also noticed by Suetonius hereafter in c. xi., where
likewise he gives an account of Valerius Cato.

[858]  Probably Suevius, of whom Macrobius informs us that he was the learned author of an
Idyll, which had the title of the Mulberry Grove; observing, that "the peach which Suevius
reckons as a species of the nuts, rather belongs to the tribe of apples."

[859]  Aurelius Opilius is mentioned by Symmachus and Gellius.  His cotemporary and friend,
Rutilius Rufus, having been a military tribune under Scipio in the Numantine war, wrote a history
of it.  He was consul A.U.C. 648, and unjustly banished, to the general grief of the people,
A.U.C. 659.

[860]  Quintilian mentions Gnipho, Instit. i. 6.  We find that Cicero was among his pupils.
The date of his praetorship, given below, fixes the time when Gnipho flourished.

[861]  This strange cognomen is supposed to have been derived from a cork arm, which supplied
the place of one Dionysius had lost.  He was a poet of Mitylene.

[862]  See before, JULIUS, c. xlvi.

[863]  A.U.C. 687.

[864]  Suetonius gives his life in c. x.

[865]  A grade of inferior officers in the Roman armies, of which we have no very exact idea.

