It was such a charming home!--my new one; a fine great house, with pictures, and delicate decorations,
and rich furniture, and no gloom anywhere, but all the wilderness of dainty colors lit up with
flooding sunshine; and the spacious grounds around it, and the great garden--oh, greensward,
and noble trees, and flowers, no end! And I was the same as a member of the family; and they
loved me, and petted me, and did not give me a new name, but called me by my old one that was
dear to me because my mother had given it me--Aileen Mavoureen. She got it out of a song; and
the Grays knew that song, and said it was a beautiful name.

Mrs. Gray was thirty, and so sweet and so lovely, you cannot imagine it; and Sadie was ten,
and just like her mother, just a darling slender little copy of her, with auburn tails down
her back, and short frocks; and the baby was a year old, and plump and dimpled, and fond of
me, and never could get enough of hauling on my tail, and hugging me, and laughing out its
innocent happiness; and Mr. Gray was thirty-eight, and tall and slender and handsome, a little
bald in front, alert, quick in his movements, business-like, prompt, decided, unsentimental,
and with that kind of trim-chiseled face that just seems to glint and sparkle with frosty intellectuality!
He was a renowned scientist. I do not know what the word means, but my mother would know how
to use it and get effects. She would know how to depress a rat-terrier with it and make a lap-dog
look sorry he came. But that is not the best one; the best one was Laboratory. My mother could
organize a Trust on that one that would skin the tax-collars off the whole herd. The laboratory
was not a book, or a picture, or a place to wash your hands in, as the college president's
dog said--no, that is the lavatory; the laboratory is quite different, and is filled with jars,
and bottles, and electrics, and wires, and strange machines; and every week other scientists
came there and sat in the place, and used the machines, and discussed, and made what they called
experiments and discoveries; and often I came, too, and stood around and listened, and tried
to learn, for the sake of my mother, and in loving memory of her, although it was a pain to
me, as realizing what she was losing out of her life and I gaining nothing at all; for try
as I might, I was never able to make anything out of it at all.

Other times I lay on the floor in the mistress's work-room and slept, she gently using me for
a foot-stool, knowing it pleased me, for it was a caress; other times I spent an hour in the
nursery, and got well tousled and made happy; other times I watched by the crib there, when
the baby was asleep and the nurse out for a few minutes on the baby's affairs; other times
I romped and raced through the grounds and the garden with Sadie till we were tired out, then
slumbered on the grass in the shade of a tree while she read her book; other times I went visiting
among the neighbor dogs--for there were some most pleasant ones not far away, and one very
handsome and courteous and graceful one, a curly-haired Irish setter by the name of Robin Adair,
who was a Presbyterian like me, and belonged to the Scotch minister.

The servants in our house were all kind to me and were fond of me, and so, as you see, mine
was a pleasant life. There could not be a happier dog that I was, nor a gratefuler one. I will
say this for myself, for it is only the truth: I tried in all ways to do well and right, and
honor my mother's memory and her teachings, and earn the happiness that had come to me, as
best I could.

By and by came my little puppy, and then my cup was full, my happiness was perfect. It was
the dearest little waddling thing, and so smooth and soft and velvety, and had such cunning
little awkward paws, and such affectionate eyes, and such a sweet and innocent face; and it
made me so proud to see how the children and their mother adored it, and fondled it, and exclaimed
over every little wonderful thing it did. It did seem to me that life was just too lovely to--

Then came the winter. One day I was standing a watch in the nursery. That is to say, I was
asleep on the bed. The baby was asleep in the crib, which was alongside the bed, on the side
next the fireplace. It was the kind of crib that has a lofty tent over it made of gauzy stuff
that you can see through. The nurse was out, and we two sleepers were alone. A spark from the
wood-fire was shot out, and it lit on the slope of the tent. I suppose a quiet interval followed,
then a scream from the baby awoke me, and there was that tent flaming up toward the ceiling!
Before I could think, I sprang to the floor in my fright, and in a second was half-way to the
door; but in the next half-second my mother's farewell was sounding in my ears, and I was back
on the bed again., I reached my head through the flames and dragged the baby out by the waist-band,
and tugged it along, and we fell to the floor together in a cloud of smoke; I snatched a new
hold, and dragged the screaming little creature along and out at the door and around the bend
of the hall, and was still tugging away, all excited and happy and proud, when the master's
voice shouted:

"Begone you cursed beast!" and I jumped to save myself; but he was furiously quick, and chased
me up, striking furiously at me with his cane, I dodging this way and that, in terror, and
at last a strong blow fell upon my left foreleg, which made me shriek and fall, for the moment,
helpless; the cane went up for another blow, but never descended, for the nurse's voice rang
wildly out, "The nursery's on fire!" and the master rushed away in that direction, and my other
bones were saved.

The pain was cruel, but, no matter, I must not lose any time; he might come back at any moment;
so I limped on three legs to the other end of the hall, where there was a dark little stairway
leading up into a garret where old boxes and such things were kept, as I had heard say, and
where people seldom went. I managed to climb up there, then I searched my way through the dark
among the piles of things, and hid in the secretest place I could find. It was foolish to be
afraid there, yet still I was; so afraid that I held in and hardly even whimpered, though it
would have been such a comfort to whimper, because that eases the pain, you know. But I could
lick my leg, and that did some good.

For half an hour there was a commotion downstairs, and shoutings, and rushing footsteps, and
then there was quiet again. Quiet for some minutes, and that was grateful to my spirit, for
then my fears began to go down; and fears are worse than pains--oh, much worse. Then came a
sound that froze me. They were calling me--calling me by name--hunting for me!

It was muffled by distance, but that could not take the terror out of it, and it was the most
dreadful sound to me that I had ever heard. It went all about, everywhere, down there: along
the halls, through all the rooms, in both stories, and in the basement and the cellar; then
outside, and farther and farther away--then back, and all about the house again, and I thought
it would never, never stop. But at last it did, hours and hours after the vague twilight of
the garret had long ago been blotted out by black darkness.

Then in that blessed stillness my terrors fell little by little away, and I was at peace and
slept. It was a good rest I had, but I woke before the twilight had come again. I was feeling
fairly comfortable, and I could think out a plan now. I made a very good one; which was, to
creep down, all the way down the back stairs, and hide behind the cellar door, and slip out
and escape when the iceman came at dawn, while he was inside filling the refrigerator; then
I would hide all day, and start on my journey when night came; my journey to--well, anywhere
where they would not know me and betray me to the master. I was feeling almost cheerful now;
then suddenly I thought: Why, what would life be without my puppy!

That was despair. There was no plan for me; I saw that; I must say where I was; stay, and wait,
and take what might come--it was not my affair; that was what life is--my mother had said it.
Then--well, then the calling began again! All my sorrows came back. I said to myself, the master
will never forgive. I did not know what I had done to make him so bitter and so unforgiving,
yet I judged it was something a dog could not understand, but which was clear to a man and
dreadful.

They called and called--days and nights, it seemed to me. So long that the hunger and thirst
near drove me mad, and I recognized that I was getting very weak. When you are this way you
sleep a great deal, and I did. Once I woke in an awful fright--it seemed to me that the calling
was right there in the garret! And so it was: it was Sadie's voice, and she was crying; my
name was falling from her lips all broken, poor thing, and I could not believe my ears for
the joy of it when I heard her say:

"Come back to us--oh, come back to us, and forgive--it is all so sad without our--"

I broke in with SUCH a grateful little yelp, and the next moment Sadie was plunging and stumbling
through the darkness and the lumber and shouting for the family to hear, "She's found, she's
found!"

The days that followed--well, they were wonderful. The mother and Sadie and the servants--why,
they just seemed to worship me. They couldn't seem to make me a bed that was fine enough; and
as for food, they couldn't be satisfied with anything but game and delicacies that were out
of season; and every day the friends and neighbors flocked in to hear about my heroism--that
was the name they called it by, and it means agriculture. I remember my mother pulling it on
a kennel once, and explaining it in that way, but didn't say what agriculture was, except that
it was synonymous with intramural incandescence; and a dozen times a day Mrs. Gray and Sadie
would tell the tale to new-comers, and say I risked my life to say the baby's, and both of
us had burns to prove it, and then the company would pass me around and pet me and exclaim
about me, and you could see the pride in the eyes of Sadie and her mother; and when the people
wanted to know what made me limp, they looked ashamed and changed the subject, and sometimes
when people hunted them this way and that way with questions about it, it looked to me as if
they were going to cry.

And this was not all the glory; no, the master's friends came, a whole twenty of the most distinguished
people, and had me in the laboratory, and discussed me as if I was a kind of discovery; and
some of them said it was wonderful in a dumb beast, the finest exhibition of instinct they
could call to mind; but the master said, with vehemence, "It's far above instinct; it's REASON,
and many a man, privileged to be saved and go with you and me to a better world by right of
its possession, has less of it that this poor silly quadruped that's foreordained to perish";
and then he laughed, and said: "Why, look at me--I'm a sarcasm! bless you, with all my grand
intelligence, the only think I inferred was that the dog had gone mad and was destroying the
child, whereas but for the beast's intelligence--it's REASON, I tell you!--the child would
have perished!"

They disputed and disputed, and I was the very center of subject of it all, and I wished my
mother could know that this grand honor had come to me; it would have made her proud.

Then they discussed optics, as they called it, and whether a certain injury to the brain would
produce blindness or not, but they could not agree about it, and said they must test it by
experiment by and by; and next they discussed plants, and that interested me, because in the
summer Sadie and I had planted seeds--I helped her dig the holes, you know--and after days
and days a little shrub or a flower came up there, and it was a wonder how that could happen;
but it did, and I wished I could talk--I would have told those people about it and shown then
how much I knew, and been all alive with the subject; but I didn't care for the optics; it
was dull, and when they came back to it again it bored me, and I went to sleep.

Pretty soon it was spring, and sunny and pleasant and lovely, and the sweet mother and the
children patted me and the puppy good-by, and went away on a journey and a visit to their kin,
and the master wasn't any company for us, but we played together and had good times, and the
servants were kind and friendly, so we got along quite happily and counted the days and waited
for the family.

And one day those men came again, and said, now for the test, and they took the puppy to the
laboratory, and I limped three-leggedly along, too, feeling proud, for any attention shown
to the puppy was a pleasure to me, of course. They discussed and experimented, and then suddenly
the puppy shrieked, and they set him on the floor, and he went staggering around, with his
head all bloody, and the master clapped his hands and shouted:

"There, I've won--confess it! He's a blind as a bat!"

And they all said:

"It's so--you've proved your theory, and suffering humanity owes you a great debt from henceforth,"
and they crowded around him, and wrung his hand cordially and thankfully, and praised him.

But I hardly saw or heard these things, for I ran at once to my little darling, and snuggled
close to it where it lay, and licked the blood, and it put its head against mine, whimpering
softly, and I knew in my heart it was a comfort to it in its pain and trouble to feel its mother's
touch, though it could not see me. Then it dropped down, presently, and its little velvet nose
rested upon the floor, and it was still, and did not move any more.

Soon the master stopped discussing a moment, and rang in the footman, and said, "Bury it in
the far corner of the garden," and then went on with the discussion, and I trotted after the
footman, very happy and grateful, for I knew the puppy was out of its pain now, because it
was asleep. We went far down the garden to the farthest end, where the children and the nurse
and the puppy and I used to play in the summer in the shade of a great elm, and there the footman
dug a hole, and I saw he was going to plant the puppy, and I was glad, because it would grow
and come up a fine handsome dog, like Robin Adair, and be a beautiful surprise for the family
when they came home; so I tried to help him dig, but my lame leg was no good, being stiff,
you know, and you have to have two, or it is no use. When the footman had finished and covered
little Robin up, he patted my head, and there were tears in his eyes, and he said: "Poor little
doggie, you saved HIS child!"

I have watched two whole weeks, and he doesn't come up! This last week a fright has been stealing
upon me. I think there is something terrible about this. I do not know what it is, but the
fear makes me sick, and I cannot eat, though the servants bring me the best of food; and they
pet me so, and even come in the night, and cry, and say, "Poor doggie--do give it up and come
home; DON'T break our hearts!" and all this terrifies me the more, and makes me sure something
has happened. And I am so weak; since yesterday I cannot stand on my feet anymore. And within
this hour the servants, looking toward the sun where it was sinking out of sight and the night
chill coming on, said things I could not understand, but they carried something cold to my heart.

"Those poor creatures! They do not suspect. They will come home in the morning, and eagerly
ask for the little doggie that did the brave deed, and who of us will be strong enough to say
the truth to them: 'The humble little friend is gone where go the beasts that perish.'"

WAS IT HEAVEN? OR HELL?

CHAPTER I

"You told a LIE?"

"You confess it--you actually confess it--you told a lie!"

CHAPTER II

The family consisted of four persons: Margaret Lester, widow, aged thirty six; Helen Lester,
her daughter, aged sixteen; Mrs. Lester's maiden aunts, Hannah and Hester Gray, twins, aged
sixty-seven. Waking and sleeping, the three women spent their days and night in adoring the
young girl; in watching the movements of her sweet spirit in the mirror of her face; in refreshing
their souls with the vision of her bloom and beauty; in listening to the music of her voice;
in gratefully recognizing how rich and fair for them was the world with this presence in it;
in shuddering to think how desolate it would be with this light gone out of it.

By nature--and inside--the aged aunts were utterly dear and lovable and good, but in the matter
of morals and conduct their training had been so uncompromisingly strict that it had made them
exteriorly austere, not to say stern. Their influence was effective in the house; so effective
that the mother and the daughter conformed to its moral and religious requirements cheerfully,
contentedly, happily, unquestionably. To do this was become second nature to them. And so in
this peaceful heaven there were no clashings, no irritations, no fault-finding, no heart-burnings.

In it a lie had no place. In it a lie was unthinkable. In it speech was restricted to absolute
truth, iron-bound truth, implacable and uncompromising truth, let the resulting consequences
be what they might. At last, one day, under stress of circumstances, the darling of the house
sullied her lips with a lie--and confessed it, with tears and self-upbraidings. There are not
any words that can paint the consternation of the aunts. It was as if the sky had crumpled
up and collapsed and the earth had tumbled to ruin with a crash. They sat side by side, white
and stern, gazing speechless upon the culprit, who was on her knees before them with her face
buried first in one lap and then the other, moaning and sobbing, and appealing for sympathy
and forgiveness and getting no response, humbly kissing the hand of the one, then of the other,
only to see it withdrawn as suffering defilement by those soiled lips.

Twice, at intervals, Aunt Hester said, in frozen amazement:

"You told a LIE?"

Twice, at intervals, Aunt Hannah followed with the muttered and amazed ejaculation:

"You confess it--you actually confess it--you told a lie!"

It was all they could say. The situation was new, unheard of, incredible; they could not understand
it, they did not know how to take hold of it, it approximately paralyzed speech.

At length it was decided that the erring child must be taken to her mother, who was ill, and
who ought to know what had happened. Helen begged, besought, implored that she might be spared
this further disgrace, and that her mother might be spared the grief and pain of it; but this
could not be: duty required this sacrifice, duty takes precedence of all things, nothing can
absolve one from a duty, with a duty no compromise is possible.

Helen still begged, and said the sin was her own, her mother had had no hand in it--why must
she be made to suffer for it?

But the aunts were obdurate in their righteousness, and said the law that visited the sins
of the parent upon the child was by all right and reason reversible; and therefore it was but
just that the innocent mother of a sinning child should suffer her rightful share of the grief
and pain and shame which were the allotted wages of the sin.

The three moved toward the sick-room.

At this time the doctor was approaching the house. He was still a good distance away, however.
He was a good doctor and a good man, and he had a good heart, but one had to know him a year
to get over hating him, two years to learn to endure him, three to learn to like him, and four
and five to learn to love him. It was a slow and trying education, but it paid. He was of great
stature; he had a leonine head, a leonine face, a rough voice, and an eye which was sometimes
a pirate's and sometimes a woman's, according to the mood. He knew nothing about etiquette,
and cared nothing about it; in speech, manner, carriage, and conduct he was the reverse of
conventional. He was frank, to the limit; he had opinions on all subjects; they were always
on tap and ready for delivery, and he cared not a farthing whether his listener liked them
or didn't. Whom he loved he loved, and manifested it; whom he didn't love he hated, and published
it from the housetops. In his young days he had been a sailor, and the salt-airs of all the
seas blew from him yet. He was a sturdy and loyal Christian, and believed he was the best one
in the land, and the only one whose Christianity was perfectly sound, healthy, full-charged
with common sense, and had no decayed places in it. People who had an ax to grind, or people
who for any reason wanted wanted to get on the soft side of him, called him The Christian--a
phrase whose delicate flattery was music to his ears, and whose capital T was such an enchanting
and vivid object to him that he could SEE it when it fell out of a person's mouth even in the
dark. Many who were fond of him stood on their consciences with both feet and brazenly called
him by that large title habitually, because it was a pleasure to them to do anything that would
please him; and with eager and cordial malice his extensive and diligently cultivated crop
of enemies gilded it, beflowered it, expanded it to "The ONLY Christian." Of these two titles,
the latter had the wider currency; the enemy, being greatly in the majority, attended to that.
Whatever the doctor believed, he believed with all his heart, and would fight for it whenever
he got the chance; and if the intervals between chances grew to be irksomely wide, he would
invent ways of shortening them himself. He was severely conscientious, according to his rather
independent lights, and whatever he took to be a duty he performed, no matter whether the judgment
of the professional moralists agreed with his own or not. At sea, in his young days, he had
used profanity freely, but as soon as he was converted he made a rule, which he rigidly stuck
to ever afterward, never to use it except on the rarest occasions, and then only when duty
commanded. He had been a hard drinker at sea, but after his conversion he became a firm and
outspoken teetotaler, in order to be an example to the young, and from that time forth he seldom
drank; never, indeed, except when it seemed to him to be a duty--a condition which sometimes
occurred a couple of times a year, but never as many as five times.

Necessarily, such a man is impressionable, impulsive, emotional. This one was, and had no gift
at hiding his feelings; or if he had it he took no trouble to exercise it. He carried his soul's
prevailing weather in his face, and when he entered a room the parasols or the umbrellas went
up--figuratively speaking--according to the indications. When the soft light was in his eye
it meant approval, and delivered a benediction; when he came with a frown he lowered the temperature
ten degrees. He was a well-beloved man in the house of his friends, but sometimes a dreaded one.

He had a deep affection for the Lester household and its several members returned this feeling
with interest. They mourned over his kind of Christianity, and he frankly scoffed at theirs;
but both parties went on loving each other just the same.

He was approaching the house--out of the distance; the aunts and the culprit were moving toward
the sick-chamber.

CHAPTER III

The three last named stood by the bed; the aunts austere, the transgressor softly sobbing.
The mother turned her head on the pillow; her tired eyes flamed up instantly with sympathy
and passionate mother-love when they fell upon her child, and she opened the refuge and shelter
of her arms.

"Wait!" said Aunt Hannah, and put out her hand and stayed the girl from leaping into them.

"Helen," said the other aunt, impressively, "tell your mother all. Purge your soul; leave nothing
unconfessed."

Standing stricken and forlorn before her judges, the young girl mourned her sorrowful tale
through the end, then in a passion of appeal cried out:

"Oh, mother, can't you forgive me? won't you forgive me?--I am so desolate!"

"Forgive you, my darling? Oh, come to my arms!--there, lay your head upon my breast, and be
at peace. If you had told a thousand lies--"

There was a sound--a warning--the clearing of a throat. The aunts glanced up, and withered
in their clothes--there stood the doctor, his face a thunder-cloud. Mother and child knew nothing
of his presence; they lay locked together, heart to heart, steeped in immeasurable content,
dead to all things else. The physician stood many moments glaring and glooming upon the scene
before him; studying it, analyzing it, searching out its genesis; then he put up his hand and
beckoned to the aunts. They came trembling to him, and stood humbly before him and waited.
He bent down and whispered:

"Didn't I tell you this patient must be protected from all excitement? What the hell have you
been doing? Clear out of the place!"

They obeyed. Half an hour later he appeared in the parlor, serene, cheery, clothed in sunshine,
conducting Helen, with his arm about her waist, petting her, and saying gentle and playful
things to her; and she also was her sunny and happy self again.

"Now, then;" he said, "good-by, dear. Go to your room, and keep away from your mother, and
behave yourself. But wait--put out your tongue. There, that will do--you're as sound as a nut!"
He patted her cheek and added, "Run along now; I want to talk to these aunts."

She went from the presence. His face clouded over again at once; and as he sat down he said:

"You too have been doing a lot of damage--and maybe some good. Some good, yes--such as it is.
That woman's disease is typhoid! You've brought it to a show-up, I think, with your insanities,
and that's a service--such as it is. I hadn't been able to determine what it was before."

With one impulse the old ladies sprang to their feet, quaking with terror.

"Sit down! What are you proposing to do?"

"Do? We must fly to her. We--"

"You'll do nothing of the kind; you've done enough harm for one day. Do you want to squander
all your capital of crimes and follies on a single deal? Sit down, I tell you. I have arranged
for her to sleep; she needs it; if you disturb her without my orders, I'll brain you--if you've
got the materials for it."

They sat down, distressed and indignant, but obedient, under compulsion. He proceeded:

"Now, then, I want this case explained. THEY wanted to explain it to me--as if there hadn't
been emotion or excitement enough already. You knew my orders; how did you dare to go in there
and get up that riot?"

Hester looked appealing at Hannah; Hannah returned a beseeching look at Hester--neither wanted
to dance to this unsympathetic orchestra. The doctor came to their help. He said:

"Begin, Hester."

Fingering at the fringes of her shawl, and with lowered eyes, Hester said, timidly:

"We should not have disobeyed for any ordinary cause, but this was vital. This was a duty.
With a duty one has no choice; one must put all lighter considerations aside and perform it.
We were obliged to arraign her before her mother. She had told a lie."

The doctor glowered upon the woman a moment, and seemed to be trying to work up in his mind
an understand of a wholly incomprehensible proposition; then he stormed out:

"She told a lie! DID she? God bless my soul! I tell a million a day! And so does every doctor.
And so does everybody--including you--for that matter. And THAT was the important thing that
authorized you to venture to disobey my orders and imperil that woman's life! Look here, Hester
Gray, this is pure lunacy; that girl COULDN'T tell a lie that was intended to injure a person.
The thing is impossible--absolutely impossible. You know it yourselves--both of you; you know
it perfectly well."

Hannah came to her sister's rescue:

"Hester didn't mean that it was that kind of a lie, and it wasn't. But it was a lie."

"Well, upon my word, I never heard such nonsense! Haven't you got sense enough to discriminate
between lies! Don't you know the difference between a lie that helps and a lie that hurts?"

"ALL lies are sinful," said Hannah, setting her lips together like a vise; "all lies are forbidden."

The Only Christian fidgeted impatiently in his chair. He went to attack this proposition, but
he did not quite know how or where to begin. Finally he made a venture:

"Hester, wouldn't you tell a lie to shield a person from an undeserved injury or shame?"

"No."

"Not even a friend?"

"No."

"Not even your dearest friend?"

"No. I would not."

The doctor struggled in silence awhile with this situation; then he asked:

"Not even to save him from bitter pain and misery and grief?"

"No. Not even to save his life."

Another pause. Then:

"Nor his soul?"

There was a hush--a silence which endured a measurable interval--then Hester answered, in a
low voice, but with decision:

"Nor his soul?"

No one spoke for a while; then the doctor said:

"Is it with you the same, Hannah?"

"Yes," she answered.

"I ask you both--why?"

"Because to tell such a lie, or any lie, is a sin, and could cost us the loss of our own souls--WOULD,
indeed, if we died without time to repent."

"Strange... strange... it is past belief." Then he asked, roughly: "Is such a soul as that
WORTH saving?" He rose up, mumbling and grumbling, and started for the door, stumping vigorously
along. At the threshold he turned and rasped out an admonition: "Reform! Drop this mean and
sordid and selfish devotion to the saving of your shabby little souls, and hunt up something
to do that's got some dignity to it! RISK your souls! risk them in good causes; then if you
lose them, why should you care? Reform!"

The good old gentlewomen sat paralyzed, pulverized, outraged, insulted, and brooded in bitterness
and indignation over these blasphemies. They were hurt to the heart, poor old ladies, and said
they could never forgive these injuries.

"Reform!"

They kept repeating that word resentfully. "Reform--and learn to tell lies!"

Time slipped along, and in due course a change came over their spirits. They had completed
the human being's first duty--which is to think about himself until he has exhausted the subject,
then he is in a condition to take up minor interests and think of other people. This changes
the complexion of his spirits--generally wholesomely. The minds of the two old ladies reverted
to their beloved niece and the fearful disease which had smitten her; instantly they forgot
the hurts their self-love had received, and a passionate desire rose in their hearts to go
to the help of the sufferer and comfort her with their love, and minister to her, and labor
for her the best they could with their weak hands, and joyfully and affectionately wear out
their poor old bodies in her dear service if only they might have the privilege.

"And we shall have it!" said Hester, with the tears running down her face. "There are no nurses
comparable to us, for there are no others that will stand their watch by that bed till they
drop and die, and God knows we would do that."

"Amen," said Hannah, smiling approval and endorsement through the mist of moisture that blurred
her glasses. "The doctor knows us, and knows we will not disobey again; and he will call no
others. He will not dare!"

"Dare?" said Hester, with temper, and dashing the water from her eyes; "he will dare anything--that
Christian devil! But it will do no good for him to try it this time--but, laws! Hannah! after
all's said and done, he is gifted and wise and good, and he would not think of such a thing....
It is surely time for one of us to go to that room. What is keeping him? Why doesn't he come
and say so?"

They caught the sound of his approaching step. He entered, sat down, and began to talk.

"Margaret is a sick woman," he said. "She is still sleeping, but she will wake presently; then
one of you must go to her. She will be worse before she is better. Pretty soon a night-and-day
watch must be set. How much of it can you two undertake?"

"All of it!" burst from both ladies at once.

The doctor's eyes flashed, and he said, with energy:

"You DO ring true, you brave old relics! And you SHALL do all of the nursing you can, for there's
none to match you in that divine office in this town; but you can't do all of it, and it would
be a crime to let you." It was grand praise, golden praise, coming from such a source, and
it took nearly all the resentment out of the aged twin's hearts. "Your Tilly and my old Nancy
shall do the rest--good nurses both, white souls with black skins, watchful, loving, tender--just
perfect nurses!--and competent liars from the cradle.... Look you! keep a little watch on Helen;
she is sick, and is going to be sicker."

The ladies looked a little surprised, and not credulous; and Hester said:

"How is that? It isn't an hour since you said she was as sound as a nut."

The doctor answered, tranquilly:

"It was a lie."

The ladies turned upon him indignantly, and Hannah said:

"How can you make an odious confession like that, in so indifferent a tone, when you know how
we feel about all forms of--"

"Hush! You are as ignorant as cats, both of you, and you don't know what you are talking about.
You are like all the rest of the moral moles; you lie from morning till night, but because
you don't do it with your mouths, but only with your lying eyes, your lying inflections, your
deceptively misplaced emphasis, and your misleading gestures, you turn up your complacent noses
and parade before God and the world as saintly and unsmirched Truth-Speakers, in whose cold-storage
souls a lie would freeze to death if it got there! Why will you humbug yourselves with that
foolish notion that no lie is a lie except a spoken one? What is the difference between lying
with your eyes and lying with your mouth? There is none; and if you would reflect a moment
you would see that it is so. There isn't a human being that doesn't tell a gross of lies every
day of his life; and you--why, between you, you tell thirty thousand; yet you flare up here
in a lurid hypocritical horror because I tell that child a benevolent and sinless lie to protect
her from her imagination, which would get to work and warm up her blood to a fever in an hour,
if I were disloyal enough to my duty to let it. Which I should probably do if I were interested
in saving my soul by such disreputable means.

"Come, let us reason together. Let us examine details. When you two were in the sick-room raising
that riot, what would you have done if you had known I was coming?"

"Well, what?"

"You would have slipped out and carried Helen with you--wouldn't you?"

The ladies were silent.

"What would be your object and intention?"

"Well, what?"

"To keep me from finding out your guilt; to beguile me to infer that Margaret's excitement
proceeded from some cause not known to you. In a word, to tell me a lie--a silent lie. Moreover,
a possibly harmful one."

The twins colored, but did not speak.

"You not only tell myriads of silent lies, but you tell lies with your mouths--you two."

"THAT is not so!"

"It is so. But only harmless ones. You never dream of uttering a harmful one. Do you know that
that is a concession--and a confession?"

"How do you mean?"

"It is an unconscious concession that harmless lies are not criminal; it is a confession that
you constantly MAKE that discrimination. For instance, you declined old Mrs. Foster's invitation
last week to meet those odious Higbies at supper--in a polite note in which you expressed regret
and said you were very sorry you could not go. It was a lie. It was as unmitigated a lie as
was ever uttered. Deny it, Hester--with another lie."

Hester replied with a toss of her head.

"That will not do. Answer. Was it a lie, or wasn't it?"

The color stole into the cheeks of both women, and with a struggle and an effort they got out
their confession:

"It was a lie."

"Good--the reform is beginning; there is hope for you yet; you will not tell a lie to save
your dearest friend's soul, but you will spew out one without a scruple to save yourself the
discomfort of telling an unpleasant truth."

He rose. Hester, speaking for both, said; coldly:

"We have lied; we perceive it; it will occur no more. To lie is a sin. We shall never tell
another one of any kind whatsoever, even lies of courtesy or benevolence, to save any one a
pang or a sorrow decreed for him by God."

"Ah, how soon you will fall! In fact, you have fallen already; for what you have just uttered
is a lie. Good-by. Reform! One of you go to the sick-room now."

CHAPTER IV

Twelve days later.

Mother and child were lingering in the grip of the hideous disease. Of hope for either there
was little. The aged sisters looked white and worn, but they would not give up their posts.
Their hearts were breaking, poor old things, but their grit was steadfast and indestructible.
All the twelve days the mother had pined for the child, and the child for the mother, but both
knew that the prayer of these longings could not be granted. When the mother was told--on the
first day--that her disease was typhoid, she was frightened, and asked if there was danger
that Helen could have contracted it the day before, when she was in the sick-chamber on that
confession visit. Hester told her the doctor had poo-pooed the idea. It troubled Hester to
say it, although it was true, for she had not believed the doctor; but when she saw the mother's
joy in the news, the pain in her conscience lost something of its force--a result which made
her ashamed of the constructive deception which she had practiced, though not ashamed enough
to make her distinctly and definitely wish she had refrained from it. From that moment the
sick woman understood that her daughter must remain away, and she said she would reconcile
herself to the separation the best she could, for she would rather suffer death than have her
child's health imperiled. That afternoon Helen had to take to her bed, ill. She grew worse
during the night. In the morning her mother asked after her:

"Is she well?"

Hester turned cold; she opened her lips, but the words refused to come. The mother lay languidly
looking, musing, waiting; suddenly she turned white and gasped out:

"Oh, my God! what is it? is she sick?"

Then the poor aunt's tortured heart rose in rebellion, and words came:

"No--be comforted; she is well."

The sick woman put all her happy heart in her gratitude:

"Thank God for those dear words! Kiss me. How I worship you for saying them!"

Hester told this incident to Hannah, who received it with a rebuking look, and said, coldly:

"Sister, it was a lie."

Hester's lips trembled piteously; she choked down a sob, and said:

"Oh, Hannah, it was a sin, but I could not help it. I could not endure the fright and the misery
that were in her face."

"No matter. It was a lie. God will hold you to account for it."

"Oh, I know it, I know it," cried Hester, wringing her hands, "but even if it were now, I could
not help it. I know I should do it again."

"Then take my place with Helen in the morning. I will make the report myself."

Hester clung to her sister, begging and imploring.

"Don't, Hannah, oh, don't--you will kill her."

"I will at least speak the truth."

In the morning she had a cruel report to bear to the mother, and she braced herself for the
trial. When she returned from her mission, Hester was waiting, pale and trembling, in the hall.
She whispered:

"Oh, how did she take it--that poor, desolate mother?"

Hannah's eyes were swimming in tears. She said:

"God forgive me, I told her the child was well!"

Hester gathered her to her heart, with a grateful "God bless you, Hannah!" and poured out her
thankfulness in an inundation of worshiping praises.

After that, the two knew the limit of their strength, and accepted their fate. They surrendered
humbly, and abandoned themselves to the hard requirements of the situation. Daily they told
the morning lie, and confessed their sin in prayer; not asking forgiveness, as not being worthy
of it, but only wishing to make record that they realized their wickedness and were not desiring
to hide it or excuse it.

Daily, as the fair young idol of the house sank lower and lower, the sorrowful old aunts painted
her glowing bloom and her fresh young beauty to the wan mother, and winced under the stabs
her ecstasies of joy and gratitude gave them.

In the first days, while the child had strength to hold a pencil, she wrote fond little love-notes
to her mother, in which she concealed her illness; and these the mother read and reread through
happy eyes wet with thankful tears, and kissed them over and over again, and treasured them
as precious things under her pillow.

Then came a day when the strength was gone from the hand, and the mind wandered, and the tongue
babbled pathetic incoherences. This was a sore dilemma for the poor aunts. There were no love-notes
for the mother. They did not know what to do. Hester began a carefully studied and plausible
explanation, but lost the track of it and grew confused; suspicion began to show in the mother's
face, then alarm. Hester saw it, recognized the imminence of the danger, and descended to the
emergency, pulling herself resolutely together and plucking victor from the open jaws of defeat.
In a placid and convincing voice she said:

"I thought it might distress you to know it, but Helen spent the night at the Sloanes'. There
was a little party there, and, although she did not want to go, and you so sick, we persuaded
her, she being young and needing the innocent pastimes of youth, and we believing you would
approve. Be sure she will write the moment she comes."

"How good you are, and how dear and thoughtful for us both! Approve? Why, I thank you with
all my heart. My poor little exile! Tell her I want her to have every pleasure she can--I would
not rob her of one. Only let her keep her health, that is all I ask. Don't let that suffer;
I could not bear it. How thankful I am that she escaped this infection--and what a narrow risk
she ran, Aunt Hester! Think of that lovely face all dulled and burned with fever. I can't bear
the thought of it. Keep her health. Keep her bloom! I can see her now, the dainty creature--with
the big, blue, earnest eyes; and sweet, oh, so sweet and gentle and winning! Is she as beautiful
as ever, dear Aunt Hester?"

"Oh, more beautiful and bright and charming than ever she was before, if such a thing can be"--and
Hester turned away and fumbled with the medicine-bottles, to hide her shame and grief.

CHAPTER V

After a little, both aunts were laboring upon a difficult and baffling work in Helen's chamber.
Patiently and earnestly, with their stiff old fingers, they were trying to forge the required
note. They made failure after failure, but they improved little by little all the time. The
pity of it all, the pathetic humor of it, there was none to see; they themselves were unconscious
of it. Often their tears fell upon the notes and spoiled them; sometimes a single misformed
word made a note risky which could have been ventured but for that; but at last Hannah produced
one whose script was a good enough imitation of Helen's to pass any but a suspicious eye, and
bountifully enriched it with the petting phrases and loving nicknames that had been familiar
on the child's lips from her nursery days. She carried it to the mother, who took it with avidity,
and kissed it, and fondled it, reading its precious words over and over again, and dwelling
with deep contentment upon its closing paragraph:

"Mousie darling, if I could only see you, and kiss your eyes, and feel your arms about me!
I am so glad my practicing does not disturb you. Get well soon. Everybody is good to me, but
I am so lonesome without you, dear mamma."

"The poor child, I know just how she feels. She cannot be quite happy without me; and I--oh,
I live in the light of her eyes! Tell her she must practice all she pleases; and, Aunt Hannah--tell
her I can't hear the piano this far, nor hear dear voice when she sings: God knows I wish I
could. No one knows how sweet that voice is to me; and to think--some day it will be silent!
What are you crying for?"

"Only because--because--it was just a memory. When I came away she was singing, 'Loch Lomond.'
The pathos of it! It always moves me so when she sings that."

"And me, too. How heartbreakingly beautiful it is when some youthful sorrow is brooding in
her breast and she sings it for the mystic healing it brings.... Aunt Hannah?"

"Dear Margaret?"

"I am very ill. Sometimes it comes over me that I shall never hear that dear voice again."

"Oh, don't--don't, Margaret! I can't bear it!"

Margaret was moved and distressed, and said, gently:

"There--there--let me put my arms around you. Don't cry. There--put your cheek to mine. Be
comforted. I wish to live. I will live if I can. Ah, what could she do without me!... Does
she often speak of me?--but I know she does."

"Oh, all the time--all the time!"

"My sweet child! She wrote the note the moment she came home?"

"Yes--the first moment. She would not wait to take off her things."

"I knew it. It is her dear, impulsive, affectionate way. I knew it without asking, but I wanted
to hear you say it. The petted wife knows she is loved, but she makes her husband tell her
so every day, just for the joy of hearing it.... She used the pen this time. That is better;
the pencil-marks could rub out, and I should grieve for that. Did you suggest that she use
the pen?"

"Y--no--she--it was her own idea."

The mother looked her pleasure, and said:

"I was hoping you would say that. There was never such a dear and thoughtful child!... Aunt
Hannah?"

"Dear Margaret?"

"Go and tell her I think of her all the time, and worship her. Why--you are crying again. Don't
be so worried about me, dear; I think there is nothing to fear, yet."

The grieving messenger carried her message, and piously delivered it to unheeding ears. The
girl babbled on unaware; looking up at her with wondering and startled eyes flaming with fever,
eyes in which was no light of recognition:

"Are you--no, you are not my mother. I want her--oh, I want her! She was here a minute ago--I
did not see her go. Will she come? will she come quickly? will she come now?... There are so
many houses ... and they oppress me so... and everything whirls and turns and whirls... oh,
my head, my head!"--and so she wandered on and on, in her pain, flitting from one torturing
fancy to another, and tossing her arms about in a weary and ceaseless persecution of unrest.

Poor old Hannah wetted the parched lips and softly stroked the hot brow, murmuring endearing
and pitying words, and thanking the Father of all that the mother was happy and did not know.

CHAPTER VI

Daily the child sank lower and steadily lower towards the grave, and daily the sorrowing old
watchers carried gilded tidings of her radiant health and loveliness to the happy mother, whose
pilgrimage was also now nearing its end. And daily they forged loving and cheery notes in the
child's hand, and stood by with remorseful consciences and bleeding hearts, and wept to see
the grateful mother devour them and adore them and treasure them away as things beyond price,
because of their sweet source, and sacred because her child's hand had touched them.

At last came that kindly friend who brings healing and peace to all. The lights were burning
low. In the solemn hush which precedes the dawn vague figures flitted soundless along the dim
hall and gathered silent and awed in Helen's chamber, and grouped themselves about her bed,
for a warning had gone forth, and they knew. The dying girl lay with closed lids, and unconscious,
the drapery upon her breast faintly rising and falling as her wasting life ebbed away. At intervals
a sigh or a muffled sob broke upon the stillness. The same haunting thought was in all minds
there: the pity of this death, the going out into the great darkness, and the mother not here
to help and hearten and bless.

Helen stirred; her hands began to grope wistfully about as if they sought something--she had
been blind some hours. The end was come; all knew it. With a great sob Hester gathered her
to her breast, crying, "Oh, my child, my darling!" A rapturous light broke in the dying girl's
face, for it was mercifully vouchsafed her to mistake those sheltering arms for another's;
and she went to her rest murmuring, "Oh, mamma, I am so happy--I longed for you--now I can die."

Two hours later Hester made her report. The mother asked:

"How is it with the child?"

"She is well."

CHAPTER VII

A sheaf of white crape and black was hung upon the door of the house, and there it swayed and
rustled in the wind and whispered its tidings. At noon the preparation of the dead was finished,
and in the coffin lay the fair young form, beautiful, and in the sweet face a great peace.
Two mourners sat by it, grieving and worshipping--Hannah and the black woman Tilly. Hester
came, and she was trembling, for a great trouble was upon her spirit. She said:

"She asks for a note."

Hannah's face blanched. She had not thought of this; it had seemed that that pathetic service
was ended. But she realized now that that could not be. For a little while the two women stood
looking into each other's face, with vacant eyes; then Hannah said:

"There is no way out of it--she must have it; she will suspect, else."

"And she would find out."

"Yes. It would break her heart." She looked at the dead face, and her eyes filled. "I will
write it," she said.

Hester carried it. The closing line said:

"Darling Mousie, dear sweet mother, we shall soon be together again. Is not that good news?
And it is true; they all say it is true."

The mother mourned, saying:

"Poor child, how will she bear it when she knows? I shall never see her again in life. It is
hard, so hard. She does not suspect? You guard her from that?"

"She thinks you will soon be well."

"How good you are, and careful, dear Aunt Hester! None goes near herr who could carry the infection?"

"It would be a crime."

"But you SEE her?"

"With a distance between--yes."

"That is so good. Others one could not trust; but you two guardian angels--steel is not so
true as you. Others would be unfaithful; and many would deceive, and lie."

Hester's eyes fell, and her poor old lips trembled.

"Let me kiss you for her, Aunt Hester; and when I am gone, and the danger is past, place the
kiss upon her dear lips some day, and say her mother sent it, and all her mother's broken heart
is in it."

Within the hour, Hester, raining tears upon the dead face, performed her pathetic mission.

CHAPTER VIII

Another day dawned, and grew, and spread its sunshine in the earth. Aunt Hannah brought comforting
news to the failing mother, and a happy note, which said again, "We have but a little time
to wait, darling mother, then we shall be together."

The deep note of a bell came moaning down the wind.

"Aunt Hannah, it is tolling. Some poor soul is at rest. As I shall be soon. You will not let
her forget me?"

"Oh, God knows she never will!"

"Do not you hear strange noises, Aunt Hannah? It sounds like the shuffling of many feet."

"We hoped you would not hear it, dear. It is a little company gathering, for--for Helen's sake,
poor little prisoner. There will be music--and she loves it so. We thought you would not mind."

"Mind? Oh no, no--oh, give her everything her dear heart can desire. How good you two are to
her, and how good to me! God bless you both always!"

After a listening pause:

"How lovely! It is her organ. Is she playing it herself, do you think?" Faint and rich and
inspiring the chords floating to her ears on the still air. "Yes, it is her touch, dear heart,
I recognize it. They are singing. Why--it is a hymn! and the sacredest of all, the most touching,
the most consoling.... It seems to open the gates of paradise to me.... If I could die now...."

Faint and far the words rose out of the stillness:

     Nearer, my God, to Thee,

     Nearer to Thee,

     E'en though it be a cross

     That raiseth me.

With the closing of the hymn another soul passed to its rest, and they that had been one in
life were not sundered in death. The sisters, mourning and rejoicing, said:

"How blessed it was that she never knew!"

CHAPTER IX

At midnight they sat together, grieving, and the angel of the Lord appeared in the midst transfigured
with a radiance not of earth; and speaking, said:

"For liars a place is appointed. There they burn in the fires of hell from everlasting unto
everlasting. Repent!"

The bereaved fell upon their knees before him and clasped their hands and bowed their gray
heads, adoring. But their tongues clove to the roof of their mouths, and they were dumb.

"Speak! that I may bear the message to the chancery of heaven and bring again the decree from
which there is no appeal."

Then they bowed their heads yet lower, and one said:

"Our sin is great, and we suffer shame; but only perfect and final repentance can make us whole;
and we are poor creatures who have learned our human weakness, and we know that if we were
in those hard straits again our hearts would fail again, and we should sin as before. The strong
could prevail, and so be saved, but we are lost."

They lifted their heads in supplication. The angel was gone. While they marveled and wept he
came again; and bending low, he whispered the decree.

CHAPTER X

Was it Heaven? Or Hell?

A CURE FOR THE BLUES

By courtesy of Mr. Cable I came into possession of a singular book eight or ten years ago.
It is likely that mine is now the only copy in existence. Its title-page, unabbreviated, reads
as follows:

"The Enemy Conquered; or, Love Triumphant. By G. Ragsdale McClintock, (1) author of 'An Address,'
etc., delivered at Sunflower Hill, South Carolina, and member of the Yale Law School. New Haven:
published by T. H. Pease, 83 Chapel Street, 1845."

No one can take up this book and lay it down again unread. Whoever reads one line of it is
caught, is chained; he has become the contented slave of its fascinations; and he will read
and read, devour and devour, and will not let it go out of his hand till it is finished to
the last line, though the house be on fire over his head. And after a first reading he will
not throw it aside, but will keep it by him, with his Shakespeare and his Homer, and will take
it up many and many a time, when the world is dark and his spirits are low, and be straightway
cheered and refreshed. Yet this work has been allowed to lie wholly neglected, unmentioned,
and apparently unregretted, for nearly half a century.

The reader must not imagine that he is to find in it wisdom, brilliancy, fertility of invention,
ingenuity of construction, excellence of form, purity of style, perfection of imagery, truth
to nature, clearness of statement, humanly possible situations, humanly possible people, fluent
narrative, connected sequence of events--or philosophy, or logic, or sense. No; the rich, deep,
beguiling charm of the book lies in the total and miraculous ABSENCE from it of all these qualities--a
charm which is completed and perfected by the evident fact that the author, whose naive innocence
easily and surely wins our regard, and almost our worship, does not know that they are absent,
does not even suspect that they are absent. When read by the light of these helps to an understanding
of the situation, the book is delicious--profoundly and satisfyingly delicious.

I call it a book because the author calls it a book, I call it a work because he calls it a
work; but, in truth, it is merely a duodecimo pamphlet of thirty-one pages. It was written
for fame and money, as the author very frankly--yes, and very hopefully, too, poor fellow--says
in his preface. The money never came--no penny of it ever came; and how long, how pathetically
long, the fame has been deferred--forty-seven years! He was young then, it would have been
so much to him then; but will he care for it now?

As time is measured in America, McClintock's epoch is antiquity. In his long-vanished day the
Southern author had a passion for "eloquence"; it was his pet, his darling. He would be eloquent,
or perish. And he recognized only one kind of eloquence--the lurid, the tempestuous, the volcanic.
He liked words--big words, fine words, grand words, rumbling, thundering, reverberating words;
with sense attaching if it could be got in without marring the sound, but not otherwise. He
loved to stand up before a dazed world, and pour forth flame and smoke and lava and pumice-stone
into the skies, and work his subterranean thunders, and shake himself with earthquakes, and
stench himself with sulphur fumes. If he consumed his own fields and vineyards, that was a
pity, yes; but he would have his eruption at any cost. Mr. McClintock's eloquence--and he is
always eloquent, his crater is always spouting--is of the pattern common to his day, but he
departs from the custom of the time in one respect: his brethren allowed sense to intrude when
it did not mar the sound, but he does not allow it to intrude at all. For example, consider
this figure, which he used in the village "Address" referred to with such candid complacency
in the title-page above quoted--"like the topmost topaz of an ancient tower." Please read it
again; contemplate it; measure it; walk around it; climb up it; try to get at an approximate
realization of the size of it. Is the fellow to that to be found in literature, ancient or
modern, foreign or domestic, living or dead, drunk or sober? One notices how fine and grand
it sounds. We know that if it was loftily uttered, it got a noble burst of applause from the
villagers; yet there isn't a ray of sense in it, or meaning to it.

McClintock finished his education at Yale in 1843, and came to Hartford on a visit that same
year. I have talked with men who at that time talked with him, and felt of him, and knew he
was real. One needs to remember that fact and to keep fast hold of it; it is the only way to
keep McClintock's book from undermining one's faith in McClintock's actuality.

As to the book. The first four pages are devoted to an inflamed eulogy of Woman--simply woman
in general, or perhaps as an institution--wherein, among other compliments to her details,
he pays a unique one to her voice. He says it "fills the breast with fond alarms, echoed by
every rill." It sounds well enough, but it is not true. After the eulogy he takes up his real
work and the novel begins. It begins in the woods, near the village of Sunflower Hill.

Brightening clouds seemed to rise from the mist of the fair Chattahoochee, to spread their
beauty over the thick forest, to guide the hero whose bosom beats with aspirations to conquer
the enemy that would tarnish his name, and to win back the admiration of his long-tried friend.

It seems a general remark, but it is not general; the hero mentioned is the to-be hero of the
book; and in this abrupt fashion, and without name or description, he is shoveled into the
tale. "With aspirations to conquer the enemy that would tarnish his name" is merely a phrase
flung in for the sake of the sound--let it not mislead the reader. No one is trying to tarnish
this person; no one has thought of it. The rest of the sentence is also merely a phrase; the
man has no friend as yet, and of course has had no chance to try him, or win back his admiration,
or disturb him in any other way.

The hero climbs up over "Sawney's Mountain," and down the other side, making for an old Indian
"castle"--which becomes "the red man's hut" in the next sentence; and when he gets there at
last, he "surveys with wonder and astonishment" the invisible structure, "which time has buried
in the dust, and thought to himself his happiness was not yet complete." One doesn't know why
it wasn't, nor how near it came to being complete, nor what was still wanting to round it up
and make it so. Maybe it was the Indian; but the book does not say. At this point we have an
episode:

Beside the shore of the brook sat a young man, about eighteen or twenty, who seemed to be reading
some favorite book, and who had a remarkably noble countenance--eyes which betrayed more than
a common mind. This of course made the youth a welcome guest, and gained him friends in whatever
condition of his life he might be placed. The traveler observed that he was a well-built figure
which showed strength and grace in every movement. He accordingly addressed him in quite a
gentlemanly manner, and inquired of him the way to the village. After he had received the desired
information, and was about taking his leave, the youth said, "Are you not Major Elfonzo, the
great musician (2)--the champion of a noble cause--the modern Achilles, who gained so many
victories in the Florida War?" "I bear that name," said the Major, "and those titles, trusting
at the same time that the ministers of grace will carry me triumphantly through all my laudable
undertakings, and if," continued the Major, "you, sir, are the patronizer of noble deeds, I
should like to make you my confidant and learn your address." The youth looked somewhat amazed,
bowed low, mused for a moment, and began: "My name is Roswell. I have been recently admitted
to the bar, and can only give a faint outline of my future success in that honorable profession;
but I trust, sir, like the Eagle, I shall look down from the lofty rocks upon the dwellings
of man, and shall ever be ready to give you any assistance in my official capacity, and whatever
this muscular arm of mine can do, whenever it shall be called from its buried GREATNESS." The
Major grasped him by the hand, and exclaimed: "O! thou exalted spirit of inspiration--thou
flame of burning prosperity, may the Heaven-directed blaze be the glare of thy soul, and battle
down every rampart that seems to impede your progress!"

There is a strange sort of originality about McClintock; he imitates other people's styles,
but nobody can imitate his, not even an idiot. Other people can be windy, but McClintock blows
a gale; other people can blubber sentiment, but McClintock spews it; other people can mishandle
metaphors, but only McClintock knows how to make a business of it. McClintock is always McClintock,
he is always consistent, his style is always his own style. He does not make the mistake of
being relevant on one page and irrelevant on another; he is irrelevant on all of them. He does
not make the mistake of being lucid in one place and obscure in another; he is obscure all
the time. He does not make the mistake of slipping in a name here and there that is out of
character with his work; he always uses names that exactly and fantastically fit his lunatics.
In the matter of undeviating consistency he stands alone in authorship. It is this that makes
his style unique, and entitles it to a name of its own--McClintockian. It is this that protects
it from being mistaken for anybody else's. Uncredited quotations from other writers often leave
a reader in doubt as to their authorship, but McClintock is safe from that accident; an uncredited
quotation from him would always be recognizable. When a boy nineteen years old, who had just
been admitted to the bar, says, "I trust, sir, like the Eagle, I shall look down from lofty
rocks upon the dwellings of man," we know who is speaking through that boy; we should recognize
that note anywhere. There be myriads of instruments in this world's literary orchestra, and
a multitudinous confusion of sounds that they make, wherein fiddles are drowned, and guitars
smothered, and one sort of drum mistaken for another sort; but whensoever the brazen note of
the McClintockian trombone breaks through that fog of music, that note is recognizable, and
about it there can be no blur of doubt.

The novel now arrives at the point where the Major goes home to see his father. When McClintock
wrote this interview he probably believed it was pathetic.

The road which led to the town presented many attractions Elfonzo had bid farewell to the youth
of deep feeling, and was now wending his way to the dreaming spot of his fondness. The south
winds whistled through the woods, as the waters dashed against the banks, as rapid fire in
the pent furnace roars. This brought him to remember while alone, that he quietly left behind
the hospitality of a father's house, and gladly entered the world, with higher hopes than are
often realized. But as he journeyed onward, he was mindful of the advice of his father, who
had often looked sadly on the ground, when tears of cruelly deceived hope moistened his eyes.
Elfonzo had been somewhat a dutiful son; yet fond of the amusements of life--had been in distant
lands--had enjoyed the pleasure of the world, and had frequently returned to the scenes of
his boyhood, almost destitute of many of the comforts of life. In this condition, he would
frequently say to his father, "Have I offended you, that you look upon me as a stranger, and
frown upon me with stinging looks? Will you not favor me with the sound of your voice? If I
have trampled upon your veneration, or have spread a humid veil of darkness around your expectations,
send me back into the world, where no heart beats for me--where the foot of man had never yet
trod; but give me at least one kind word--allow me to come into the presence sometimes of thy
winter-worn locks." "Forbid it, Heaven, that I should be angry with thee," answered the father,
"my son, and yet I send thee back to the children of the world--to the cold charity of the
combat, and to a land of victory. I read another destiny in thy countenance--I learn thy inclinations
from the flame that has already kindled in my soul a strange sensation. It will seek thee,
my dear ELFONZO, it will find thee--thou canst not escape that lighted torch, which shall blot
out from the remembrance of men a long train of prophecies which they have foretold against
thee. I once thought not so. Once, I was blind; but now the path of life is plain before me,
and my sight is clear; yet, Elfonzo, return to thy worldly occupation--take again in thy hand
that chord of sweet sounds--struggle with the civilized world and with your own heart; fly
swiftly to the enchanted ground--let the night-OWL send forth its screams from the stubborn
oak--let the sea sport upon the beach, and the stars sing together; but learn of these, Elfonzo,
thy doom, and thy hiding-place. Our most innocent as well as our most lawful DESIRES must often
be denied us, that we may learn to sacrifice them to a Higher will."

Remembering such admonitions with gratitude, Elfonzo was immediately urged by the recollection
of his father's family to keep moving.

McClintock has a fine gift in the matter of surprises; but as a rule they are not pleasant
ones, they jar upon the feelings. His closing sentence in the last quotation is of that sort.
It brings one down out of the tinted clouds in too sudden and collapsed a fashion. It incenses
one against the author for a moment. It makes the reader want to take him by this winter-worn
locks, and trample on his veneration, and deliver him over to the cold charity of combat, and
blot him out with his own lighted torch. But the feeling does not last. The master takes again
in his hand that concord of sweet sounds of his, and one is reconciled, pacified.

His steps became quicker and quicker--he hastened through the PINY woods, dark as the forest
was, and with joy he very soon reached the little village of repose, in whose bosom rested
the boldest chivalry. His close attention to every important object--his modest questions about
whatever was new to him--his reverence for wise old age, and his ardent desire to learn many
of the fine arts, soon brought him into respectable notice.

One mild winter day, as he walked along the streets toward the Academy, which stood upon a
small eminence, surrounded by native growth--some venerable in its appearance, others young
and prosperous--all seemed inviting, and seemed to be the very place for learning as well as
for genius to spend its research beneath its spreading shades. He entered its classic walls
in the usual mode of southern manners.

The artfulness of this man! None knows so well as he how to pique the curiosity of the reader--and
how to disappoint it. He raises the hope, here, that he is going to tell all about how one
enters a classic wall in the usual mode of Southern manners; but does he? No; he smiles in
his sleeve, and turns aside to other matters.

The principal of the Institution begged him to be seated and listen to the recitations that
were going on. He accordingly obeyed the request, and seemed to be much pleased. After the
school was dismissed, and the young hearts regained their freedom, with the songs of the evening,
laughing at the anticipated pleasures of a happy home, while others tittered at the actions
of the past day, he addressed the teacher in a tone that indicated a resolution--with an undaunted
mind. He said he had determined to become a student, if he could meet with his approbation.
"Sir," said he, "I have spent much time in the world. I have traveled among the uncivilized
inhabitants of America. I have met with friends, and combated with foes; but none of these
gratify my ambition, or decide what is to be my destiny. I see the learned world have an influence
with the voice of the people themselves. The despoilers of the remotest kingdoms of the earth
refer their differences to this class of persons. This the illiterate and inexperienced little
dream of; and now if you will receive me as I am, with these deficiencies--with all my misguided
opinions, I will give you my honor, sir, that I will never disgrace the Institution, or those
who have placed you in this honorable station." The instructor, who had met with many disappointments,
knew how to feel for a stranger who had been thus turned upon the charities of an unfeeling
community. He looked at him earnestly, and said: "Be of good cheer--look forward, sir, to the
high destination you may attain. Remember, the more elevated the mark at which you aim, the
more sure, the more glorious, the more magnificent the prize." From wonder to wonder, his encouragement
led the impatient listener. A strange nature bloomed before him--giant streams promised him
success--gardens of hidden treasures opened to his view. All this, so vividly described, seemed
to gain a new witchery from his glowing fancy.

It seems to me that this situation is new in romance. I feel sure it has not been attempted
before. Military celebrities have been disguised and set at lowly occupations for dramatic
effect, but I think McClintock is the first to send one of them to school. Thus, in this book,
you pass from wonder to wonder, through gardens of hidden treasure, where giant streams bloom
before you, and behind you, and all around, and you feel as happy, and groggy, and satisfied
with your quart of mixed metaphor aboard as you would if it had been mixed in a sample-room
and delivered from a jug.

Now we come upon some more McClintockian surprise--a sweetheart who is sprung upon us without
any preparation, along with a name for her which is even a little more of a surprise than she
herself is.

In 1842 he entered the class, and made rapid progress in the English and Latin departments.
Indeed, he continued advancing with such rapidity that he was like to become the first in his
class, and made such unexpected progress, and was so studious, that he had almost forgotten
the pictured saint of his affections. The fresh wreaths of the pine and cypress had waited
anxiously to drop once more the dews of Heaven upon the heads of those who had so often poured
forth the tender emotions of their souls under its boughs. He was aware of the pleasure that
he had seen there. So one evening, as he was returning from his reading, he concluded he would
pay a visit to this enchanting spot. Little did he think of witnessing a shadow of his former
happiness, though no doubt he wished it might be so. He continued sauntering by the roadside,
meditating on the past. The nearer he approached the spot, the more anxious he became. At that
moment a tall female figure flitted across his path, with a bunch of roses in her hand; her
countenance showed uncommon vivacity, with a resolute spirit; her ivory teeth already appeared
as she smiled beautifully, promenading--while her ringlets of hair dangled unconsciously around
her snowy neck. Nothing was wanting to complete her beauty. The tinge of the rose was in full
bloom upon her cheek; the charms of sensibility and tenderness were always her associates.
In Ambulinia's bosom dwelt a noble soul--one that never faded--one that never was conquered.

Ambulinia! It can hardly be matched in fiction. The full name is Ambulinia Valeer. Marriage
will presently round it out and perfect it. Then it will be Mrs. Ambulinia Valeer Elfonzo.
It takes the chromo.

Her heart yielded to no feeling but the love of Elfonzo, on whom she gazed with intense delight,
and to whom she felt herself more closely bound, because he sought the hand of no other. Elfonzo
was roused from his apparent reverie. His books no longer were his inseparable companions--his
thoughts arrayed themselves to encourage him to the field of victory. He endeavored to speak
to his supposed Ambulinia, but his speech appeared not in words. No, his effort was a stream
of fire, that kindled his soul into a flame of admiration, and carried his senses away captive.
Ambulinia had disappeared, to make him more mindful of his duty. As she walked speedily away
through the piny woods, she calmly echoed: "O! Elfonzo, thou wilt now look from thy sunbeams.
Thou shalt now walk in a new path--perhaps thy way leads through darkness; but fear not, the
stars foretell happiness."

To McClintock that jingling jumble of fine words meant something, no doubt, or seemed to mean
something; but it is useless for us to try to divine what it was. Ambulinia comes--we don't
know whence nor why; she mysteriously intimates--we don't know what; and then she goes echoing
away--we don't know whither; and down comes the curtain. McClintock's art is subtle; McClintock's
art is deep.

Not many days afterward, as surrounded by fragrant flowers she sat one evening at twilight,
to enjoy the cool breeze that whispered notes of melody along the distant groves, the little
birds perched on every side, as if to watch the movements of their new visitor. The bells were
tolling, when Elfonzo silently stole along by the wild wood flowers, holding in his hand his
favorite instrument of music--his eye continually searching for Ambulinia, who hardly seemed
to perceive him, as she played carelessly with the songsters that hopped from branch to branch.
Nothing could be more striking than the difference between the two. Nature seemed to have given
the more tender soul to Elfonzo, and the stronger and more courageous to Ambulinia. A deep
feeling spoke from the eyes of Elfonzo--such a feeling as can only be expressed by those who
are blessed as admirers, and by those who are able to return the same with sincerity of heart.
He was a few years older than Ambulinia: she had turned a little into her seventeenth. He had
almost grown up in the Cherokee country, with the same equal proportions as one of the natives.
But little intimacy had existed between them until the year forty-one--because the youth felt
that the character of such a lovely girl was too exalted to inspire any other feeling than
that of quiet reverence. But as lovers will not always be insulted, at all times and under
all circumstances, by the frowns and cold looks of crabbed old age, which should continually
reflect dignity upon those around, and treat the unfortunate as well as the fortunate with
a graceful mien, he continued to use diligence and perseverance. All this lighted a spark in
his heart that changed his whole character, and like the unyielding Deity that follows the
storm to check its rage in the forest, he resolves for the first time to shake off his embarrassment
and return where he had before only worshiped.

At last we begin to get the Major's measure. We are able to put this and that casual fact together,
and build the man up before our eyes, and look at him. And after we have got him built, we
find him worth the trouble. By the above comparison between his age and Ambulinia's, we guess
the war-worn veteran to be twenty-two; and the other facts stand thus: he had grown up in the
Cherokee country with the same equal proportions as one of the natives--how flowing and graceful
the language, and yet how tantalizing as to meaning!--he had been turned adrift by his father,
to whom he had been "somewhat of a dutiful son"; he wandered in distant lands; came back frequently
"to the scenes of his boyhood, almost destitute of many of the comforts of life," in order
to get into the presence of his father's winter-worn locks, and spread a humid veil of darkness
around his expectations; but he was always promptly sent back to the cold charity of the combat
again; he learned to play the fiddle, and made a name for himself in that line; he had dwelt
among the wild tribes; he had philosophized about the despoilers of the kingdoms of the earth,
and found out--the cunning creature--that they refer their differences to the learned for settlement;
he had achieved a vast fame as a military chieftain, the Achilles of the Florida campaigns,
and then had got him a spelling-book and started to school; he had fallen in love with Ambulinia
Valeer while she was teething, but had kept it to himself awhile, out of the reverential awe
which he felt for the child; but now at last, like the unyielding Deity who follows the storm
to check its rage in the forest, he resolves to shake off his embarrassment, and to return
where before he had only worshiped. The Major, indeed, has made up his mind to rise up and
shake his faculties together, and to see if HE can't do that thing himself. This is not clear.
But no matter about that: there stands the hero, compact and visible; and he is no mean structure,
considering that his creator had never structure, considering that his creator had never created
anything before, and hadn't anything but rags and wind to build with this time. It seems to
me that no one can contemplate this odd creature, this quaint and curious blatherskite, without
admiring McClintock, or, at any rate, loving him and feeling grateful to him; for McClintock
made him, he gave him to us; without McClintock we could not have had him, and would now be poor.

But we must come to the feast again. Here is a courtship scene, down there in the romantic
glades among the raccoons, alligators, and things, that has merit, peculiar literary merit.
See how Achilles woos. Dwell upon the second sentence (particularly the close of it) and the
beginning of the third. Never mind the new personage, Leos, who is intruded upon us unheralded
and unexplained. That is McClintock's way; it is his habit; it is a part of his genius; he
cannot help it; he never interrupts the rush of his narrative to make introductions.

It could not escape Ambulinia's penetrating eye that he sought an interview with her, which
she as anxiously avoided, and assumed a more distant calmness than before, seemingly to destroy
all hope. After many efforts and struggles with his own person, with timid steps the Major
approached the damsel, with the same caution as he would have done in a field of battle. "Lady
Ambulinia," said he, trembling, "I have long desired a moment like this. I dare not let it
escape. I fear the consequences; yet I hope your indulgence will at least hear my petition.
Can you not anticipate what I would say, and what I am about to express? Will not you, like
Minerva, who sprung from the brain of Jupiter, release me from thy winding chains or cure me--"
"Say no more, Elfonzo," answered Ambulinia, with a serious look, raising her hand as if she
intended to swear eternal hatred against the whole world; "another lady in my place would have
perhaps answered your question in bitter coldness. I know not the little arts of my sex. I
care but little for the vanity of those who would chide me, and am unwilling as well as ashamed
to be guilty of anything that would lead you to think 'all is not gold that glitters'; so be
no rash in your resolution. It is better to repent now, than to do it in a more solemn hour.
Yes, I know what you would say. I know you have a costly gift for me--the noblest that man
can make--YOUR HEART! You should not offer it to one so unworthy. Heaven, you know, has allowed
my father's house to be made a house of solitude, a home of silent obedience, which my parents
say is more to be admired than big names and high-sounding titles. Notwithstanding all this,
let me speak the emotions of an honest heart--allow me to say in the fullness of my hopes that
I anticipate better days. The bird may stretch its wings toward the sun, which it can never
reach; and flowers of the field appear to ascend in the same direction, because they cannot
do otherwise; but man confides his complaints to the saints in whom he believes; for in their
abodes of light they know no more sorrow. From your confession and indicative looks, I must
be that person; if so deceive not yourself."

Elfonzo replied, "Pardon me, my dear madam, for my frankness. I have loved you from my earliest
days--everything grand and beautiful hath borne the image of Ambulinia; while precipices on
every hand surrounded me, your GUARDIAN ANGEL stood and beckoned me away from the deep abyss.
In every trial, in every misfortune, I have met with your helping hand; yet I never dreamed
or dared to cherish thy love, till a voice impaired with age encouraged the cause, and declared
they who acquired thy favor should win a victory. I saw how Leos worshiped thee. I felt my
own unworthiness. I began to KNOW JEALOUSLY, a strong guest--indeed, in my bosom,--yet I could
see if I gained your admiration Leos was to be my rival. I was aware that he had the influence
of your parents, and the wealth of a deceased relative, which is too often mistaken for permanent
and regular tranquillity; yet I have determined by your permission to beg an interest in your
prayers--to ask you to animate my drooping spirits by your smiles and your winning looks; for
if you but speak I shall be conqueror, my enemies shall stagger like Olympus shakes. And though
earth and sea may tremble, and the charioteer of the sun may forget his dashing steed, yet
I am assured that it is only to arm me with divine weapons which will enable me to complete
my long-tried intention."

"Return to yourself, Elfonzo," said Ambulinia, pleasantly: "a dream of vision has disturbed
your intellect; you are above the atmosphere, dwelling in the celestial regions; nothing is
there that urges or hinders, nothing that brings discord into our present litigation. I entreat
you to condescend a little, and be a man, and forget it all. When Homer describes the battle
of the gods and noble men fighting with giants and dragons, they represent under this image
our struggles with the delusions of our passions. You have exalted me, an unhappy girl, to
the skies; you have called me a saint, and portrayed in your imagination an angel in human
form. Let her remain such to you, let her continue to be as you have supposed, and be assured
that she will consider a share in your esteem as her highest treasure. Think not that I would
allure you from the path in which your conscience leads you; for you know I respect the conscience
of others, as I would die for my own. Elfonzo, if I am worthy of thy love, let such conversation
never again pass between us. Go, seek a nobler theme! we will seek it in the stream of time,
as the sun set in the Tigris." As she spake these words she grasped the hand of Elfonzo, saying
at the same time--"Peace and prosperity attend you, my hero; be up and doing!" Closing her
remarks with this expression, she walked slowly away, leaving Elfonzo astonished and amazed.
He ventured not to follow or detain her. Here he stood alone, gazing at the stars; confounded
as he was, here he stood.

Yes; there he stood. There seems to be no doubt about that. Nearly half of this delirious story
has now been delivered to the reader. It seems a pity to reduce the other half to a cold synopsis.
Pity! it is more than a pity, it is a crime; for to synopsize McClintock is to reduce a sky-flushing
conflagration to dull embers, it is to reduce barbaric splendor to ragged poverty. McClintock
never wrote a line that was not precious; he never wrote one that could be spared; he never
framed one from which a word could be removed without damage. Every sentence that this master
has produced may be likened to a perfect set of teeth, white, uniform, beautiful. If you pull
one, the charm is gone.

Still, it is now necessary to begin to pull, and to keep it up; for lack of space requires
us to synopsize.

We left Elfonzo standing there amazed. At what, we do not know. Not at the girl's speech. No;
we ourselves should have been amazed at it, of course, for none of us has ever heard anything
resembling it; but Elfonzo was used to speeches made up of noise and vacancy, and could listen
to them with undaunted mind like the "topmost topaz of an ancient tower"; he was used to making
them himself; he--but let it go, it cannot be guessed out; we shall never know what it was
that astonished him. He stood there awhile; then he said, "Alas! am I now Grief's disappointed
son at last?" He did not stop to examine his mind, and to try to find out what he probably
meant by that, because, for one reason, "a mixture of ambition and greatness of soul moved
upon his young heart," and started him for the village. He resumed his bench in school, "and
reasonably progressed in his education." His heart was heavy, but he went into society, and
sought surcease of sorrow in its light distractions. He made himself popular with his violin,
"which seemed to have a thousand chords--more symphonious than the Muses of Apollo, and more
enchanting than the ghost of the Hills." This is obscure, but let it go.

During this interval Leos did some unencouraged courting, but at last, "choked by his undertaking,"
he desisted.

Presently "Elfonzo again wends his way to the stately walls and new-built village." He goes
to the house of his beloved; she opens the door herself. To my surprise--for Ambulinia's heart
had still seemed free at the time of their last interview--love beamed from the girl's eyes.
One sees that Elfonzo was surprised, too; for when he caught that light, "a halloo of smothered
shouts ran through every vein." A neat figure--a very neat figure, indeed! Then he kissed her.
"The scene was overwhelming." They went into the parlor. The girl said it was safe, for her
parents were abed, and would never know. Then we have this fine picture--flung upon the canvas
with hardly an effort, as you will notice.

Advancing toward him, she gave a bright display of her rosy neck, and from her head the ambrosial
locks breathed divine fragrance; her robe hung waving to his view, while she stood like a goddess
confessed before him.

There is nothing of interest in the couple's interview. Now at this point the girl invites
Elfonzo to a village show, where jealousy is the motive of the play, for she wants to teach
him a wholesome lesson, if he is a jealous person. But this is a sham, and pretty shallow.
McClintock merely wants a pretext to drag in a plagiarism of his upon a scene or two in "Othello."

The lovers went to the play. Elfonzo was one of the fiddlers. He and Ambulinia must not been
seen together, lest trouble follow with the girl's malignant father; we are made to understand
that clearly. So the two sit together in the orchestra, in the midst of the musicians. This
does not seem to be good art. In the first place, the girl would be in the way, for orchestras
are always packed closely together, and there is no room to spare for people's girls; in the
next place, one cannot conceal a girl in an orchestra without everybody taking notice of it.
There can be no doubt, it seems to me, that this is bad art.

Leos is present. Of course, one of the first things that catches his eye is the maddening spectacle
of Ambulinia "leaning upon Elfonzo's chair." This poor girl does not seem to understand even
the rudiments of concealment. But she is "in her seventeenth," as the author phrases it, and
that is her justification.

Leos meditates, constructs a plan--with personal violence as a basis, of course. It was their
way down there. It is a good plain plan, without any imagination in it. He will go out and
stand at the front door, and when these two come out he will "arrest Ambulinia from the hands
of the insolent Elfonzo," and thus make for himself a "more prosperous field of immortality
than ever was decreed by Omnipotence, or ever pencil drew or artist imagined." But, dear me,
while he is waiting there the couple climb out at the back window and scurry home! This is
romantic enough, but there is a lack of dignity in the situation.

At this point McClintock puts in the whole of his curious play--which we skip.

Some correspondence follows now. The bitter father and the distressed lovers write the letters.
Elopements are attempted. They are idiotically planned, and they fail. Then we have several
pages of romantic powwow and confusion dignifying nothing. Another elopement is planned; it
is to take place on Sunday, when everybody is at church. But the "hero" cannot keep the secret;
he tells everybody. Another author would have found another instrument when he decided to defeat
this elopement; but that is not McClintock's way. He uses the person that is nearest at hand.

The evasion failed, of course. Ambulinia, in her flight, takes refuge in a neighbor's house.
Her father drags her home. The villagers gather, attracted by the racket.

Elfonzo was moved at this sight. The people followed on to see what was going to become of
Ambulinia, while he, with downcast looks, kept at a distance, until he saw them enter the abode
of the father, thrusting her, that was the sigh of his soul, out of his presence into a solitary
apartment, when she exclaimed, "Elfonzo! Elfonzo! oh, Elfonzo! where art thou, with all thy
heroes? haste, oh! haste, come thou to my relief. Ride on the wings of the wind! Turn thy force
loose like a tempest, and roll on thy army like a whirlwind, over this mountain of trouble
and confusion. Oh friends! if any pity me, let your last efforts throng upon the green hills,
and come to the relief of Ambulinia, who is guilty of nothing but innocent love." Elfonzo called
out with a loud voice, "My God, can I stand this! arouse up, I beseech you, and put an end
to this tyranny. Come, my brave boys," said he, "are you ready to go forth to your duty?" They
stood around him. "Who," said he, "will call us to arms? Where are my thunderbolts of war?
Speak ye, the first who will meet the foe! Who will go forward with me in this ocean of grievous
temptation? If there is one who desires to go, let him come and shake hands upon the altar
of devotion, and swear that he will be a hero; yes, a Hector in a cause like this, which calls
aloud for a speedy remedy." "Mine be the deed," said a young lawyer, "and mine alone; Venus
alone shall quit her station before I will forsake one jot or tittle of my promise to you;
what is death to me? what is all this warlike army, if it is not to win a victory? I love the
sleep of the lover and the mighty; nor would I give it over till the blood of my enemies should
wreak with that of my own. But God forbid that our fame should soar on the blood of the slumberer."
Mr. Valeer stands at his door with the frown of a demon upon his brow, with his dangerous weapon
(3) ready to strike the first man who should enter his door. "Who will arise and go forward
through blood and carnage to the rescue of my Ambulinia?" said Elfonzo. "All," exclaimed the
multitude; and onward they went, with their implements of battle. Others, of a more timid nature,
stood among the distant hills to see the result of the contest.

It will hardly be believed that after all this thunder and lightning not a drop of rain fell;
but such is the fact. Elfonzo and his gang stood up and black-guarded Mr. Valeer with vigor
all night, getting their outlay back with interest; then in the early morning the army and
its general retired from the field, leaving the victory with their solitary adversary and his
crowbar. This is the first time this has happened in romantic literature. The invention is
original. Everything in this book is original; there is nothing hackneyed about it anywhere.
Always, in other romances, when you find the author leading up to a climax, you know what is
going to happen. But in this book it is different; the thing which seems inevitable and unavoidable
never happens; it is circumvented by the art of the author every time.

Another elopement was attempted. It failed.

We have now arrived at the end. But it is not exciting. McClintock thinks it is; but it isn't.
One day Elfonzo sent Ambulinia another note--a note proposing elopement No. 16. This time the
plan is admirable; admirable, sagacious, ingenious, imaginative, deep--oh, everything, and
perfectly easy. One wonders why it was never thought of before. This is the scheme. Ambulinia
is to leave the breakfast-table, ostensibly to "attend to the placing of those flowers, which
should have been done a week ago"--artificial ones, of course; the others wouldn't keep so
long--and then, instead of fixing the flowers, she is to walk out to the grove, and go off
with Elfonzo. The invention of this plan overstrained the author that is plain, for he straightway
shows failing powers. The details of the plan are not many or elaborate. The author shall state
them himself--this good soul, whose intentions are always better than his English:

"You walk carelessly toward the academy grove, where you will find me with a lightning steed,
elegantly equipped to bear you off where we shall be joined in wedlock with the first connubial
rights."

Last scene of all, which the author, now much enfeebled, tries to smarten up and make acceptable
to his spectacular heart by introducing some new properties--silver bow, golden harp, olive
branch--things that can all come good in an elopement, no doubt, yet are not to be compared
to an umbrella for real handiness and reliability in an excursion of that kind.

And away she ran to the sacred grove, surrounded with glittering pearls, that indicated her
coming. Elfonzo hails her with his silver bow and his golden harp. They meet--Ambulinia's countenance
brightens--Elfonzo leads up the winged steed. "Mount," said he, "ye true-hearted, ye fearless
soul--the day is ours." She sprang upon the back of the young thunderbolt, a brilliant star
sparkles upon her head, with one hand she grasps the reins, and with the other she holds an
olive branch. "Lend thy aid, ye strong winds," they exclaimed, "ye moon, ye sun, and all ye
fair host of heaven, witness the enemy conquered." "Hold," said Elfonzo, "thy dashing steed."
"Ride on," said Ambulinia, "the voice of thunder is behind us." And onward they went, with
such rapidity that they very soon arrived at Rural Retreat, where they dismounted, and were
united with all the solemnities that usually attended such divine operations.

There is but one Homer, there is but one Shakespeare, there is but one McClintock--and his
immortal book is before you. Homer could not have written this book, Shakespeare could not
have written it, I could not have done it myself. There is nothing just like it in the literature
of any country or of any epoch. It stands alone; it is monumental. It adds G. Ragsdale McClintock's
to the sum of the republic's imperishable names.

1. The name here given is a substitute for the one actually attached to the pamphlet.

2. Further on it will be seen that he is a country expert on the fiddle, and has a three-township
fame.

3. It is a crowbar.

THE CURIOUS BOOK

Complete

(The foregoing review of the great work of G. Ragsdale McClintock is liberally illuminated
with sample extracts, but these cannot appease the appetite. Only the complete book, unabridged,
can do that. Therefore it is here printed.--M.T.)

THE ENEMY CONQUERED; OR, LOVE TRIUMPHANT

     Sweet girl, thy smiles are full of charms,

     Thy voice is sweeter still,

     It fills the breast with fond alarms,

     Echoed by every rill.

I begin this little work with an eulogy upon woman, who has ever been distinguished for her
perseverance, her constancy, and her devoted attention to those upon whom she has been pleased
to place her AFFECTIONS. Many have been the themes upon which writers and public speakers have
dwelt with intense and increasing interest. Among these delightful themes stands that of woman,
the balm to all our sighs and disappointments, and the most pre-eminent of all other topics.
Here the poet and orator have stood and gazed with wonder and with admiration; they have dwelt
upon her innocence, the ornament of all her virtues. First viewing her external charms, such
as set forth in her form and benevolent countenance, and then passing to the deep hidden springs
of loveliness and disinterested devotion. In every clime, and in every age, she has been the
pride of her NATION. Her watchfulness is untiring; she who guarded the sepulcher was the first
to approach it, and the last to depart from its awful yet sublime scene. Even here, in this
highly favored land, we look to her for the security of our institutions, and for our future
greatness as a nation. But, strange as it may appear, woman's charms and virtues are but slightly
appreciated by thousands. Those who should raise the standard of female worth, and paint her
value with her virtues, in living colors, upon the banners that are fanned by the zephyrs of
heaven, and hand them down to posterity as emblematical of a rich inheritance, do not properly
estimate them.

Man is not sensible, at all times, of the nature and the emotions which bear that name; he
does not understand, he will not comprehend; his intelligence has not expanded to that degree
of glory which drinks in the vast revolution of humanity, its end, its mighty destination,
and the causes which operated, and are still operating, to produce a more elevated station,
and the objects which energize and enliven its consummation. This he is a stranger to; he is
not aware that woman is the recipient of celestial love, and that man is dependent upon her
to perfect his character; that without her, philosophically and truly speaking, the brightest
of his intelligence is but the coldness of a winter moon, whose beams can produce no fruit,
whose solar light is not its own, but borrowed from the great dispenser of effulgent beauty.
We have no disposition in the world to flatter the fair sex, we would raise them above those
dastardly principles which only exist in little souls, contracted hearts, and a distracted
brain. Often does she unfold herself in all her fascinating loveliness, presenting the most
captivating charms; yet we find man frequently treats such purity of purpose with indifference.
Why does he do it? Why does he baffle that which is inevitably the source of his better days?
Is he so much of a stranger to those excellent qualities as not to appreciate woman, as not
to have respect to her dignity? Since her art and beauty first captivated man, she has been
his delight and his comfort; she has shared alike in his misfortunes and in his prosperity.

Whenever the billows of adversity and the tumultuous waves of trouble beat high, her smiles
subdue their fury. Should the tear of sorrow and the mournful sigh of grief interrupt the peace
of his mind, her voice removes them all, and she bends from her circle to encourage him onward.
When darkness would obscure his mind, and a thick cloud of gloom would bewilder its operations,
her intelligent eye darts a ray of streaming light into his heart. Mighty and charming is that
disinterested devotion which she is ever ready to exercise toward man, not waiting till the
last moment of his danger, but seeks to relieve him in his early afflictions. It gushes forth
from the expansive fullness of a tender and devoted heart, where the noblest, the purest, and
the most elevated and refined feelings are matured and developed in those may kind offices
which invariably make her character.

In the room of sorrow and sickness, this unequaled characteristic may always been seen, in
the performance of the most charitable acts; nothing that she can do to promote the happiness
of him who she claims to be her protector will be omitted; all is invigorated by the animating
sunbeams which awaken the heart to songs of gaiety. Leaving this point, to notice another prominent
consideration, which is generally one of great moment and of vital importance. Invariably she
is firm and steady in all her pursuits and aims. There is required a combination of forces
and extreme opposition to drive her from her position; she takes her stand, not to be moved
by the sound of Apollo's lyre or the curved bow of pleasure.

Firm and true to what she undertakes, and that which she requires by her own aggrandizement,
and regards as being within the strict rules of propriety, she will remain stable and unflinching
to the last. A more genuine principle is not to be found in the most determined, resolute heart
of man. For this she deserves to be held in the highest commendation, for this she deserves
the purest of all other blessings, and for this she deserves the most laudable reward of all
others. It is a noble characteristic and is worthy of imitation of any age. And when we look
at it in one particular aspect, it is still magnified, and grows brighter and brighter the
more we reflect upon its eternal duration. What will she not do, when her word as well as her
affections and LOVE are pledged to her lover? Everything that is dear to her on earth, all
the hospitalities of kind and loving parents, all the sincerity and loveliness of sisters,
and the benevolent devotion of brothers, who have surrounded her with every comfort; she will
forsake them all, quit the harmony and sweet sound of the lute and the harp, and throw herself
upon the affections of some devoted admirer, in whom she fondly hopes to find more than she
has left behind, which is not often realized by many. Truth and virtue all combined! How deserving
our admiration and love! Ah cruel would it be in man, after she has thus manifested such an
unshaken confidence in him, and said by her determination to abandon all the endearments and
blandishments of home, to act a villainous part, and prove a traitor in the revolution of his
mission, and then turn Hector over the innocent victim whom he swore to protect, in the presence
of Heaven, recorded by the pen of an angel.

Striking as this train may unfold itself in her character, and as pre-eminent as it may stand
among the fair display of her other qualities, yet there is another, which struggles into existence,
and adds an additional luster to what she already possesses. I mean that disposition in woman
which enables her, in sorrow, in grief, and in distress, to bear all with enduring patience.
This she has done, and can and will do, amid the din of war and clash of arms. Scenes and occurrences
which, to every appearance, are calculated to rend the heart with the profoundest emotions
of trouble, do not fetter that exalted principle imbued in her very nature. It is true, her
tender and feeling heart may often be moved (as she is thus constituted), but she is not conquered,
she has not given up to the harlequin of disappointments, her energies have not become clouded
in the last movement of misfortune, but she is continually invigorated by the archetype of
her affections. She may bury her face in her hands, and let the tear of anguish roll, she may
promenade the delightful walks of some garden, decorated with all the flowers of nature, or
she may steal out along some gently rippling stream, and there, as the silver waters uninterruptedly
move forward, shed her silent tears; they mingle with the waves, and take a last farewell of
their agitated home, to seek a peaceful dwelling among the rolling floods; yet there is a voice
rushing from her breast, that proclaims VICTORY along the whole line and battlement of her
affections. That voice is the voice of patience and resignation; that voice is one that bears
everything calmly and dispassionately, amid the most distressing scenes; when the fates are
arrayed against her peace, and apparently plotting for her destruction, still she is resigned.

Woman's affections are deep, consequently her troubles may be made to sink deep. Although you
may not be able to mark the traces of her grief and the furrowings of her anguish upon her
winning countenance, yet be assured they are nevertheless preying upon her inward person, sapping
the very foundation of that heart which alone was made for the weal and not the woe of man.
The deep recesses of the soul are fields for their operation. But they are not destined simply
to take the regions of the heart for their dominion, they are not satisfied merely with interrupting
her better feelings; but after a while you may see the blooming cheek beginning to droop and
fade, her intelligent eye no longer sparkles with the starry light of heaven, her vibrating
pulse long since changed its regular motion, and her palpitating bosom beats once more for
the midday of her glory. Anxiety and care ultimately throw her into the arms of the haggard
and grim monster death. But, oh, how patient, under every pining influence! Let us view the
matter in bolder colors; see her when the dearest object of her affections recklessly seeks
every bacchanalian pleasure, contents himself with the last rubbish of creation. With what
solicitude she awaits his return! Sleep fails to perform its office--she weeps while the nocturnal
shades of the night triumph in the stillness. Bending over some favorite book, whilst the author
throws before her mind the most beautiful imagery, she startles at every sound. The midnight
silence is broken by the solemn announcement of the return of another morning. He is still
absent; she listens for that voice which has so often been greeted by the melodies of her own;
but, alas! stern silence is all that she receives for her vigilance.

Mark her unwearied watchfulness, as the night passes away. At last, brutalized by the accursed
thing, he staggers along with rage, and, shivering with cold, he makes his appearance. Not
a murmur is heard from her lips. On the contrary, she meets him with a smile--she caresses
him with tender arms, with all the gentleness and softness of her sex. Here, then, is seen
her disposition, beautifully arrayed. Woman, thou art more to be admired than the spicy gales
of Arabia, and more sought for than the gold of Golconda. We believe that Woman should associate
freely with man, and we believe that it is for the preservation of her rights. She should become
acquainted with the metaphysical designs of those who condescended to sing the siren song of
flattery. This, we think, should be according to the unwritten law of decorum, which is stamped
upon every innocent heart. The precepts of prudery are often steeped in the guilt of contamination,
which blasts the expectations of better moments. Truth, and beautiful dreams--loveliness, and
delicacy of character, with cherished affections of the ideal woman--gentle hopes and aspirations,
are enough to uphold her in the storms of darkness, without the transferred colorings of a
stained sufferer. How often have we seen it in our public prints, that woman occupies a false
station in the world! and some have gone so far as to say it was an unnatural one. So long
has she been regarded a weak creature, by the rabble and illiterate--they have looked upon
her as an insufficient actress on the great stage of human life--a mere puppet, to fill up
the drama of human existence--a thoughtless, inactive being--that she has too often come to
the same conclusion herself, and has sometimes forgotten her high destination, in the meridian
of her glory. We have but little sympathy or patience for those who treat her as a mere Rosy
Melindi--who are always fishing for pretty complements--who are satisfied by the gossamer of
Romance, and who can be allured by the verbosity of high-flown words, rich in language, but
poor and barren in sentiment. Beset, as she has been, by the intellectual vulgar, the selfish,
the designing, the cunning, the hidden, and the artful--no wonder she has sometimes folded
her wings in despair, and forgotten her HEAVENLY mission in the delirium of imagination; no
wonder she searches out some wild desert, to find a peaceful home. But this cannot always continue.
A new era is moving gently onward, old things are rapidly passing away; old superstitions,
old prejudices, and old notions are now bidding farewell to their old associates and companions,
and giving way to one whose wings are plumed with the light of heaven and tinged by the dews
of the morning. There is a remnant of blessedness that clings to her in spite of all evil influence,
there is enough of the Divine Master left to accomplish the noblest work ever achieved under
the canopy of the vaulted skies; and that time is fast approaching, when the picture of the
true woman will shine from its frame of glory, to captivate, to win back, to restore, and to
call into being once more, THE OBJECT OF HER MISSION.

     Star of the brave! thy glory shed,
     O'er all the earth, thy army led--
     Bold meteor of immortal birth!
     Why come from Heaven to dwell on Earth?

Mighty and glorious are the days of youth; happy the moments of the LOVER, mingled with smiles
and tears of his devoted, and long to be remembered are the achievements which he gains with
a palpitating heart and a trembling hand. A bright and lovely dawn, the harbinger of a fair
and prosperous day, had arisen over the beautiful little village of Cumming, which is surrounded
by the most romantic scenery in the Cherokee country. He endeavored to make his way through
Sawney's Mountain, where many meet to catch the gales that are continually blowing for the
refreshment of the stranger and the traveler. Surrounded as he was by hills on every side,
naked rocks dared the efforts of his energies. Soon the sky became overcast, the sun buried
itself in the clouds, and the fair day gave place to gloomy twilight, which lay heavily on
the Indian Plains. He remembered an old Indian Castle, that once stood at the foot of the mountain.
He thought if he could make his way to this, he would rest contented for a short time. The
mountain air breathed fragrance--a rosy tinge rested on the glassy waters that murmured at
its base. His resolution soon brought him to the remains of the red man's hut: he surveyed
with wonder and astonishment the decayed building, which time had buried in the dust, and thought
to himself, his happiness was not yet complete. I felt my own unworthiness. The rippling stream
rolled on at his feet. Twilight had already begun to draw her sable mantle over the earth,
and now and then the fiery smoke would ascend from the little town which lay spread out before
him. The citizens seemed to be full of life and good-humor; but poor Elfonzo saw not a brilliant
scene. No; his future life stood before him, stripped of the hopes that once adorned all his
sanguine desires. "Alas!" said he, "am I now Grief's disappointed son at last." Ambulinia's
image rose before his fancy. A mixture of ambition and greatness of soul moved upon his young
heart, and encouraged him to bear all his crosses with the patience of a Job, notwithstanding
he had to encounter with so many obstacles. He still endeavored to prosecute his studies, and
reasonable progressed in his education. Still, he was not content; there was something yet
to be done before his happiness was complete. He would visit his friends and acquaintances.
They would invite him to social parties, insisting that he should partake of the amusements
that were going on. This he enjoyed tolerably well. He passed some days in the country. During
that time Leos had made many calls upon Ambulinia, who was generally received with a great
deal of courtesy by the family. They thought him to be a young man worthy of attention, though
he had but little in his soul to attract the attention or even win the affections of her whose
graceful manners had almost made him a slave to every bewitching look that fell from her eyes.
Leos made several attempts to tell her of his fair prospects--how much he loved her, and how
much it would add to his bliss if he could but think she would be willing to share these blessings
with him; but, choked by his undertaking, he made himself more like an inactive drone than
he did like one who bowed at beauty's shrine.

Elfonzo again wends his way to the stately walls and new-built village. He now determines to
see the end of the prophesy which had been foretold to him. The clouds burst from his sight;
he believes if he can but see his Ambulinia, he can open to her view the bloody altars that
have been misrepresented to stigmatize his name. He knows that her breast is transfixed with
the sword of reason, and ready at all times to detect the hidden villainy of her enemies. He
resolves to see her in her own home, with the consoling theme: "'I can but perish if I go.'
Let the consequences be what they may," said he, "if I die, it shall be contending and struggling
for my own rights."

Night had almost overtaken him when he arrived in town. Colonel Elder, a noble-hearted, high-minded,
and independent man, met him at his door as usual, and seized him by the hand. "Well, Elfonzo,"
said the Colonel, "how does the world use you in your efforts?" "I have no objection to the
world," said Elfonzo, "but the people are rather singular in some of their opinions." "Aye,
well," said the Colonel, "you must remember that creation is made up of many mysteries; just
take things by the right handle; be always sure you know which is the smooth side before you
attempt your polish; be reconciled to your fate, be it what it may; and never find fault with
your condition, unless your complaining will benefit it. Perseverance is a principle that should
be commendable in those who have judgment to govern it. I should never had been so successful
in my hunting excursions had I waited till the deer, by some magic dream, had been drawn to
the muzzle of the gun before I made an attempt to fire at the game that dared my boldness in
the wild forest. The great mystery in hunting seems to be--a good marksman, a resolute mind,
a fixed determination, and my world for it, you will never return home without sounding your
horn with the breath of a new victory. And so with every other undertaking. Be confident that
your ammunition is of the right kind--always pull your trigger with a steady hand, and so soon
as you perceive a calm, touch her off, and the spoils are yours."

This filled him with redoubled vigor, and he set out with a stronger anxiety than ever to the
home of Ambulinia. A few short steps soon brought him to the door, half out of breath. He rapped
gently. Ambulinia, who sat in the parlor alone, suspecting Elfonzo was near, ventured to the
door, opened it, and beheld the hero, who stood in an humble attitude, bowed gracefully, and
as they caught each other's looks the light of peace beamed from the eyes of Ambulinia. Elfonzo
caught the expression; a halloo of smothered shouts ran through every vein, and for the first
time he dared to impress a kiss upon her cheek. The scene was overwhelming; had the temptation
been less animating, he would not have ventured to have acted so contrary to the desired wish
of his Ambulinia; but who could have withstood the irrestistable temptation! What society condemns
the practice but a cold, heartless, uncivilized people that know nothing of the warm attachments
of refined society? Here the dead was raised to his long-cherished hopes, and the lost was
found. Here all doubt and danger were buried in the vortex of oblivion; sectional differences
no longer disunited their opinions; like the freed bird from the cage, sportive claps its rustling
wings, wheels about to heaven in a joyful strain, and raises its notes to the upper sky. Ambulinia
insisted upon Elfonzo to be seated, and give her a history of his unnecessary absence; assuring
him the family had retired, consequently they would ever remain ignorant of his visit.

"It does seem to me, my dear sir," said Ambulinia, "that you have been gone an age. Oh, the
restless hours I have spent since I last saw you, in yon beautiful grove. There is where I
trifled with your feelings for the express purpose of trying your attachment for me. I now
find you are devoted; but ah! I trust you live not unguarded by the powers of Heaven. Though
oft did I refuse to join my hand with thine, and as oft did I cruelly mock thy entreaties with
borrowed shapes: yes, I feared to answer thee by terms, in words sincere and undissembled.
O! could I pursue, and you have leisure to hear the annals of my woes, the evening star would
shut Heaven's gates upon the impending day before my tale would be finished, and this night
would find me soliciting your forgiveness."

"Dismiss thy fears and thy doubts," replied Elfonzo.

"Look, O! look: that angelic look of thine--bathe not thy visage in tears; banish those floods
that are gathering; let my confession and my presence bring thee some relief." "Then, indeed,
I will be cheerful," said Ambulinia, "and I think if we will go to the exhibition this evening,
we certainly will see something worthy of our attention. One of the most tragical scenes is
to be acted that has ever been witnessed, and one that every jealous-hearted person should
learn a lesson from. It cannot fail to have a good effect, as it will be performed by those
who are young and vigorous, and learned as well as enticing. You are aware, Major Elfonzo,
who are to appear on the stage, and what the characters are to represent." "I am acquainted
with the circumstances," replied Elfonzo, "and as I am to be one of the musicians upon that
interesting occasion, I should be much gratified if you would favor me with your company during
the hours of the exercises."

"What strange notions are in your mind?" inquired Ambulinia. "Now I know you have something
in view, and I desire you to tell me why it is that you are so anxious that I should continue
with you while the exercises are going on; though if you think I can add to your happiness
and predilections, I have no particular objection to acquiesce in your request. Oh, I think
I foresee, now, what you anticipate." "And will you have the goodness to tell me what you think
it will be?" inquired Elfonzo. "By all means," answered Ambulinia; "a rival, sir, you would
fancy in your own mind; but let me say for you, fear not! fear not! I will be one of the last
persons to disgrace my sex by thus encouraging every one who may feel disposed to visit me,
who may honor me with their graceful bows and their choicest compliments. It is true that young
men too often mistake civil politeness for the finer emotions of the heart, which is tantamount
to courtship; but, ah! how often are they deceived, when they come to test the weight of sunbeams
with those on whose strength hangs the future happiness of an untried life."

The people were now rushing to the Academy with impatient anxiety; the band of music was closely
followed by the students; then the parents and guardians; nothing interrupted the glow of spirits
which ran through every bosom, tinged with the songs of a Virgil and the tide of a Homer. Elfonzo
and Ambulinia soon repaired to the scene, and fortunately for them both the house was so crowded
that they took their seats together in the music department, which was not in view of the auditory.
This fortuitous circumstances added more the bliss of the Major than a thousand such exhibitions
would have done. He forgot that he was man; music had lost its charms for him; whenever he
attempted to carry his part, the string of the instrument would break, the bow became stubborn,
and refused to obey the loud calls of the audience. Here, he said, was the paradise of his
home, the long-sought-for opportunity; he felt as though he could send a million supplications
to the throne of Heaven for such an exalted privilege. Poor Leos, who was somewhere in the
crowd, looking as attentively as if he was searching for a needle in a haystack; here is stood,
wondering to himself why Ambulinia was not there. "Where can she be? Oh! if she was only here,
how I could relish the scene! Elfonzo is certainly not in town; but what if he is? I have got
the wealth, if I have not the dignity, and I am sure that the squire and his lady have always
been particular friends of mine, and I think with this assurance I shall be able to get upon
the blind side of the rest of the family and make the heaven-born Ambulinia the mistress of
all I possess." Then, again, he would drop his head, as if attempting to solve the most difficult
problem in Euclid. While he was thus conjecturing in his own mind, a very interesting part
of the exhibition was going on, which called the attention of all present. The curtains of
the stage waved continually by the repelled forces that were given to them, which caused Leos
to behold Ambulinia leaning upon the chair of Elfonzo. Her lofty beauty, seen by the glimmering
of the chandelier, filled his heart with rapture, he knew not how to contain himself; to go
where they were would expose him to ridicule; to continue where he was, with such an object
before him, without being allowed an explanation in that trying hour, would be to the great
injury of his mental as well as of his physical powers; and, in the name of high heaven, what
must he do? Accordingly he made himself sentinel, immediately after the performance of the
evening--retained his position apparently in defiance of all the world; he waited, he gazed
at every lady, his whole frame trembled; here he stood, until everything like human shape had
disappeared from the institution, and he had done nothing; he had failed to accomplish that
which he so eagerly sought for. Poor, unfortunate creature! he had not the eyes of an Argus,
or he might have seen his Juno and Elfonzo, assisted by his friend Sigma, make their escape
from the window, and, with the rapidity of a race-horse, hurry through the blast of the storm
to the residence of her father, without being recognized. He did not tarry long, but assured
Ambulinia the endless chain of their existence was more closely connected than ever, since
he had seen the virtuous, innocent, imploring, and the constant Amelia murdered by the jealous-hearted
Farcillo, the accursed of the land.

The following is the tragical scene, which is only introduced to show the subject-matter that
enabled Elfonzo to come to such a determinate resolution that nothing of the kind should ever
dispossess him of his true character, should he be so fortunate as to succeed in his present
undertaking.

Amelia was the wife of Farcillo, and a virtuous woman; Gracia, a young lady, was her particular
friend and confidant. Farcillo grew jealous of Amelia, murders her, finds out that he was deceived,
AND STABS HIMSELF. Amelia appears alone, talking to herself.

A. Hail, ye solitary ruins of antiquity, ye sacred tombs and silent walks! it is your aid I
invoke; it is to you, my soul, wrapt in deep mediating, pours forth its prayer. Here I wander
upon the stage of mortality, since the world hath turned against me. Those whom I believed
to be my friends, alas! are now my enemies, planting thorns in all my paths, poisoning all
my pleasures, and turning the past to pain. What a lingering catalogue of sighs and tears lies
just before me, crowding my aching bosom with the fleeting dream of humanity, which must shortly
terminate. And to what purpose will all this bustle of life, these agitations and emotions
of the heart have conduced, if it leave behind it nothing of utility, if it leave no traces
of improvement? Can it be that I am deceived in my conclusions? No, I see that I have nothing
to hope for, but everything for fear, which tends to drive me from the walks of time.

     Oh! in this dead night, if loud winds arise,

     To lash the surge and bluster in the skies,

     May the west its furious rage display,

     Toss me with storms in the watery way.

(Enter Gracia.)

G. Oh, Amelia, is it you, the object of grief, the daughter of opulence, of wisdom and philosophy,
that thus complaineth? It cannot be you are the child of misfortune, speaking of the monuments
of former ages, which were allotted not for the reflection of the distressed, but for the fearless
and bold.

A. Not the child of poverty, Gracia, or the heir of glory and peace, but of fate. Remember,
I have wealth more than wit can number; I have had power more than kings could emcompass; yet
the world seems a desert; all nature appears an afflictive spectacle of warring passions. This
blind fatality, that capriciously sports with the rules and lives of mortals, tells me that
the mountains will never again send forth the water of their springs to my thirst. Oh, that
I might be freed and set at liberty from wretchedness! But I fear, I fear this will never be.

G. Why, Amelia, this untimely grief? What has caused the sorrows that bespeak better and happier
days, to those lavish out such heaps of misery? You are aware that your instructive lessons
embellish the mind with holy truths, by wedding its attention to none but great and noble affections.

A. This, of course, is some consolation. I will ever love my own species with feelings of a
fond recollection, and while I am studying to advance the universal philanthropy, and the spotless
name of my own sex, I will try to build my own upon the pleasing belief that I have accelerated
the advancement of one who whispers of departed confidence.

     And I, like some poor peasant fated to reside

     Remote from friends, in a forest wide.

     Oh, see what woman's woes and human wants require,

     Since that great day hath spread the seed of sinful fire.

G. Look up, thou poor disconsolate; you speak of quitting earthly enjoyments. Unfold thy bosom
to a friend, who would be willing to sacrifice every enjoyment for the restoration of the dignity
and gentleness of mind which used to grace your walks, and which is so natural to yourself;
not only that, but your paths were strewed with flowers of every hue and of every order.

     With verdant green the mountains glow,

     For thee, for thee, the lilies grow;

     Far stretched beneath the tented hills,

     A fairer flower the valley fills.

A. Oh, would to Heaven I could give you a short narrative of my former prospects for happiness,
since you have acknowledged to be an unchangeable confidant--the richest of all other blessings.
Oh, ye names forever glorious, ye celebrated scenes, ye renowned spot of my hymeneal moments;
how replete is your chart with sublime reflections! How many profound vows, decorated with
immaculate deeds, are written upon the surface of that precious spot of earth where I yielded
up my life of celibacy, bade youth with all its beauties a final adieu, took a last farewell
of the laurels that had accompanied me up the hill of my juvenile career. It was then I began
to descend toward the valley of disappointment and sorrow; it was then I cast my little bark
upon a mysterious ocean of wedlock, with him who then smiled and caressed me, but, alas! now
frowns with bitterness, and has grown jealous and cold toward me, because the ring he gave
me is misplaced or lost. Oh, bear me, ye flowers of memory, softly through the eventful history
of past times; and ye places that have witnessed the progression of man in the circle of so
many societies, and, of, aid my recollection, while I endeavor to trace the vicissitudes of
a life devoted in endeavoring to comfort him that I claim as the object of my wishes.

     Ah! ye mysterious men, of all the world, how few

     Act just to Heaven and to your promise true!

     But He who guides the stars with a watchful eye,

     The deeds of men lay open without disguise;

     Oh, this alone will avenge the wrongs I bear,

     For all the oppressed are His peculiar care.

(F. makes a slight noise.)

A. Who is there--Farcillo?

G. Then I must gone. Heaven protect you. Oh, Amelia, farewell, be of good cheer.

     May you stand like Olympus' towers,

     Against earth and all jealous powers!

     May you, with loud shouts ascend on high

     Swift as an eagle in the upper sky.

A. Why so cold and distant tonight, Farcillo? Come, let us each other greet, and forget all
the past, and give security for the future.

F. Security! talk to me about giving security for the future--what an insulting requisition!
Have you said your prayers tonight, Madam Amelia?

A. Farcillo, we sometimes forget our duty, particularly when we expect to be caressed by others.

F. If you bethink yourself of any crime, or of any fault, that is yet concealed from the courts
of Heaven and the thrones of grace, I bid you ask and solicit forgiveness for it now.

A. Oh, be kind, Farcillo, don't treat me so. What do you mean by all this?

F. Be kind, you say; you, madam, have forgot that kindness you owe to me, and bestowed it upon
another; you shall suffer for your conduct when you make your peace with your God. I would
not slay thy unprotected spirit. I call to Heaven to be my guard and my watch--I would not
kill thy soul, in which all once seemed just, right, and perfect; but I must be brief, woman.

A. What, talk you of killing? Oh, Farcillo, Farcillo, what is the matter?

F. Aye, I do, without doubt; mark what I say, Amelia.

A. Then, O God, O Heaven, and Angels, be propitious, and have mercy upon me.

F. Amen to that, madam, with all my heart, and with all my soul.

A. Farcillo, listen to me one moment; I hope you will not kill me.

F. Kill you, aye, that I will; attest it, ye fair host of light, record it, ye dark imps of hell!

A. Oh, I fear you--you are fatal when darkness covers your brow; yet I know not why I should
fear, since I never wronged you in all my life. I stand, sir, guiltless before you.

F. You pretend to say you are guiltless! Think of thy sins, Amelia; think, oh, think, hidden woman.

A. Wherein have I not been true to you? That death is unkind, cruel, and unnatural, that kills
for living.

F. Peace, and be still while I unfold to thee.

A. I will, Farcillo, and while I am thus silent, tell me the cause of such cruel coldness in
an hour like this.

F. That RING, oh, that ring I so loved, and gave thee as the ring of my heart; the allegiance
you took to be faithful, when it was presented; the kisses and smiles with which you honored
it. You became tired of the donor, despised it as a plague, and finally gave it to Malos, the
hidden, the vile traitor.

A. No, upon my word and honor, I never did; I appeal to the Most High to bear me out in this
matter. Send for Malos, and ask him.

F. Send for Malos, aye! Malos you wish to see; I thought so. I knew you could not keep his
name concealed. Amelia, sweet Amelia, take heed, take heed of perjury; you are on the stage
of death, to suffer for YOUR SINS.

A. What, not to die I hope, my Farcillo, my ever beloved.

F. Yes, madam, to die a traitor's death. Shortly your spirit shall take its exit; therefore
confess freely thy sins, for to deny tends only to make me groan under the bitter cup thou
hast made for me. Thou art to die with the name of traitor on thy brow!

A. Then, O Lord, have mercy upon me; give me courage, give me grace and fortitude to stand
this hour of trial.

F. Amen, I say, with all my heart.

A. And, oh, Farcillo, will you have mercy, too? I never intentionally offended you in all my
life, never LOVED Malos, never gave him cause to think so, as the high court of Justice will
acquit me before its tribunal.

F. Oh, false, perjured woman, thou didst chill my blood, and makest me a demon like thyself.
I saw the ring.

A. He found it, then, or got it clandestinely; send for him, and let him confess the truth;
let his confession be sifted.

F. And you still wish to see him! I tell you, madam, he hath already confessed, and thou knowest
the darkness of thy heart.

A. What, my deceived Farcillo, that I gave him the ring, in which all my affections were concentrated?
Oh, surely not.

F. Aye, he did. Ask thy conscience, and it will speak with a voice of thunder to thy soul.

A. He will not say so, he dare not, he cannot.

F. No, he will not say so now, because his mouth, I trust, is hushed in death, and his body
stretched to the four winds of heaven, to be torn to pieces by carnivorous birds.

A. What, he is dead, and gone to the world of spirits with that declaration in his mouth? Oh,
unhappy man! Oh, insupportable hour!

F. Yes, and had all his sighs and looks and tears been lives, my great revenge could have slain
them all, without the least condemnation.

A. Alas! he is ushered into eternity without testing the matter for which I am abused and sentenced
and condemned to die.

F. Cursed, infernal woman! Weepest thou for him to my face? He that hath robbed me of my peace,
my energy, the whole love of my life? Could I call the fabled Hydra, I would have him live
and perish, survive and die, until the sun itself would grow dim with age. I would make him
have the thirst of a Tantalus, and roll the wheel of an Ixion, until the stars of heaven should
quit their brilliant stations.

A. Oh, invincible God, save me! Oh, unsupportable moment! Oh, heavy hour! Banish me, Farcillo--send
me where no eye can ever see me, where no sound shall ever great my ear; but, oh, slay me not,
Farcillo; vent thy rage and thy spite upon this emaciated frame of mine, only spare my life.

F. Your petitions avail nothing, cruel Amelia.

A. Oh, Farcillo, perpetrate the dark deed tomorrow; let me live till then, for my past kindness
to you, and it may be some kind angel will show to you that I am not only the object of innocence,
but one who never loved another but your noble self.

F. Amelia, the decree has gone forth, it is to be done, and that quickly; thou art to die, madam.

A. But half an hour allow me, to see my father and my only child, to tell her the treachery
and vanity of this world.

F. There is no alternative, there is no pause: my daughter shall not see its deceptive mother
die; your father shall not know that his daughter fell disgraced, despised by all but her enchanting
Malos.

A. Oh, Farcillo, put up thy threatening dagger into its scabbard; let it rest and be still,
just while I say one prayer for thee and for my child.

F. It is too late, thy doom is fixed, thou hast not confessed to Heaven or to me, my child's
protector--thou art to die. Ye powers of earth and heaven, protect and defend me in this alone.
(STABS HER WHILE IMPLORING FOR MERCY.)

A. Oh, Farcillo, Farcillo, a guiltless death I die.

F. Die! die! die!

(Gracia enters running, falls on her knees weeping, and kisses Amelia.)

G. Oh, Farcillo, Farcillo! oh, Farcillo!

F. I am here, the genius of the age, and the avenger of my wrongs.

G. Oh, lady, speak once more; sweet Amelia, on, speak again. Gone, gone--yes, forever gone!
Farcillo, oh, cold-hearted Farcillo, some evil fiend hath urged you to do this, Farcillo.

F. Say not so again, or you shall receive the same fate. I did the glorious deed, madam--beware,
then, how you talk.

G. I fear not your implements of war; I will let you know you have not the power to do me harm.
If you have a heart of triple brass, it shall be reached and melted, and thy blood shall chill
thy veins and grow stiff in thy arteries. Here is the ring of the virtuous and innocent murdered
Amelia; I obtained it from Malos, who yet lives, in hopes that he will survive the wound given
him, and says he got it clandestinely--declares Amelia to be the princess of truth and virtue,
invulnerable to anything like forgetting her first devotion to thee. The world has heard of
your conduct and your jealousy, and with one universal voice declares her to be the best of
all in piety; that she is the star of this great universe, and a more virtuous woman never
lived since the wheels of time began. Oh, had you waited till tomorrow, or until I had returned,
some kind window would have been opened to her relief. But, alas! she is gone--yes, forever
gone, to try the realities of an unknown world!

(Farcillo leaning over the body of Amelia.)

F. Malos not dead, and here is my ring! Oh, Amelia! falsely murdered! Oh, bloody deed! Oh,
wretch that I am! Oh, angels forgive me! Oh, God, withhold thy vengeance! Oh, Amelia! if Heaven
would make a thousand worlds like this, set with diamonds, and all of one perfect chrysolite,
I would not have done this for them all, I would not have frowned and cursed as I did. Oh,
she was heavenly true, nursed in the very lap of bright angels! Cursed slave that I am! Jealousy,
oh! thou infernal demon! Lost, lost to every sense of honor! Oh! Amelia--heaven-born Amelia--dead,
dead! Oh! oh! oh!--then let me die with thee. Farewell! farewell! ye world that deceived me!
(STABS HIMSELF.)

Soon after the excitement of this tragical scene was over, and the enlisted feeling for Amelia
had grown more buoyant with Elfonzo and Ambulinia, he determined to visit his retired home,
and make the necessary improvements to enjoy a better day; consequently he conveyed the following
lines to Ambulinia:

     Go tell the world that hope is glowing,

     Go bid the rocks their silence break,

     Go tell the stars that love is glowing,

     Then bid the hero his lover take.

In the region where scarcely the foot of man hath ever trod, where the woodman hath not found
his way, lies a blooming grove, seen only by the sun when he mounts his lofty throne, visited
only by the light of the stars, to whom are entrusted the guardianship of earth, before the
sun sinks to rest in his rosy bed. High cliffs of rocks surround the romantic place, and in
the small cavity of the rocky wall grows the daffodil clear and pure; and as the wind blows
along the enchanting little mountain which surrounds the lonely spot, it nourishes the flowers
with the dew-drops of heaven. Here is the seat of Elfonzo; darkness claims but little victory
over this dominion, and in vain does she spread out her gloomy wings. Here the waters flow
perpetually, and the trees lash their tops together to bid the welcome visitor a happy muse.
Elfonzo, during his short stay in the country, had fully persuaded himself that it was his
duty to bring this solemn matter to an issue. A duty that he individually owed, as a gentleman,
to the parents of Ambulinia, a duty in itself involving not only his own happiness and his
own standing in society, but one that called aloud the act of the parties to make it perfect
and complete. How he should communicate his intentions to get a favorable reply, he was at
a loss to know; he knew not whether to address Esq. Valeer in prose or in poetry, in a jocular
or an argumentative manner, or whether he should use moral suasion, legal injunction, or seizure
and take by reprisal; if it was to do the latter, he would have no difficulty in deciding in
his own mind, but his gentlemanly honor was at stake; so he concluded to address the following
letter to the father and mother of Ambulinia, as his address in person he knew would only aggravate
the old gentleman, and perhaps his lady.

Cumming, Ga., January 22, 1844

Mr. and Mrs. Valeer--

Again I resume the pleasing task of addressing you, and once more beg an immediate answer to
my many salutations. From every circumstance that has taken place, I feel in duty bound to
comply with my obligations; to forfeit my word would be more than I dare do; to break my pledge,
and my vows that have been witnessed, sealed, and delivered in the presence of an unseen Deity,
would be disgraceful on my part, as well as ruinous to Ambulinia. I wish no longer to be kept
in suspense about this matter. I wish to act gentlemanly in every particular. It is true, the
promises I have made are unknown to any but Ambulinia, and I think it unnecessary to here enumerate
them, as they who promise the most generally perform the least. Can you for a moment doubt
my sincerity or my character? My only wish is, sir, that you may calmly and dispassionately
look at the situation of the case, and if your better judgment should dictate otherwise, my
obligations may induce me to pluck the flower that you so diametrically opposed. We have sword
by the saints--by the gods of battle, and by that faith whereby just men are made perfect--to
be united. I hope, my dear sir, you will find it convenient as well as agreeable to give me
a favorable answer, with the signature of Mrs. Valeer, as well as yourself.

With very great esteem,

your humble servant,

J. I. Elfonzo.

The moon and stars had grown pale when Ambulinia had retired to rest. A crowd of unpleasant
thoughts passed through her bosom. Solitude dwelt in her chamber--no sound from the neighboring
world penetrated its stillness; it appeared a temple of silence, of repose, and of mystery.
At that moment she heard a still voice calling her father. In an instant, like the flash of
lightning, a thought ran through her mind that it must be the bearer of Elfonzo's communication.
"It is not a dream!" she said, "no, I cannot read dreams. Oh! I would to Heaven I was near
that glowing eloquence--that poetical language--it charms the mind in an inexpressible manner,
and warms the coldest heart." While consoling herself with this strain, her father rushed into
her room almost frantic with rage, exclaiming: "Oh, Ambulinia! Ambulinia!! undutiful, ungrateful
daughter! What does this mean? Why does this letter bear such heart-rending intelligence? Will
you quit a father's house with this debased wretch, without a place to lay his distracted head;
going up and down the country, with every novel object that many chance to wander through this
region. He is a pretty man to make love known to his superiors, and you, Ambulinia, have done
but little credit to yourself by honoring his visits. Oh, wretchedness! can it be that my hopes
of happiness are forever blasted! Will you not listen to a father's entreaties, and pay some
regard to a mother's tears. I know, and I do pray that God will give me fortitude to bear with
this sea of troubles, and rescue my daughter, my Ambulinia, as a brand from the eternal burning."
"Forgive me, father, oh! forgive thy child," replied Ambulinia. "My heart is ready to break,
when I see you in this grieved state of agitation. Oh! think not so meanly of me, as that I
mourn for my own danger. Father, I am only woman. Mother, I am only the templement of thy youthful
years, but will suffer courageously whatever punishment you think proper to inflict upon me,
if you will but allow me to comply with my most sacred promises--if you will but give me my
personal right and my personal liberty. Oh, father! if your generosity will but give me these,
I ask nothing more. When Elfonzo offered me his heart, I gave him my hand, never to forsake
him, and now may the mighty God banish me before I leave him in adversity. What a heart must
I have to rejoice in prosperity with him whose offers I have accepted, and then, when poverty
comes, haggard as it may be, for me to trifle with the oracles of Heaven, and change with every
fluctuation that may interrupt our happiness--like the politician who runs the political gantlet
for office one day, and the next day, because the horizon is darkened a little, he is seen
running for his life, for fear he might perish in its ruins. Where is the philosophy, where
is the consistency, where is the charity, in conduct like this? Be happy then, my beloved father,
and forget me; let the sorrow of parting break down the wall of separation and make us equal
in our feeling; let me now say how ardently I love you; let me kiss that age-worn cheek, and
should my tears bedew thy face, I will wipe them away. Oh, I never can forget you; no, never,
never!"

"Weep not," said the father, "Ambulinia. I will forbid Elfonzo my house, and desire that you
may keep retired a few days. I will let him know that my friendship for my family is not linked
together by cankered chains; and if he ever enters upon my premises again, I will send him
to his long home." "Oh, father! let me entreat you to be calm upon this occasion, and though
Elfonzo may be the sport of the clouds and winds, yet I feel assured that no fate will send
him to the silent tomb until the God of the Universe calls him hence with a triumphant voice."

Here the father turned away, exclaiming: "I will answer his letter in a very few words, and
you, madam, will have the goodness to stay at home with your mother; and remember, I am determined
to protect you from the consuming fire that looks so fair to your view."

Cumming, January 22, 1844.

Sir--In regard to your request, I am as I ever have been, utterly opposed to your marrying
into my family; and if you have any regard for yourself, or any gentlemanly feeling, I hope
you will mention it to me no more; but seek some other one who is not so far superior to you
in standing.

W. W. Valeer.

When Elfonzo read the above letter, he became so much depressed in spirits that many of his
friends thought it advisable to use other means to bring about the happy union. "Strange,"
said he, "that the contents of this diminutive letter should cause me to have such depressed
feelings; but there is a nobler theme than this. I know not why my MILITARY TITLE is not as
great as that of SQUIRE VALEER. For my life I cannot see that my ancestors are inferior to
those who are so bitterly opposed to my marriage with Ambulinia. I know I have seen huge mountains
before me, yet, when I think that I know gentlemen will insult me upon this delicate matter,
should I become angry at fools and babblers, who pride themselves in their impudence and ignorance?
No. My equals! I know not where to find them. My inferiors! I think it beneath me; and my superiors!
I think it presumption; therefore, if this youthful heart is protected by any of the divine
rights, I never will betray my trust."

He was aware that Ambulinia had a confidence that was, indeed, as firm and as resolute as she
was beautiful and interesting. He hastened to the cottage of Louisa, who received him in her
usual mode of pleasantness, and informed him that Ambulinia had just that moment left. "Is
it possible?" said Elfonzo. "Oh, murdered hours! Why did she not remain and be the guardian
of my secrets? But hasten and tell me how she has stood this trying scene, and what are her
future determinations." "You know," said Louisa, "Major Elfonzo, that you have Ambulinia's
first love, which is of no small consequence. She came here about twilight, and shed many precious
tears in consequence of her own fate with yours. We walked silently in yon little valley you
see, where we spent a momentary repose. She seemed to be quite as determined as ever, and before
we left that beautiful spot she offered up a prayer to Heaven for thee." "I will see her then,"
replied Elfonzo, "though legions of enemies may oppose. She is mine by foreordination--she
is mine by prophesy--she is mine by her own free will, and I will rescue her from the hands
of her oppressors. Will you not, Miss Louisa, assist me in my capture?"

"I will certainly, by the aid of Divine Providence," answered Louisa, "endeavor to break those
slavish chains that bind the richest of prizes; though allow me, Major, to entreat you to use
no harsh means on this important occasion; take a decided stand, and write freely to Ambulinia
upon this subject, and I will see that no intervening cause hinders its passage to her. God
alone will save a mourning people. Now is the day and now is the hour to obey a command of
such valuable worth." The Major felt himself grow stronger after this short interview with
Louisa. He felt as if he could whip his weight in wildcats--he knew he was master of his own
feelings, and could now write a letter that would bring this litigation to AN ISSUE.

Cumming, January 24, 1844.

Dear Ambulinia--

We have now reached the most trying moment of our lives; we are pledged not to forsake our
trust; we have waited for a favorable hour to come, thinking your friends would settle the
matter agreeably among themselves, and finally be reconciled to our marriage; but as I have
waited in vain, and looked in vain, I have determined in my own mind to make a proposition
to you, though you may think it not in accord with your station, or compatible with your rank;
yet, "sub loc signo vinces." You know I cannot resume my visits, in consequence of the utter
hostility that your father has to me; therefore the consummation of our union will have to
be sought for in a more sublime sphere, at the residence of a respectable friend of this village.
You cannot have an scruples upon this mode of proceeding, if you will but remember it emanates
from one who loves you better than his own life--who is more than anxious to bid you welcome
to a new and happy home. Your warmest associates say come; the talented, the learned, the wise,
and the experienced say come;--all these with their friends say, come. Viewing these, with
many other inducements, I flatter myself that you will come to the embraces of your Elfonzo;
for now is the time of your acceptance of the day of your liberation. You cannot be ignorant,
Ambulinia, that thou art the desire of my heart; its thoughts are too noble, and too pure,
to conceal themselves from you. I shall wait for your answer to this impatiently, expecting
that you will set the time to make your departure, and to be in readiness at a moment's warning
to share the joys of a more preferable life. This will be handed to you by Louisa, who will
take a pleasure in communicating anything to you that may relieve your dejected spirits, and
will assure you that I now stand ready, willing, and waiting to make good my vows.

I am, dear Ambulinia, your

truly, and forever,

J. I. Elfonzo.

Louisa made it convenient to visit Mr. Valeer's, though they did not suspect her in the least
the bearer of love epistles; consequently, she was invited in the room to console Ambulinia,
where they were left alone. Ambulinia was seated by a small table--her head resting on her
hand--her brilliant eyes were bathed in tears. Louisa handed her the letter of Elfonzo, when
another spirit animated her features--the spirit of renewed confidence that never fails to
strengthen the female character in an hour of grief and sorrow like this, and as she pronounced
the last accent of his name, she exclaimed, "And does he love me yet! I never will forget your
generosity, Louisa. Oh, unhappy and yet blessed Louisa! may you never feel what I have felt--may
you never know the pangs of love. Had I never loved, I never would have been unhappy; but I
turn to Him who can save, and if His wisdom does not will my expected union, I know He will
give me strength to bear my lot. Amuse yourself with this little book, and take it as an apology
for my silence," said Ambulinia, "while I attempt to answer this volume of consolation." "Thank
you," said Louisa, "you are excusable upon this occasion; but I pray you, Ambulinia, to be
expert upon this momentous subject, that there may be nothing mistrustful upon my part." "I
will," said Ambulinia, and immediately resumed her seat and addressed the following to Elfonzo:

Cumming, Ga., January 28, 1844.

Devoted Elfonzo--

I hail your letter as a welcome messenger of faith, and can now say truly and firmly that my
feelings correspond with yours. Nothing shall be wanting on my part to make my obedience your
fidelity. Courage and perseverance will accomplish success. Receive this as my oath, that while
I grasp your hand in my own imagination, we stand united before a higher tribunal than any
on earth. All the powers of my life, soul, and body, I devote to thee. Whatever dangers may
threaten me, I fear not to encounter them. Perhaps I have determined upon my own destruction,
by leaving the house of the best of parents; be it so; I flee to you; I share your destiny,
faithful to the end. The day that I have concluded upon for this task is SABBATH next, when
the family with the citizens are generally at church. For Heaven's sake let not that day pass
unimproved: trust not till tomorrow, it is the cheat of life--the future that never comes--the
grave of many noble births--the cavern of ruined enterprise: which like the lightning's flash
is born, and dies, and perishes, ere the voice of him who sees can cry, BEHOLD! BEHOLD!! You
may trust to what I say, no power shall tempt me to betray confidence. Suffer me to add one
word more.

     I will soothe thee, in all thy grief,

     Beside the gloomy river;

     And though thy love may yet be brief;

     Mine is fixed forever.

Receive the deepest emotions of my heart for thy constant love, and may the power of inspiration
by thy guide, thy portion, and thy all. In great haste,

Yours faithfully,

Ambulinia.

"I now take my leave of you, sweet girl," said Louisa, "sincerely wishing you success on Sabbath
next." When Ambulinia's letter was handed to Elfonzo, he perused it without doubting its contents.
Louisa charged him to make but few confidants; but like most young men who happened to win
the heart of a beautiful girl, he was so elated with the idea that he felt as a commanding
general on parade, who had confidence in all, consequently gave orders to all. The appointed
Sabbath, with a delicious breeze and cloudless sky, made its appearance. The people gathered
in crowds to the church--the streets were filled with neighboring citizens, all marching to
the house of worship. It is entirely useless for me to attempt to describe the feelings of
Elfonzo and Ambulinia, who were silently watching the movements of the multitude, apparently
counting them as then entered the house of God, looking for the last one to darken the door.
The impatience and anxiety with which they waited, and the bliss they anticipated on the eventful
day, is altogether indescribable. Those that have been so fortunate as to embark in such a
noble enterprise know all its realities; and those who have not had this inestimable privilege
will have to taste its sweets before they can tell to others its joys, its comforts, and its
Heaven-born worth. Immediately after Ambulinia had assisted the family off to church, she took
advantage of that opportunity to make good her promises. She left a home of enjoyment to be
wedded to one whose love had been justifiable. A few short steps brought her to the presence
of Louisa, who urged her to make good use of her time, and not to delay a moment, but to go
with her to her brother's house, where Elfonzo would forever make her happy. With lively speed,
and yet a graceful air, she entered the door and found herself protected by the champion of
her confidence. The necessary arrangements were fast making to have the two lovers united--everything
was in readiness except the parson; and as they are generally very sanctimonious on such occasions,
the news got to the parents of Ambulinia before the everlasting knot was tied, and they both
came running, with uplifted hands and injured feelings, to arrest their daughter from an unguarded
and hasty resolution. Elfonzo desired to maintain his ground, but Ambulinia thought it best
for him to leave, to prepare for a greater contest. He accordingly obeyed, as it would have
been a vain endeavor for him to have battled against a man who was armed with deadly weapons;
and besides, he could not resist the request of such a pure heart. Ambulinia concealed herself
in the upper story of the house, fearing the rebuke of her father; the door was locked, and
no chastisement was now expected. Esquire Valeer, whose pride was already touched, resolved
to preserve the dignity of his family. He entered the house almost exhausted, looking wildly
for Ambulinia. "Amazed and astonished indeed I am," said he, "at a people who call themselves
civilized, to allow such behavior as this. Ambulinia, Ambulinia!" he cried, "come to the calls
of your first, your best, and your only friend. I appeal to you, sir," turning to the gentleman
of the house, "to know where Ambulinia has gone, or where is she?" "Do you mean to insult me,
sir, in my own house?" inquired the gentleman. "I will burst," said Mr. V., "asunder every
door in your dwelling, in search of my daughter, if you do not speak quickly, and tell me where
she is. I care nothing about that outcast rubbish of creation, that mean, low-lived Elfonzo,
if I can but obtain Ambulinia. Are you not going to open this door?" said he. "By the Eternal
that made Heaven and earth! I will go about the work instantly, if this is not done!" The confused
citizens gathered from all parts of the village, to know the cause of this commotion. Some
rushed into the house; the door that was locked flew open, and there stood Ambulinia, weeping.
"Father, be still," said she, "and I will follow thee home." But the agitated man seized her,
and bore her off through the gazing multitude. "Father!" she exclaimed, "I humbly beg your
pardon--I will be dutiful--I will obey thy commands. Let the sixteen years I have lived in
obedience to thee by my future security." "I don't like to be always giving credit, when the
old score is not paid up, madam," said the father. The mother followed almost in a state of
derangement, crying and imploring her to think beforehand, and ask advice from experienced
persons, and they would tell her it was a rash undertaking. "Oh!" said she, "Ambulinia, my
daughter, did you know what I have suffered--did you know how many nights I have whiled away
in agony, in pain, and in fear, you would pity the sorrows of a heartbroken mother."

"Well, mother," replied Ambulinia, "I know I have been disobedient; I am aware that what I
have done might have been done much better; but oh! what shall I do with my honor? it is so
dear to me; I am pledged to Elfonzo. His high moral worth is certainly worth some attention;
moreover, my vows, I have no doubt, are recorded in the book of life, and must I give these
all up? must my fair hopes be forever blasted? Forbid it, father; oh! forbid it, mother; forbid
it, Heaven." "I have seen so many beautiful skies overclouded," replied the mother, "so many
blossoms nipped by the frost, that I am afraid to trust you to the care of those fair days,
which may be interrupted by thundering and tempestuous nights. You no doubt think as I did--life's
devious ways were strewn with sweet-scented flowers, but ah! how long they have lingered around
me and took their flight in the vivid hope that laughs at the drooping victims it has murdered."

Elfonzo took the lead of his band. Night arose in clouds; darkness concealed the heavens; but
the blazing hopes that stimulated them gleamed in every bosom. All approached the anxious spot;
they rushed to the front of the house and, with one exclamation, demanded Ambulinia. "Away,
begone, and disturb my peace no more," said Mr. Valeer. "You are a set of base, insolent, and
infernal rascals. Go, the northern star points your path through the dim twilight of the night;
go, and vent your spite upon the lonely hills; pour forth your love, you poor, weak-minded
wretch, upon your idleness and upon your guitar, and your fiddle; they are fit subjects for
your admiration, for let me assure you, though this sword and iron lever are cankered, yet
they frown in sleep, and let one of you dare to enter my house this night and you shall have
the contents and the weight of these instruments." "Never yet did base dishonor blur my name,"
said Elfonzo; "mine is a cause of renown; here are my warriors; fear and tremble, for this
night, though hell itself should oppose, I will endeavor to avenge her whom thou hast banished
in solitude. The voice of Ambulinia shall be heard from that dark dungeon." At that moment
Ambulinia appeared at the window above, and with a tremulous voice said, "Live, Elfonzo! oh!
live to raise my stone of moss! why should such language enter your heart? why should thy voice
rend the air with such agitation? I bid thee live, once more remembering these tears of mine
are shed alone for thee, in this dark and gloomy vault, and should I perish under this load
of trouble, join the song of thrilling accents with the raven above my grave, and lay this
tattered frame beside the banks of the Chattahoochee or the stream of Sawney's brook; sweet
will be the song of death to your Ambulinia. My ghost shall visit you in the smiles of Paradise,
and tell your high fame to the minds of that region, which is far more preferable than this
lonely cell. My heart shall speak for thee till the latest hour; I know faint and broken are
the sounds of sorrow, yet our souls, Elfonzo, shall hear the peaceful songs together. One bright
name shall be ours on high, if we are not permitted to be united here; bear in mind that I
still cherish my old sentiments, and the poet will mingle the names of Elfonzo and Ambulinia
in the tide of other days." "Fly, Elfonzo," said the voices of his united band, "to the wounded
heart of your beloved. All enemies shall fall beneath thy sword. Fly through the clefts, and
the dim spark shall sleep in death." Elfonzo rushes forward and strikes his shield against
the door, which was barricaded, to prevent any intercourse. His brave sons throng around him.
The people pour along the streets, both male and female, to prevent or witness the melancholy
scene.

"To arms, to arms!" cried Elfonzo; "here is a victory to be won, a prize to be gained that
is more to me that the whole world beside." "It cannot be done tonight," said Mr. Valeer. "I
bear the clang of death; my strength and armor shall prevail. My Ambulinia shall rest in this
hall until the break of another day, and if we fall, we fall together. If we die, we die clinging
to our tattered rights, and our blood alone shall tell the mournful tale of a murdered daughter
and a ruined father." Sure enough, he kept watch all night, and was successful in defending
his house and family. The bright morning gleamed upon the hills, night vanished away, the Major
and his associates felt somewhat ashamed that they had not been as fortunate as they expected
to have been; however, they still leaned upon their arms in dispersed groups; some were walking
the streets, others were talking in the Major's behalf. Many of the citizen suspended business,
as the town presented nothing but consternation. A novelty that might end in the destruction
of some worthy and respectable citizens. Mr. Valeer ventured in the streets, though not without
being well armed. Some of his friends congratulated him on the decided stand he had taken,
and hoped he would settle the matter amicably with Elfonzo, without any serious injury. "Me,"
he replied, "what, me, condescend to fellowship with a coward, and a low-lived, lazy, undermining
villain? no, gentlemen, this cannot be; I had rather be borne off, like the bubble upon the
dark blue ocean, with Ambulinia by my side, than to have him in the ascending or descending
line of relationship. Gentlemen," continued he, "if Elfonzo is so much of a distinguished character,
and is so learned in the fine arts, why do you not patronize such men? why not introduce him
into your families, as a gentleman of taste and of unequaled magnanimity? why are you so very
anxious that he should become a relative of mine? Oh, gentlemen, I fear you yet are tainted
with the curiosity of our first parents, who were beguiled by the poisonous kiss of an old
ugly serpent, and who, for one APPLE, DAMNED all mankind. I wish to divest myself, as far as
possible, of that untutored custom. I have long since learned that the perfection of wisdom,
and the end of true philosophy, is to proportion our wants to our possessions, our ambition
to our capacities; we will then be a happy and a virtuous people." Ambulinia was sent off to
prepare for a long and tedious journey. Her new acquaintances had been instructed by her father
how to treat her, and in what manner, and to keep the anticipated visit entirely secret. Elfonzo
was watching the movements of everybody; some friends had told him of the plot that was laid
to carry off Ambulinia. At night, he rallied some two or three of his forces, and went silently
along to the stately mansion; a faint and glimmering light showed through the windows; lightly
he steps to the door; there were many voices rallying fresh in fancy's eye; he tapped the shutter;
it was opened instantly, and he beheld once more, seated beside several ladies, the hope of
all his toils; he rushed toward her, she rose from her seat, rejoicing; he made one mighty
grasp, when Ambulinia exclaimed, "Huzza for Major Elfonzo! I will defend myself and you, too,
with this conquering instrument I hold in my hand; huzza, I say, I now invoke time's broad
wing to shed around us some dewdrops of verdant spring."

But the hour had not come for this joyous reunion; her friends struggled with Elfonzo for some
time, and finally succeeded in arresting her from his hands. He dared not injure them, because
they were matrons whose courage needed no spur; she was snatched from the arms of Elfonzo,
with so much eagerness, and yet with such expressive signification, that he calmly withdrew
from this lovely enterprise, with an ardent hope that he should be lulled to repose by the
zephyrs which whispered peace to his soul. Several long days and night passed unmolested, all
seemed to have grounded their arms of rebellion, and no callidity appeared to be going on with
any of the parties. Other arrangements were made by Ambulinia; she feigned herself to be entirely
the votary of a mother's care, and she, by her graceful smiles, that manhood might claim his
stern dominion in some other region, where such boisterous love was not so prevalent. This
gave the parents a confidence that yielded some hours of sober joy; they believed that Ambulinia
would now cease to love Elfonzo, and that her stolen affections would now expire with her misguided
opinions. They therefore declined the idea of sending her to a distant land. But oh! they dreamed
not of the rapture that dazzled the fancy of Ambulinia, who would say, when alone, youth should
not fly away on his rosy pinions, and leave her to grapple in the conflict with unknown admirers.

     No frowning age shall control

     The constant current of my soul,

     Nor a tear from pity's eye

     Shall check my sympathetic sigh.

With this resolution fixed in her mind, one dark and dreary night, when the winds whistled
and the tempest roared, she received intelligence that Elfonzo was then waiting, and every
preparation was then ready, at the residence of Dr. Tully, and for her to make a quick escape
while the family was reposing. Accordingly she gathered her books, went the wardrobe supplied
with a variety of ornamental dressing, and ventured alone in the streets to make her way to
Elfonzo, who was near at hand, impatiently looking and watching her arrival. "What forms,"
said she, "are those rising before me? What is that dark spot on the clouds? I do wonder what
frightful ghost that is, gleaming on the red tempest? Oh, be merciful and tell me what region
you are from. Oh, tell me, ye strong spirits, or ye dark and fleeting clouds, that I yet have
a friend." "A friend," said a low, whispering voice. "I am thy unchanging, thy aged, and thy
disappointed mother. Why brandish in that hand of thine a javelin of pointed steel? Why suffer
that lip I have kissed a thousand times to equivocate? My daughter, let these tears sink deep
into thy soul, and no longer persist in that which may be your destruction and ruin. Come,
my dear child, retract your steps, and bear me company to your welcome home." Without one retorting
word, or frown from her brow, she yielded to the entreaties of her mother, and with all the
mildness of her former character she went along with the silver lamp of age, to the home of
candor and benevolence. Her father received her cold and formal politeness--"Where has Ambulinia
been, this blustering evening, Mrs. Valeer?" inquired he. "Oh, she and I have been taking a
solitary walk," said the mother; "all things, I presume, are now working for the best."

Elfonzo heard this news shortly after it happened. "What," said he, "has heaven and earth turned
against me? I have been disappointed times without number. Shall I despair?--must I give it
over? Heaven's decrees will not fade; I will write again--I will try again; and if it traverses
a gory field, I pray forgiveness at the altar of justice."

Desolate Hill, Cumming, Geo., 1844.

Unconquered and Beloved Ambulinia-- I have only time to say to you, not to despair; thy fame
shall not perish; my visions are brightening before me. The whirlwind's rage is past, and we
now shall subdue our enemies without doubt. On Monday morning, when your friends are at breakfast,
they will not suspect your departure, or even mistrust me being in town, as it has been reported
advantageously that I have left for the west. Fail not to do this--think not of the tedious
relations of our wrongs--be invincible. You alone occupy all my ambition, and I alone will
make you my happy spouse, with the same unimpeached veracity. I remain, forever, your devoted
friend and admirer, J. L. Elfonzo.

