The unhappy Marechal could not survive the loss of his royal master's favour, or stand up against
the enmity the King's explanations had created against him; he died a few months after consumed
with grief, and with an affliction nothing could soften, and to which the King was insensible
to such a point, that he made semblance of not perceiving that he had lost a servitor so useful
and so illustrious.  Vauban, justly celebrated over all Europe, was regretted in France by
all who were not financiers or their supporters.

Boisguilbert, whom this event ought to have rendered wise, could not contain himself.  One
of the objections which had been urged against his theories, was the difficulty of carrying
out changes in the midst of a great war.  He now published a book refuting this point, and
describing such a number of abuses then existing, to abolish which, he asked, was it necessary
to wait for peace, that the ministers were outraged. Boisguilbert was exiled to Auvergne. 
I did all in my power to revoke this sentence, having known Boisguilbert at Rouen, but did
not succeed until the end of two months.  He was then allowed to return to Rouen, but was severely
reprimanded, and stripped of his functions for some little time.  He was amply indemnified,
however, for this by the crowd of people, and the acclamations with which he was received.

It is due to Chamillart to say, that he was the only minister who had listened with any attention
to these new systems of Vauban and Boisguilbert.  He indeed made trial of the plans suggested
by the former, but the circumstances were not favourable to his success, and they of course
failed.  Some time after, instead of following the system of Vauban, and reducing the imposts,
fresh ones were added.  Who would have said to the Marechal that all his labours for the relief
of the people of France would lead to new imposts, more harsh, more permanent, and more heavy
than he protested against?  It is a terrible lesson against all improvements in matters of
taxation and finance.

But it is time, now, that I should retrace my steps to other matters, which, if related in
due order of time, should have found a place ere this.  And first, let me relate the particulars
concerning a trial in which I was engaged, and which I have deferred allusion to until now,
so as not to entangle the thread of my narrative.

My sister, as I have said in its proper place, had married the Duc de Brissac, and the marriage
had not been a happy one.  After a time, in fact, they separated.  My sister at her death left
me her universal legatee; and shortly after this, M. de Brissac brought an action against me
on her account for five hundred thousand francs.  After his death, his representatives continued
the action, which I resisted, not only maintaining that I owed none of the five hundred thousand
francs, but claiming to have two hundred thousand owing to me, out of six hundred thousand
which had formed the dowry of my sister.

When M. de Brissac died, there seemed some probability that his peerage would become extinct;
for the Comte de Cosse, who claimed to succeed him, was opposed by a number of peers, and but
for me might have failed to establish his pretensions. Mr Buckley founde a recorde in the Temple,
that Chaucer was fyned for beatinge the fryer; ergo, Gower and Chaucer were of the Temple. But
for myne owne parte, yf I wolde stande vppon termes for matter of Antiquytye and ransacke the originall
of the lawiers fyrst settlinge in the Temple, I dobte whether Chaucer
were of the temple or noe, vnless yt were towardes his latter tyme,
for he was an olde manne, as appereth by Gower in Confessione Amantis
in the xvi yere of R. 2: when Gower wroote that Booke.

But I will passe over all those matters scito pede, and leave euerye manne to his owne iudgemente
therein for this tyme.

[Sidenote: Speight knoweth not the name of Chaucer’s wife, nor doth Thynne.] IN THE TITLE OF
Chawcer’s mariage yo{u} saye, yo{u} cannotte fynde the name of the
Gentlewomanne whome he maryed.  Now, as I have said, I not only resisted this demand made upon me for five hundred
thousand francs, but I, in my turn, claimed two hundred thousand francs, and my claim, once
admitted, all the personal creditors of the late Duc de Brissac (creditors who, of course,
had to be paid by the new Duke) would have been forced to stand aside until my debt was settled.

I, therefore, refused this offer of Cosse, lest other creditors should hear of the arrangement,
and force him to make a similar one with them. He was overwhelmed with a generosity so little
expected, and we became more intimately connected from that day.

Cosse, once received as Duc de Brissac, I no longer feared to push forward the action I had
commenced for the recovery of the two hundred thousand francs due to me, and which I had interrupted
only on his account.  I had gained it twice running against the late Duc de Brissac, at the
parliament of Rouen; but the Duchesse d'Aumont, who in the last years of his life had lent
him money, and whose debt was in danger, succeeded in getting this cause sent up for appeal
to the parliament at Paris, where she threw obstacle upon obstacle in its path, and caused
judgment to be delayed month after month.  When I came to take active steps in the matter,
my surprise--to use no stronger word--was great, to find Cosse, after all I had done for him,
favouring the pretensions of the Duchesse d'Aumont, and lending her his aid to establish them.
However, he and the Duchesse d'Aumont lost their cause, for when it was submitted to the judges
of the council at Paris, it was sent back to Rouen, and they had to pay damages and expenses.

For years the affair had been ready to be judged at Rouen, but M. d'Aumont every year, by means
of his letters of state, obtained a postponement.  At last, however, M. d'Aumont died, and
I was assured that the letters of state should not be again produced, and that in consequence
no further adjournment should take place.  I and Madame de Saint-Simon at once set out, therefore,
for Rouen, where we were exceedingly well received, fetes and entertainments being continually
given in our honour.

After we had been there but eight or ten days, I received a letter from Pontchartrain, who
sent me word that the King had learnt with surprise I was at Rouen, and had charged him to
ask me why I was there: so attentive was the King as to what became of the people of mark,
he was accustomed to see around him! But that is also one error. for this Barthelmewe was of a collaterall
lyne to that S^r Johne Burgershe the father of Mawde wyfe to Thomas
Chawcer; and therefore coulde not that S^r Johne Burghershe be descended
of this Barthelmewe Burgershe, though hee were of that howse.

  The letters of
state had again been put in, for the purpose of obtaining another adjournment.

My design is not to weary by recitals, which interest only myself; but I must explain this
matter fully.  It was Monday evening.  The parliament of Rouen ended on the following Saturday.
If we waited until the opening of the next parliament, we should have to begin our cause from
the beginning, and with new presidents and judges, who would know nothing of the facts.  What
was to be done?  To appeal to the King seemed impossible, for he was at Marly, and, while there,
never listened to such matters.  By the time he left Marly, it would be too late to apply to him.

