Vafrino had seen Armida in the camp and had learned through Erminia not only the princes' designs
on Rinaldo, but also that they meant to assume the signs of the red-cross knights and thus
reach the neighborhood of Godfrey and slay him. On this intelligence Godfrey changed the signs
of his men that they might recognize the Egyptians on the following day and put them to death.

Terrible to the Franks was the sight of the Egyptian army when they opened their eyes upon
it next morning. Clouds of dust obscured all the heavens, hills, and valleys, so great was
the coming host. But Godfrey, with an eloquence that fired each soul, told them of the helplessness
of the enemy, of how many of them were slaves, scourged to the battle, and reminded them of
the great undertaking before them, the saving of the Sepulchre, until fired with zeal, and
burning to fight, they rushed into battle and dispersed the Egyptians. Many of the Christians
fell by the sword of the terrible Soldan, among them Gildippe and her husband, united in death
as in life. Rinaldo, hearing of their slaughter, speedily avenged it by laying the Soldan low
on the battle-field.

One after another of Armida's champions attacked Rinaldo, determined to win the prize, but
his good sword sent them to earth, and Armida was left alone and unprotected. Rinaldo, having
seen her fly away over the plain and knowing the victory achieved, followed and found her ready
to put herself to death in a lonely glade. He snatched the sword from her hand and speedily
changed back her hate to love. She fell upon his breast, and with the promise to become a Christian
and give her life to him, accompanied him back to the city.

During the battle, Aladine and those who were imprisoned in the citadel overpowered Count Raymond,
and rushed out to battle, only to be overcome and slain. Prince Altamore, who, covered with
blood, remained alone on the field, yielded himself to Godfrey, and was given his life and
his kingdom.

Then, from the field covered with spoil and floating with blood, the conquering troops, clad
in their bloody armor, marched in solemn cavalcade to the Temple and paid their, vowed devotions
at the sacred tomb.

SELECTION FROM THE JERUSALEM DELIVERED.

SOPHRONIA AND OLINDO.

At the instigation of the wizard Ismeno, Aladine, king of Jerusalem, stole an image of the
Virgin from the temple of the Christians and put it in his mosque in order to render the city
impregnable. When morning dawned the image was gone, and no search could reveal any clue to
the theft.

  In every temple, hermitage, and hall,
  A long and eager search the monarch made,
  And tortures or rewards decreed to all
  Who screened the guilty, or the guilt betrayed;
  Nor ceased the Sorcerer to employ in aid
  Of the inquiry all his arts, but still
  Without success; for whether Heaven conveyed
  The prize away, or power of human will,
  Heaven close the secret kept, and shamed his vaunted skill.

  But when the king found all expedients vain
  To trace th' offender, then, beyond disguise,
  Flamed forth his hatred to the Christians; then,
  Fed by wild jealousies and sharp surmise,
  Immoderate fury sparkled in his eyes;
  Follow what may, he will revenge the deed,
  And wreak his rage: "Our wrath shall not," he cries,
  "Fall void, but root up all th' accursed seed;
  Thus in the general doom the guilty yet shall bleed!

  "So that he 'scapes not, let the guiltless die!
  But wherefore thus of guiltlessness debate?
  Each guilty is, nor 'mongst them all know I
  One, well-affected to the faith and state;
  And what if some be unparticipate
  In this new crime, new punishment shall pay
  For old misdeeds; why longer do ye wait,
  My faithful Mussulmans? up! up! away!
  Hence with the torch and sword: seize, fire, lay waste, and slay!"

  Thus to the crowd he spake, the mandate flew,
  And in the bosoms of the Faithful shed
  Astonishment and stupor; stupor threw
  On every face the paleness of the dead;
  None dared, none sought to make defence; none fled,
  None used entreaty, none excuse; but there
  They stood, like marble monuments of dread,
  Irresolute,--but Heaven conceived their prayer,
  And whence they least had hope, brought hope to their despair.

  Of generous thoughts and principles sublime
  Amongst them in the city lived a maid,
  The flower of virgins in her ripest prime,
  Supremely beautiful! but that she made
  Never her care, or beauty only weighed
  In worth with virtue; and her worth acquired
  A deeper charm from blooming in the shade;
  Lovers she shunned, nor loved to be admired,
  But from their praises turned, and lived a life retired.

  Yet could not this coy secrecy prevent
  Th' admiring gaze and warm desires of one
  Tutored by Love, nor yet would Love consent
  To hide such lustrous beauty from the sun;
  Love! that through every change delight'st to run,
  The Proteus of the heart I who now dost blind,
  Now roll the Argus eyes that nought can shun!
  Thou through a thousand guards unseen dost wind,
  And to the chastest maids familiar access find.

  Sophronia hers, Olindo was his name;
  Born in one town, by one pure faith illumed;
  Modest--as she was beautiful, his flame
  Feared much, hoped little, and in nought presumed;
  He could not, or he durst not speak, but doomed
  To voiceless thought his passion; him she slighted,
  Saw not, or would not see; thus he consumed
  Beneath the vivid fire her beauty lighted;
  Either not seen ill known, or, known, but ill requited.

  And thus it was, when like an omen drear
  That summoned all her kindred to the grave,
  The cruel mandate reached Sophronia's ear,
  Who, brave as bashful, yet discreet as brave,
  Mused how her people she from death might save;
  Courage inspired, but virginal alarm
  Repressed the thought, till maiden shyness gave
  Place to resolve, or joined to share the harm;
  Boldness awoke her shame, shame made her boldness charm.

  Alone amidst the crowd the maid proceeds,
  Nor seeks to hide her beauty, nor display;
  Downcast her eyes, close veiled in simple weeds,
  With coy and graceful steps she wins her way:
  So negligently neat, one scarce can say
  If she her charms disdains, or would improve,--
  If chance or taste disposes her array;
  Neglects like hers, if artifices, prove
  Arts of the friendly Heavens, of Nature, and of Love.

  All, as she passed unheeding, all, admire
  The noble maid; before the king she stood;
  Not for his angry frown did she retire,
  But his indignant aspect coolly viewed:
  "To give,"--she said, "but calm thy wrathful mood,
  And check the tide of slaughter in its spring,--
  To give account of that thou hast pursued
  So long in vain, seek I thy face, O king!
  The urged offence I own, the doomed offender bring!"

  The modest warmth, the unexpected light
  Of high and holy beauty, for a space
  O'erpowered him,--conquered of his fell despite,
  He stood, and of all fierceness lost the trace.
  Were his a spirit, or were hers a face
  Of less severity, the sweet surprise
  Had melted him to love; but stubborn grace
  Subdues not stubborn pride; Love's potent ties
  Are flattering fond regards, kind looks, and smiling eyes.

  If 't were not Love that touched his flinty soul,
  Desire it was, 't was wonder, 't was delight:
  "Safe be thy race!" he said, "reveal the whole,
  And not a sword shall on thy people light."
  Then she: "The guilty is before thy sight,--
  The pious robbery was my deed; these hands
  Bore the blest Image from its cell by night;
  The criminal thou seek'st before thee stands,--
  Justice from none but me her penalty demands."

  Thus she prepares a public death to meet,
  A people's ransom at a tyrant's shrine:
  Oh glorious falsehood! beautiful deceit!
  Can Truth's own light thy loveliness outshine?
  To her bold speech misdoubting Aladine
  With unaccustomed temper calm replied:
  "If so it were, who planned the rash design,
  Advised thee to it, or became thy guide?
  Say, with thyself who else his ill-timed zeal allied?"

  "Of this my glory not the slightest part
  Would I," said she, "with one confederate share;
  I needed no adviser; my full heart
  Alone sufficed to counsel, guide and dare."
  "If so," he cried, "then none but thou must bear
  The weight of my resentment, and atone
  For the misdeed." "Since it has been my care,"
  She said, "the glory to enjoy alone,
  'T is just none share the pain; it should be all mine own."

  To this the tyrant, now incensed, returned,
  "Where rests the Image?" and his face became
  Dark with resentment: she replied, "I burned
  The holy Image in the holy flame,
  And deemed it glory; thus at least no shame
  Can e'er again profane it--it is free
  From farther violation: dost thou claim
  The spoil or spoiler? this behold in me;
  But that, whilst time rolls round, thou never more shall see.

  "Albeit no spoiler I; it was no wrong
  To repossess what was by force obtained:"
  At this the tyrant loosed his threatening tongue,
  Long-stifled passion raging unrestrained:
  No longer hope that pardon may be gained,
  Beautiful face, high spirit, bashful heart!
  Vainly would Love, since mercy is disdained,
  And Anger flings his most envenomed dart,
  In aid of you his else protecting shield impart!

  The crowd collect; the sentence is divulged;
  With them Olindo comes, by pity swayed;
  It might be that the youth the thought indulged,
  What if his own Sophronia were the maid!
  There stand the busy officers arrayed
  For the last act, here swift the flames arise;
  But when the pinioned beauty stands displayed
  To the full gaze of his inquiring eyes,--
  'T is she! he bursts through all, the crowd before him flies.

  Aloud he cries: "To her, oh not to her
  The crime belongs, though frenzy may misplead!
  She planned not, dared not, could not, king, incur
  Sole and unskilled the guilt of such a deed!
  How lull the guards, or by what process speed
  The sacred Image from its vaulted cell?
  The theft was mine! and 't is my right to bleed!"
  Alas for him! how wildly and how well
  He loved the unloving maid, let this avowal tell.

  "I marked where your high Mosque receives the air
  And light of heaven; I climbed the dizzy steep;
  I reached a narrow opening; entered there,
  And stole the Saint whilst all were hushed in sleep:
  Mine was the crime, and shall another reap
  The pain and glory? Grant not her desire!
  The chains are mine; for me the guards may heap
  Around the ready stake the penal fire;
  For me the flames ascend; 't is mine, that funeral pyre!"

  Sophronia raised to him her face,--her eye
  Was filled with pity and a starting tear:
  She spoke--the soul of sad humanity
  Was in her voice, "What frenzy brings thee here,
  Unhappy innocent! is death so dear,
  Or am I so ill able to sustain
  A mortal's wrath, that thou must needs appear?
  I have a heart, too, that can death disdain,
  Nor ask for life's last hour companionship in pain."

  Thus she appeals to him; but scorning life,
  His settled soul refuses to retreat:
  Oh glorious scene, where in sublimest strife
  High-minded Virtue and Affection meet!
  Where death's the prize of conquest, and defeat
  Seals its own safety, yet remains unblest!
  But indignation at their fond deceit,
  And rage, the more inflames the tyrant's breast,
  The more this constant pair the palm of guilt contest.

  He deems his power despised, and that in scorn
  Of him they spurn the punishment assigned:
  "Let," he exclaimed, "the fitting palm adorn
  The brows of both! both pleas acceptance find!"
  Beckoning he bids the prompt tormentors bind
  Their galling chains around the youth--'t is done;
  Both to one stake are, back to back, consigned,
  Like sunflowers twisted from their worshipped sun,
  Compelled the last fond looks of sympathy to shun.

  Around them now the unctuous pyre was piled,
  And the fanned flame was rising in the wind,
  When, full of mournful thoughts, in accents wild,
  The lover to his mate in death repined:
  "Is this the bond, then, which I hoped should bind
  Our lives in blissful marriage? this the fire
  Of bridal faith, commingling mind with mind,
  Which, I believed, should in our hearts inspire
  Like warmth of sacred zeal and delicate desire?

  "For other flames Love promised to impart,
  Than those our envious planets here prepare;
  Too, ah too long they kept our hands apart,
  But harshly now they join them in despair!
  Yet does it soothe, since by a mode so rare
  Condemned to die, thy torments to partake,
  Forbid by fate thy sweetnesses to share;
  If tears I shed, 't is but for thy dear sake,
  Not mine,--with thee beside, I bless the burning stake!

  "And oh! this doom would be indeed most blest,
  My sharpest sufferings blandishments divine,
  Might I but be permitted, breast to breast,
  On thy sweet lips my spirit to resign;
  If thou too, panting toward one common shrine,
  Wouldst the next happy instant parting spend
  Thy latest sighs in sympathy on mine!"
  Sorrowing he spake; she, when his plaints had end,
  Did thus his fond discourse most sweetly reprehend.

  "Far other aspirations, other plaints
  Than these, dear friend, the solemn hour should claim.
  Think what reward God offers to his saints;
  Let meek repentance raise a loftier aim:
  These torturing fires, if suffered in his name,
  Will, bland as zephyrs, waft us to the blest;
  Regard the sun, how beautiful his flame!
  How fine a sky invites him to the west!
  These seem to soothe our pangs, and summon us to rest."

  The Pagans lifting up their voices, wept;
  In stifled sorrow wept the Faithful too;
  E'en the stern king was touched,--a softness crept
  O'er his fierce heart, ennobling, pure, and new;
  He felt, he scorned it, struggled to subdue,
  And lest his wavering firmness should relent,
  His eyes averted, and his steps withdrew;
  Sophronia's spirit only was unbent;
  She yet lamented not, for whom all else lament.

  In midst of their distress, a knight behold,
  (So would it seem) of princely port! whose vest
  And arms of curious fashion, grained with gold,
  Bespeak some foreign and distinguished guest;
  The silver tigress on the helm impressed,
  Which for a badge is borne, attracts all eyes,--
  A noted cognizance, th' accustomed crest
  Used by Clorinda, whence conjectures rise,
  Herself the stranger is,--nor false is their surmise.

  All feminine attractions, aims, and parts,
  She from her childhood cared not to assume;
  Her haughty hand disdained all servile arts,
  The needle, distaff, and Arachne's loom;
  Yet, though she left the gay and gilded room
  For the free camp, kept spotless as the light
  Her virgin fame, and proud of glory's plume,
  With pride her aspect armed, she took delight
  Stern to appear, and stern, she charmed the gazer's sight.

  Whilst yet a girl, she with her little hand
  Lashed and reined in the rapid steed she raced,
  Tossed the huge javelin, wrestled on the sand,
  And by gymnastic toils her sinews braced;
  Then through the devious wood and mountain-waste
  Tracked the struck lion to his entered den,
  Or in fierce wars a nobler quarry chased;
  And thus in fighting field and forest glen,
  A man to savage beasts, a savage seemed to men.

  From Persia now she comes, with all her skill
  The Christians to resist, though oft has she
  Strewed with their blood the field, till scarce a rill
  Remained, that ran not purple to the sea.
  Here now arrived, the dreadful pageantry
  Of death presents itself,--the crowd--the pyre--
  And the bound pair; solicitous to see,
  And know what crime condemns them to the fire,
  Forward she spurs her steed and hastens to inquire.

  The throng falls back, and she awhile remains,
  The fettered pair more closely to survey;
  One she sees silent, one she sees complains,
  The stronger spirit nerves the weaker prey;
  She sees him mourn like one whom the sad sway
  Of powerful pity doth to tears chastise,
  Not grief, or grief not for himself; but aye
  Mute kneels the maid, her blue beseeching eyes
  So fixed on heaven, she seems in heaven ere yet she dies.

  Clorinda melts, and with them both condoles;
  Some tears she sheds, but greater tenderness
  Feels for her grief who most her grief controls,--
  The silence moves her much, the weeping less;
  No longer now does she delay to press
  For information; turning towards one
  Of reverend years, she said with eagerness,
  "Who are they? speak! and oh, what crime has won
  This death? in Mercy's name, declare the deed they've done!"

  Thus she entreats; a brief reply he gives,
  But such as well explains the whole event:
  Amazed she heard it, and as soon conceives
  That they are both sincerely innocent;
  Her heart is for them, she is wholly bent
  To avert their fate, if either arms can aid,
  Or earnest prayers secure the king's consent;
  The fire she nears, commands it to be stayed,
  That now approached them fast, and to th' attendants said:

  "Let none of you presume to prosecute
  Your barbarous office, till the king I see;
  My word I pledge that at Clorinda's suit,
  Your fault he will forgive, if fault it be."
  Moved by her speech and queenlike dignity
  The guards obey, and she departs in quest
  Of the stern monarch, urgent of her plea:
  Midway they met; the monarch she addressed
  And in this skilful mode her generous purpose pressed.

  "I am Clorinda; thou wilt know perchance
  The name, from vague remembrance or renown;
  And here I come to save with sword and lance
  Our common Faith, and thy endangered crown,
  Impose the labor, lay th' adventure down,
  Sublime, I fear it not, nor low despise;
  In open field or in the straitened town,
  Prepared I stand for every enterprise,
  Where'er the danger calls, where'er the labor lies!"

  "'T would be assuredly a thing most rare,
  If the reward the service should precede;
  But of thy bounty confident, I dare
  For future toils solicit, as my meed,
  Yon lovers' pardon; since the charge indeed
  Rests on no evidence, 't was hard to press
  The point at all, but this I waive, nor plead
  On those sure signs which, urged, thou must confess
  Their hands quite free from crime, or own their guilt far less.

  "Yet will I say, though here the common mind
  Condemns the Christians of the theft, for me,
  Sufficient reasons in mine own I find
  To doubt, dispute, disparage the decree;
  To set their idols in our sanctuary
  Was an irreverence to our laws, howe'er
  Urged by the sorcerer; should the Prophet see
  E'en idols of our own established there?
  Much less then those of men whose lips his faith forswear:

  "The Christian statue ravished from your sight
  To Allah therefore rather I impute,
  In sign that he will let no foreign rite
  Of superstition his pure place pollute:
  Spells and enchantments may Ismeno suit,
  Leave him to use such weapons at his will;
  But shall we warriors by a wand dispute?
  No! no! our talisman, our hope, our skill,
  Lie in our swords alone, and they shall serve us still!"

  She ceased; and he, though mercy could with pain
  Subdue a heart so full of rage and pride,
  Relents, her reasons move, her prayers constrain.--
  Such intercessor must not be denied;
  Thus, though reluctant, he at length complied:
  "The plea for the fair pleader I receive;
  I can refuse thee nothing; this," he cried,
  "May justice be or mercy,--let them live;
  Guiltless--I set them free, or guilty I forgive!"

           Wiffen's Translation, Canto

PARADISE LOST.

Paradise Lost was written by John Milton, who was born in London, Dec. 9, 1608, and died Nov.
8, 1674. After leaving college, he spent five years in study at home, during which time he
wrote L'Allegro, Il Penseroso, Arcades, Comus, and Lycidas. In 1638 he travelled on the continent
and in Italy, where he met Galileo. He hastened home in 1639 on account of the political disturbances
in England, and espousing the Puritan cause, devoted the next twenty years of his life to the
writing of pamphlets in its defence. In 1649 he was appointed Latin Secretary under Cromwell.
In 1652 he lost his sight in consequence of overwork. At the age of twenty-nine, Milton had
decided to make an epic poem his life work, and had noted many historical subjects. By 1641
he had decided on a Biblical subject. He had probably conceived Paradise Lost at the age of
thirty-two, although the poem was not composed until he was over fifty. It was written after
his blindness and dictated in small portions to various persons, the work being collected and
revised by Milton and Aubrey Phillips. It was completed, according to the authority of Phillips,
in 1663, but on account of the Plague and the Great Fire, it was not published until 1667.

Paradise Lost is divided into twelve books and is written, to use Milton's own words, "In English
heroic verse without rhyme, as that of Homer in Greek and of Virgil in Latin, rhyme being no
necessary adjunct or true ornament of poem or good verse."

Paradise Lost was neglected until the time of the Whig supremacy in England. In 1688 Lord Somers,
the Whig leader, published an edition de luxe of the poem; Addison's papers on it, in 1712,
increased its popularity, and through the influence of the Whigs a bust of the poet was placed
in Westminster Abbey in 1737.

There is no better proof of the greatness of Paradise Lost than the way in which it has survived
hostile criticism. It has been criticised for the lengthy conversations and "arguments" of
its characters; for its materialization of the Divine Being; because of its subject; because
of Milton's vagueness of description of things awesome and terrible, in comparison with Dante's
minute descriptions. But the earnest spirit in which it was conceived and written; the subject,
giving it a "higher argument" than any merely national epic, even though many of Milton's,
and his age's, special beliefs are things of the past, and its lofty and poetical style, have
rendered unassailable its rank among the noblest of the epics.

BIBLIOGRAPHY AND CRITICISM, PARADISE LOST.

Joseph Addison's Notes upon the Twelve Books of Paradise Lost; by Albert S. Cook, 1892. (In
the Spectator from Dec. 31, 1711-May 3, 1712);

Samuel Austin Allibone's Dictionary of Authors, 1891, vol. ii., pp. 1301-1311;

Matthew Arnold's A French Critic on Milton (see his Mixed Essays, 1880, pp. 260-273);

Walter Bagehot's Literary Studies, by Richard Holt Hutton, 1879, vol. i., 202-219;

Richard Bentley's Emendations on the Twelve Books of Paradise Lost, 1732;

E. H. Bickersteth's Milton's Paradise Lost, 1876. (St. James Lectures, 2d series. 5, vol. iii.,
pp. 475-483;

Mark Pattison's John Milton, n. d. (English Men of Letters Series);

H. A. Taine's History of English Literature; Tr. by H. Van Laun, 1877, vol. ii., pp. 106-124.

THE STORY OF PARADISE LOST.

When that bright spirit, afterwards known as Satan, rose in rebellion against the Almighty
Ruler of the Universe, presumptuously thinking himself equal to him in strength and following,
he was overthrown by the Great Power and cast with his followers out of Heaven down to his
future dwelling, flaming Hell.

Nine days he and his horrid crew fell through Chaos into the flaming pit yawning to receive
them, and there lay for nine days,--rendered still more miserable by the thought of their immortality
and the eternal bliss they had forfeited. Then Satan, rousing himself from the stupor consequent
upon the fall, half rose and addressed the next in power to himself, Beelzebub.

"Thou art the same, yet not the same," said he; "changed, lost is some of thy former brightness.
Yet why repine? While we live, while we have so large a following, all is not lost. Our hate
still lives, and have we but strength enough, we may still revenge ourselves upon him who thrust
us into this accursed place."

Rising from the lake, his great shield slung over his shoulders, the unconquered archangel
walked over the burning marl to the beach of that fiery sea, and there with chiding words addressed
the legions strewn around him. The great army rose hastily at the voice of its chief and passed
before him, spirits whose heavenly names were now forever lost, who later became the gods of
the idolaters. There was mighty Moloch, Chemos, those who later went by the general names of
Baalim and Ashtaroth,--Thammuz, Dagon, Rimmon, Osiris, Isis, Orus and their train, Belial,
and last of all, the Ionian gods.

His despair in part dissipated by the sight of this heroic array, their prince, towering high
above all, addressed them. No one had foreseen the calamity that had overtaken them. Who could
have guessed the power of the Almighty? But though overthrown they were not totally defeated.
A rumor had long since been rife of the creation of another world with which they could interfere.
At any rate, there must never be peace between them and the heavenly Powers. War there must
be, war in secret, or war waged openly. As he ended, shield clashed against shield, and swords,
quickly drawn, flashed before his eyes, and loud cries hurled defiance to Heaven.

The legions, led by Mammon, who in Heaven had been an honored architect, sought a hill near
by, and quickly emptying it of its rich store of gold and jewels, built a massive structure.
Like a temple in form was it, and round about it stood Doric columns overlaid with gold. No
king of any future state could boast of a grander hall than this palace of Pandemonium which
was so quickly reared upon a hill in Hell, and to which the heralds' trumpets now summoned
all the host.

On the massive throne, blazing with jewels, sat the fallen spirit, and thus addressed his followers:
"Our success is sure in whatever we undertake. We shall never be riven with internecine warfare,
for surely no one will quarrel over precedence in Hell. Therefore, united, we can, sure of
our success, debate of the way in which we shall take up our warfare with the powers that have
overthrown us."

Moloch, Belial, Mammon, and Beelzebub spoke. Moloch was in favor of open war, since nothing
could be worse than Hell, and continued assault against the Most High would, in annoying him,
be a sweet revenge. Belial, who though timorous and slothful, was a persuasive orator, denounced
Moloch's plan. Since the ruler of Heaven was all-powerful, and they immortal, no one knew to
what greater misery he could push them; perhaps he would bury them in boiling pitch to eternity,
or inflict a thousand undreamed-of tortures. War, open and secret, he disliked, since it was
impossible to conceal aught from the eye of the Most High. To make the best of Hell seemed
all that was possible; in time they might become inured to its flames and better days might
come, if they but accepted their doom patiently.

Mammon also considered war impossible. They could never hope to overcome the Almighty; neither
could they hope nor wish for a reconciliation, for how hateful would be an eternity spent in
cringing to one whom they hated. The desert soil of Hell teemed with riches, they could find
peaceful pursuits, and it was his advice to continue there in quiet, untroubled by any thoughts
of revenge.

Amid the murmur of applause that followed Mammon's speech, Beelzebub, than whom none towered
higher save Satan, arose, his face grave, his attitude majestic. "Would you, Thrones and Imperial
Powers," he cried, "think to build up a kingdom here, secure from the arm of Heaven? Have you
so soon forgotten that this is not a kingdom ceded to you by the Most High, but a dungeon in
which he has shut you for your everlasting punishment? Never will he forget that you are his
prisoners; your lot will not be peace, but custody and stripes. What return can we make, then,
but to think out some slow but sure and sweet revenge? It is not necessary to attempt to scale
the walls of Heaven. Other things remain. There is this new world, his plaything. It may lie
exposed, and we can at least make the attempt to seize it and lay it waste, and thus vex him."
As he saw their eyes sparkle, he continued: "We may in this attempt come near to the steps
of our old abode and breathe again its delicious airs instead of these hellish flames. But
first we must find some one, strong, wary, and watchful, to send in search of it."

Satan strode forth, his courage and his consciousness of it making his face shine with transcendent
glory. "Long is the way and hard; its dangers unknown and terrible, but I should be a poor
sovereign did I hesitate in the attempt to seek it out. I do not refuse the sovereignty, for
I fear not to accept as great a share of hazard as of honor. Stay here; charm away your time,
and I will seek deliverance abroad for all of us."

As he spoke he rose to depart, fearful lest others might now offer to go and share the glory
with him.

The legions rose with a sound like thunder, bowed in deepest reverence and went forth, some,
to explore their dismal abode, others to amuse themselves at games, others to discuss Free
Will and Fate, while their leader pursued his way toward the gate of Hell.

The nine-fold gates were of brass, iron, and adamantine rock, reaching high to the mighty roof,
and most horrible were the Shapes that guarded it.

On one side sat a creature, woman to the waist, below, a serpent, surrounded by a crew of hell
hounds, forever barking and then seeking refuge within her. On the other, a Shape, black, fierce,
terrible, crowned with the likeness of a kingly crown, and shaking in its hands a dreadful
dart. As he strode, Hell trembled. Satan, undaunted, met him with fierce words. As the two
stood, their lances pointed at each other, the woman shrieked and ran between them.

"Father, rush not upon thy son! Son, raise not thy hand against thy father!" She then explained
that she was Satan's daughter, Sin, who had sprung from his head full grown, and that she later
became by him the mother of the creature called Death who sat with her to guard the gates.

Satan at once unfolded to them his plan of seeking the new world and making a happy home for
both Sin and Death, where they could forever find food to gratify their hideous cravings. Charmed
by his highly-colored pictures, and forgetful of the commands from above, Sin opened the mighty
doors, so that the flames of Hell spread far out into Chaos, but her strength failed her when
she attempted to close them again.

For a moment Satan looked out into the mixture of Hot and Cold and Moist and Dry that formed
Chaos, and then started forth, now rising, now falling, his wings heavy with the dense masses,
now wading, now creeping, until at last he reached the spot where was fixed the throne of Chaos
and of Night. Here Satan learned of the situation of the new world and soon caught a glimpse
of it, hanging like a star, by a golden chain, from Heaven.

Sitting in Heaven, high throned above all, God, all-seeing, all-knowing, was conscious of Satan's
escape from Hell and his approach to the new world. To his Son, sitting on his right hand,
he pointed out the fallen spirit. "No prescribed bounds can shut our Adversary in; nor can
the chains of hell hold him. To our new world he goes, and there, by no fault of mine, will
pervert man, whom I have placed therein, with a free will; so to remain until he enthralls
himself. Man will fall as did Satan, but as Satan was self-tempted, and man will be deceived
by another, the latter shall find grace where his tempter did not."

Great was the joy of the Son when he learned that man would receive mercy for his transgression.
"Pardon and mercy he shall receive," declared the Father, "but some one must be willing to
expiate his sin for him; the just must die for the unjust. Who in Heaven is willing to make
the sacrifice?"

For a moment all the Heavenly quire stood mute; then the Son of God spoke and implored his
Father to let his anger fall on him, since he could not wholly die, but could arise from death
and subdue his vanquisher.

When his Father accepted the sacrifice, and named him Son of God and Man who should hereafter
be Universal King, Ruler of Heaven and Earth, Heaven rang with the shouts of the Angels, who,
casting down their amaranthine wreaths until the golden pavement was covered with the garlands,
took their golden harps and sang the praises of the Father and the Son. 

And Mrs. Stevenson (his mother) told me that she thought he was inspired by recollections of
a visit paid in boyhood to an uncle living at a remote farmhouse in that district called Overshiels,
in the parish of Stow. But though he may have thought of the Lammermuirs in the first instance,
we have already found him drawing his description of the kirk and manse from another haunt
of his youth, namely, Glencorse in the Pentlands; while passages in chapters v. and viii. point
explicitly to a third district, that is, Upper Tweeddale, with the
country stretching thence towards the wells of Clyde.

With this country also holiday rides and excursions from Peebles had made him familiar as a
boy: and on the whole it is this which best answers the geographical indications of the story.
Some of the place-names are clearly not meant to furnish literal indications. The Spango, for
instance, is a water running, I believe, not into the Tweed but into
the Nith.

Crossmichael as the name of a town is borrowed from Galloway; but it may be taken to all intents
and purposes as standing for Peebles, where I am told by Sir George
Douglas there existed in the early years of the century a well-known
club of the same character as that described in the story.

Lastly, the name Hermiston itself is taken from a farm on the Water of Ale, between Ettrick and
Teviotdale, and close to the proper country of the Elliotts.

But it is with the general and essential that the artist deals, and questions of strict historical
perspective or local definition are beside the mark in considering his work. Nor will any reader
expect, or be grateful for, comment in this place on matters which are more properly to the point--on
the seizing and penetrating power of the author's ripened art as exhibited in the foregoing
pages, his vital poetry of vision and magic of presentment. Good is forever lost to me, and I must now make Evil
my good. I can at least divide the empire of the world with the King of Heaven."

As he realized how his bitter thoughts had dimmed his countenance he smoothed it over with
outward calm, but not before Uriel, from the Sun, had noted and wondered over his strange gestures.

Leaping over the high natural walls of Paradise, Satan, in the form of a cormorant, perched
himself on the Tree of Life. Beautiful was the scene before him. All the trees and plants were
of the noblest kind. In the midst of them stood the Tree of Life with its golden fruit, and
not far off the Tree of Knowledge. Southward through Eden ran a river, which, passing under
a huge hill, emerged into four great streams wandering through many afterwards famous realms.
Between the rows of trees stretched level lawns where grazed the happy flocks, and over the
green mead were sprinkled flowers of every hue. No fairer scene ever met living eyes, and fairest
of all were the two stately forms, in whose looks shone the divinity of their Maker. Hand in
hand they passed through the garden, refreshed themselves with the delicious fruits, and were
happy in each other.

As he gazed on them while the animals fell asleep and the sun sank below the horizon, Satan,
still torn with conflicting emotions, ruminated over the unhappiness he was to bring the lovely
pair. He admired them, he could love them; they had not harmed him, but he must bring unhappiness
upon them because of their likeness to their Creator. Through them only could he obtain his
longed-for revenge.

Anxious to learn where to attack them, he prowled about them, now as a lion, now as a tiger,
listening to their conversation. They spoke of their garden, of the Tree of Life, and of the
forbidden Tree of Knowledge. "In the day ye eat thereof, ye shall surely die," had been their
warning. Eve recalled the day of her creation, when she had first fled from Adam, and then
yielded to his embraces, and Satan, watching their caresses, envied and hardened his heart.
"Live while ye may!" he muttered. "Soon will I return and offer you new woes for your present
pleasures."

In the mean time, Gabriel, warned by Uriel, who suspected that an evil spirit had crept into
Paradise, had set watches around the garden. Ithuriel and Zephon, sent to search for him, spied
Satan in the form of a toad, sitting near the ear of Eve, tainting her dreams with foul whispers.
Touched by Ithuriel's spear, he was forced to resume his own shape and was taken to Gabriel.
The angry Satan attempted to use force, but warned by a sign from Heaven that his strength
was insufficient, fled, murmuring, through the night.

When morning dawned on Eden, a morn of unimaginable beauty, Adam waked Eve from her restless
slumbers, and heard her troubled dreams, in which she had been tempted to taste of the fruit
of the Tree of Knowledge. He comforted her, and after their morning hymn, in which they glorified
their Creator, they set about their pleasant work of pruning the too luxuriant vines of their
Paradise. In the mean time, the Father above, knowing the design of Satan, and determined that
man should not fall without warning, sent Raphael down to Adam to tell him that he was threatened
by an enemy, and that, as a free agent, if he fell, his sin would be upon his own head.

Six-winged Raphael swept down through the spheres and stood in Paradise, welcomed by Adam.
Eve hastened to set before their guest every delicacy that Eden knew, and while she was preparing
these Adam listened to the Angel's warning.

To emphasize the sin of disobedience, Raphael related to the pair the story of Satan's conspiracy
with the other powers because the Father had proclaimed the power of his Son. The Father, knowing
Satan's confidence in himself, had allowed him for two days to fight an equal number of his
legions of angels, among whom was Abdiel who had fled, indignant, from Satan's ranks, and on
the third day, when the legions of evil lay crushed beneath the mountains which the shining
angels had heaped upon them, the Son of God drove forth in his chariot, and single-handed,
forced them before him, terror-stricken, until, Heaven's wall having opened, they fell downward
for nine days, in horror and confusion into the depths of Hell. The Messiah, returning home
in triumph in his chariot, was welcomed by the bright orders into the home of his Father.

