THE STORY OF ROME FROM THE EARLIEST TIMES TO THE END OF THE REPUBLIC

BY ARTHUR GILMAN, M.A.

PREFACE.

It is proposed to rehearse the lustrous story of Rome, from its beginning in the mists of myth
and fable down to the mischievous times when the republic came to its end, just before the
brilliant period of the empire opened.

As one surveys this marvellous vista from the vantage-ground of the present, attention is fixed
first upon a long succession of well- authenticated facts which are shaded off in the dim distance,
and finally lost in the obscurity of unlettered antiquity. The flesh and blood heroes of the
more modern times regularly and slowly pass from view, and in their places the unsubstantial
worthies of dreamy tradition start up. The transition is so gradual, however, that it is at
times impossible to draw the line between history and legend. Fortunately for the purposes
of this volume it is not always necessary to make the effort. The early traditions of the Eternal
City have so long been recounted as truth that the world is slow to give up even the least
jot or tittle of them, and when they are disproved as fact, they must be told over and over
again as story.

Roman history involves a narrative of social and political struggles, the importance of which
is as wide as modern civilization, and they must not be passed over without some attention,
though in the present volume they cannot be treated with the thoroughness they deserve. The
story has the advantage of being to a great extent a narrative of the exploits of heroes, and
the attention can be held almost the whole time to the deeds of particular actors who successively
occupy the focus or play the principal parts on the stage. In this way the element of personal
interest, which so greatly adds to the charm of a story, may be infused into the narrative.

It is hoped to enter to some degree into the real life of the Roman people, to catch the true
spirit of their actions, and to indicate the current of the national life, while avoiding the
presentation of particular episodes or periods with undue prominence. It is intended to set
down the facts in their proper relation to each other as well as to the facts of general history,
without attempting an incursion into the domain of philosophy.

A.G.

CAMBRIDGE, September, 1885.

CONTENTS

I.

ONCE UPON A TIME

The old king at Troy--Paris, the wayward youth--Helen carried off--The war of ten years--Æneas,
son of Anchises, goes to Italy--His death-- Fact and fiction in early stories--How Milton wrote
about early England--How Æneas was connected with England--Virgil writes about Æneas--How Livy
wrote about Æneas--Was Æneas a son of Venus?--Italy, as Æneas would have seen it--Greeks in
Italy--How Evander came from Arcadia--How Æneas died--Thirty cities rise--Twins and a she-wolf--
Trojan names in Italy--How the Romans named their children and themselves.

II.

HOW THE SHEPHERDS BEGAN THE CITY

Augury resorted to--Romulus and Remus on two hills--Vultures determine a question--Pales, god
of the shepherds--Beginning the city--Celer killed--An asylum--Bachelors want wives--A game
of wife-snatching-- Sabines wish their daughters back--Tarpeia on the hill--A duel between
two hills--Two men named Curtius--Women interfere for peace--Where did Romulus go?--Society
divided by Romulus--Numa Pompilius chosen king-- Laws of religion given the people--Guilds
established--The year divided into months--Tullus Hostilius king--Six brothers fight--Horatia
killed --Ancus Martius king--The wooden bridge.

III.

HOW CORINTH GAVE ROME A NEW DYNASTY

Magna Græcia--Cypselus, the democratic politician--Demaratus goes to Tarquinii--Etruscan relics--Lucomo's
cap lifted--Lucomo changes his name--A Greek king of Rome--A circus and other great public
works--A light around a boy's head--Servius Tullius king--How the kingdom passed from the Etruscan
dynasty.

IV.

THE RISE OF THE COMMONS

A king of the plebeians--A league with Latin cities--A census taken-- The Seven Hills--Classes
formed among the people--Assemblies of the people--How ace means one--Heads of the people--Armor
of the different classes--A Lustration or Suovetaurilia--What is a lustrum?-- Servius divides
certain lands--A wicked husband and a naughty wife-- King Servius killed--Sprinkled with a
father's blood.

V.

HOW A PROUD KING FELL

A tyrant king--The mysterious Sibyl of Cumæ comes to sell books--The head found on the Capitoline--A
serpent frightens a king--A serious inquiry sent to Delphi--A hollow stick filled with gold
helps a young man--A good wife spinning--A terrible oath--The Tarquins banished--A republic
takes the place of the kingdom--The first of the long line of consuls--The good Valerius--The
god Silvanus cries out to some effect-- Lars Porsena of Clusium and what he tried to do--Horatius
the brave-- Rome loses land--A dictator appointed--Castor and Pollux help the army at Lake
Regillus--Caius Marcius wins a crown--Appius Claudius comes to town.

VI.

THE ROMAN RUNNYMEDE

The character of the Romans--Traits of the kings--Insignificance of Latin territory--Occupations--Art
backward--A narrow religion--Who were the populus Romanus?--Patricians oppress the people--Wrongs
of Roman money-lending--How a debtor flaunted his rags to good purpose-- Appius Claudius defied--A
secession to the Anio--Apologue of the body and its members--Laws of Valerius re-affirmed--Tribunes
of the people appointed--Peace by the treaty of the Sacred Mount.

VII.

HOW THE HEROES FOUGHT FOR A HUNDRED YEARS

Coriolanus fights bravely--He enrages the plebeians--Women melt the strong man's heart--Plebeians
gain ground--Agrarian laws begin to be made--Cassius, who makes the first, undermined--The
family of the Fabii support the commons--A black day on the Cremara--Cincinnatus called from
his plow--The Æquians subjugated--What a conquest meant in those days--The Aventine Hill given
to the commons--The ten men make ten laws and afterwards twelve--The ten men become arrogant--How
Virginia was killed--Appius Claudius cursed--The second secession of the plebeians-- The third
secession--The commons make gains--Censors chosen--The wonderful siege of Veii--How a tunnel
brings victory--Camillus the second founder of Rome--How the territory was increased, but ill
omens threaten.

VIII.

A BLAST FROM BEYOND THE NORTH WIND

What the Greeks thought when they shivered--A warlike people come into notice--Brennus leads
the barbarians to victory--A voice from the temple of Vesta--Tearful Allia--The city alarmed
and Camillus called for--How the sacred geese chattered to a purpose--Brennus successful, but
defeated at last--A historical game of scandal--Camillus sets to work to make a new city--Camillus
honored as the second founder of Rome--Manlius less fortunate--Poor debtors protected by a
law of Stolo --A plague comes to Rome, and priests order stage-plays to be performed--The floods
of the Tiber come into the circus.

IX.

HOW THE REPUBLIC OVERCAME ITS NEIGHBORS

Alexander the Great strides over Persia--Suppose he had attacked Rome? --The man with a chain,
and the man helped by a crow--How the Samnites came into Campania--The memorable battle of
Mount Gaurus--How Carthage thought best to congratulate Rome--Debts become heavy again--How
Decius Mus sacrificed himself for the army--Misfortune at the Caudine Forks--A general muddle,
in which another Mus sacrifices himself--Another secession of the commons--An agrarian law
and an abolition of debts-- What the wild waves washed up--Pyrrhus, King of Epirus, takes a
lofty model--How Cineas asked hard questions--Blind Appius Claudius stirs up the people--Maleventum
gets a better name--Ptolemy Philadelphus thinks best to congratulate Rome--How the Romans made
roads--The classes of citizens.

X.

AN AFRICAN SIROCCO

How an old Bible city sent out a colony--Carthage attends strictly to its own business--Sicily
a convenient place for a great fight--The Mamertines not far from Scylla and Charybdis--Ancient
war-vessels and how they were rowed--The prestige of Carthage on the water destroyed-- Xanthippus
the Spartan helps the Carthaginians--The horrible fate of noble Regulus--Hamilcar, the man
of lightning, comes to view--Gates of the temple of Janus closed the second time--A perfidious
queen overthrown--Two Gauls and two Greeks buried alive--Hannibal hates Rome --Rome and Carthage
fight the second time--Scipio and Fabius the Delayer fight for Rome--Hannibal crosses the Alps--The
terrible rout at Lake Trasimenus--A business man beaten--Syracuse falls and Archimedes dies--Fabius
takes Tarentum--A great victory at the Metaurus--War carried to Africa and closed at Zama--Hannibal
a wanderer.

XI.

THE NEW PUSHES THE OLD--WARS AND CONQUESTS

Tumultuous women stir up the city--What the Oppian Law forbade--Cato the Stern opposes the
women--The women find a valorous champion--How did the matrons establish their high character?--Two
parties look at the growing influence of ideas from Greece--What were those influences?--How
Rome coveted Eastern conquests--How Flamininus fought at the Dog-heads--How the Grecians cried
for joy at the Isthmian games --Great battles at Thermopylæ and Magnesia, and their results--
Philopoemen, Hannibal, and Scipio die--The battle of Pydna marks an era--Greece despoiled of
its works of art--Cato wishes Carthage destroyed--Numantia destroyed--The slaves in Sicily
give trouble.

XII.

A FUTILE EFFORT AT REFORM

Scipio gives away his daughter--Tiberius Gracchus serves the state-- Romans without family
altars or tombs--Cornelia urges Gracchus to do somewhat for the state--Gracchus misses an opportunity--Another
son of Cornelia comes to the front--The younger Gracchus builds roads and makes good laws--Drusus
undermines the reformer--Office looked upon as a means of getting riches--Marius and Sulla
appear--Jugurtha fights and bribes--Metellus, the general of integrity--Marius captures Jugurtha--A
shadow falls upon Rome--A terrible battle at Vercellæ--The slaves rise again--The Domitian
law restricts the rights of the senate--The ill- gotten gold of Toulouse.

XIII.

SOCIAL AND CIVIL WARS

The agrarian laws of Appuleius--Luxury increases and faith falls away-- Rome for the Romans--Another
Drusus appears--The brave Marsians menace Rome--Ten new tribes formed--A war with Mithridates
of Pontus--Marius and Sulla struggle and Marius goes to the wall--Sulla besieges Athens-- Sulla
threatens the senate--The capitol burned--A battle at the Colline Gate--Proscription and carnage--Sulla
makes laws and retires to see the effect--A congiarium--A grand funeral and a cremation.

XIV.

THE MASTER-SPIRITS OF THIS AGE

Tendency towards monarchy--Sertorius and his white fawn--Crassus and his great house--Cicero,
the eloquent orator--Verres, the great thief-- How Verres ran away--Catiline the Cruel--Cæsar,
the man born to rule-- Looking for gain in confusion--Lepidus flees after the fight of the
Mulvian bridge--How the two young men caused gladiators to fight--What Spartacus did--Six thousand
crosses--Pompey overawes the senate.

XV.

PROGRESS OF THE GREAT POMPEY

Pompey the principal citizen--Crassus feeds the people at ten thousand tables--How the pirates
caught Cæsar, and how Cæsar caught the pirates --Gabinius makes a move--The Manilian law sets
Pompey further on-- Mithridates fights and flees--Times of treasons, stratagems, and spoils--Catiline
plots--The sacrilege of Clodius--Cæsar pushes himself to the front--The last agrarian law--Cæsar's
success in Gaul-- Vercingetorix appears--Cæsar's conquests.

XVI.

HOW THE TRIUMVIRS CAME TO UNTIMELY ENDS

Pompey builds a theatre--Crassus must make his mark--Cato against Cæsar--Curio helps Cæsar--Solemn
jugglery of the pontiffs--Curio warm enough--At the Rubicon--Crossing the little river--Pompey
stamps in vain--Cato flees from Rome--Metellus stands aside--Pompey killed-- Veni, vidi, vici--Honors
and plans of Cæsar--The calendar reformed--Cæsar has too much ambition--'T was one of those
coronets-- The Ides of March--Antony, the actor--Antony the chief man in Rome-- What next?.

XVII.

HOW THE REPUBLIC BECAME AN EMPIRE

How Octavius became a Cæsar--Agrippa and Cicero give him their help-- Octavius wins the soldiers,
and Cicero launches his Philippics--Antony, Lepidus, and Octavius become Triumvirs--Their first
work a bloody one-- Cicero falls--Brutus and Cassius defeated at Philippi--Antony forgets Fulvia--Antony
and Octavius quarrel and meet for discussion at Tarentum--How Horace travelled to Brundusium--The
duration of the Triumvirate extended five years--Cleopatra beguiles Antony a second time--The
great battle off Actium--Octavius wins complete power, and a new era begins--The Republic ends.

XVIII.

SOME MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF THE ROMAN PEOPLE

How did these people live?--The first Roman house--The vestibule and the dark room--The dining-room
and the parlor--Rooms for pictures and books--Cooking taken out of the atrium--How the houses
were heated and lighted--Life in a villa--The extravagance of the pleasure villa--When a man
and a woman had agreed to marry--How the bride dressed and what the groom did--The wife's position
and work--The stola and the toga--Foot-gear from soccus to cothurnus--Breakfast, luncheon,
and dinner--The formal dinner--How the Romans travelled, and how they sought office--The law
and its penalties.

XIX.

THE ROMAN READING AND WRITING

Grecian influence on Roman mental culture--Textbooks--Cato and Varro on education--Dictation
and copy-books--The early writers--Fabius Pictor-- Plautus--Terence--Atellan plays--Cicero's
works--Varro's works--Cæsar and Catullus--Lucretius--Ovid and Tibullus--Sallust--Livy--Horace--
Cornelius Nepos--Virgil and his works--Life at the villa of Mæcenas.

XX.

THE ROMAN REPUBLICANS SERIOUS AND GAY

The will of the gods sought for--The first temples--Festivals in the first month--Vinalia and
Saturnalia--Fires of Vulcan and Vesta-- Matronly and family services--No mythology at first--Colleges
of priests needed--An incursion of Greek philosophers--Games of childhood --Checkers and other
games of chance--The people cry for games--Games in the circus--The amphitheatre invented--Men
and beasts fight--Funeral ceremonies--Charon paid--The mourning procession--Inurning the ashes
--The columbarium--The Roman May-day--Change from rustic simplicity to urban orgies.

INDEX.

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

MAP OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE
MAP OF ANCIENT ROME
VIEW OF THE COLOSSEUM AND PORTION OF MODERN ROME
THE PLAIN OF TROY IN MODERN TIMES
ROMAN GIRLS WITH A STYLUS AND WRITING-TABLET
A ROMAN ALTAR MONUMENT OF THE HORATII AND THE CURIATII
MOUTH OF THE CLOACA MAXIMA AT THE TIBER, AND THE SO-CALLED
  TEMPLE OF VESTA
ROMAN SOLDIERS, COSTUMES AND ARMOR
THE RAVINE OF DELPHI
THE CAPITOL RESTORED
ROMAN STREET PAVEMENT
A PHOENICIAN VESSEL (TRIREME)
A ROMAN WAR-VESSEL
HANNIBAL
TERENCE, THE LAST ROMAN COMIC POET
PUBLIUS CORNELIUS SCIPIO AFRICANUS
A ROMAN MATRON
ROMAN HEAD-DRESSES
GLADIATORS AT A FUNERAL
ACTORS' MASKS
A ROMAN MILE-STONE
IN A ROMAN STUDY
PLAN OF A ROMAN CAMP IN THE TIME OF THE REPUBLIC
POMPEY (CNEIUS POMPEIUS MAGNUS)
CAIUS JULIUS CÆSAR
GLADIATORS
TRIUMPHAL PROCESSION OF A ROMAN GENERAL
INTERIOR OF A ROMAN HOUSE
A ROMAN POETESS
THE FORUM ROMANUM IN MODERN TIMES
AN ELEPHANT IN ARMOR
ITALIAN AND GERMAN ALLIES, COSTUMES AND ARMOR
INTERIOR OF THE FORUM ROMANUM
MARCUS TULLIUS CICERO
CLEOPATRA'S SHOW SHIP
ANCIENT STATUE OF AUGUSTUS
THE HOUSE-PHILOSOPHER
DINING-TABLE AND COUCHES
COVERINGS FOR THE FEET
ARTICLES OF THE ROMAN TOILET
RUINS OF THE COLOSSEUM, SEEN FROM THE PALATINE HILL
A COLUMBARIUM

THE STORY OF ROME.

I.

ONCE UPON A TIME.

Once upon a time, there lived in a city of Asia Minor, not far from Mount Ida, as old Homer
tells us in his grand and beautiful poem, a king who had fifty sons and many daughters. How
large his family was, indeed, we cannot say, for the storytellers of the olden time were not
very careful to set down the actual and exact truth, their chief object being to give the people
something to interest them. That they succeeded well in this respect we know, because the story
of this old king and his great family of sons and daughters has been told and retold thousands
of times since it was first related, and that was so long ago that the bard himself has sometimes
been said never to have lived at all. Still; somebody must have existed who told the wondrous
story, and it has always been attributed to a blind poet, to whom the name Homer has been given.

The place in which the old king and his great family lived was Ilium, though it is better known
as Troja or Troy, because that is the name that the Roman people used for it in later times.
One of the sons of Priam, for that was the name of this king, was Paris, who, though very handsome,
was a wayward and troublesome youth. He once journeyed to Greece to find a wife, and there
fell in love with a beautiful daughter of Jupiter, named Helen. She was already married to
Menelaus, the Prince of Lacedæmonia (brother of another famous hero, Agamemnon), who had most
hospitably entertained young Paris, but this did not interfere with his carrying her off to
Troy. The wedding journey was made by the roundabout way of Phoenicia and Egypt, but at last
the couple reached home with a large amount of treasure taken from the hospitable Menelaus.

This wild adventure led to a war of ten years between the Greeks and King Priam, for the rescue
of the beautiful Helen. Menelaus and some of his countrymen at last contrived to conceal themselves
in a hollow wooden horse, in which they were taken into Troy. Once inside, it was an easy task
to open the gates and let the whole army in also. The city was then taken and burned. Menelaus
was naturally one of the first to hasten from the smoking ruins, though he was almost the last
to reach his home. He lived afterwards for years in peace, health, and happiness with the beautiful
wife who had cost him so much suffering and so many trials to regain.

Among the relatives of King Priam was one Anchises, a descendant of Jupiter, who was very old
at the time of the war. He had a valiant son, however, who fought well in the struggle, and
the story of his deeds was ever afterwards treasured up among the most precious narratives
of all time. This son was named Æneas, and he was not only a descendant of Jupiter, but also
a son of the beautiful goddess Venus. He did not take an active part in the war at its beginning,
but in the course of time he and Hector, who was one of the sons of the king, became the most
prominent among the defenders of Troy. After the destruction of the city, he went out of it,
carrying on his shoulders his aged father, Anchises, and leading by the hand his young son,
Ascanius, or Iulus, as he was also called. He bore in his hands his household gods, called
the Penates, and began his now celebrated wanderings over the earth. He found a resting-place
at last on the farther coast of the Italian peninsula, and there one day he marvellously disappeared
in a battle on the banks of the little brook Numicius, where a monument was erected to his
memory as "The Father and the Native God." According to the best accounts, the war of Troy
took place nearly twelve hundred years before Christ, and that is some three thousand years
ago now. It was before the time of the prophet Eli, of whom we read in the Bible, and long
before the ancient days of Samuel and Saul and David and Solomon, who seem so very far removed
from our times. There had been long lines of kings and princes in China and India before that
time, however, and in the hoary land of Egypt as many as twenty dynasties of sovereigns had
reigned and passed away, and a certain sort of civilization had flourished for two or three
thousand years, so that the great world was not so young at that time as one might at first
think If only there had been books and newspapers in those olden days, what revelations they
would make to us now! They would tell us exactly where Troy was, which some of the learned
think we do not know, and we might, by their help, separate fact from fiction in the immortal
poems and stories that are now our only source of information. It is not for us to say that
that would be any better for us than to know merely what we do, for poetry is elevating and
entertaining, and stirs the heart; and who could make poetry out of the columns of a newspaper,
even though it were as old as the times of the Pharaohs? Let us, then, be thankful for what
we have, and take the beginnings of history in the mixed form of truth and fiction, following
the lead of learned historians who are and long have been trying to trace the true clue of
fact in the labyrinth of poetic story with which it is involved.

When the poet Milton sat down to write the history of that part of Britain now called England,
as he expressed it, he said: "The beginning of nations, those excepted of whom sacred books
have spoken, is to this day unknown. Nor only the beginning, but the deeds also of many succeeding
ages, yes, periods of ages, either wholly unknown or obscured or blemished with fables." Why
this is so the great poet did not pretend to tell, but he thought that it might be because
people did not know how to write in the first ages, or because their records had been lost
in wars and by the sloth and ignorance that followed them. Perhaps men did not think that the
records of their own times were worth preserving when they reflected how base and corrupt,
how petty and perverse such deeds would appear to those who should come after them. For whatever
reason, Milton said that it had come about that some of the stories that seemed to be the oldest
were in his day regarded as fables; but that he did not intend to pass them over, because that
which one antiquary admitted as true history, another exploded as mere fiction, and narratives
that had been once called fables were afterward found to "contain in them many footsteps and
reliques of something true," as what might be read in poets "of the flood and giants, little
believed, till undoubted witnesses taught us that all was not feigned." For such reasons Milton
determined to tell over the old stories, if for no other purpose than that they might be of
service to the poets and romancers who knew how to use them judiciously. He said that he did
not intend even to stop to argue and debate disputed questions, but, "imploring divine assistance,"
to relate, "with plain and lightsome brevity," those things worth noting.

After all this preparation Milton began his history of England at the Flood, hastily recounted
the facts to the time of the great Trojan war, and then said that he had arrived at a period
when the narrative could not be so hurriedly dispatched. He showed how the old historians had
gone back to Troy for the beginnings of the English race, and had chosen a great-grandson of
Æneas, named Brutus, as the one by whom it should be attached to the right royal heroes of
Homer's poem. Thus we see how firm a hold upon the imagination of the world the tale of Troy
had after twenty-seven hundred years.

Twenty-five or thirty years before the birth of Christ there was in Rome another poet, named
Virgil, writing about the wanderings of Æneas. He began his beautiful story with these words:
"Arms I sing, and the hero, who first, exiled by fate, came from the coast of Troy to Italy
and the Lavinian shore." He then went on to tell in beautiful words the story of the wanderings
of his hero,--a tale that has now been read and re-read for nearly two thousand years, by all
who have wished to call themselves educated; generations of school-boys, and schoolgirls too,
have slowly made their way through the Latin of its twelve books. This was another evidence
of the strong hold that the story of Troy had upon men, as well as of the honor in which the
heroes, and descent from them, were held.

In the generation after Virgil there arose a graphic writer named Livy, who wrote a long history
of Rome, a large portion of which has been preserved to our own day. Like Virgil, Livy traced
the origin of the Latin people to Æneas, and like Milton, he re-told the ancient stories, saying
that he had no intention of affirming or refuting the traditions that had come down to his
time of what had occurred before the building of the city, though he thought them rather suitable
for the fictions of poetry than for the genuine records of the historian. He added, that it
was an indulgence conceded to antiquity to blend human things with things divine, in such a
way as to make the origin of cities appear more venerable. This principle is much the same
as that on which Milton wrote his history, and it seems a very good one. Let us, therefore,
follow it.

In the narrative of events for several hundred years after the city of Rome was founded, according
to the early traditions, it is difficult to distinguish truth from fiction, though a skilful
historian (and many such there have been) is able, by reading history backwards, to make up
his mind as to what is probable and what seems to belong only to the realm of myth. It does
not, for example, seem probable that Æneas was the son of the goddess Venus; and it seems clear
that a great many of the stories that are mixed with the early history of Rome were written
long after the events they pretend to record, in order to account for customs and observances
of the later days. Some of these we shall notice as we go on with our pleasant story.

We must now return to Æneas. After long wanderings and many marvellous adventures, he arrived,
as has been said, on the shores of Italy. He was not able to go rapidly about the whole country,
as we are in these days by means of our good roads and other modes of communication, but if
he could have done this, he would have found that he had fallen upon a land in which the inhabitants
had come, as he had, from foreign shores. Some of them were of Greek origin, and others had
emigrated from countries just north of Italy, though, as we now know that Asia was the cradle
of our race, and especially of that portion of it that has peopled Europe, we suppose that
all the dwellers on the boot-shaped peninsula had their origin on that mysterious continent
at some early period.

If Æneas could have gone to the southern part of Italy,--to that part from which travellers
now take the steamships for the East at Brindisi, he would have found some of the emigrants
from the North. If he had gone to the north of the river Tiber, he would have seen a mixed
population enjoying a greater civilization than the others, the aristocracy of which had come
also from the northern mountains, though the common people were from Greece or its colonies.
These people of Greek descent were called Etruscans, and it has been discovered that they had
advanced so far in civilization, that they afterwards gave many of their customs to the city
of Rome when it came to power. A confederacy known as the "Twelve Cities of Etruria" became
famous afterwards, though no one knows exactly which the twelve were. Probably they changed
from time to time; some that belonged to the union at one period, being out of it at another.
It will be enough for us to remember that Veii, Clusium, Fidenæ, Volsinii, and Tarquinii were
of the group of Etruscan cities at a later date.

The central portion of the country to which Æneas came is that known as Italia, the inhabitants
of which were of the same origin as the Greeks. It is said that about sixty years before the
Trojan war, King Evander (whose name meant good man and true) brought a company from the land
of Arcadia, where the people were supposed to live in a state of ideal innocence and virtue,
to Italia, and began a city on the banks of the Tiber, at the foot of the Palatine Hill. Evander
was a son of Mercury, and he found that the king of the country he had come to was Turnus,
who was also a relative of the immortal gods. Turnus and Evander became fast friends, and it
is said that Turnus taught his neighbors the art of writing, which he had himself learned from
Hercules, but this is one of the transparent fictions of the story. It may be that he taught
them music and the arts of social life, and gave them good laws. What ever became of good Evander
we do not know.

The king of the people among whom Æneas landed was one Latinus, who became a friend of his
noble visitor, giving him his daughter Lavinia to wife, though he had previously promised her
to Turnus. Æneas named the town in which he lived Lavinium, in honor of his wife. Turnus was
naturally enraged at the loss of his expected bride, and made war upon both Æneas and Latinus.
The Trojan came off victorious, both the other warriors being killed in the struggle. Thus
for a short time, Æneas was left sole king of all those regions, with no one to dispute his
title to the throne or his right to his wife; but the pleasure of ruling was not long to be
his, for a short time after his accession to power, he was killed in battle on the banks of
the Numicius, as has already been related. His son Ascanius left the low and unhealthy site
of Lavinium, and founded a city on higher ground, which was called Alba Longa (the long, white
city), and the mountain on the side of which it was, the Alban mountain. The new capital of
Ascanius became the centre and principal one of thirty cities that arose in the plain, over
all of which it seemed to have authority. Among these were Tusculum, Præneste, Lavinium, and
Ardea, places of which subsequent history has much to say.

Ascanius was successful in founding a long line of sovereigns, who reigned in Alba for three
hundred years, until there arose one Numitor who was dispossessed of his throne by a younger
brother named Amulius. One bad act usually leads to another, and this case was no exception
to the rule, for when Amulius had taken his brother's throne, he still feared that the rightful
children might interfere with the enjoyment of his power. Though he supported Numitor in comfort,
he cruelly killed his son and shut his daughter up in a temple. This daughter was called Silvia,
or, sometimes, Rhea Silvia. Wicked men are not able generally to enjoy the fruits of their
evil doings long, and, in the course of time, the daughter of the dethroned Numitor became
the mother of a beautiful pair of twin boys, (their father being the god of war, Mars,) who
proved the avengers of their grandfather. Not immediately, however. The detestable usurper
determined to throw the mother and her babes into the river Tiber, and thus make an end of
them, as well as of all danger to him from them. It happened that the river was at the time
overflowing its banks, and though the poor mother was drowned, the cradle of the twins was
caught on the shallow ground at the foot of the Palatine Hill, at the very place where the
good Evander had begun his city so long before. There the waifs were found by one of the king's
shepherds, after they had been, strangely enough, taken care of for a while by a she-wolf,
which gave them milk, and a woodpecker, which supplied them with other food. Faustulus was
the name of this shepherd, and he took them to his wife Laurentia, though she already had twelve
others to care for. The brothers, who were named Romulus and Remus, grew up on the sides of
the Palatine Hill to be strong and handsome men, and showed themselves born leaders among the
other shepherds, as they attended to their daily duties or fought the wild animals that troubled
the flocks.

The grandfather of the twins fed his herds on the Aventine Hill, nearer the river Tiber, just
across a little valley, and a quarrel arose between his shepherds and those of Faustulus, in
the course of which Remus was captured and taken before Numitor. The old man thus discovered
the relationship that existed between him and the twins who had so long been lost. In consequence
of the discovery of their origin, and the right to the throne that was their father's, they
arose against their unworthy uncle, and with the aid of their followers, put him to death and
placed Numitor in supreme authority, where he rightfully belonged. The twins had become attached
to the place in which they had spent their youth, and preferred to live there rather than to
go to Alba with their royal grandfather. He therefore granted to them that portion of his possessions,
and there they determined to found a city.

Thus we have the origin of the Roman people. Of course, he swore me to secrecy, and I was foolish
enough to give him my promise. I got the key to the bowling alley from the ring in Dan's closet,
and two or three times went with him at night after you all were asleep."

"I know you did," said Tom.

"How could you know it--has the Marquis--?"

"No, Dan and I saw you. I woke one night, happened to look out of
the window and saw the Marquis going into the bowling alley.

It was moonlight, you know. I woke Dan, we slipped down stairs, saw a light in the Oak Parlour,
peeped through the shutters and saw you and the old Marquis at the cabinet."

"When was this?" asked Nancy.

"The night--before our walk in the woods."

"And you did not tell me! What could you think I was doing?"

"I didn't know. How could I know? It was that which first made me suspicious of the Marquis. We
made up our minds to watch. But that day in the woods--well, I forgot everything in the world
but just that I was in love with you."

"Ah!" exclaimed Nancy, flushing.

"But tell me," asked Tom, "What did you find in the cabinet?"

"We found nothing. I began to think that the Marquis had deceived me. I didn't know what to
believe. I didn't know what to do. I threatened each day to tell Dan. And then came our walk.
When we came in that night--do you recall?--we found the Marquis sitting in the bar before
the fire, and I went over and spoke to him."

"Yes, I remember," Tom answered.

"I had made up my mind that I must take you all,--mother and you and Dan,--into my confidence.
I told him so. He begged me to wait until the next day and promised that he would tell you then
himself. I was beginning to think he might be a little crazy, that there was no hidden treasure."

"I'm
sure there is," said Tom. "There was another half of that torn scrap of paper, hidden in one
of the cubby-holes of the old cabinet. Dan found it. It's the directions, sure enough, for finding
the treasure."

"Ah! but what has it all to do with me?"

"I don't know; something I fancy, or the Marquis would not have told you as much as he did. But here
is the other half. You can tell whether it is part of the paper he showed you."

He drew from his pocket the yellowed bit of paper and spread it on
the table before them.

Nance bent over and examined it closely.

"I believe it is the other half. See, it is signed ...'ancois de Boisdhyver'. I remember perfectly
that the signature of the other was missing, except for the letters 'F-r-' It is, it must be, Francois
de Boisdhyver, who, the Marquis says, was my father. Then look! here are the words 'tresor', 'bijoux
et monaie'. I remember in the other there were phrases that seemed to go with these--'tresor cache'
'lingots d'or'. Ah! do you suppose there really is a fortune hidden away in the Inn all these
years?"

"Yes, I think so," said Tom. "And I feel certain you have some claim to it, or they wouldn't have
made such an effort to involve you in their plot. But, please, Nance, tell me the rest. You
got to the night of your disappearance."

"It was a horror--that night!" exclaimed Nancy. "It must have been about twelve that the Marquis
came and tapped at my door. For some reason I was restless and had not gone to bed. I slipped
out into the hall with him and we came in here to talk. He begged me to make one more expedition
with him to the Oak Parlour. But I refused--I insisted that I must tell Dan. Suddenly, Tom,
without the slightest warning, I felt my arms pinioned from behind, and before I could scream,
the Marquis himself had thrust a handkerchief in my mouth, and I was gagged and bound. Everything
was done so quickly, so noiselessly, that not a soul in the house could have heard. They carried
me out of the Inn and into the avenue of maples. From there on I was forced to walk. We went
to the beach. I was put into a small boat and rowed out to the schooner, and there they locked
me up in the little cabin in which you found me."

"What time did you say it was?" asked Tom.

"About twelve--after midnight, perhaps; I don't know for sure. The Marquis went to the beach
with us and pretended to assure me that I was in no danger; that I would be released in good time,
and that he would see me again. As a matter of fact for three days I have seen no one but Captain
Bonhomme. He brought my meals, and was inclined to talk about anything that come into his head.
Last night he told me that Dan was also a prisoner on the Southern
Cross, if that would be of any consolation to me.

Then he said he had to go ashore and locked me up. Several times I was taken on deck for exercise,
but the captain kept close by my side."

"And you haven't seen or heard from the Marquis again?"

"No! nor do I want to see him. But, Tom, what is the meaning of it all? How are we going to rescue
Dan? What are we going to do? We can't keep the Marquis a prisoner indefinitely."

Tom gave her his own version of the last few days. He told her of what he and Dan had suspected,
of Dan's proposal to visit the House on the Dunes and his disappearance, of his own investigations
there, and his determination to play the same game with the Marquis as hostage.

"But what to do next, I confess I don't know," he continued. "At present it seems to be stale
mate. For to-night, any way, we are safe, I think, for I shall take turns in keeping guard with
Jesse and Ezra. I have the idea that to-morrow, when they realize something has happened to
the Marquis we shall hear from Madame de la Fontaine or from the
schooner.

In the morning I am going to take you and Mrs. Frost to the Red Farm for safety. I intend to fight
this thing out with that gang, whatever happens. If there is treasure, according to their own story,
it belongs to you. If I don't get a proposal from them, I shall make the offer, through Madame
de la Fontaine, of exchanging the Marquis for Dan.... But I must
go now, Nance, and relieve one of the men.

We must all get some sleep to-night, and it's already after twelve. Go to bed, sweetheart, and
try to get some rest. One of us will be within call all night, watching right there in the hall;
so don't be afraid."

"It was my wretched curiosity that got us into all this trouble."

"Not a bit of it! The trouble was all arranged by the Marquis; he was simply waiting for the schooner.
Now that I have you back again, my heart is fairly light. We shall get Dan to-morrow, I am
sure."

CHAPTER XVI

MADAME AT THE INN

In the morning the fog lifted, a bright sun shone from a cloudless sky, the marshes sparkled with
pools of melted snow and the long-promised thaw seemed definitely to have set in. Soon after
breakfast Tom sent Jesse to the Red Farm with directions for the
people there to make preparations for Mrs. Frost and Nancy, whom he
proposed to drive over himself in the course of the afternoon.

About the middle of the morning as Tom and Nancy stood on the gallery discussing the situation,
Tom drew her attention to a small boat putting off from The Southern Cross. They examined it
through the glass, and Nancy recognized the figure of Captain Bonhomme sitting amongst the stern-sheets.

"You
may depend upon it," said Tom, "he is going to the House on the Dunes to report your disappearance
to Madame de la Fontaine.

The most curious thing about this whole business to me is the mixing-up in it of such a woman
as Dan described Madame de la Fontaine to be."

"It is strange," Nancy agreed, "but from the bits of talk I've overheard, I should say that she
was the prime mover in it all."

"In a way I am rather glad of that," said Tom, "for with a woman at the head of things there
is less chance of their resorting to force to gain their ends. But the stake they are playing
for must be a big one, and already they have done enough to make me sure that we should be prepared
for anything. I shall be surprised if we don't get some communication from them to-day. The old
Marquis counts on it, or he would not keep so still. At any cost, we must get Dan back."

They talked for some time longer and were about to go in, when Nancy pointed to a horse and rider
coming down the avenue of Maples. A glance sufficed to show that the rider was a woman. Nancy
slipped inside to escape observation, while Tom waited on the gallery to receive the visitor.

As
the lady drew rein under the Red Oak, he ran down the steps, and
helped her to dismount.

Her grace, her beauty, her manner as of the great world, made him sure that he was in the presence
of Madame de la Fontaine.

"Good morning, sir," said the lady, with a charming smile, "if I mistake not, I have the pleasure
of addressing Mr. Pembroke?"

"Yes, madam,--at you service," replied Tom.

"I am come on a strange errand, monsieur; as an ambassadress, so to
say, of those whom I fear you take to be your enemies."

"You are frank, madam. I believe that I am speaking with--?"

"Madame de la Fontaine," the lady instantly supplied. "Events have so precipitated themselves, monsieur,
that pretense and conventionality were an affectation. I am informed, you understand, of your
brilliant rescue of Mademoiselle Eloise de Boisdhyver."

"If you mean Nancy Frost by Mademoiselle Eloise de Boisdhyver, madam, your information is correct.
I gathered that you had been told of this, when I saw Captain Bonhomme make his way to the House
on the Dunes this morning."

"Ah! What eyes, monsieur!" exclaimed the lady. "But I have grown accustomed to having my privacy
examined over-curiously during the few days I have spent on your hospitable shores. Mais pardon--my
purpose in coming to the Inn at the Red Oak this morning was but to request that my name be conveyed
to Monsieur the Marquis de Boisdhyver."

"You mean, madam, that you wish to see the Marquis?"

"Yes, monsieur, if you will be so good as to allow me to do so."

"I am sorry," Tom rejoined, "that I must disappoint you. Circumstances over which the Marquis
has no control will deprive him of the pleasure of seeing you this morning."

"Ah!" exclaimed Madame de la Fontaine, "I was right then. Monsieur le Marquis is, shall we
say, in confinement?"

"As you please, madam; as safe, for the time, as is my friend Dan Frost."

"Eh bien, monsieur! It is that you have--do you not say?--turned the tables upon us?"

"Precisely, madam," assented Tom.

"And you will not permit me even a word--ever so little a word--with my poor friend?" murmured
Madame de la Fontaine plaintively.

"Again I am sorry to refuse you, madam; but--not even a little word."

"So!
Mais oui, I am not greatly surprised. I was assured last night...."

"When
you did not see the signals?" suggested Tom quickly.

"When I did
not see the signals," repeated the lady, with a glance of the briefest
enquiry, "I was assured that something had befallen Monsieur le Marquis.
Mais vraiment, monsieur, you do us much dishonour in assuming a wicked
conspiracy on our parts. The Marquis is my friend; he is also the
friend of the charming Mademoiselle. All that we wish, all that we
would do is as much in her interest as in his own. But it is impossible
that my old friend shall remain in confinement. On what condition,
monsieur, will you release the Marquis de Boisdhyver?"

"On the condition,
naturally, that my friend Dan Frost is released from the Southern
Cross."

"Ah! Is it that you are quite sure that Monsieur Frost is
confined on the ship?"

"Quite sure, Madame de la Fontaine. I was
on board The Southern Cross last night."

"Yes, I know it; and I congratulate
you upon your extraordinary success. Very well, then, I accept your
condition. Monsieur Dan Frost returns; Monsieur le Marquis is released.
And now you will perhaps have the kindness--"

"No, madame; in this
affair the Marquis and his friends have been the aggressors. I cannot
consent that you should hold any communication with the Marquis till
Dan returns free and unharmed to the Inn."

"And what assurance then
shall I have that the Marquis will be released?"

"None, madame, but
my word of honour."

"Pardon, monsieur. I accept your terms. Monsieur
Frost shall return. The instant he enters the Inn at the Red Oak,
you promise that the Marquis de Boisdhyver be released and that he
be given this note from me?"

"Certainly, madam."

The lady took a
sealed note from the pocket of her habit and handed it to Tom. "There
remains, monsieur," she murmured, "but to bid you good-day. If you
will be so kind--"

She ran lightly down the steps, and held up her
foot for Tom to assist her into the saddle.

"Your friend will return
tout de suite, monsieur," she cried gayly, as she drew in the rein.

"And
we shall have the pleasure of seeing you again?" asked Tom.

"Ah!
who can tell?" She touched the horse lightly with her whip, inclined
her head, and soon disappeared down the avenue of maples.

Some time
later Nancy and Tom watched her cantering across the beach. She waved
her handkerchief as a signal to the schooner; a small boat put ashore,
and she was rowed out to The Southern Cross.

"Once Dan is back, and
we get rid of the old Marquis," said Tom, "I shall breathe considerably
easier."

"I can't believe they will give the game up so easily,"
was Nancy's reply. "Seizing the Marquis, Tom, was a check, not a mate."

Out
on the schooner in the Cove, Madame de la Fontaine and Dan Frost were
once more talking together.

"Dear boy," said the lady. "I cannot
do that which I promised. It is impossible that your sister shall
make to you the request to give me the torn scrap of paper, for the
reason that Mademoiselle Nancy has chosen to disappear. Have no fear,
monsieur, for I have good reason to believe she has returned to the
Inn at the Red Oak. Our schemes, mon ami, have failed. You are no
longer a prisoner, you are free. And this is good-bye. I abandon our
mission. I leave the House on the Dunes to-day; to-morrow I return
to France."

"But, madame, you bewilder me," exclaimed Dan. "Why should
you go; why should we not all join forces, hunt for the treasure together,
if there is a treasure; why this division of interests?"

"C'est impossible!"
she exclaimed impetuously. "Monsieur le Marquis will not consent.
He is treated with intolerable rudeness by your friend Mr. Pembroke.
He will not accept that which I propose. And I--vraiment, I desire
no longer to work against you. No, monsieur Dan, tout est fini, we
must say good-bye."

She held out her hands and Dan impetuously seized
them. Then, suddenly, she was in his arms and his lips were seeking
hers.

"I cannot let you go," he cried hoarsely. "I cannot say good-bye."

For
a moment he held her, but soon, almost brusquely, she repulsed him.
"C'est folie, mon ami, folie! We lose our heads, we lose our hearts."

"But
I love you," cried Dan. "You must believe it; will you believe it
if I give you the paper?"

"No, no!--What!--you wish to give to me
the secret of the Oak Parlour?--"

"Aye, to entrust to you my life,
my soul, my honour."

"Ah, but you must go," she murmured tensely.

"Captain
Bonhomme is returning. It is better that he knows of your release
after you are gone. C'est vrai, my friend, that I risk not a little
in your behalf. Go now, quickly ... No! No!" she protested, as she
drew away from him. "I tell you, C'est folie,--madness and folly.
You do not know me. Go now, while there is time!"

"But you will see
me again?" insisted Dan. "Promise me that; or, on my honour, I refuse
to leave. Do with me what you will, but--"

"Listen!" she whispered
hurriedly. "I shall meet you to-night at ten o'clock, at the end of
the avenue of maples near to your inn; you know the place? Bien! Bring
me the paper there, to prove that you trust me. And I--mais non, I
implore you--go quickly!"

Dan turned at last and opened the door.
Madame de la Fontaine called sharply to the waiting Jean, and he,
motioning to Dan to follow him, led the way on deck. In a moment they
were in a little boat heading for the shore. The afternoon sun was
bright in the western sky. The Southern Cross rode serenely at anchor,
and from her deck, Madame de la Fontaine was waving him good-bye.

CHAPTER
XVII

THE MARQUIS LEAVES THE INN

By the time Dan was put ashore on
the beach of the Cove it was afternoon. During the short row from
the schooner he had been unable to exchange remarks with the surly
Jean, for that individual's only response to his repeated efforts,
was a surly "Je ne parle pas anglais," which seemed to answer as a
general formula to the conspirators. He gave up at last in disgust,
and waited impatiently for the small boat to be beached, distrustful
lest at the last moment some fresh trick be played upon him. One story is that in the year 362 B.C.--that is,
some four centuries after the battle we have just related, the earth in the forum gave way,
and all efforts to fill it proving unsuccessful, the oracles were appealed to. They replied
that the spot could not be made firm until that on which Rome's greatness was based had been
cast into the chasm, but that then the state would prosper. In the midst of the doubting that
followed this announcement, the gallant youth, Curtius, came forward, declaring that the city
had no greater treasure than a brave citizen in arms, upon which he immediately leaped into
the abyss with his horse. Thereupon the earth closed over the sacrifice. This is the story
that Livy prefers. The third is simply to the effect that while one Curtius was consul, in
the year 445 B.C., the earth at the spot was struck by lightning, and was afterwards ceremoniously
enclosed by him at the command of the senate. This is a good example of the sort of myth that
the learned call ætiological--that is, myths that have grown up to account for certain facts
or customs. The story of the carrying off of the Sabine women is one of this kind, for it seems
to have originated in a desire to account for certain incidents in the marriage ceremonies
of the Romans. We cannot believe either, though it is reasonable to suppose that some event
occurred which was the basis of the tradition told in connection with the history of different
periods. We shall find that, in the year 390, all the records of Roman history were destroyed
by certain barbarians who burned the city, and that therefore we have tradition only upon which
to base the history before that date. We may reasonably believe, however, that at some time
the marshy ground in the forum gave way, as ground often does, and that there was difficulty
in filling up the chasm. A grand opportunity was thus offered for a good story-teller to build
up a romance, or to touch up the early history with an interesting tale of heroism. The temptation
to do this would have been very strong to an imaginative writer.

The Sabines gained the first advantage in the present struggle, and it seemed as though fortune
was about to desert the Romans, when Romulus commended their cause to Jupiter in a prayer in
which he vowed to erect an altar to him as Jupiter Stator--that is, "Stayer," if he would stay
the flight of the Romans. The strife was then begun with new vigor, and in the midst of the
din and carnage the Sabine women, who had by this time become attached to their husbands, rushed
between the fierce men and urged them not to make them widows or fatherless, which was the
sad alternative presented to them. "Make us not twice captives!" they exclaimed. Their appeal
resulted in peace, and the two peoples agreed to form one nation, the ruler of which should
be alternately a Roman and a Sabine, though at first Romulus and Tatius ruled jointly. The
women became thus dearer to the whole community, and the feast called Matronalia was established
in their honor, when wives received presents from their husbands and girls from their lovers.

Romulus continued to live on the Palatine among the Romans, and Tatius on the Quirinal, where
the Sabines also lived. Each people adopted some of the fashions and customs of the other,
and they all met for the transaction of business in the Forum Romanum, which was in the valley
of the Curtian Lake, between the hills. For a time this arrangement was carried on in peace,
and the united nation grew in numbers and power. After five years, however, Tatius was slain
by some of the inhabitants of Lavinium, and Romulus was left sole ruler until his death.

Under him the nation grew still more rapidly, and others were made subject to it, all of which
good fortune was attributed to his prowess and skill. Romulus became after a while somewhat
arrogant. He dressed in scarlet, received his people lying on a couch of state, and surrounded
himself with a body of young soldiers called Celeres, from the swiftness with which they executed
his orders. It was a suspicious fact that all at once, at a time when the people had become
dissatisfied with his actions, Romulus disappeared (717 B.C.). Like Evander, he went, no one
knew where, though one of his friends presented himself in the forum and assured the people
under oath that one day, as he was going along the road, he met Romulus coming toward him,
dressed in shining armor, and looking comelier than ever. Proculus, for that was the friend's
name, was struck with awe and filled with religious dread, but asked the king why he had left
the people to bereavement, endless sorrow, and wicked surmises, for it had been rumored that
the senators had made away with him. Romulus replied that it pleased the gods that, after having
built a city destined to be the greatest in the world for empire and glory, he should return
to heaven, but that Proculus might tell the Romans that they would attain the height of power
by exercising temperance and fortitude, in which effort he would sustain them and remain their
propitious god Quirinus. An altar was accordingly erected to the king's honor, and a festival
called the Quirinalia was annually celebrated on the seventeenth of February, the day on which
he is said to have been received into the number of the gods.

Romulus left the people organized into two great divisions, Patricians and Clients: the former
being the Populus Romanus, or Roman People, and possessing the only political rights; and the
others being entirely dependent upon them. The Patricians were divided into three tribes—the
Romans (Ramnes), the Etruscans (Luceres), and the Sabines (Tities, from Tatius). Another body,
not yet organized, called Plebeians, or Plebs, was composed of inhabitants of conquered towns
and refugees. These, though not slaves, had no political rights. Each tribe was divided into
ten Curiae, and the thirty Curiae composed the Comitia Curiata, which was the sovereign assembly
of the Patricians, authorized to choose the king and to decide all cases affecting the lives
of the citizens. A number of men of mature age, known as the Patres, composed the Senate, which
Romulus formed to assist him in the government. This body consisted of one hundred members
until the union with the Sabines, when it was doubled, the Etruscans not being represented
until a later time. The army was called a Legion, and was composed of a contribution of a thousand
foot-soldiers and a hundred cavalry (Equites, Knights) from each tribe.

A year passed after the death of Romulus before another king was chosen, and the people complained
that they had a hundred sovereigns instead of one, because the senate governed, and that not
always with justness. It was finally agreed that the Romans should choose a king, but that
he should be a Sabine. The choice fell upon Numa Pompilius, a man learned in all laws, human
and divine, and two ambassadors were accordingly sent to him at his home at Cures, to offer
the kingdom to him. The ambassadors were politely received by the good man, but he assured
them that he did not wish to change his condition; that every alteration in life is dangerous
to a man; that madness only could induce one who needed nothing to quit the life to which he
was accustomed; that he, a man of peace, was not fitted to direct a people whose progress had
been gained by war; and that he feared that he might prove a laughing-stock to the people if
he were to go about teaching them the worship of the gods and the offices of peace when they
wanted a king to lead them to war. The more he declined, the more the people wished him to
accept, and at last his father argued with him that a martial people needed one who should
teach them moderation and religion; that he ought to recognize the fact that the gods were
calling him to a large sphere of usefulness. These arguments proved sufficient, and Numa accepted
the crown. After making the appropriate offerings to the gods, he set out for Rome, and was
met by the populace coming forth to receive him with joyful acclamations. Sacrifices were offered
in the temples, and with impressive ceremonies the new authority was joyfully entrusted to
him (715 B.C.).

As Romulus had given the Romans their warlike customs, so now Numa gave them the ceremonial
laws of religion; but before entering upon this work, he divided among the people the public
lands that Romulus had added to the property of the city by his conquests, by this movement
showing that he was possessed of worldly as well as of heavenly wisdom. He next instituted
the worship of the god Terminus, who seems to have been simply Jupiter in the capacity of guardian
of boundaries. Numa ordered all persons to mark the limits of their lands by consecrated stones,
and at these, when they celebrated the feast of Terminalia, sacrifices were to be offered of
cakes, meal, and fruits. Moses had done something like this hundreds of years before, in the
land of Palestine, when he wrote in his laws: "Thou shalt not remove thy neighbor's landmark,
which they of old time have set, in thine inheritance which thou shalt inherit, in the land
that the Lord thy God giveth thee." He had impressed it upon the people, repeating in a solemn
religious service the words: "Cursed be he that removeth his neighbor's landmark," to which
all the people in those primitive times solemnly said "Amen!" You will find the same sentiment
repeated in the Proverbs of Solomon. When Romulus had laid out the pomoerium, he made the outline
something like a square, and called it Roma Quadrata, that is "Square Rome," but he did not
direct the landmarks of the public domain to be distinctly indicated. The consecration of the
boundaries undoubtedly made the people consider themselves more secure in their possessions,
and consequently made the state itself more stable.

In order to make the people feel more like one body and think less of the fact that they comprised
persons belonging to different nations, Numa instituted nine guilds among which the workmen
were distributed. These were the pipers, carpenters, goldsmiths, tanners, leather- workers,
dyers, potters, smiths, and one in which all other handicraftsmen were united. Thus these men
spoke of each other as members of this or that guild, instead of as Etruscans, Romans, and Sabines.

Human sacrifices were declared abolished at this time; the rites of prayer were established;
the temple of Janus was founded (which was closed in time of peace and open in time of war);
priests were ordained to conduct the public worship, the Pontifex Maximus [Footnote: Pontifex
means bridge-builder (pons, a bridge, facere, to make), and the title is said to have been
given to these magistrates because they built the wooden bridge over the Tiber, and kept it
in repair, so that sacrifices might be made on both sides of the river. The building of this
bridge is, however, ascribed to Ancus Martius at a later date, and so some think the name was
originally pompifex (pompa, a solemn procession), and meant that the officers had charge of
such celebrations.] being at the head of them, and the Flamens, Vestal Virgins, and Salii,
being subordinate. Numa pretended that he met by night a nymph named Egeria, at a grotto under
the Coelian Hill, not far from the present site of the Baths of Caracalla, and that from time
to time she gave him directions as to what rites would be acceptable to the gods. Another nymph,
whom Numa commended to the special veneration of the Romans, was named Tacita, or the silent.
This was appropriate for one of such quiet and unobtrusive manners as this good king possessed.

Romulus is said to have made the year consist of but ten months, the first being March, named
from Mars, the god whom he delighted to honor; but Numa saw that his division was faulty, and
so he added two months, making the first one January, from Janus, the god who loved civil and
social unity, whose temple he had built; and the second February, or the month of purification,
from the Latin word februa. If he had put in his extra months at some other part of the year,
he might have allowed it still to begin in the spring, as it naturally does, and we should
not be obliged to explain to every generation why the ninth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth months
are still called the seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth. [Footnote: We shall find that in the
course of time this arrangement of the year proved very faulty in its turn, and that Julius
Cæsar made another effort to reform it. In due time, after a long reign and a peaceful and
useful life, Numa died, not by disease or war, but by the natural decline of his faculties.
The people mourned for him heartily and honored him with a costly burial.

After the death of this king an interregnum followed, during which the senate ruled again,
but it was not long before the Sabines chose as king a Roman, Tullus Hostilius, grandson of
that Hostus Hostilius who had won distinction in the war with the Sabines. The new sovereign
thought that the nation was losing its noble prestige through the quietness with which it lived
among its neighbors, and therefore he embraced every opportunity to stir up war with the surrounding
peoples, and success followed his campaigns. The peasants between Rome and Alba [Footnote:
Alba became the chief of a league of thirty Latin cities, lying in the southern part of the
great basin through which the Tiber finds its way to the sea, between Etruria and Campania.]
afforded him the first pretext, by plundering each other's lands. The Albans were ready to
settle the difficulty in a peaceful manner, but Tullus, determined upon aggrandizement, refused
all overtures. It was much like a civil war, for both nations were of Trojan origin, according
to the traditions. The Albans pitched their tents within five miles of Rome, and built a trench
about the city. The armies were drawn up ready for battle, when the Alban leader came out and
made a speech, in which he said that as both Romans and Sabines were surrounded by strange
nations who would like to see them weakened, as they would undoubtedly be by the war, he proposed
that the question which should rule the other, ought to be decided in some less destructive way.

It happened that there were in the army of the Romans three brothers known as the Horatii,
of the same age as three others in the Alban army called the Curiatii, and it was agreed that
these six should fight in the place of the two armies. At the first clash of arms two of the
Romans fell lifeless, though every one of the Curiatii was wounded. This caused the Sabines
to exult, especially as they saw the remaining Roman apparently running away. The flight of
Horatius was, however, merely feigned, in order to separate the opposing brothers, whom he
met as they followed him, and killed in succession. A triumph [Footnote: A "triumph" was a
solemn rejoicing after a victory, and included a pompa, or procession of the general and soldiers
on foot with their plunder. Triumphs seem to have been celebrated in some style in the earliest
days of Rome. In later times they increased very much in splendor and costliness.] followed;
but it appears that a sister of Horatius, named Horatia, [Footnote: The Romans seem in one
respect to have had little ingenuity in the matter of names, though generally they had too
many of them, and formed that of a woman from the name of a man by simply changing the end
of it from the masculine form to the feminine.] was to have married one of the Curiatii, and
when she met her victorious brother bearing as his plunder the military robe of her lover that
she had wrought with her own hands, she tore her hair and uttered bitter exclamations. Horatius
in his anger and impatience thrust her through with his sword, saying: "So perish every Roman
woman who shall mourn an enemy?" For this act, the victorious young man was condemned to death,
but he appealed to the people, and they mitigated his sentence in consequence of his services
to the state.

Another war followed, with the Etruscans this time, and the Albans not behaving like true allies,
their city was demolished and its inhabitants removed to Rome, where they were assigned to
the Coelian Hill. Some of the more noble among them were enrolled among the Patricians, and
the others were added to the Plebs, who then became for the first time an organic part of the
social body, though not belonging to the Populus Romanus (or Roman People), so called. On another
occasion Tullus made war upon the Sabines and conquered them, but finally he offended the gods,
and in spite of the fact that he bethought himself of the good Numa and began to follow his
example, Jupiter smote him with a thunder-bolt and destroyed him and his house.

Again an interregnum followed, and again a king was chosen, this time Ancus Marcius, a Sabine,
grandson of the good Numa, a man who strove to emulate the virtues of his ancestor. It is to
be noticed that the four kings of Rome thus far are of two classes, the warlike and peaceful
alternating in the legends. The neighbors expected that Ancus would not be a forceful king,
and some of them determined to take advantage of his supposed weakness. He set himself to repair
the neglected religion, putting up tables in the forum on which were written the ceremonial
law, so that all might know its demands, and seeking to lead the people to worship the gods
in the right spirit. Ancus seems to have united with his religious character, however, a proper
regard for the rights of the nation, and when the Latins who lived on the river Anio, made
incursions into his domain, thinking that he would not notice it, in the ardor of his services
at the temples and altars, he entered upon a vigorous and successful campaign, conquering several
cities and removing their inhabitants, giving them homes on the Aventine Hill, thus increasing
the lands that could be divided among the Romans and adding to the number of the Plebeians. Tom
drew another glass of rum, which Manners eagerly, if rashly, devoured. Then the liveryman wrapped
himself in his furs, bade them good-night, and started out again into the storm for his drive back
to Monday Port.

All this time the old gentleman stood warming his feet and hands at the fire, watching his two
companions with quickly-shifting eyes, or glancing curiously over the great bar which the light
of the fire and the few candles but faintly illuminated.

Having barred the door, Tom turned back to the hearth.

"It is a bad night, sir."

"But yes," exclaimed the Marquis. "I think I perish. Oh! that dreary tavern at your Monday Port.
I think when I arrive there I prefer to perish. But this, this is the old Inn at the Red Oak,
is it not? And it dates, yes,--from the year 1693? The old inn, eh, by the great tree?"

"Yes, certainly," Pembroke answered; "at least, that is the date that some people claim is on
the old cornerstone. You have been here before then, sir?"

"I?" exclaimed Monsieur de Boisdhyver. "Oh, no! not I. I have heard from my friend who was here
some years ago."

"Oh, I see. And you have come far to-day?"

"From Coventry, monsieur--Monsieur--?"

"Pembroke," Tom replied, with a little start.

"Ah! yes, Monsieur Pembroke. A member of the household?"

"No--a friend."

"I make a mistake," quickly interposed the traveller, "Pardon. I am come from Coventry, Monsieur
Pembroke, in an everlasting an eternal stage, a monster of a carriage, monsieur. It is only
a few days since that I arrive from France."

"Ah, France!" exclaimed Tom, recalling that only a little while before he and Dan had been dreaming
of that magic country. And here was a person who actually lived in France, who had just come from
there, who extraordinarily chose to leave that delightful land for the Inn at the Red Oak
in mid-winter.

"France," he repeated; "all my life, sir, I have been longing to go there."

"So?" said the Marquis, raising his white eyebrows with interest. "You love ma belle patrie,
eh? Qui Sait?--you will perhaps some day go there. You have interests, friends in my country?"

"No,
none," Tom answered. "I wish I had.

You come from Paris, sir?"

"Mais oui."

For some time they chatted in such fashion, the Marquis answering Tom's many questions with
characteristic French politeness, but turning ever and anon a pathetic glance toward the door
through which Dan and Nancy had disappeared. It was with undisguised satisfaction that he greeted
young Frost when he returned to announce that supper was ready.

"I famish!" the old gentleman exclaimed. "I have dined to-day on a
biscuit and a glass of water."

They found the kitchen table amply spread with food,--cold meats, hot eggs and coffee, and a
bottle of port. Monsieur de Boisdhyver ate heartily and drank his wine with relish, gracefully
toasting Nancy as he did so. When his meal was finished, he begged with many excuses to be shown
to his bedroom; and indeed his fatigue was evident. Dan saw him to the great south chamber,
carrying a pair of lighted candles before. He made sure that all had been done that sulky
sleepy maids could be induced to do, and then left him to make ready for the night.

Lights were extinguished in the parlour and the bar, the fires were banked, and the two young
men went up to Dan's own room.

There on either side of the warm hearth, had been drawn two great four-posted beds, and it
took the lads but a moment to tumble into them.

"It's queer," said Dan, as he pulled the comfort snugly about his shoulders, calling to Tom across
the way; "it's queer--the old chap evidently means to stay awhile. What does a French marquis
want in a deserted hole like this, I'd like to know? But if he pays, why the longer he stays the
better."

"I hope he does," said Tom sleepily. "He has a reason, I fancy, for he asked questions enough while
you were out seeing to his supper. He seems to know the place almost as well as if he had been
here before, though he said he hadn't. But, by gad, I wish you and I were snug in a little hotel
on the banks of the Seine to-night and not bothering our heads about a doddering old marquis
who hadn't sense enough to stay there."

"Wish we were," Dan replied. "Good-night," he called, realizing that his friend was too sleepy to
lie awake and discuss any longer their unexpected guest.

"Good-night," murmured Tom, and promptly drifted away into dreams of the wonderful land he had
never seen. As for Dan he lay awake a long time, wondering what could possibly have brought
the old Marquis to the deserted inn at such a time of the year and
on such a night.

CHAPTER II

THE LIONS EYE

Toward daylight the storm blew itself out, the wind swung round to the northwest, and the morning
dawned clear and cold, with a sharp breeze blowing and a bright sun shining upon a snow-clad, ice-crusted
world and a sparkling sapphire sea.

Dan had risen early and had set Jesse to clear a way across the court and down the avenue to the
road. The maids, astir by dawn, were no longer sulky but bustled about at the preparation of an unusually
good breakfast in honour of the new guest.

Mrs. Frost, who habitually lay till nine or ten o'clock behind the crimson curtains of her great
bed, had caught wind of something out of the ordinary, demanded Nancy's early assistance, and
announced her intention of breakfasting with the household.

She was fretful during the complicated process of her toilette and so hurt the feelings of her
foster-daughter, that when Dan came to take her into the breakfast
room, Nancy found an excuse for not accompanying them.

The Marquis was awaiting their appearance. He stood with his back-to the fire, a spruce and carefully-dressed
little figure, passing remarks upon the weather with young Pembroke, who leaned his graceful length
against the mantelpiece.

The noble traveller was presented with due ceremony to Mrs. Frost, who greeted him with old-world
courtesy. She had had, indeed, considerably more association with distinguished personages
than had most of the dames of the neighbouring farms who considered themselves her social superiors.
She welcomed Monsieur de Boisdhyver graciously, enquiring with interest of his journey and with
solicitude as to his rest during the night.

She received with satisfaction his rapturous compliments on the comforts that had been provided
him, on the beauty of the surrounding country upon which he had looked from the windows of
his chamber, and on her own condescension in vouchsafing to breakfast with them. She was delighted
that he should find the Inn at the Red Oak so much to his taste that he proposed to stay with
them indefinitely.

They were soon seated at the breakfast-table and had addressed themselves to the various good things
that black Deborah had provided. The native Johnny cakes, made of meal ground by their own windmill,
the Marquis professed to find particularly tempting.

Despite Mrs. Frost's questions, despite his own voluble replies, Monsieur de Boisdhyver gave
no hint, that there was any deeper reason for his seeking exile at the Inn of the Red Oak than
that he desired rest and quiet and had been assured that he would find them there. And who had
so complimented their simple abode of hospitality?

"Ah, madame," he murmured, lifting his tiny hands, "so many!"

"But I fear, monsieur," replied his hostess, "that you, who are accustomed to the luxuries
of a splendid city like Paris, to so many things of which we read, will find little to interest and amuse
you in our remote countryside."

"As for interest, madame," the Marquis protested, "there are the beauties
of nature, your so delightful household, my few books, my writing;
and for amusement, I have my violin;--I so love to play.

You will not mind?--perhaps, enjoy it?"

"Indeed yes," said Mrs. Frost. "Dan, too, is a fiddler after a fashion; and as for Nancy, she has a
passion for music, and dreams away many an evening while my son plays his old tunes."

"Ah, yes," said the Marquis, "Mademoiselle Nancy, I have not the pleasure to see her this morning?"

"No,"
replied Mrs. Frost, flushing a trifle at the recollection of why Nancy was not present, "she
is somewhat indisposed--a mere trifle. You will see her later in the day. But, monsieur, you
should have come to us in the spring or the summer, for then the
country is truly beautiful; now, with these snow-bound roads, when
not even the stagecoach passes, we are indeed lonely and remote."

"It is that," insisted the Marquis, "which so charms me. When one is old and when one has lived
a life too occupied, it is this peace, this quiet, this remoteness one desires. To walk a
little, to sit by your so marvellously warm fires, to look upon your beautiful country, cest
bou!"

He held her for a moment with his piercing little eyes, a faint smile upon his lips, as though
to say that it was impossible he should be convinced that he had not found precisely what he
was seeking, and insisting, as it were, that his hostess take his words as the compliment they
were designed to be.

Before she had time to reply, he had turned to Dan. "What a fine harbour you have, Monsieur Frost,"
he said, pointing through the window toward the Cove, separated from the river and the sea by
the great curve of Strathsey Neck, its blue waters sparkling now in the light of the morning sun.

"Yes,"
replied Dan, glancing out upon the well-known shoreline, "it is a good harbour, though nothing,
of course, to compare with a Port. But it's seldom that we see a ship at anchor here, now."

"There is, however," inquired the Marquis with interest, "anchorage
for a vessel, a large vessel?"

"Yes, indeed," Tom interrupted, "in the old days when my father had his ships plying between Havana
and the Port, he would often have them anchor in the Cove for convenience in lading them with
corn from the farm."

"And they were large ships?"

"Full-rigged, sir; many of 'em, and drawing eight feet at least."

"Eh bien! And the old Inn, madame, it dates, your son tells me, from 1693?"

"We think so, sir, though I have no positive knowledge of its existence
before 1750.

My husband purchased the place in '94, and it had then been a hostelry for some years, certainly
from the middle of the century. But we have made many additions.

Danny dear, perhaps it will interest the Marquis if you should take him over the house. We are
proud of our old inn, sir."

"And with reason, madame. If monsieur will, I shall be charmed."

"I will leave you then with my son. Give me your arm, Dan, to the parlour. Unfortunately, Monsieur
le Marquis, affliction has crippled me and I spend the day in my chair in the blue parlour. I
shall be so pleased, if you will come and chat with me. Tommy, you will be staying to dinner
with us?"

"Thank you, Mrs. Frost, but I must get to the Port for the day. Mother and Father are leaving by
the afternoon stage, if it gets through. They are going to spend the winter in Coventry. But
I shall be back to-night as I have promised Dan to spend that time with him."

"We shall be glad to have you, as you know."

Soon after Mrs. Frost had left the breakfast-room and Tom had started forth with horse and
sleigh, Dan returned. The Marquis promptly reminded him of the suggestion that he should be taken
over the Inn. It seemed to Dan an uninteresting way to entertain his guest and the morning was
a busy one.

However, he promised to be ready at eleven o'clock to show the Marquis all there was in the
old house.

As Dan went about the offices and stables, performing himself much of the work that in prosperous
times fell to grooms and hostlers, he found himself thinking about his new guest. Dan knew
enough of French history to be aware there were frequent occasions in France when partisans of the
various factions, royalist, imperialist, or republican, found it best to expatriate themselves.
He knew that in times past many of the most distinguished exiles had found asylum in America.
But at the present, he understood, King Louis Philippe, was reigning
quietly at the Tuileries and, moreover, the Marquis de Boisdhyver,
mysterious as he was, did not suggest the political adventurer of
whom Dan as a boy had heard his parents tell such extraordinary tales.

In the few years immediately after the final fall of the great Bonaparte
there had been an influx of imperialistic supporters in America, some
of whom had even found their way to Monday Port and Deal.

One of these, Dan remembered, had stayed for some months in '14 or '15 at the Inn at the Red
Oak, and it was he whom Tom had recalled the night before as having told them stories of his
adventurous exploits in the wars of the Little Corporal. But it was too long after Napoleon's
fall to connect his present guest with the imperial exiles. He could imagine no ulterior reason for
the Marquis's coming and was inclined to put it down as the caprice of an old restless gentleman
who had a genuine mania for solitude. Of solitude, certainly, he was apt to get his fill at
the Inn at the Red Oak.

At eleven o'clock he returned to keep his appointment. He found the Marquis established at a
small table in the bar by an east window, from which was obtained a view of the Cove, of the
sand-dunes along the Neck, and of the open sea beyond.

A writing-desk was on the table, ink and quills had been provided, a number of books and papers
were strewn about, and Monsieur de Boisdhyver was apparently busy with his correspondence.

"Enchanted"
he exclaimed, as he pulled out a great gold watch. "Punctual. I find another virtue, monsieur,
in a character to which I have already had so much reason to pay my compliments. I trust I do
not trespass upon your more important duties." As he spoke, he rapidly swept the papers into
the writing-desk, closed and locked it, and carefully placed the tiny golden key into the pocket
of his gayly-embroidered waistcoat.

"Not at all," Dan replied courteously, "I shall be glad to show you
about.

But I fear you will find it cold and dismal, for the greater part of the house is seldom used or even
entered."

"I bring my cloak," said the Marquis. "Interest will give me warmth. What I have already seen of
the Inn at the Red Oak is so charming, that I doubt not there is much more to delight one. I imagine,
monsieur, how gay must have been this place once."

He took his great cloak from the peg near the fire where it had been
hung the night before to dry wrapped himself snugly in it; and then,
with a little bow, preceded Dan into the cold and draughty corridor
that opened from the bar into the older part of the house.

This hallway extended fifty or sixty feet to the north wall of the main part of the inn whence
a large window at the turn of a flight of stairs gave light. On the right, extending the same
distance as the hall itself, was a great room known as the Red Drawing-room, into which Dan first
showed the Marquis. This room had not been used since father's death four or five years before, and
for a long time previous to that only on the rare occasions when a county gathering of some
sort was held at the inn. It had been furnished in good taste and style in colonial days, but was
now dilapidated and musty. The heavy red damask curtains were drawn before the windows, and
the room was dark and cheerless. Dan admitted the dazzling light of the sun; but the Marquis
only shivered and seemed anxious to pass quickly on.

"You see, sir," observed the young landlord, "it is dismal enough."

"Mais oui--mais oui," exclaimed the Marquis.

At the foot of the stairway the corridor turned at right angles and ran north. On either side
opened a number of chambers in like conditions of disrepair, which had been used as bedrooms
in the palmy days of the hostelry. This corridor ended at the bowling-alley, where as children
Tom and Dan had loved to play. Half-way to the entrance to the bowling-alley
a third hallway branched off to the right, leading to a similar set
of chambers. Into all these they entered, the Marquis examining each
with quick glances, dismissing them with the briefest interest and
the most obvious comment.

Dan saved the piece-de-resistance till
last. This was a little room entered from the second corridor just
at the turn--the only room indeed, as he truthfully said, that merited
a visit.

"This," he explained, "we call the Oak Parlour. It is the
only room on this floor worth showing you. My father brought the wainscoting
from an old English country-house in Dorsetshire. My father's people
were Torries, sir, and kept up their connection with the old country."

It
was a delightful room into which Dan now admitted the light of day,
drawing aside the heavy green curtains from the eastern windows. It
was wainscoted from floor to cornice in old black English oak, curiously
and elaborately carved, and divided into long narrow panels. The ceiling,
of similar materials and alike elaborately decorated, was supported
by heavy transverse beams that seemed solid and strong enough to support
the roof of a cathedral. On one side two windows opened upon the gallery
and court and looked out upon the Cove, on the other side stood a
cabinet. It was the most striking piece of furniture in the room,
of enormous dimensions and beautifully carved on the doors of the
cupboards below and on the top-pieces between the mirrors were lion's
heads of almost life-size. Opposite the heavy door, by which they
had entered, was a large fireplace, containing a pair of elaborately
ornamented brass and irons. There was not otherwise a great deal of
furniture,--two or three tables, some chairs, a deep window-seat,
a writing-desk of French design; but all, except this last, in keeping
with the character of the room, and all brought across the seas from
the old Dorsetshire mansion, from which Peter Frost had obtained the
interior.

"Charmant!" exclaimed the Marquis. "You have a jewel, mon
ami; a bit of old England or of old France in the heart of America;
a room one finds not elsewhere in the States. It is a creation superbe."

With
enthusiastic interest he moved about, touching each article of furniture,
examining with care the two of three old English landscapes that had
been let into panels on the west side of the room, pausing in ecstacies
before the great cabinet and standing before the fireplace as if he
were warming his hands at that generous hearth.

"Ah, Monsieur Frost,
could I but write, read, dream here...!"

"I fear that would be impossible,
sir," replied Dan. "It is difficult to heat this portion of the house;
and in fact, we never use it."

"Helas!" exclaimed the Marquis, "those
things which allure us in this world are so often impossible. Perhaps
in the spring, in the summer, when there is no longer the necessity
of the fire, you will permit me."

"It may be, monsieur," Dan replied,
"that long before the summer comes you will have left us."

"Mais
non!" cried M. de Boisdhyver. "Every hour that I stay but proves to
me how long you will have to endure my company."

Somewhat ungraciously,
it seemed, young Frost made no reply to this pleasantry; for already
he was impatient to be gone. Although the room was intensely cold
and uncomfortable, still his guest lingered, standing before the massive
cabinet, exclaiming upon the exquisiteness of the workmanship, and
every now and then running his dainty fingers along the carving of
its front. As Dan stood waiting for the Marquis to leave, he chanced
to glance through the window to the court without, and saw Jesse starting
out in the sleigh. As he had given him no such order he ran quickly
to the window, rapped vigourously and then, excusing himself to the
Marquis, hurried out to ask Jesse to explain his errand.

The Marquis
de Boisdhyver stood for a moment, as Dan left him, motionless in front
of the cabinet. His face was bright with surprise and delight, his
eyes alert with interest and cunning. After a moment's hesitation
he stole cautiously to the window, and seeing Frost was engaged in
conversation with Jesse, he sprang back with quick steps to the cabinet.
He hastily ran the tips of his fingers along the beveled edges of
the wide shelf from end to end several times, each time the expression
of alertness deepening into one of disappointment. He stopped for
a moment and listened. All was quiet. Again with quick motions he
felt beneath the edges. Suddenly his eyes brightened and he breathed
quickly; his sensitive fingers had detected a slight unevenness in
the smooth woodwork. Again he paused and listened, and then pressed
heavily until he heard a slight click. He glanced up, as directly
in front of him the eye of one of the carved wooden lion's heads on
the front of the board winked and slowly raised, revealing a small
aperture. With a look of satisfaction, the Marquis thrust his fingers
into the tiny opening and drew forth a bit of tightly folded yellow
paper; he glanced at it for an instant and thrust it quickly into
the pocket of his waistcoat. Then he lowered the lid of the lion's
eye. There was a slight click again; and he turned, just as Dan reappeared
in the doorway.

"Excuse my leaving you so abruptly," said Frost,
"but I saw Jesse going off with the sleigh, and as I had given him
no orders, I wanted to know where he was going. But it was all right.
Are you ready, sir? I am afraid if we stay much longer you will catch
cold." This last remark was added as the Marquis politely smothered
a sneeze with his flimsy lace handkerchief.

"C'est bien, monsieur.
I fear I have taken a little cold. Perhaps it would be just as well
if we explore no further to-day."

"If you prefer, sir," answered
Dan, holding the door open for his guest to go out. Monsieur de Boisdhyver
turned and surveyed the Oak Parlour once more before he left it. "Ah!"
he exclaimed, "this so charming room--it is of a perfection! Dorsetshire,
you say? ... To me it would seem French." They walked back rapidly
along the dark cold corridors to the bar. All the way the Marquis,
wrapped tightly in his great cloak, kept the thumb of his left hand
in his waistcoat pocket, pressing securely against the paper he had
taken from the old cabinet in the Oak Parlour.

CHAPTER III

THE MARQUIS
AT NIGHT

The household of the Inn at the Red Oak soon became accustomed
to the presence of their new member; indeed, he seemed to them during
those bleak winter months a most welcome addition. Except for an occasional
traveller who spent a night or a Sunday at the Inn, he was the only
guest. He was gregarious and talkative, and would frequently keep
them for an hour or so at table as he talked to them of his life in
France, and of his adventures in the exciting times through which
his country had passed during the last fifty years. He was the cadet,
he told them, of a noble family of the Vendee, the head of which,
though long faithful to the exiled Bourbons, had gone over to Napoleon
upon the establishment of the Empire. But as for himself--Marie-Anne-Timelon-Armand
de Boisdhyver--he still clung to the Imperial cause, and though now
for many years his age and infirmities had forced him to withdraw
from any part in intrigues aiming at the restoration of the Empire,
his sympathies were still keen.

Servius came to the senate-house in the midst of the harangue, and called to Lucius to know
by what audacity he had taken the royal seat, and summoned the senate during the life of the
sovereign. Lucius replied in an insulting manner, and, taking advantage of the king's age,
seized him by the middle, carried him out, and threw him down the steps to the bottom! Almost
lifeless, Servius was slain by emissaries of Lucius as he was making his way to his home on
the Esquiline Hill (B.C. 534). The royal retinue, in their fright, left the body where it fell,
and there it was when Tullia, returning from having congratulated her husband, reached the
place. Her driver, terrified at the sight, stopped, and would have avoided the king's corpse,
though the narrowness of the street made it difficult; but the insane daughter ordered him
to drive on, and stained and sprinkled herself with her father's blood, which seemed to cry
out for vengeance upon such a cruel act! The vengeance came speedily, as we shall see.

V.

HOW A PROUD KING FELL.

The new king was a tyrant. He was elected by no general consent of the people he governed;
he allowed himself to be bound by no laws; he recognized no limit to his authority; and he
surrounded himself with a body-guard for protection from the attacks of any who might wish
to take the crown from him in the way that he had snatched it from his predecessor. As soon
as possible after coming to the throne, he swept away all privilege and right that had been
conceded to the commons, commanded that there should no longer be any of those assemblages
on the occasions of festivals and sacrifices that had before tended to unite the people and
to break the monotony of their lives; he put the poor at taskwork, and mistrusted, banished,
or murdered the rich. To strengthen the position of Rome as chief of the confederates cities,
and his own position as the ruler of Rome, he gave his daughter to Octavius Mamilius of Tusculum
to wife; and to beautify the capital he warred against other peoples, and with their spoil
pushed forward the work on the great temple on the Capitoline Hill, [Footnote: This hill is
said to have received its name from the fact that as the men were preparing for the foundation
of the temple, they came upon a human head, fresh and bleeding, from which it was augured that
the spot was to become the head of the world. (Caput, a head.)] a wonderful and massy structure.

It is said that Amalthea, the mysterious sibyl of Cumæ, one day came to Tarquin with nine sealed
prophetical books (which, she said, contained the destiny of the Romans and the mode to bring
it about), that she offered to sell. The king refused, naturally unwilling to pay for things
that he could not examine; and thereupon the unreasonable being went away and destroyed three
of the volumes that she had described as of inestimable value. Soon after she returned and
offered the remaining six for the price that she had demanded for the nine. Once more, the
tyrant declined the offer, and again the aged sibyl destroyed three, and demanded the original
price for the remainder. The king's curiosity was now aroused, and he bought the three books,
upon which the prophetess vanished. The volumes were placed under the new temple on the Capitoline,
no one doubting that they actually contained precepts of the utmost importance. The wise-looking
augurs came together, peered into the rolls, and told the king and the people that they were
right, and age after age the books were appealed to for direction, though, as the people never
were permitted even to peep into the sacred cell in which they were hidden, they never could
be quite certain that the augurs who consulted them found any thing in them that they did not
put there themselves.

While Tarquinius was going on with his great works, while he was oppressing his own people
and conquering his neighbors uninterruptedly, he was suddenly startled by a dire portent. A
serpent crawled out from beneath the altar in his palace and coolly ate the flesh of the royal
sacrifice. The meaning of this appalling omen could not be allowed to remain uncertain, and
as no one in Italy was able to explain it, Tarquin sent to the oracle of Apollo at Delphi,
to ask the signification. Delphi is a place situated in the midst of the most sublime scenery
of Greece, just north of the Gulf of Corinth. Shut in on all sides by stupendous cliffs, among
which flow the inspiring waters of the Castalian Spring, thousands of feet above which frowns
the summit of Parnassus, on which Deucalion is said to have landed after the deluge, this romantic
valley makes a deep impression on the mind of the visitor, and it is not strange that at an
age when signs and wonders were looked for in every direction, it should have become the home
of a sibyl.

The king's messengers to Delphi were his two sons and a nephew named Lucius Junius Brutus,
a young man who had saved his life by taking advantage of the fact that a madman was esteemed
sacred by the Romans, and assuming an appearance of stupidity [Footnote: Brutus in Latin means
irrational, dull, stupid, brutish, which senses our word "brute" preserves.] at a time when
his tyrannical uncle had put his brother to death that he might appropriate his wealth. Upon
hearing the question of the king, the oracle said that the portent foretold the fall of Tarquin.
The sons then asked who should take his throne, and the reply was: "He who shall first kiss
his mother." Brutus had propitiated the oracle by the present of a hollow stick filled with
gold, and learned the symbolical meaning of this reply. The sons decided to allow their remaining
brother Sextus to know the answer, and to determine by lot which of them should rule; but Brutus
kept his own counsel, and on reaching home, fell upon mother earth, as by accident, and kissed
the ground, thus observing the terms of the oracle.

The prophecy now hastened to its fulfilment. As the army lay before the town of Ardea, belonging
to the Rutulians, south of Rome, a dispute arose among the sons of the king and their cousin
Collatinus, as to which had the most virtuous wife. There being nothing to keep them in camp,
the young men arose from their cups and rode to Rome, where they found the princesses at a
banquet revelling amid flowers and wine. Lucretia, the wife of Collatinus, was found at Collatia
among her maidens spinning, like the industrious wife described in the Proverbs. The evil passions
of Sextus were aroused by the beauty of his cousin's wife, and he soon found an excuse to return
to the home of Collatinus. He was hospitably entertained by Lucretia, who did not suspect the
demon that he was, and one night he entered her apartment and with vile threats overcame her.
In her terrible distress, Lucretia sent immediately for her father, Lucretius, and her husband,
Collatinus. They came, each bringing a friend, Brutus being the companion of the outraged husband.
To them, with bitter tears, Lucretia, clad in the garments of mourning and almost beside herself
with sorrow, told the story of crime, and, saying that she could not survive dishonor, plunged
a knife into her bosom and fell in the agony of shame and death! So saying, the knife was handed
to each of the others in turn, and they all took the same oath to revenge the innocent blood.
The body of Lucretia was laid in the forum of Collatia, her home, and the populace, maddened
by the sight, were easily persuaded to rise against the tyrant. A multitude was collected,
and the march began to Rome, where a like excitement was stirred up; a gathering at the forum
was addressed by Brutus, who recalled to memory not only the story of Lucretia's wrongs, but
also the horrid murder of Servius, and the blood-thirstiness of Tullia. On the Campus Martius
the citizens met and decreed that the dignity of king should be forever abolished and the Tarquins
banished. Tullia fled, followed by the curses of men and women; Sextus found his way to Gabii,
where he was slain; and the tyrant himself took refuge in Cære, a city of Etruria, the country
of his father.

There is a tradition that it had been the intention of Servius to resign the kingly honor,
and to institute in its stead the office of Consul, to be jointly held by two persons chosen
annually. There seems to be some ground for this belief, because immediately after the banishment
of the Tarquins, the republic was established with two consuls at its head. [Footnote: The
custom of confiding the chief civil authority and the command of the army to two magistrates
who were changed each year, was not given up as long as the republic endured, but towards its
end, Cinna maintained himself in the office alone for almost a year, and Pompey was appointed
sole consul to keep him from becoming dictator. The authority of consul was usurped by both
Cinna and Marius. The consuls were elected by the comitia of the centuries. They could not
appear in public without the protection of twelve lictors, who bore bundles of twigs (fasces)
and walked in single file before their chiefs.] The first to hold the highest office were Lucius
Junius Brutus and Lucius Tarquinius Collatinus, husband of Lucretia.

Some time after Tarquin had fled to Cære, he found an asylum at Tarquinii, and from that city
made an effort to stir up a conspiracy in his favor at Rome. He sent messengers ostensibly
to plead for the restoration of his property, but really for the purpose of exciting treason.
There were at Rome vicious persons who regretted that they were obliged to return to regular
ways, and there were patricians who disliked to see the plebeians again enjoying their rights.
Some of these were ready to take up the cause of the deposed tyrant. The conspirators met for
consultation in one of the dark chambers of a Roman house, and their conference was overheard.
They were brought before the consuls in the Comitium, and, to the dismay of Brutus, two of
his own sons were found among the number. With the unswerving virtue of a Roman or a Spartan,
he condemned them to death, and they were executed before his eyes. The discovery of the plot
of Tarquin put an end to his efforts to regain any foothold at Rome by peaceable methods, and
he made the appeal to arms. These plots led to the banishment of the whole Tarquinian house,
even the consul whose troubles had brought the result about being obliged to lay down his office
and leave the city. Publius Valerius was appointed in his stead. For a time he was in office
alone, and several times he was re-chosen. He was afterwards known as Poplicola, "the people's
friend," on account of certain laws that he passed, limiting the power of the aristocrats and
alleviating the condition of the plebeians. [Footnote: When Valerius was consul alone he began
to build a house for himself on the Velian Hill, and a cry was raised that he intended to make
himself king, upon which he stopped building. The people were ashamed of their conduct and
granted him land to build on. One of his laws enacted that whoever should attempt to make himself
king should be devoted to the gods, and that any one might kill him. When Valerius died he
was mourned by the matrons for ten months. See Plutarch, Poplicola.]

In pursuance of his new plans, Tarquin obtained the help of the people of Veii and Tarquinii
and marched against Rome. He was met by an army under Brutus, and a bloody battle was fought
near Arsia. Brutus was killed and the Etruscans were about to claim the victory, when, in the
night, the voice of the god Silvanus was heard saying that the killed among the Etruscans outnumbered
by one man those of the Romans. Upon this the Etruscans fled, knowing that ultimate victory
would not be theirs. This is not the way that a modern army would have acted. Valerius returned
to Rome in triumph, and the matrons mourned Brutus as the avenger of Lucretia, an entire year.

This is the time of heroes and of highly ornamented lays, and we are not surprised to find
truth covered up beneath a mass of fulsome bombast. It is related that Tarquinius now obtained
the help of Prince or Lars Porsena of Clusium in Etruria, and with a large army proceeded undisturbed
quite up to the Janiculum Hill on his march to Rome. There he found himself separated from
the object of his long struggle only by the wooden bridge. We may picture to ourselves the
city stirred to its centre by the fearful prospect before it. The bridge that had been of so
much use, that the pontifices had so carefully built and preserved, must be cut away, or all
was lost. At this critical juncture, the brave Horatius Cocles, with one on either hand, kept
the enemy at bay while willing arms swung the axes against the supports of the structure, and
when it was just ready to fall uttered a prayer to Father Tiber, plunged into the muddy torrent,
fully armed as he was, and swam to the opposite shore amid the plaudits of the rejoicing people,
as related in the ballad of Lord Macaulay. Then it was, too, that the people determined to
erect a bridge which could be more readily removed in case of necessity. Baffled in this attempt
to enter Rome, the enemy laid siege to the city, and as it was unprepared, it soon suffered
the distress of famine. Then another brave man arose, Caius Mucius by name, and offered to
go to the camp of the invaders and kill the hated king. He was able to speak the Etruscan language,
and felt that a little audacity was all that he needed to carry his mission out safely. Though
he went boldly, he killed a secretary dressed in purple, instead of his master, and was caught
and threatened with torture. Putting his right hand into the fire on the altar near by, he
held it there until it was destroyed, [Footnote: Mucius was after this called Scævola, the
left- handed.] and said that suffering had no terrors for him, nor for three hundred of his
companions who had all vowed to kill the king. The Roman writers say that, thereupon Porsena
took hostages from them and made peace. It is true that peace was made, but Rome was forced
to agree not to use iron except in cultivating the earth, and she lost ten of her thirty "regions,"
being all the territory that the kings had conquered on the west bank of the Tiber. [Footnote:
See Niebuhr's Lectures, chapter xxiv.]

Tarquin had been foiled in his attempts to regain his throne, but still he tried again, the
last time having the aid of his son-in-law, Mamilius of Tusculum. It was a momentous juncture.
The weakened Romans were to encounter the combined powers of the thirty Latin cities that had
formerly been in league with them. They needed the guidance of one strong man; but they had
decreed that there should never be a king again, and so they appointed a "dictator" with unlimited
power, for a limited time. We shall find them resorting to this expedient on other occasions
of sudden and great trouble. A fierce struggle followed at Lake Regillus, in which the Latins
were turned to flight through the intervention of Castor and Pollux, who fought at the head
of the Roman knights on foaming white steeds. There was no other quarter to which Tarquinius
could turn for help, and he therefore fled to Cumæ, where he died after a wretched old age.
A temple was erected on the field of the battle of Lake Regillus in honor of Castor and Pollux,
and thither annually on the fifteenth of July the Roman knights were wont to pass in solemn
procession, in memory of the fact that the twins had fought at the head of their columns in
the day of distress when fortune seemed to be about to desert the national cause. At this battle
Caius Marcius, a stripling descended from Ancus Marcius, afterwards known as Coriolanus, received
the oaken crown awarded to the man who should save the life of a Roman citizen, because he
struck down one of the Latins, in the presence of the commander, just as he was about to kill
a Roman soldier.

In the year 504 B.C., there was in the town of Regillum, a man of wealth and importance, who,
at the time of the war with the Sabines, had advocated peace, and as his fellow-citizens were
firmly opposed to him, left them, accompanied by a long train of followers (much as we suppose
the first Tarquin left Tarquinii), and took up his abode in Rome. The name of this man was
Atta Clausus, or perhaps Atta Claudius, but, however that may be, he was known at Rome as Appius
Claudius. He was received into the ranks of the patricians, ample lands were assigned to him
and his followers, and he became the ancestor of one of the most important Roman families,
that of Claudius, noted through a long history for its hatred of the plebeians. His line lasted
some five centuries, as we shall have occasion to observe.

VI.

THE ROMAN RUNNYMEDE.

The establishment of the republic marked an era in the history of Rome. The people had decreed,
as has been said, that for them there never should be a king, and the law was kept to the letter;
though, if they meant that supreme authority should never be held among them by one man, it
was violated many times. The story of Rome is unique in the history of the world, for it is
not the record of the life of one great country, but of a city that grew to be strong and successfully
established its authority over many countries. The most ancient and the most remote from the
sea of the cities of Latium, Rome soon became the most influential, and began to combine in
itself the traits of the peoples near it; but owing to the singular strength and rare impressiveness
of the national character, these were assimilated, and the inhabitant of the capital remained
distinctively a Roman in spite of his intimate association with men of different origin and
training.

The citizen of Rome was practical, patriotic, and faithful to obligation; he loved to be governed
by inflexible law; and it was a fundamental principle with him that the individual should be
subordinate to the state. His kings were either organizers, like Numa and Ancus Marcius, or
warriors, like Romulus and Tullus Hostilius; they either made laws, like Servius, or they enforced
them with the despotism of Tarquinius Superbus. It is difficult for us to conceive of such
a majestic power emanating from a territory so insignificant. We hardly realize that Latium
did not comprise a territory quite fifty miles by one hundred in extent, and that it was but
a hundred miles from the Mediterranean to the Adriatic. It was but a short walk from Rome to
the territory of the Etruscans, and when Tarquin found an asylum at Cære, he did not separate
himself by twenty miles from the scene of his tyranny. Ostia was scarcely more distant, and
one might have ridden before the first meal of the day to Lavinium, or Alba, or Veii, or to
Ardea, the ancient city of the Rutuli. It is important to keep these facts in mind as we read
the story of the remarkable city.

All towns were built on hills in these early days, for safety in case of war, as well as because
the valleys were insalubrious, but this is not a peculiarity of the Romans, for in New England
in the late ages of our own ancestors they were obliged to follow the same custom. On the tops
and slopes of seven hills, as they liked to remind themselves, the Romans built their city.
They were not impressive elevations, though their sides were sharp and rocky, for the loftiest
rose less than three hundred feet above the sea level. Their summits were crowned with groves
of beech trees and oaks, and in the lower lands grew osiers and other smaller varieties.

The earlier occupations of the Roman people were war and agriculture, or the pasturage of flocks
and herds. They raised grapes and made wines; they cultivated the oil olive and knew the use
of its fruit. They found copper in their soil and made a pound (as) of it their unit of value,
but it was so cheap that ten thousand ases were required to buy a war horse, though cattle
and sheep were much lower. They yoked their oxen and called the path they occupied a jugerum
(jugum, a cross-beam, or a yoke), and this in time came to be their familiar standard of square
measure, containing about two thirds of an acre. Two of these were assigned to a citizen, and
seven were the narrow limit to which only one's landed possessions were for a long time allowed
to extend. In time commerce was added to the pursuits of the men, and with it came fortunes
and improved dwellings and public buildings.

Laziness and luxury were frowned upon by the early Romans. Mistress and maid worked together
in the affairs of the household, like Lucretia and other noble women of whom history tells,
and the man did not hesitate to hold the plow, as the example of Cincinnatus will show us.
Time was precious, and thrift and economy were necessary to success. The father was the autocrat
in the household, and exercised his power with stern rigidity.

Art was backward and came from abroad; of literature there was none, long after Greece had
passed its period of heroic poetry. The dwellings of the citizens were low and insignificant,
though as time passed on they became more massive and important. The vast public structures
of the later kings were comparable to the task-work of the builders of the Egyptian pyramids,
and they still strike us with astonishment and surprise.

The religion of these strong conquerors was narrow, severe, and dreary. The early fathers worshipped
native deities only. They recognized gods everywhere--in the home, in the grove, and on the
mountain. They erected their altars on the hills; they had their Lares and Penates to watch
over their hearthstones, and their Vestal Virgins kept everlasting vigil near the never-dying
fires in the temples. With the art of Greece that made itself felt through Etruria, came also
the influence of the Grecian mythology, and Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva found a shrine on the
top of the Capitoline, where the first statue of a deity was erected. The mysterious Sibylline
Books are also a mark of the Grecian influence, coming from Cumæ, a colony of Magna Græcia.

During the period we have considered, the city passed through five distinct stages of political
organization. The government at first, as we have seen, was an elective monarchy, the electors
being a patriarchal aristocracy. After the invasion of the Sabines, there was a union with
that people, the sovereignty being held by rulers chosen from each; but it was not long before
Rome became the head of a federal state. The Tarquins established a monarchy, which rapidly
degenerated into an offensive tyranny, which aroused rebellion and at last led to the republic.
We have noted that in Greece in the year 510 B.C., the tyranny of the family of Pisistratus
was likewise overturned.

During all these changes, the original aristocrats and their descendants firmly held their
position as the Populus Romanus, the Roman People, insisting that every one else must belong
to an inferior order, and, as no body of men is willing to be condemned to a hopelessly subordinate
position in a state, there was a perpetual antagonism between the patricians and the plebeians,
between the aristocracy and the commonalty. This led to a temporary change under Servius Tullius,
when property took the place of pedigree in establishing a man's rank and influence; but, owing
to the peculiar method of voting adopted, the power of the commons was not greatly increased.
However, they had made their influence felt, and were encouraged. The overturning of the scheme
by Tarquin favored a union of the two orders for the punishment of that tyrant, and they combined;
but it was only for a time. When the danger had been removed, the tie was found broken and
the antagonism rather increased, so that the subsequent history for five generations, though
exceedingly interesting, is largely a record of the struggles of the commons for relief from
the burdens laid upon them by the aristocrats.

The father passed down to his son the story of the oppression of the patricians, and the son
told the same sad narrative to his offspring. The mother mourned with her daughter over the
sufferings brought upon them by the rich, for whom their poor father and brothers were obliged
to fight the battles while they were not allowed to share the spoil, nor to divide the lands
gained by their own prowess. The struggle was not so much between patrician and plebeian as
between the rich and the poor. It was intimately connected with the uses of money in those
times. What could the rich Roman do with his accumulations? He might buy land or slaves, or
he might become a lender; to a certain extent he could use his surplus in commerce; but of
these its most remunerative employment was found in usury. As there were no laws regulating
the rates of interest, they became exorbitant, and, as it was customary to compound it, debts
rapidly grew beyond the possibility of payment. As the rich made the laws, they naturally exerted
their ingenuity to frame them in such a way as to enable the lender to collect his dues with
promptness, and with little regard for the feelings or interests of the debtor.

It is difficult, if not impossible, for us to form a proper conception of the magnitude of
the wrongs involved in the system of money-lending at Rome during the period of the republic.
The small farmers were ever needy, and came to their wealthy neighbors for accommodation loans.
If these were not paid when due, the debtor was liable to be locked up in prison, to be sold
into slavery, with his children, wife, and grandchildren; and the heartless law reads, that
in case the estate should prove insufficient to satisfy all claims, the creditors were actually
authorized to cut the body to pieces, that each Shylock might take the pound of flesh that
he claimed.

At last the severity of the lenders overreached itself. It was in the year four hundred and
ninety-five, B.C., that a poor, but brave debtor, one who had been at the very front in the
wars, broke out of his prison, and while the wind flaunted his rags in the face of the populace,
clanked his chains and told the story of his calamities so effectually in words of natural
eloquence, that the commons were aroused to madness, and resolved at last to make a vigorous
effort and seek redress for their wrongs in a way that could not be resisted. The form of this
man stands out forever on the pages of Roman history, as he entered the forum with all the
badges of his misery upon him. [Footnote: See Livy, Book II., chapter xxiii.] His pale and
emaciated body was but partially covered by his wretched tatters; his long hair played about
his shoulders, and his glaring eyes and the grizzled beard hanging down before him added to
his savage wildness. As he passed along, he uncovered the scars of near twoscore battles that
remained upon his breast, and explained to enquirers that while he had been serving in the
Sabine war, his house had been pillaged and burned by the enemy; that when he had returned
to enjoy the sweets of the peace he had helped to win, he had found that his cattle had been
driven off, and a tax imposed. To meet the debts that thronged upon him, and the interest by
which they were aggravated, he had stripped himself of his ancestral farms. Finally, pestilence
had overtaken him, and as he was not able to work, his creditor had placed him in a house of
detention, the savage treatment in which was shown by the fresh stripes upon his bleeding back.

At the moment a war was imminent, and the forum--the entire city, in fact--already excited,
was filled with the uproar of the angry plebeians. Many confined for debt broke from their
prison houses, and ran from all quarters into the crowds to claim protection. The majesty of
the consuls was insufficient to preserve order, and while the discord was rapidly increasing,
horsemen rushed into the gates announcing that an enemy was actually upon them, marching to
besiege the city. The plebeians saw that their opportunity had arrived, and when proud Appius
Claudius called upon them to enroll their names for the war, they refused the summons, saying
that the patricians might fight their own battles; that for themselves it was better to perish
together at home rather than to go to the field and die separated. Threatened with war beyond
the gates, and with riot at home, the patricians were forced to promise to redress the civil
grievances. When this was known, the released prisoners volunteered in numbers, and entered
upon the war with enthusiasm. The legions were victorious, and when peace was declared, the
plebeians anxiously looked for the ratification of the promises made to them.

Their expectations were disappointed. They had, however, seen their power, and were determined
to act upon their new knowledge. Without undue haste, they protected their homes on the Aventine,
and retreated the next year to a mountain across the Anio, about three miles from the city,
to a spot which afterwards held a place in the memories of the Romans similar to that which
the green meadow on the Thames called Runnymede has held in British history since the June
day when King John met his commons there, and gave them the great charter of their liberties.

The plebeians said calmly that they would no longer be imposed upon; that not one of them would
thereafter enlist for a war until the public faith were made good. They reiterated the declaration
that the lords might fight their own battles, so that the perils of conflict should lie where
its advantages were. When the situation of affairs was thoroughly understood, Rome was on fire
with anxiety, and the enforced suspense filled the citizens with fear lest an external enemy
should take the opportunity for a successful onset upon the city. Meanwhile the poor secessionists
fortified their camp, but carefully refrained from actual war. The people left in the city
feared the senators, and the senators in turn dreaded the citizens lest they should do them
violence. It was a time of panic and suspense. After consultation, good counsels prevailed
in the senate, and it was resolved to send an embassy to the despised and down-trodden plebeians,
who now seemed, however, to hold the balance of power, and to treat for peace, for there could
be no security until the secessionists had returned to their homes.

The spokesman on the occasion was Menenius Agrippa Lanatus, who was popular with the people
and had a reputation for eloquence. In the course of his argument he related the famous apologue
which Shakespeare has so admirably used in his first Roman play.

Lanatus then applied the fable to the body politic, showing that all the citizens must work
in unity if its greatest welfare is to be attained. The address of this good man had its desired
effect, and the people were at last willing to listen to a proposition for their return. It
was settled that there should be a general release of all those who had been handed over to
their creditors, and a cancelling of debts, and that two of the plebeians should be selected
as their protectors, with power to veto objectionable laws, their persons being as inviolable
at all times as were those of the sacred messengers of the gods. These demands, showing that
the plebeians did not seek political power, were agreed to, the Valerian laws were reaffirmed,
and a solemn treaty was concluded, each party swearing for itself and its posterity, with all
the formality of representatives of foreign nations. The two leaders of the commons, Caius
Licinius and Lucius Albinius, were elected the first Tribunes of the People, as the new officers
were called, with two Ædiles to aid them. [Footnote: The duties of the ædiles were various,
and at first they were simple assistants of the tribunes. Ædes means house or temple, and the
ædiles seem to have derived their name from the fact that they had the care of the temple of
Ceres, goddess of agriculture, a very important divinity in Rome as well as in Greece.] They
were not to leave the city during their term of office; their doors being open day and night,
that all who needed their protection might have access to them. The hill upon which this treaty
had been concluded was ever after known as the Sacred Mount; its top was enclosed and consecrated,
an altar being built upon it, on which sacrifices were offered to Jupiter, the god of terror
and deliverance, who had allowed the commons to return home in safety, though they had gone
out in trepidation. Henceforth the commons were to be protected; they were better fitted to
share the honors as well as the benefits of their country, and the threatened dissolution of
the nation was averted.

Towards the end of the year, Lanatus, the successful intercessor, died, and it was found that
his poverty was so great that none but the most ordinary funeral could be afforded. Thereupon
the plebeians contributed enough to give him a splendid burial; but the sum was afterwards
presented to his children, because the senate decreed that the funeral expenses should be defrayed
by the state. (B.C. 494.)

VII.

HOW THE HEROES FOUGHT FOR A HUNDRED YEARS.

There is a long story connected with the young stripling who, at the battle of Lake Regillus
received the oaken crown for saving the life of a Roman citizen. The century after that event
was filled with wars with the neighboring peoples, and in one of them this same Caius Marcius
fought so bravely at the taking of the Latin town of Corioli that he was ever after known as
Coriolanus (B.C. 493). He was a proud patrician, and on one occasion when he was candidate
for the office of consul, behaved with so much unnecessary haughtiness toward the plebeians
that they refused him their votes. [Footnote: The whole interesting story is found in Plutarch's
Lives, and in Shakespeare's play which bears the hero's name.] After a while a famine came
to Rome,--famines often came there,--and though in a former emergency of the kind Coriolanus
had himself obtained corn and beef for the people, he was now so irritated by his defeat that
when a contribution of grain arrived from Syracuse, in Sicily (B.C. 491), he actually advocated
that it should not be distributed among the people unless they would consent to give up their
tribunes which had been assured to them by the laws of the Sacred Mount! This enraged the plebeians
very much, and they caused Coriolanus to be summoned for trial before the comitia of the tribes,
which body, in spite of his acknowledged services to the state, condemned him to exile. When
he heard this sentence, Coriolanus angrily determined to cast in his lot with his old enemies
the Volscians, and raised an army for them with which he marched victoriously towards Rome.
As he went, he destroyed the property of the plebeians, but preserved that of the patricians.
The people were in the direst state of anxious fear, and some of the senators were sent out
to plead with the dreaded warrior for the safety of the city. These venerable ambassadors were
repelled with scorn. Again, the sacred priests and augurs were deputed to make the petition,
this time in the name of the gods of the people; but, alas, they too entreated in vain. Then
it was remembered that the stern man had always reverenced his mother, and she with an array
of matrons, accompanied by the little ones of Coriolanus, went out to add their efforts to
those which had failed.

A temple was accordingly built in memory of this event, and in honor of Feminine Fortune, at
the request of the women of Rome, for the senate had decreed that any wish they might express
should be gratified. As for Coriolanus, he is said to have lived long in banishment, bewailing
his misfortune, and saying that exile bore heavily on an old man. The entire story, heroic
and tragic as it is related to us, is not substantiated, and we do not really know whether
if true it should be assigned to the year 488 B.C., or to a date a score of years later.

During all the century we are now considering, the plebeians were slowly gaining ground in
their attempts to improve their political condition, though they did not fail to meet rebuffs,
and though they were many times unjustly treated by their proud opponents. These efforts at
home were complicated, too, by the fact that nearly all the time there was war with one or
another of the adjoining nations. Treaties were made at this period with some of the neighboring
peoples, by a good friend of the plebeians, Spurius Cassius, who was consul in the year 486,
and these to a certain extent repaired the losses that had followed the war with Porsena after
the fall of the Tarquins. Cassius tried to strengthen the state internally, too, by dividing
certain lands among the people, and by requiring rents to be paid for other tracts, and setting
the receipts aside to pay the commons when they should be called out as soldiers. This is known
as the first of the many Agrarian Laws (ager, a meadow, a field) that are recorded in Roman
history, though something of the same nature is said to have existed in the days of Servius
Tullius.

There were public and private lands in Roman territory, just as there are in the territory
of the United States, and in those days, just as in our own, there were "squatters," as they
have been called in our history, who settled upon public lands without right, and without paying
any thing to the government for the privileges they enjoyed. Laws regulating the use and ownership
of the public lands were passed from time to time until Julius Cæsar (B.C. 59) enacted the
last. They had for their object the relief of poverty and the stopping of the clamors of the
poor, the settling of remote portions of territory, the rewarding of soldiers, or the extension
of the popularity of some general or other leader. The plan was not efficient in developing
the country, because those to whom the land was allotted were often not at all adapted to pursue
agriculture successfully, and because the evils of poverty are not to be met in that way.

It was a sign of the power of the people that this proposition of Cassius should have been
successful; but it irritated the patricians exceedingly, because they had derived large wealth
from the improper use of the public lands. The following year consuls came into power who were
more in sympathy with the patricians, and they accused Cassius of laying plans to be made king.
His popularity was undermined, and his reputation blasted. Finally he was declared guilty of
treason by his enemies, and condemned to be scourged and beheaded, while his house was razed
to the ground. For seven years after this one of the consuls was always a member of the powerful
family of the Fabii, which had been influential in thus overthrowing Cassius. The Fabians had
opposed the laws dividing the lands, and they now refused to carry them out. The result was
that the commons, deprived of their rights, again went to the extreme of refusing to fight
for the state; and when on one occasion they were brought face to face with an enemy, they
refused to conquer when they had victory in their hands. A little later they went one step
further, and attempted to stop entirely the raising of an army. One of the patrician family
just mentioned, Marcus Fabius, proved too noble willingly to permit such strife between the
classes to interfere with the progress of the state, and determined to conciliate the commons.
He succeeded, and led them to battle, and, though his army won victory, was himself killed
in the combat (B.C. 481). The other members of the family took up the cause, cared kindly for
the wounded, and thus still further ingratiated themselves with the army. The next year (B.C.
480) another Fabian was consul, and he too determined to stand up for the laws of Spurius Cassius.
He was treated with scorn by his fellow patricians, and finding that he could not carry out
his principles and live at peace in Rome, determined to exile himself. Going out with his followers,
he established a camp on the side of the river Cremera, a few miles above Rome, and alone carried
on a war against the fortified city of Veii. The unequal strife was continued for two years;
but then the brave family was completely cut off. There was not a member left, excepting one
who seems to have refused to renounce the former opinions of the family, and had remained at
Rome [Footnote: The Fabii were cut off on the Cremera on the 16th of July, a day afterwards
marked by a terrible battle on the Allia, in which the Gauls defeated the Romans.] (B.C. 477).
He became the ancestor of the Fabii of after-history.

The support thus received from the aristocratic Fabii encouraged the commons, and the sacrifice
of the family exasperated them. They felt anew that it was possible for them to exert some
power in the state, and they promptly accused one of the consuls, Titus Menenius, of treason,
because he had allowed his army to lie inactive near Cremera while the Fabii were cut off before
him. Menenius was found guilty, and died of vexation and shame. The aristocrats now attempted
to frighten the commons by treachery and assassination, and succeeded, until one, Volero Publilius,
arose and took their part. He boldly proposed a law by which the tribunes of the people, instead
of being chosen by the comitia of the centuries, in which, as we have seen, the aristocrats
had the advantage, should be chosen by the comitia of the tribes, in which there was no such
inferiority of the commons. Though violently opposed by the patricians, this law was passed,
in the year 471 B.C. Other measures were, however, still necessary to give the plebeians a
satisfactory position in the state.

In the year 458, the ancient tribe of the Æquians came down upon Rome, and taking up a position
upon Mount Algidus, just beyond Alba Longa, repulsed an army sent against them, and surrounded
its camp. We can imagine the clattering of the hoofs on the hard stones of the Via Latina as
five anxious messengers, who had managed to escape before it was too late, hurried to Rome
to carry the disheartening news. All eyes immediately turned in one direction for help. There
lived just across the Tiber a member of an old aristocratic family, one Lucius Quintius, better
known as Cincinnatus, because that name had been added to his others to show that he wore his
hair long and in curls. Lucius was promptly appointed Dictator--that is, he was offered supreme
authority over all the state,--and messengers were sent to ask him to accept the direction
of affairs. He was found at work on his little farm, which comprised only four jugera, either
digging or plowing, and after he had sent for his toga, or outer garment, which he had thrown
off for convenience in working, and had put it on, he listened to the message, and accepted
the responsibility. The next morning he appeared on the forum by daylight, like an early rising
farmer, and issued orders that no one should attend to private business, but that all men of
proper age should meet him on the field of Mars by sunset with food sufficient for five days.
At the appointed hour the army was ready, and, so rapidly did it march, that before midnight
the camp of the enemy was reached. The Æquians, not expecting such promptness, were astonished
to hear a great shout, and to find themselves shut up between two Roman armies, both of which
advanced and successfully hemmed them in. They were thus forced to surrender, and Cincinnatus
obliged them to pass under the yoke, in token of subjugation. (Sub, under, jugum, a yoke.)
The yoke in this case was made of two spears fastened upright in the ground with a third across
them at the top. In the short space of twenty-four hours, Lucius Quintius Cincinnatus raised
an army, defeated an enemy, and laid down his authority as dictator! It was decreed that he
should enter the city in triumph. He rode in his chariot through the streets, the rejoicing
inhabitants spreading tables in front of their houses, laden with meat and drink for the soldiers.
The defeated chiefs walked before the victor, and after them followed the standards that had
been won, while still farther behind were the soldiers, bearing the rich spoils. It was customary
in those days for a conqueror to take every thing from the poor people whom he had vanquished,--homes,
lands, cattle, wealth of every sort,--and then even to carry the men, women, and children away
into slavery themselves. Thus a subjugated country became a desolation, unless the conquerors
sent settlers to occupy the vacant homes and cultivate the neglected farms. Bad and frightful
as war is now, it is not conducted on such terrible principles as were followed in early times.

Though from time to time concessions were made to the commons, they continued to feel that
they were deprived of many of their just political rights, and the antagonism remained lively
between them and the patricians. The distresses that they suffered were real, and endured even
for two centuries after the time assigned to Coriolanus. We have now, indeed, arrived at a
period of their sore trial, though it was preceded by some events that seemed to promise them
good. In the year 454, Lucius Icilius, one of the tribunes of the people, managed to have the
whole of the Aventine Hill given up to them, and as it was, after the Capitoline, the strongest
of all the seven, their political importance was of course increased. It was but a few years
later (B.C. 451) when, according to tradition, after long and violent debates it was decided
that a commission should be sent to Athens, or to some colony of the Greeks, to learn what
they could from the principles of government adopted by that ancient and wise people, which
was then at the very height of its prosperity and fame. After this commission had made its
report (in the year B.C. 450), all the important magistrates, including the consuls, tribunes,
and ædiles, were replaced by ten patricians, known as Decemvirs (decem, ten, vir, a man), appointed
to prepare a new code of laws.

The chief of this body was an Appius Claudius, son of the haughty patrician of the same name,
and equally as haughty as he ever was. The laws of Rome before this time had been in a mixed
condition, partly written and partly unwritten and traditional; but now all were to be reduced
to order, and incorporated with those two laws that could not be touched--that giving the Aventine
to the plebeians, and the sacred law settled on the Roman Runnymede after the first secession
to the Sacred Mount. After a few months the ten men produced ten laws, which were written out
and set up in public places for the people to read and criticise. Suggestions for alterations
might be made, and if the ten men approved them, they made them a part of their report, after
which all was submitted to the senate and the curiæ, and finally approved. The whole code of
laws was then engraved on ten tables of enduring brass and put up in the comitium, where all
might see them and have no excuse for not obeying them.

We do not know exactly what all these laws were, but enough has come down to us to make it
clear that they were drawn up with great fairness, because they met the expectations of the
people; and this shows, of course, that the political power of the plebeians was now considerable,
because ten patricians would not have made the laws fair, unless there had been a strong influence
exerted over them, obliging them to be careful in their action. The ten had acted so well,
indeed, that it was thought safe and advisable to continue the government in the same form
for another year. This proved a mistake, for Appius managed to gain so much influence that
he was the only one of the original ten who was re-elected, and he was able also to cause nine
others to be chosen with him who were weak men, whom he felt sure that he could control. When
the new decemvirs came into power, they soon added two new laws to the original ten, and the
whole are now known, therefore, as the "Twelve Tables." The additional laws proved so distasteful
to the people that they were much irritated, and seemed ready to revolt against the government
on the slightest provocation. The decemvirs became exceedingly ostentatious and haughty, too,
in their bearing, as well as tyrannical in their acts, so that the city was all excitement
and opposition to the government that a few weeks before had been liked so well. Nothing was
needed to bring about an outbreak except a good excuse, and that was not long waited for. Nations
do not often have to wait long for a cause for fighting, if they want to find one.

A war broke out with the Sabines and the Æquians at the same time, and armies were sent against
them both, commanded by friends of the plebeians. Lucius Sicinius Dentatus, one of the bravest,
was sent out at the head of one army with some traitors, who, under orders from the decemvirs,
murdered him in a lonely place. The other commander was Lucius Virginius, who will be known
as long as literature lasts as father of the beautiful but unfortunate Virginia. While Virginius
was fighting the city's war against the Æquians, the tyrant Appius was plotting to snatch from
him his beloved daughter, who was affianced to the tribune Lucius Icilius, the same who had
caused the Aventine to be assigned to the plebeians. At first wicked Appius endeavored to entice
the maiden from her noble lover, but without success; and he therefore determined to take her
by an act of tyranny, under color of law. He caused one of his minions to claim her as his
slave, intending to get her into his hands before her father could hear of the danger and return
from the army. The attempt was not successful, for trusty friends carried the news quickly,
and Virginius reached Rome in time to hear the cruel sentence by which the tyrant thought to
gratify his evil intention. Before Virginia could be taken from the forum, Virginius drew her
aside, suddenly snatched a sharp knife from a butcher's stall, and plunged it in her bosom,
crying out: "This is the only way, my child, to keep thee free!" Then, turning to Appius, he
held the bloody knife on high and cried: "On thy head be the curse of this blood." Vainly did
Appius call upon the crowd to arrest the infuriated father; the people stood aside to allow
him to pass, as though he had been something holy, and he rushed onward toward his portion
of the army, which was soon joined by the troops that Dentatus had commanded. Meantime, Icilius
held up the body of his loved one before the people in the forum, and bade them gaze on the
work of their decemvir. A tumult was quickly stirred up, in the midst of which Appius fled
to his house, and the senate, hastily summoned, cast about for means to stop the wild indignation
of the exasperated populace; for the people were then, as they are now, always powerful in
the strength of outraged feeling or righteous indignation.

All was vain. The two armies returned to the Aventine united, and from the other parts of the
city the plebeians flocked to them. This was the second secession, and, like the first, it
was successful. The decemvirs were compelled to resign, their places being filled by two consuls;
Appius was thrown into prison, to await judgment, and took his life there; and ten tribunes
of the people were chosen to look out for the interests of the commons, Virginius and Icilius
being two of the number. Thus, for the first time since the days of Publius Valerius, the control
of government was in the hands of men who wished to carry it on for the good of the country,
rather than in the interest of a party. Thus good came out of evil.

Among the laws of the Twelve Tables, the particular one which had at this time excited the
plebeians was a statute prohibiting marriages between members of their order and the patricians.
There had been such marriages, and this made the opposition to the law all the more bitter,
though no one was powerful enough to cause it to be abolished. There now arose a tribune of
the people who possessed force and persistence, Caius Canuleius by name, and he urged the repeal
of this law. For the third time the plebeians seceded, this time going over the Tiber to the
Janiculum Hill, where it would have been possible for them to begin a new city, if they had
not been propitiated. Canuleius argued with vigor against the consuls who stood up for the
law, and at last he succeeded. In the year 445 the restriction was removed, and plebeian girls
were at liberty to become the wives of patrician men, with the assurance that their children
should enjoy the rank of their fathers. This right of intermarriage led in time to the entrance
of plebeians upon the highest magistracies of the city, and it was, therefore, of great political
importance.

It was agreed in 444 B.C. that the supreme authority should be centred in two magistrates,
called Military Tribunes, who should have the power of consuls, and might be chosen from the
two orders. The following year, however (443 B.C.), the patricians were allowed to choose from
their own order two officers known as Censors, who were always considered to outrank all others,
excepting the dictator, when there was one of those extraordinary magistrates. The censors
wore rich robes of scarlet, and had almost kingly dignity. They made the register of the citizens
at the time of the census, [Footnote: After the expulsion of the Tarquins, the consuls took
the census, and this was the first appointment of special officers for the purpose.] administered
the public finances, and chose the members of the senate, besides exercising many other important
duties connected with public and private life. The term of office of the censors at first was
a lustrum or five years, but ten years later it was limited to eighteen months. In 421, the
plebeians made further progress, for the office of quæstor (paymaster) was opened to them,
and they thus became eligible to the senate. A score of years passed, however, before any plebeian
was actually chosen to the office of military tribune even, owing to the great influence of
the patricians in the comitia centuriata.

All the time that these events were occurring, Rome was carrying on intermittent wars with
the surrounding nations, and by her own efforts, as well as by the help of her allies, was
adding to her warlike prestige. Nothing in all the story of war exceeds in interest the poetical
narrative that relates to the siege and fall of the Etruscan city of Veii, with which, since
the days of Romulus, Rome had so many times been involved in war.

Year after year the army besieged the strong place, and there seemed no hope that its walls
would fall. It was allied with Fidenæ, another city halfway between it and Rome, which was
taken by means of a mine in the year 426. A peace with Veii ensued, after which the incessant
war began again, and fortune sometimes favored one side and sometimes the other. The siege
of the city can be fittingly compared to that of Troy, Seven years had passed without result,
when of a sudden, in the midst of an autumn drought, the waters of the Alban Lake, away off
to the other side of Rome, began to rise. Higher and still higher they rose without any apparent
cause, until the fields and houses were covered, and then they found a passage where the hills
were lowest, and poured down in a great torrent upon the plains below. Unable to understand
this portent, for such it was considered, the Romans called upon the oracle at Delphi for counsel,
and were told that not until the waters should find their way into the lowlands by a new channel,
should not rush so impetuously to the sea, but should water the country, could Veii be taken.
It is hardly necessary to say that no one but an oracle or a poet could see the connection
between the draining of a lake fifteen miles from Rome on one side, and the capture of a fortress
ten miles away on the other. However, the lake was drained. With surprising skill, a tunnel
was built directly through the rocky hills, and the waters allowed to flow over the fields
below. The traveller may still see this ancient structure performing its old office. It is
cut for a mile and a half, mainly through solid rock, four feet wide and from seven to ten
in height. The lake is a thousand feet above the sea-level, and of very great depth.

Marcus Furius Camillus is the hero who now comes to the rescue. He was chosen dictator in order
that he might push the war with the utmost vigor. The people of Veii sent messengers to him
to sue for peace, but their appeal was in vain. Steadily the siege went on. We must not picture
to ourselves the army of Camillus using the various engines of war that the Romans became acquainted
with in later times through intercourse with the Greeks, but trusting more to their strong
arms and their simple means of undermining the walls or breaking down the gates. Their bows
and slings and ladders were weak instruments against strong stone walls, and the siege was
a long and wearisome labor. It proved so long in this case, indeed, that the soldiers, unable
to make visits to their homes to plant and reap their crops, were for the first time paid for
their services.

As the unsuccessful ambassadors from Veii turned away from the senate- house, one of them uttered
a fearful prophecy, saying that though the unmerciful Romans feared neither the wrath of the
gods nor the vengeance of men, they should one day be rewarded for their hardness by the loss
of their own country.

Summer and winter the Roman army camped before the doomed city, but it did not fall. At last,
to ensure success, Camillus began a mine or tunnel under the city, which he completed to a
spot just beneath the altar in the temple of Juno. When but a single stone remained to be taken
away, he uttered a fervent prayer to the goddess, and made a vow to Apollo consecrating a tenth
part of the spoil of the city to him. He then ordered an assault upon the walls, and at the
moment when the king was making an offering on the altar of Juno, and the augur was telling
him that victory in the contest was to fall to him who should burn the entrails then ready,
the Romans burst from their tunnel, finished the sacrifice, and rushing to the gates, let their
own army in. The city was sacked, and as Camillus looked on, he exclaimed: "What man's fortune
was ever so great as mine?" A magnificent triumph was celebrated in Rome. Day after day the
temples were crowded, and Camillus, hailed as a public benefactor, rode to the capitol in a
chariot drawn by four white horses. The territory of the conquered city was divided among the
patricians, but Camillus won their hatred after a time by calling upon them to give up a tenth
part of their rich booty to found a temple to Apollo, in pursuance of his vow, which he claimed
to have forgotten meanwhile. It was not long before he was accused of unfairness in distributing
the spoils, some of which he was said to have retained himself, and when he saw that the people
were so incensed at him that condemnation was inevitable, he went into banishment. As he went
away, he added a malediction to the prophecy of the ambassador from Veii, and said that the
republic might soon have cause to regret his loss. He was, as he had expected, condemned, a
fine of one hundred and fifty thousand ases being laid upon him.

Thus was the territory of Rome greatly increased, after a hundred years of war and intrigue,
and thus did the warrior to whom the city owed the most, and whom it had professed to honor,
go from it with a malediction on his lips. Let us see how the ill omens were fulfilled.

VIII.

A BLAST FROM BEYOND THE NORTH-WIND.

When the Greeks shivered in the cold north-wind, they thought that Boreas, one of their divinities
who dwelt beyond the high mountains, had loosened the blast from a mysterious cave. The North
was to them an unknown region. Far beyond the hills they thought there dwelt a nation known
as Hyperboreans, or people beyond the region of Boreas, who lived in an atmosphere of feathers,
enjoying Arcadian happiness, and stretching their peaceful lives out to a thousand years. That
which is unknown is frightful to the ignorant or the superstitious, and so it was that the
North was a land in which all that was alarming might be conjured up. The inhabitants of the
Northern lands were called Gauls by the Romans. They lived in villages with no walls about
them, and had no household furniture; they slept in straw, or leaves, or grass, and their business
in life was either agriculture or war. They were hardy, tall, and rough in appearance; their
hair was shaggy and light in color compared with that of the Italians, and their fierce appearance
struck the dwellers under sunnier climes with dread.

These warlike people had come from the plains of Asia, and in Central and Northern Europe had
increased to such an extent that they could at length find scarcely enough pasturage for their
flocks. The mountains were full of them, and it was not strange that some looked down from
their summits into the rich plains of Italy, and then went thither; and, tempted by the crops,
so much more abundant than they had ever known, and by the wine, which gave them a new sensation,
at last made their homes there. It was a part of their life to be on the move, and by degrees
they slipped farther and farther into the pleasant land. They flocked from the Hercynian forests,
away off in Bohemia or Hungary, and swarmed over the Alps; they followed the river Po in its
course, and they came into the region of the Apennines too. [Footnote: No one knows exactly
when the Gauls first entered Northern Italy. Some think that it was as long back as the time
of the Tarquins, while others put it only ten or twenty years before the battle of the Allia--
410-400 B.C.] It was they who had weakened the Etruscans and made it possible for the Romans
to capture Veii. Afterwards they came before the city of Clusium (B.C. 391), and the people
in distress begged for aid from Rome. No help was given, but ambassadors were sent to warn
the invaders courteously not to attack the friends of the Roman people who had done them no
harm. Such a request might have had an effect upon a nation that knew the Romans better, but
the fierce Northerners who knew nothing of courtesy replied that if the Clusians would peaceably
give up a portion of their lands, no harm should befall them; but that otherwise they should
be attacked, and that in the presence of the Romans, who might thus take home an account of
how the Gauls excelled all other mortals in bravery. Upon being asked by what right they proposed
to take a part of the Clusian territory, Brennus, the leader of the barbarians, replied that
all things belonged to the brave, and that their right lay in their trusty swords. 

"Then I, having impressed the services of Captain Bonhomme and his ship the Southern Cross,
set sail and arrived at the House on the Dunes only a few days ago, as you already know. The signals
that you saw flashing at night were to indicate that all was well."

"The green light, I suppose," commented Dan, "was to indicate that; and the red--"

"Was the signal of danger. Because the Marquis discovered last night that you were not in the house;
he flashed the warning that made Captain Bonhomme go to the House on the Dunes. Quite recently
the manners of your friend, Mr.--eh--?"

"Pembroke?"

"Yes, Mr. Pembroke--led the Marquis to believe that he was being watched.

"I

understand," said Dan, "but nothing you have told me so far, madame, accounts for Nancy's disappearance,
and I am as anxious as ever to know where she is."

"Mademoiselle is perfectly safe, Monsieur Dan; I assure you. She left the Inn because she had
fear of betraying our plans, particularly as she loved your friend, Mr. Pembroke."

"It is still strange to me, madame, that Nancy should distrust her oldest and best friends. But now you
will let me see her?"

"Of course I shall soon, very soon, my dear boy.

I have told you all, and now you will aid me to find the treasure that is your foster-sister's
heritage, will you not?"

"Why certainly I want Nancy to have what is hers," replied Dan.

"Bravo, my friend. We are to count you one of us, I am sure."

"Just a moment," said Dan, resisting the temptation to touch the little hand that had been placed
impulsively upon his arm. "May I ask one more question?"

"A thousand, my dear, if you desire."

"Why then, since until last night everything has gone as you planned it, why has not the treasure
already been discovered?"

"Because, mon ami; the Marquis has only been able to visit the Oak
Parlour at night.

And also it was decided to wait until I arrived."

"With the schooner?" suggested Dan.

"With the schooner, if you will. And you may remember that it was only the day before yesterday
that I reached your so hospitable countryside."

"Ah! I understand; so then all that you desire of me, madame, is that I shall permit the Marquis
or anyone else whom you may select for the purpose, to make such investigation of the Oak Parlour
as is desired."

"Yes, my friend; and also there is yet another thing that we desire."

"But suppose, madame, that I cannot agree to that?"

"Ah! cher ami, but you will. I confess--you must remember that the Marquis de Boisdhyver has
been a soldier--that my friends have not agreed with me entirely. It has seemed to them simpler
that we should keep you a prisoner on this ship, as we could so easily do, until our mission
is accomplished. But,--I like you too much to agree to that."

Dan flushed a trifle, but he was not yet quite sure enough to fall in entirely with his charming
gaoler's suggestions. "Madame de la Fontaine," he said after a moment's reflection, "I am greatly
obliged to you for explaining the situation to me so fully. I shall be only too happy to help
you, particularly in anything that is for the benefit of Nancy."

"I was sure of it. Now, my friend, there is a service that you can immediately render."

"And that is?" asked Dan.

"To entrust to me the other half of the paper of directions written by Francois de Boisdhyver,
which you found in a secret cubby-hole in the old cabinet."

"What makes you think that I was successful in finding that, when the Marquis failed?"

"Because, at first having forgotten his precise directions after so many years, the Marquis could
not find the fourth and last hiding-place in the cabinet, in which he knew the Marechal had
placed the other half of the torn scrap of paper. Another time he did find the cubby-hole, and
it was empty. So knowing he was watched by you and Mr. Pembroke, he decided that you must have
found it. Is it not so, that you have it?"

"It is certainly not in my possession at this moment," said Dan.

"No, but you have it?"

"And if I have?"

"It is necessary for our success."

"Then, my first service, is to put you into complete possession of the secret?"

"If you will so express it."

"Very well, madame, I will do so; but, on one condition."

"And what is that, my friend?"

"That I be allowed to see Nancy, and that she herself shall ask me to do as you desire."

For a moment Madame de la Fontaine was silent. "Eh bien," she said at last, "you do not trust
me?"

"But, dear madame, think of my situation, it is hard for me."

"Ah! I know it, believe me. C'est difficile. But I hoped you would trust me as I have you."

"Indeed, madame," exclaimed Dan, "I must try to think of everything, the mystery, this extraordinary
mission upon which you are engaged, the fact that I am quite literally your prisoner. When I think
about you, I know only you are beautiful, that you are lovely, and that I am happy near you."

She looked at him for a moment with a glance of anxious interrogation, as if to ask were it safe
for her to believe these protestations. "You say, my friend," she asked at length, "that you care
a little for me, for just me? C'est impossible. If Claire de la Fontaine could believe that,
understand me, monsieur, it would be very sweet and very precious to her."

"I do care," cried Dan.

"Ah!" she exclaimed. "You have touched my heart. I am not a young girl, mon ami, but I confess that
you have made me to know again the dreams of youth."

"Only let me prove that I care," cried Dan, considering but little now to what he committed himself.

"Let
me prove," cried she, "that I too believe in you. I must first see the Marquis, and then,
tonight, if it can be arranged, you shall receive from Eloise de Boisdhyver's own lips the request
I have made of you. But if, for any reason, this cannot be arranged for to-night, you must
be patient till morning; you must trust me to the extent of remaining on this ship. I cannot
act entirely on my own judgment, but I assure you that in the end my judgment will prevail.
And now, au revoir."

She placed her hand in his, and responded to the impulsive pressure with which he clasped it.
Their eyes met; in Dan's the frankest expression of her conquest of his emotions; in her's a glance
at once tender and sad, above all a glance that seemed to search his spirit for assurance that he
was in earnest. Suddenly fired by her alluring beauty, Dan drew her to him and bent his head to
hers.

"Ah! my friend," she murmured, "you are taking an unfair advantage of the fact that this morning
I too rashly yielded to an impulse."

"I cannot help it," Dan stammered. "You bewitch me." He bent lower to kiss her cheek, when he
suddenly thrilled to the realization that his lips had met hers.

A moment later Madame de la Fontaine was gone and Captain Bonhomme had reappeared in the doorway.

CHAPTER
XIV

IN THE FOG

Tom Pembroke was as good as his word. He returned to the little room, in which he had confined
the Marquis, within an hour after he had left him. It was then nearly supper-time and dusk was
fast settling upon the gloomy countryside. An unwonted calm had fallen upon land and sea after
the sharp blow of the previous night, but the sky was still gray and there was promise of more
rain, if not of wind.

To Tom's indignation and alarm, though scarcely to his surprise, there had been no sign or word
from Dan or Nancy. Shortly after he had left the Marquis, he saw, by aid of the field-glass,
Madame de la Fontaine, attended by two seamen, leave the schooner and return to the House on the
Dunes. He smiled a little as he thought of the account the lively young maid-servant would
give of his recent visit. But withal, he felt very much as if he were playing a game of blind
man's buff and that he was "it." He was impatient for his interview with the Marquis, though he
was but little hopeful that an hour's confinement would have been sufficient to bring the old
gentleman to terms. Nor was he to be surprised.

He found Monsieur de Boisdhyver huddled in a great arm chair near the fire that that been kindled
on the hearth of his prison. The Marquis glanced up, as Tom entered, but dropped his eyes
at once and offered him no greeting. Tom placed his candle on the table and, drawing up a
chair, seated himself between the Marquis and the door.

"Well, sir," he said at last, "as I promised you, I have returned within an hour. Have you
anything to say to me?"

"Have I anything to say to you!" exclaimed the Marquis. "For why, monsieur? If I venture to
express my astonishment and indignation at the way I am treated,
you subject me to a barbarity that could be matched no where else
in the civilized world than in this extraordinary country.

My life is menaced with firearms.

My protests are sneered at.

I have left but one inference--you have gone mad."

"No, marquis," said Pembroke, "I am not mad. I am simply determined that the mysteries by which
we have been surrounded and of which you are the center, shall cease. You have a free choice: put
me in the way of getting my friend and his sister back to the Inn, or resign yourself to a
prolonged confinement in this room."

"But monsieur I have nothing to communicate to you concerning the disappearance of your friends."

"Pardon
me, marquis," returned Pembroke; "you have much to communicate to me. Perhaps you are not aware that
I know the motive of your coming to the Inn at the Red Oak; that I know the reason for your prolonged
stay here; that I know of the influence that you have acquired over Nancy Frost; and that
I have been a witness of your midnight prowlings about the Inn. Nor am I in ignorance of your connection
with the rascally-looking captain of the schooner at anchor in the Cove and with the mysterious
woman, who has taken possession of the House on the Dunes. I am convinced that you know what has become
of Dan as well as what has happened to Nancy. And, believe me, I am determined to find out."

"Bien!"
exclaimed Monsieur de Boisdhyver, "permit me to wish you good luck in your undertaking. I repeat,
Monsieur Pembroke, I have no information to give to you. I do not know to what extent I have
been watched, but I may say with truth that my actions do not in the least concern you."

"They concern my friends," said Tom. "Dan, as you know, is more to me than a brother; and as
for his sister Nancy, I hope and expect to make her my wife."

"In that case," rejoined the Marquis with ill-concealed irony, "I may be permitted to offer
to you my congratulations. But even so, monsieur, there is nothing that I can do to facilitate
your matrimonial plans."

"You refuse then to come to terms?" asked Pembroke.

The Marquis raised his hands with a gesture of despair. "What shall I say, monsieur? If you insisted
upon my flying from here to yonder beach, I might have all the desire in the world to oblige you,
but the fact would remain that I was without the means of doing so. Since you are so little disposed
to accept my protestations, I will no longer make them, but simply decline your proposal.
And, pardon me, but so long as I am submitted to the indignity of this confinement, it would
be a courtesy that I should appreciate if you would spare me your company."

"Very good," said Tom. "Your meals will be served regularly; and you may ask the servant for anything
necessary. I shall not visit you again until you request me to do so."

"Merci," said the Marquis drily. He rose from his seat as Dan turned toward the door, and bowed
ironically.

Pembroke went downstairs to have his supper with Mrs. Frost. He said what he could to pacify
her, not altogether with success, for as darkness fell the old lady became increasingly apprehensive.

"I
know you are anxious, Mrs. Frost," said Tom, "but you must not worry. Try to believe that
all will come out right. I am going out after supper, but I shall leave Jesse and Ezra on guard,
and you may be sure everything will be safe."

It was some time before Mrs. Frost would consent to his leaving the Inn. If she had yielded to
her inclinations, she would have spent the evening in hysterics with Tom at hand to administer
comfort. Pembroke, however, deputed that office to black Deborah, and immediately after supper
set about his business.

He gave the necessary instructions to Jesse, Ezra and the maids, saw that everything was closely
locked and barred, supplied himself with arms and ammunition, and slipped out into the night. Having
saddled Fleetwing, he swung himself on the young hunter's back, and trotted down the avenue
to the Port Road. The night was intensely dark and still. The moon had not yet risen, and a thick
fog rolled in from the sea, shrouding the countryside with its impenetrable veil.

At the Beach Road Pembroke dismounted, tied his horse to a fence rail, and proceeded thence on
foot toward the Cove.

Stumbling along through the heavy sand, he made his way to the boathouse at the northern end of the
little beach. There he ventured to light his lantern, unlocked the door and stepped within. On either
side of the entrance were the two sailboats that he and Dan used in summer and to the rear
was the old-fashioned whaleboat with which they did their deep fishing. Over it, in a rudely constructed
rack, was the Indian birch-bark canoe which Dan had purchased in the mountains a few years before.
As the sea had fallen to a dead calm, he decided to use this canoe, which he could paddle quite
noiselessly, and pulling down the little craft from its winter resting-place, he carried it
to the water's edge. The sea, so angry the night before, now scarcely murmured; only a low lazy
swell, at regularly recurring intervals, slapped the shore and hissed upon the sands. Tom pushed
the nose of the canoe into the water, leaped lightly over the rail, and with his paddle thrust
it off the beach. He was launched without mishap.

Not the faintest gleam of light showed the position of the Southern
Cross, but estimating as well as he could the general direction, he
paddled out through the enshrouding fog.

For ten minutes or so, he pushed on into the strange, misty night. Then suddenly he found
himself alongside an old fisherman's yawl that had been rotting all winter at her moorings, and
he knew from her position that he could not be far from the Southern Cross.

A few more strokes to leeward, and a spot of dull light broke through the darkness. He headed
directly for it. To his relief it grew brighter; when suddenly, too late to stop the progress
of his canoe, he shot under it, and the bow of his craft bumped with a dull thud against the timber
side of the schooner. Its dark outlines were just perceptible above him; and at one or two
points there gleamed rays of light in the fog, green and red from the night lamps on the masthead,
and dull yellow from the port holes in the rear. A second after the contact the canoe receded, then
the wash of the sea drew her toward the stern. Another moment and Pembroke felt his prow scrape
gently against the rudder, which prevented further drifting. Apparently, since he heard nothing
from the deck above, he had reached his goal without attracting attention.

He kept perfectly still, however, for some little time, until satisfied that there was no one at the wheel
above, he pushed the canoe softly back to the rope ladder, that a day or so before he had seen
hanging over the side. It was the work of a moment to make his little boat fast to the lower rung.
Then slipping over the rail, he climbed stealthily up till his head protruded above the gunwhale.
The immediate deck seemed deserted; but he was sure that some one was keeping the watch, and
probably near the point where he was, that is to say, where access to the deck was easiest. But
the fog and the darkness afforded him protection, as he climbed over
the gunwhale and, without making a sound, moved toward the stern,
crossed the after-deck and found the wheel.

As he had surmised, it was deserted. The watch evidently was forward. Beneath him, sending its
ineffectual rays obliquely into the fog, shone the light from the little cabin below.

Determined to get a look through the port, he climbed over the gunwhale again, fastened a stern-sheet
about his waist and to a staple, and at the risk, if he slipped or if the rope gave way, of
plunging head foremost into the icy waters of the Cove, he let himself
down until his head was on a level of the port.

Through the blurred
glass he peered into a tiny cabin. There with back toward him, just
a few feet away stood Nancy Frost. He steadied himself with an effort,
and looking again saw that she was alone. A moment's hesitation, and
he tapped resolutely on the pane with his finger tips. At first Nancy
did not hear, but presently, aroused by the slight tapping, she glanced
with a frightened expression toward the door, and stood anxiously
listening. Tom continued to knock on the window, not daring to make
it louder for fear of being heard above. The alarm deepened on Nancy's
face, and in sheer pity Tom was tempted to desist; but at that instant
her attention was riveted upon the spot whence the tapping came. At
last, still with the expression of alarm on her face, she came slowly
toward the port. She hesitated, then pressed her face against the
pane over which Tom had spread his fingers. At whatever risk, of frightening
her or of danger to himself, as she drew back, he pressed his own
face against the outside of the little window glass. She stared at
him as if she were looking at a ghost.

He moved his lips to form
the word "Open." At length, in obedience to this direction, Nancy
cautiously unloosened the window of the port and drew it back.

"Good
heavens, Tom!" she whispered. "Is it you?"

"Yes, yes," Pembroke whispered
back. "But for God's sake, speak softly. I'm in a devilishly unpleasant
position, and can hang here but a minute. Tell me quickly--are you
here of your own free will or are you a prisoner?"

"How can you ask?"
she exclaimed. "For the love of heaven, help me to escape."

"That's
what I'm here for," was Toms reply. "Now, quick; are you only locked
in or barred as well? I've brought some keys along."

"Only locked,
I think."

"Where does that door lead?"

"Into a little passage off
the companion-way. Give me your keys. They have but one man on watch.
The captain is on shore to-night, apt to return at any moment. And
you?"

"I have a canoe tied to the ladder on the shore side. If the
captain returns, I'm caught. Try those keys." He slipped into her
the bunch of keys that he had brought along. "I was sure you were
here, and against your will."

"Dan, too, is locked up on board."

"I
thought as much; but you first. Hurry."

Nancy sprang to the door,
trying one key after another in feverish haste. At last, to Tom's
infinite relief, he saw the key turn in the lock, and the door open.

"On
deck," she whispered; "at the ladder. I'm not likely to be caught."
Then she waved her hand and disappeared into the passage.

Tom pulled
himself up, unloosed the rope, and stole along the rail toward the
ladder. For a few moments, which seemed like a thousand years, he
stood in anguished suspense waiting for Nancy. Then suddenly she came
out of the mist and was at his side. They stood for a moment like
disembodied spirits, creatures of the night and the fog. The next
instant a hand shot out and grasped the girl's shoulder.

"Peste!
mam'zelle," a rough voice hissed, "ou allez-vous?"

As the man spoke
Tom swung at him with the butt of his revolver, and without a murmur
the figure fell to the deck.

"Quick now," Pembroke whispered, "down
the ladder."

Instantly Nancy was over the rail and Tom was climbing
down after her. As he knelt in the bow and fumbled with the painter,
the plash of oars sounded a dozen yards away.

"Ho! Croix du Midi!"
came a hail through the fog.

"Curse it!" muttered Tom; "the painter's
caught." He drew out his knife, slashed the rope that bound them to
the schooner, got to his place amidships, and pushed the canoe free.
The lights of a small boat were just emerging from the dark a dozen
feet away. But the canoe slid by unobserved, in the fog. They heard
the nose of the small boat bump against the schooner; then an oath,
and a man's voice calling the watch.

"They've found my painter,"
whispered Tom, "and in a second they'll find the sailor on their deck."

The
lights of the Southern Cross grew dim; vanished; the sound of angry
voices became muffled. They were half-way to shore when they heard
the noise of oars again. Evidently some one had started in pursuit.
For a moment Tom rested, listening intently; but the sound was still
some distance away. Probably, he thought, they were heading directly
for the shore, whereas he, at a considerable angle, was making for
the boathouse at the north end of the beach. In ten minutes he had
beached the canoe within a rod of the point from where he embarked.

"I
can't hear them," whispered Tom, after a moment's listening. "They've
made for shore down the beach. They can't find us in the dark. I've
got Fleetwing tied to a fence in the meadow yonder. Come."

It was
the work of a moment to stow the canoe, lock the boathouse, run across
the sands, and mount Nancy in front of him on the back of his trusty
hunter. A second later Fleetwing's hoofs were striking fire on the
stones that the high tides had washed into the beach road. In the
distance there was a cry, the sharp ring of a pistol shot; but they
were safe on their way, racing wildly for the Inn. The escape, the
adventure had thrilled Nancy. Tom's arms were around her, and her
hands on his that grasped the bridle. At last they were in the avenue,
and Tom pulled in under the great branches of the Red Oak. He slipped
from the back of the horse and held out his arms to Nance.

"We are
safe, girl," he whispered.

"You are sure? Oh, thank God, thank God!
Quick, let us in! Can they be following?"

"No, no. They won't follow.
It's all right. Easy,--before we go in--please, dear--once--kiss me."

"Oh,
Tom, Tom," she whispered, as she lifted her face to his.

"I have
you at last, sweetheart," he murmured. "You love me?"

"Ah!" she cried,
"with my whole heart and soul."

CHAPTER XV

NANCY

It was after eleven
before Nancy rejoined Tom in the bar. She seemed more like herself
as she slipped in and took her accustomed seat beside the blazing
logs.

"Oh, I am all right, thank you," she insisted, declining the
glass of wine that Pembroke poured out for her. "I wonder, Tom, if
you killed that poor wretch on the deck?"

"Don't know," Tom answered.
"I hope so. But what the deuce, Nance, has been happening? I can wait
till to-morrow to hear, if you are too tired to tell me; but I do
want awfully to know."

"I am not tired," Nancy replied, "and I shan't
sleep a wink anyway. If I close my eyes I'll feel that hand on my
shoulder and hear the thud of that man's fall on the deck. I can't
bear to think that this miserable business will bring bloodshed."

"But
tell me, Nance, who is the Marquis--what happened--how did they get
you away?"

"Ah! the Marquis," exclaimed Nancy with a shudder. "I
am glad you have him locked up. I can't bear to think of him, but
I'll tell you what I know. You remember, Tom, he tried to be friends
with me from the first; and he seemed to fascinate me in some unaccountable
way. Then he questioned me about my identity, and began to drop hints
that he knew more than he cared to let appear to the others, and my
curiosity was excited. I have always known of course that there was
some mystery about my being left to Mrs. Frost's care. She has been
kind, good, all that she should be; but she wasn't my mother. Well,
the Marquis stirred all the old wonder that I had as a child, and
before long quite won my confidence. He told me after a time that
I was the daughter of his elder brother, the Marquis Francois de Boisdhyver,
who in 1814 stayed here at the Inn at the Red Oak under the name of
General Pointelle. I was not altogether surprised, for I have always
believed that I was French by birth, and his assertion that I was
his niece seemed to account for his interest in me. My father, if
this Marquis de Boisdhyver was my father, was one of the Emperor Napoleon's
marshals and was a party to the plot to rescue the Emperor from Elba.
He was obliged to return to France, and since it was impossible for
him to take me with him--I was a little girl of two at the time--he
left me with Mrs. Frost. Thinking of my future, he hid a large treasure
in some secret chamber off the Oak Parlour."

"I know," Tom interrupted.

"What?
You mean there is a treasure?"

"I think there is; but go on. I will
tell you afterwards."

"Then he set sail for France, took part in
the great events of the Hundred Days, and fell at Waterloo.
The aim of each of the combatants seems to have been to gain as many allies as possible, and
to lessen the adherents of the enemy. For this reason the war was peculiar, the armies of Rome
being often found in Apulia, and those of the enemy being ever ready to overrun Campania.

Success at first followed the Samnite banners, and this was notably the case at the battle
of Caudine Forks, fought in a pass on the road from Capua to Beneventum (then Maleventum),
in the year 321, when the Romans were entrapped and all obliged to pass under the yoke. Such
a success is apt to influence allies, and this tended to strengthen the Samnites. It was not
until seven years had passed that the Romans were able to make decided gains, and though their
cause appeared quite hopeful, the very success brought new troubles, because it led the Etruscans
to take part with the Samnites and to create a diversion on the north. This outbreak is said
to have been quelled by Fabius Maximus Rullus, (a general whose personal prowess is vaunted
in the highest terms by the historians of Rome,) who defeated the Etruscans at Lake Vadimonis,
B.C. 310. Success followed in the south, also, and in the year 304, Bovianum, in the heart
of Samnium, which had been before taken by them, fell into the hands of the Romans and closed
the war, leaving Rome the most powerful nation in Central Italy.

Unable to overcome its northern neighbor, Samnium now turned to attack Lucania, the country
to the south, which reached as far as the Tarentine Gulf, just under the great heel of Italy.
Magna Græcia was then in a state of decadence, and Lucania was an ally of Rome, which took
its part against Samnium, not as loving Samnium less, but as loving power more. The struggle
became very general. The Etruscans had begun a new war with Rome, but were about to treat for
peace, when the Samnites induced them to break off the negotiations, and they attacked Rome
at once on the north and the south. The undaunted Romans struck out with one arm against the
Etruscans and their allies the Gauls on the north, and with the other hurled defiance at the
Samnites on the south. The war was decided by a battle fought in 295, on the ridge of the Apennines,
near the town of Sentinum in Umbria, where the allies had all managed to unite their forces.
On this occasion it is related that Publius Decius Mus, son of that hero who had sacrificed
himself at Mount Vesuvius, followed his father's example, devoted himself and the opposing
army to the infernal gods, and thus enabled the Romans to achieve a splendid victory.

The Samnites continued the desperate struggle five years longer, but in the year 290 they became
subject to Rome; their leader, the hero of the battle of the Caudine Forks, having been taken
two years previously and perfidiously put to death in Rome as the triumphal car of the victor
ascended the Capitoline Hill. This is considered one of the darkest blots on the Roman name,
and Dr. Arnold forcibly says that it shows that in their dealings with foreigners, the Romans
"had neither magnanimity, nor humanity, nor justice."

The Etruscans and the Gauls did not yet cease their wars on the north, and in 283 they encountered
the Roman army at the little pond, between the Ciminian Hills and the Tiber, known as Lake
Vadimonis, on the spot where the Etrurian power had been broken thirty years before by Fabius
Maximus, and were defeated with great slaughter. The constant wars had made the rich richer
than before, while at the same time the poor were growing poorer, and after the third Samnite
war we are ready to believe that debts were again pressing with heavy force upon many of the
citizens. Popular tumults arose, and the usual remedy, an agrarian law, was proposed. There
was a new secession of the people to the Janiculum, followed by the enactment of the Hortensian
laws, celebrated in the history of jurisprudence because they deprived the senate of its veto
and declared that the voice of the people assembled in their tribes was supreme law. Debts
were abolished or greatly reduced, and seven jugera of land were allotted to every citizen.
We see from this that the commotions of our own days, made by socialists, communists, and nihilists,
as they are called, are only repetitions of such agitations as those which took place so many
centuries ago.

In the midst of a storm in the especially boisterous winter season of the year 280, the waves
of the Mediterranean washed upon the shores of Southern Italy a brave man more dead than alive,
who was to take the lead in the last struggle against the supremacy of Rome among its neighbors.
The winds and the waves had no respect for his crown. They knew not that he ruled over a strong
people whose extensive mountainous land was known as the "continent," and that he had left
it with thousands of archers and slingers and footmen and knights; and that he had also huge
elephants trained to war, beasts then unknown in Italian warfare, which he expected would strike
horror into the cavalry of the country he had been cast upon.

As we study history, we find that at almost every epoch it centres about the personality of
some strong man who has either power to control, or sympathetic attractiveness that holds to
him those who are around him. It was so in this case. Pyrrhus, King of Epirus, was born seven
years after the great Alexander died, and was at this time thirty-seven years of age. Claiming
descent from Pyhrrus, son of Achilles, and being a son of Æacides, he was in the direct line
the Kings of Epirus. He was also cousin of an Alexander, who, in the year 332, had crossed
over from Epirus to help the Tarentines against the Lucanians, had formed an alliance with
the Romans, and had finally been killed by a Lucanian on the banks of the Acheron, in 326.
After a variety of vicissitudes, Pyrrhus had ascended the throne of his father at the age of
twenty-three, and, taking Alexander the Great as his model, had soon become popular and powerful.
Aiming at the conquest of the whole of Greece, he attacked the king of Macedonia and overcame
him. After resting a while upon his laurels, he found a life of inactivity unbearable, and
accepted a request, sent him in 281, to follow in the footsteps of his cousin Alexander, and
go to the help of the people of Tarentum against the Romans, with whom they were then at war.
This is the reason why he was voyaging in haste to Italy, and it was this ambition that led
to his shipwreck on a winter's night.

Pyrrhus had a counsellor named Cineas, who asked him how he would use his victory if he should
be so fortunate as to overcome the Romans, who were reputed great warriors and conquerors of
many peoples. The Romans overcome, replied the king, no city, Greek nor barbarian, would dare
to oppose me, and I should be master of all Italy. Well, Italy conquered, what next? Sicily
next would hold out its arms to receive me, Pyrrhus replied. And, what next? These would be
but forerunners of greater victories. There are Libya and Carthage, said the king. Then? Then,
continued Pyrrhus, I should be able to master all Greece. And then? continued Cineas. Then
I would live at ease, eat and drink all day, and enjoy pleasant conversation. And what hinders
you from taking now the ease that you are planning to take after such hazards and so much blood-shedding?
Here the conversation closed, for Pyrrhus could not answer this question.

Once on the Italian shore the invading king marched to Tarentum, and found it a city of people
given up to pleasures, who had no thought of fighting themselves, but expected that he would
do that work for them while they enjoyed their theatres, their baths, and their festivities.
They soon found, however, that they had a master instead of a servant. Pyrrhus shut up the
theatres and was inflexible in demanding the services of the young and strong in the army.
His preparations were made as promptly as possible, but Rome was ahead of him, and her army
was superior, excepting that the Grecians brought elephants with them. The first battle was
fought on the banks of the river Liris, and the elephants gave victory to the invader, but
the valor of the Romans was such that Pyrrhus is said to have boasted that if he had such soldiers
he could conquer the world, and to have confessed that another such victory would send him
back to Epirus alone. It is not to be wondered at, therefore, that he sent Cineas to Rome to
plead for peace. The Romans were on the point of entering into negotiations, when aged and
blind Appius Claudius, hearing of it, caused himself to be carried to the forum, where he delivered
an impassioned protest against the proposed action. So effectual was he that the people became
eager for war, and sent word to Pyrrhus that they would only treat with him when he should
withdraw his forces from Italy. Pyrrhus then marched rapidly towards Rome, but when he had
almost reached the city, after devastating the country through which he had passed, he learned
that the Romans had made peace with the Etruscans, with whom they had been fighting, and that
thus another army was free to act against him. He therefore retreated to winter quarters at
Tarentum. The next year the two forces met on the edge of the plains of Apulia, at Asculum,
but the battle resulted in no gain to Pyrrhus, who was again obliged to retire for the winter
to Tarentum. (B.C. 279.)

In the last battle the brunt of the fighting had fallen to the share of the Epirots, and Pyrrhus
was not anxious to sacrifice his comparatively few remaining troops for the benefit of the
Tarentines. Therefore, after arranging a truce with Rome, he accepted an invitation from the
Greeks of Sicily to go to their help against the Carthaginians. For two years he fought, at
first with success; but afterwards he met repulses, so that being again asked to assist his
former allies in Italy, he returned, in 276, and for two years led the remnants of his troops
and the mercenaries that he had attracted to his standard against the Romans. His Italian career
closed in the year 274, when he encountered his enemy in the neighborhood of Maleventum, and
was defeated, the Romans having learned how to meet the formerly dreaded elephants. The name
of this place was then changed to Beneventum. Two years later still, in 272, Tarentum fell
under the sway of Rome, which soon had overcome every nation on the peninsula south of a line
marked by the Rubicon on the east and the Macra on the west,--the boundaries of Gallia Cisalpina.
(Cis, on this side, alpina, alpine.)

Not only had Rome thus gained power and prestige at home, but she had begun to come in contact
with more distant peoples. Carthage had offered to assist her after the battle of Asculum,
sending a large fleet of ships to Ostia in earnest of her good faith. Now, when the news of
the permanent repulse of the proud king of Epirus was spread abroad, great Ptolemy Philadelphus,
the Egyptian patron of art, literature, and science, sent an embassy empowered to conclude
a treaty of amity with the republic. The proposition was accepted with earnestness, and ambassadors
of the highest rank were sent to Alexandria, where they were treated with extraordinary consideration,
and allowed to see all the splendor of the Egyptian capital.

Rome had now reached a position of wealth and physical prosperity; the rich had gained much
land, and the poor had been permitted to share the general progress; commerce, agriculture,
and, to some extent, manufactures had advanced. Rome kept a firm hold upon all of the territory
she had won, connecting them with the capital by good roads, but making no arrangements for
free communication between the chief cities of the conquered regions. The celebrated military
roads, of which we now can see the wonderful remains, date from a later period, with the exception
of the Appian Way, which was begun in 312, and, after the conquest of Italy was completed to
Brundusium, through Capua, Tres Taberna, and Beneventum. Other than this there were a number
of earth roads leading from Rome in various directions. One of the most ancient of these was
that over which Pyrrhus marched as far as Præneste, known as the Via Latina, which ran over
the Tusculum Hills, and the Alban Mountain. The Via Ostiensis ran down the left bank of the
Tiber; the Via Saleria ran up the river to Tibur, and was afterward continued, as the Via Valeria,
over the Apennines to the Adriatic.

The population of Italy (at this time less than three million) was divided into three general
classes: first, the Roman Citizens, comprising the members of the thirty-three tribes, stretching
from Veii to the river Liris, the citizens in the Roman colonies, and in certain municipal
towns; the Latin Name, including the inhabitants of the colonies generally, and some of the
most flourishing towns of Italy; and the Allies, or all other inhabitants of the peninsula
who were dependent upon Rome, but liked to think that they were not subjects. The Romans had
been made rich and prosperous by war, and were ready to plunge into any new struggle promising
additional power and wealth.

X.

AN AFRICAN SIROCCO.

All the time that the events that we have been giving our attention to were occurring--that
is to say, ever since the foundation of Rome, another city had been growing up on the opposite
side of the Mediterranean Sea, in which a different kind of civilization had been developed.
Carthage, of which we have already heard, was founded by citizens of Phoenicia. The early inhabitants
were from Tyre, that old city of which we read in the Bible, which in the earliest times was
famous for its rich commerce. How long the people of Phoenicia had lived in their narrow land
under the shadow of great Libanus, we cannot tell, though Herodotus, when writing his history,
went there to find out, and reported that at that time Tyre had existed twenty-three hundred
years, which would make its foundation forty-five hundred years ago, and more. However that
may be, the purple of Tyre and the glass of Sidon, another and still older Phoenician city,
were celebrated long before Rome was heard of. It was from this ancient land that the people
of Carthage had come. It has been usual for emigrants to call their cities in a new land "new,"
(as Nova Scotia, New York, New England, New Town, or Newburg,) and that is the way in which
Carthage was named, for the word means, in the old language of the Phoenicians, simply new
city, just as Naples was merely the Greek for new city, as we have already seen.

Through six centuries, the people of Carthage had been permitted by the mother-city to attend
diligently to their commerce, their agriculture, and to the building up of colonies along the
southern coast of the Mediterranean, and the advantages of their position soon gave them the
greatest importance among the colonies of the Phoenicians. There was Utica, near by, which
had existed for near three centuries longer than Carthage, but its situation was not so favorable,
and it fell behind. Tunes, now called Tunis, was but ten or fifteen miles away, but it also
was of less importance. The commerce of Carthage opened the way for foreign conquest, and so,
besides having a sort of sovereignty over all the peoples on the northern coast of Africa,
she established colonies on Sardinia, Corsica, Sicily, and other Mediterranean islands, and
history does not go back far enough to tell us at how early a date she had obtained peaceable
possessions in Spain, from the mines of which she derived a not inconsiderable share of her riches.

Perhaps it may be thought strange that Carthage and Rome had not come into conflict before
the time of which we are writing, for the distance between the island of Sicily and the African
coast is so small that but a few hours would have been occupied in sailing across. It may be
accounted for by the facts that the Carthaginians attended to their own business, and the Romans
did not engage to any extent in maritime enterprises. On several occasions, however, Carthage
had sent her compliments across to Rome, though Rome does not appear to have reciprocated them
to any great degree; and four formal treaties between the cities are reported, B.C. 509, 348,
306, and 279.

It is said that when Pyrrhus, King of Epirus, was about to leave Sicily, he exclaimed: "What
a grand arena [Footnote: Arena in Latin meant "sand," and as the central portions of the amphitheatres
were strewn with sand to absorb the blood of the fighting gladiators and beasts, an arena came
to mean, as at present, any open, public place for an exhibition. To the ancients, however,
it brought to mind the desperate combats to which the thousands of spectators were wont to
pay wrapt attention, and it was a much more vivid word than it now is.] this would be for Rome
and Carthage to contend upon!" It did not require the wisdom of an oracle to suggest that such
a contest would come at some time, for the rich island lay just between the two cities, apparently
ready to be grasped by the more enterprising or the stronger. As Carthage saw the gradual extension
of Roman authority over Southern Italy, she realized that erelong the strong arm would reach
out too far in the direction of the African continent. She was, accordingly, on her guard,
as she needed to be.

At about the time of the beginning of the war with Pyrrhus, a band of soldiers from Campania,
which had been brought to Sicily, took possession of the town of Messana, a place on the eastern
end of the island not far from the celebrated rocks Scylla and Charybdis, opposite Rhegium.
Calling themselves Mamertines, after Mars, one form of whose name was Mamers, these interlopers
began to extend their power over the island. In their contests with Hiero, King of Syracuse,
they found themselves in need of help. In the emergency there was a fatal division of counsel,
one party wishing to call upon Rome and the other thinking best to ask Carthage, which already
held the whole of the western half of the island and the northern coast, and had for centuries
been aiming at complete possession of the remainder. Owing to this want of united purpose it
came about that both cities were appealed to, and it very naturally happened that the fortress
of the Mamertines was occupied by a garrison from Carthage before Rome was able to send its army.

The Roman senate had hesitated to send help to the Mamertines because they were people whom
they had driven out of Rhegium, as robbers, six years before, with the aid of the same Hiero,
of Syracuse, who was now besieging them. However, the people of Rome, not troubled with the
honest scruples of the senate, were, under the direction of the consuls, inflamed by the hope
of conquest and of the riches that they expected would follow success, and a war which lasted
twenty-three years was the result of their reckless greed (B.C. 264).

The result was really decided during the first two years, for the Romans persuaded the Mamertines
to expel the Carthaginians from Messana, and then, though besieged by them and by Hiero, drove
them both off, and in the year 263 took many Sicilian towns and even advanced to Syracuse.
Then Hiero concluded a peace with Rome to which he was faithful to the time of his death, fifty
years afterward. The Sicilian city next to Syracuse in importance was Agrigentum, and this
the Romans took the next year, thus turning the tables and making themselves instead of the
Carthaginians masters of most of the important island, with the exception of Panormus and Mount
Eryx, near Drepanum (B.C. 262).

The Carthaginians, being a commercial people, were well supplied with large ships, and the
Romans now saw that they, too, must have a navy. Possessing no models on which to build ships
of war larger than those with three banks of oars, [Footnote: The ancient war vessels were
moved by both sails and oars; but the oars were the great dependence in a fight. At first there
was but one bank of oars; but soon there were two rows of oarsmen, seated one above the other,
the uppermost having long oars. After awhile three banks were arranged, then four, now five,
and later more, the uppermost oars being of immense length, and requiring several men to operate
each. We do not now know exactly how so many ranges of rowers were accommodated, nor how such
unwieldly oars were managed. The Athenians tried various kinds of ships, but concluded that
light and active vessels were better than awkward quinquiremes.] they took advantage of the
fact that a Carthaginian vessel of five banks (a quinquireme) was wrecked on their shores,
and in the remarkably short space of time of less than two months built and launched one hundred
and thirty vessels of that size! They were clumsy, however, and the crews that manned them
were poorly trained, but, nevertheless, the bold Romans ventured, under command of Caius Duilius,
to attack the enemy off the Sicilian town of Mylæ, and the Carthaginians were overwhelmed,
what remained of their fleet being forced to seek safety in flight. The naval prestige of Carthage
was destroyed. There was a grand celebration of the victory at Rome, and a column adorned with
the ornamental prows of ships was set up in the forum.

For a few years the war was pursued with but little effect; but in the ninth year, when the
favorite Marcus Atilius Regulus was consul, it was determined to carry it on with more vigor,
to invade Africa with an overwhelming force, and, if possible, close the struggle. Regulus
sailed from Economus, not far from Agrigentum, with three hundred and thirty vessels and one
hundred thousand men, but his progress was soon interrupted by the Carthaginian fleet, commanded
by Hamilcar. After one of the greatest sea-fights of all time, in which the Carthaginians lost
nearly a hundred ships and many men, the Romans gained the victory, and found nothing to hinder
their progress to the African shore. The enemy hastened with the remainder of their fleet to
protect Carthage, and the conflict was transferred to Africa. Regulus prosecuted the war with
vigor, and, owing to the incompetence of the generals opposed to him, was successful to an
extraordinary degree. Both he and the senate became intoxicated to such an extent, that when
the Carthaginians made overtures for peace, only intolerable terms were offered them. This
resulted in prolonging the war, for the Carthaginians called to their aid Xanthippus, a Spartan
general, who showed them the weakness of their officers, and, finally, when his army had been
well drilled, offered battle to Regulus on level ground, where the dreaded African elephants
were of service, instead of among the mountains. The Roman army was almost annihilated, and
Regulus himself was taken prisoner (B.C. 255).

The Romans saw that to retain a footing in Africa they must first have control of the sea.
Though the fleet that brought back the remains of the army of Regulus was destroyed, another
of two hundred and twenty ships was made ready in three months, only, however, to meet a similar
fate off Cape Palinurus on the coast of Lucania. The Romans, at Panormus (now Palermo), were,
in the year 250, attacked by the Carthaginians, over whom they gained a victory which decided
the struggle, though it was continued nine years longer, owing to the rich resources of the
Carthaginians. After this defeat an embassy was sent to Rome to ask terms of peace. Regulus,
who had then been five years a captive, accompanied it, and, it is said, urged the senate not
to make terms. He then returned to Carthage and suffered a terrible death. The character given
him in the old histories and his horrible fate made Regulus the favorite of orators for ages.

The Romans now determined to push the war vigorously, and began the siege of Lilybæum (now
Marsala), which was the only place besides Drepanum, fifteen miles distant, yet remaining to
the enemy on the island of Sicily (B.C. 250). It was not until the end of the war that the
Carthaginians could be forced from these two strongholds. Six years before that time (B.C.
247), there came to the head of Carthaginian affairs a man of real greatness, Hamilcar Barca,
whose last name is said to mean lightning; but even he was not strong enough to overcome the
difficulties caused by the faults of others, and in 241 he counselled peace, which was accordingly
concluded, though Carthage was obliged to pay an enormous indemnity, and to give up her claim
to Sicily, which became a part of the Roman dominion (the first "province" so-called), governed
by an officer annually sent from Rome. Hamilcar had at first established himself on Mount Ercte,
overhanging Panormus, whence he made constant descents upon the enemy, ravaging the coast as
far as Mount Ætna. Suddenly he quitted this place and occupied Mount Eryx, another height,
overlooking Drepanum, where he supported himself two years longer, and the Romans despaired
of dislodging him.

In their extremity, they twice resorted to the navy, and at last, with a fleet of two hundred
ships, defeated the Carthaginians off the Ægusæ Islands, to the west of Sicily, and as the
resources of Hamilcar were then cut off, it was only a question of time when the armies at
Eryx, Drepanum, and Lilybæum would be reduced by famine. It was in view of this fact that the
settlement was effected.

A period of peace followed this long war, during which at one time, in the year 235, the gates
of the temple of Janus, which were always open during war and had not been shut since the days
of Numa, were closed, but it was only for a short space. After this war, the Carthaginians
became involved with their own troops, who arose in mutiny because they could not get their
pay, and Rome took advantage of this to rob them of the islands of Sardinia and Corsica, and
at the same time to demand a large addition to the indemnity fund that had been agreed upon
at the peace (B.C. 227). Such arbitrary treatment of a conquered foe could not fail to beget
and keep alive the deepest feelings of resentment, of which, in after years, Rome reaped the
bitter fruits.

The Adriatic Sea was at that time infested with pirates from Illyria, the country north of
Epirus, just over the sea to the east of Italy, and as Roman towns suffered from their inroads,
an embassy was sent to make complaint. One of these peaceful messengers was murdered by direction
of the queen of the country, Teuta, by name, and of course war was declared, which ended in
the overthrow of the treacherous queen. Her successor, however, when he thought that the Romans
were too much occupied with other matters to oppose him successfully, renewed the piratical
incursions (B.C. 219), and in spite of the other wars this brought out a sufficient force from
Rome. The Illyrian sovereign was forced to fly, and all his domain came under the Roman power.

Meantime the Romans had begun to think of the extensive tracts to the north acquired from the
Gauls, and in 232 B.C., a law was passed dividing them among the poorer people and the veterans,
in the expectation of attracting inhabitants to that part of Italy. The barbarians were alarmed
by the prospect of the approach of Roman civilization, and in 225, united to make a new attack
upon their old enemies. When it was rumored at Rome that the Gauls were preparing to make a
stand and probably intended to invade the territory of their southern neighbors, the terrible
days of the Allia were vividly brought to mind and the greatest consternation reigned. The
Sibylline or other sacred books were carefully searched for counsel in the emergency, and in
obedience to instructions therein found, two Gauls and two Greeks (a man and a woman of each
nation) were buried alive in the Forum Boarium, [Footnote: The Forum Boarium, though one of
the largest and most celebrated public places in the city, was not a regular market surrounded
with walls, but an irregular space bounded by the Tiber on the west, and the Palatine Hill
and the Circus Maximus on the east. The Cloaca Maxima ran beneath it, and it was rich in temples
and monuments. On it the first gladiatorial exhibition occurred, B.C. 264, and there too, other
burials of living persons had been made, in spite of the long-ago abolishment of such rites
by Numa.] and the public excitement somewhat allayed in that horrible way. A large army was
immediately raised, and sent to meet the Gauls at Ariminum on the Adriatic, but they avoided
it by taking a route further to the west. They were met by a reserve force, however, which
suffered a great defeat, probably near Clusium. Afterwards the main army effected a junction
with another body coming from Pisa, and as the Gauls were attacked on both sides at once, they
were annihilated. This battle occurred near Telamon, in Etruria, not far from the mouth of
the Umbria. The victory was followed up, and after three years, the whole of the valley of
the Po, between the Alps and the Apennines, was made a permanent addition to Roman territory.
Powerful colonies were planted at Placentia and Cremona to secure it.

No greater generals come before us in the grand story of Rome than those who are now to appear.
One was born while the first Punic war was still raging, and the other in the year 235, when
the gates of the temple of Janus were, for the first time in centuries, closed in token that
Rome was at peace with the world. Hannibal, the elder of the two was son of Hamilcar Barca,
and inherited his father's hatred of Rome, to which, indeed, he had been bound by a solemn
oath, willingly sworn upon the altar at the dictation of his father.

When Livy began his story of the second war between Rome and Carthage, he said that he was
about to relate the most memorable of all wars that ever were waged; and though we may not
express ourselves in such general terms, it is safe to say that no struggle recorded in the
annals of antiquity, or of the middle age, surpasses it in importance or in historical interest.
The war was to decide whether the conqueror of the world was to be self-centred Rome; or whether
it should be a nation of traders, commanded by a powerful general who dictated to them their
policy,--a nation not adapted to unite the different peoples in bonds of sympathy,--one whose
success would, in the words of Dr. Arnold, "have stopped the progress of the world."

Hannibal stands out among the famed generals of history as one of the very greatest. We must
remember that we have no records of his own countrymen to show how he was estimated among them;
but we know that though he was poorly supported by the powers at home, he was able to keep
together an army of great size, by the force of his own personality, and to wage a disastrous
war against the strongest people of his age, far from his base of supplies, in the midst of
the enemy's country. It has well been said that the greatest masters of the art of war, from
Scipio to Napoleon, have concurred in homage to his genius.

The other hero, and the successful one, in the great struggle, was Publius Cornelius Scipio,
who was born in that year when the temple of Janus was closed, of a family that for a series
of generations had been noted in Roman history, and was to continue illustrious for generations
to come.

Another among the many men of note who came into prominence during the second war with Carthage
was Quintus Fabius Maximus, a descendant of that Rullus who in the Sabine wars brought the
names Fabius and Maximus into prominence. His life is given by Plutarch under the name Fabius,
and he is remembered as the originator of the policy of delay in war, as our dictionaries tell
us, because his plan was to worry his enemy, rather than risk a pitched battle with him. On
this account the Romans called him Cunctator, which meant delayer, or one who is slow though
safe, not rash. He was called also Ovicula, or the lamb, on account of his mild temper, and
Verrucosus, because he had a wart on his upper lip (Verruca, a wart).

The second Punic war was not so much a struggle between Carthage and Rome, as a war entered
into by Hannibal and carried on by him against the Roman republic in spite of the opposition
of his own people; and this fact makes the strength of his character appear in the strongest
light. Just at the close of the first war, the Carthaginians had established in Spain a city
which took the name of New Carthage--that is, New New City,--and had extended their dominion
over much of that country, as well as over most of the territory on the south shore of the
Mediterranean Sea. Hannibal laid siege to the independent city of Saguntum, on the northeast
of New Carthage, and, after several months of desperate resistance, took it, thus throwing
down the gauntlet to Rome and completing the dominion of Carthage in that region (B.C. 218).
Rome sent ambassadors to Carthage, to ask reparation and the surrender of Hannibal: but "War!"
was the only response, and for seventeen years a struggle of the most determined sort was carried
on by Hannibal and the Roman armies.

After wintering at New Carthage, Hannibal started for Italy with a great army. He crossed the
Pyrenees, went up the valley of the Rhone, and then up the valley of the Isère, and most probably
crossed the Alps by the Little St. Bernard pass. It was an enterprise of the greatest magnitude
to take an army of this size through a hostile country, over high mountains, in an inclement
season; but no difficulty daunted this general. In five months he found himself in the valley
of the Duria (modern Dora Baltea), in Northern Italy, with a force of twenty thousand foot
and six thousand cavalry (the remains of the army of ninety-four thousand that had left New
Carthage), with which he expected to conquer a country that counted its soldiers by the hundred
thousand. The father of the great Scipio met Hannibal in the plains west of the Ticinus, and
was routed, retreating to the west bank of the Trebia, where the Romans, with a larger force,
were again defeated, though the December cold caused the invading army great suffering and
killed all the elephants but one. The success of the Carthaginians led the Gauls to flock to
their standard, and Hannibal found himself able to push forward with increasing vigor.

Taking the route toward the capital, he met the Romans at Lake Trasimenus, and totally routed
them, killing the commander, Caius Flaminius, who had come from Arretium to oppose him. The
defeat was accounted for by the Romans by the fact that Flaminius, always careless about his
religious observances, had broken camp at Ariminum, whence he had come to Arretium, though
the signs had been against him, and had also previously neglected the usual solemnities upon
his election as consul before going to Ariminum. The policy of Hannibal was to make friends
of the allies of Rome, in order to attract them to his support, and after his successes he
carefully tended the wounded and sent the others away, often with presents. He hoped to undermine
Rome by taking away her allies, and after this great success he did not march to the capital,
though he was distant less than a hundred miles from it, because he expected to see tokens
that his policy was a success.

The dismay that fell upon Rome when it was known that her armies had twice been routed, can
better be imagined than described. The senate came together, and for two days carefully considered
the critical state of affairs. They decided that it was necessary to appoint a dictator, and
Fabius Maximus was chosen. Hannibal in the meantime continued to avoid Rome, and to march through
the regions on the Adriatic, hoping to arouse the inhabitants to his support. In vain were
his efforts. Even the Gauls seemed now to have forgotten him, and Carthage itself did not send
him aid. Fabius strove to keep to the high lands, where it was impossible for Hannibal to attack
him, while he harassed him or tried to shut him up in some defile.

In the spring of the year 216, both parties were prepared for a more terrible struggle than
had yet been seen. The Romans put their forces under one Varro, a business man, who was considered
the champion of popular liberty. The armies met on the field of Cannæ, on the banks of the
river Aufidus which enters the Adriatic, and there the practical man was defeated with tremendous
slaughter, though he was able himself to escape toward the mountains to Venusia, and again
to return to Canusium. There he served the state so well that his defeat was almost forgotten,
and he was actually thanked by the senate for his skill in protecting the remnant of the wasted
army.

The people now felt that the end of the republic had come, but still they would not listen
to Hannibal when he sent messengers to ask terms of peace. They were probably surprised when,
instead of marching upon their capital, the Carthaginian remained in comparative inactivity,
in pursuance of his former policy. He was not entirely disappointed this time, in expecting
that his brilliant victory would lead some of the surrounding nations to declare in his favor,
for finally the rich city of Capua, which considered itself equal to Rome, opened to him its
gates, and he promised to make it the capital of Italy (B.C. 216). With Capua went the most
of Southern Italy, and Hannibal thought that the war would soon end after such victories, but
he was mistaken.

Two other sources of help gave him hope, but at last failed him. Philip V., one of the ablest
monarchs of Macedon, who had made a treaty with Hannibal after the battle of Cannæ, tried to
create a diversion in his favor on the other side of the Adriatic, but his schemes were not
energetically pressed, and failed. Again, a new king of Syracuse, who had followed Hiero, offered
direct assistance, but he, too, was overcome, and his strong and wealthy city taken with terrible
carnage, though the scientific skill of the famous Archimedes long enabled its ruler to baffle
the Roman generals (B.C. 212). The Romans overran the Spanish peninsula, too, and though they
were for a time brought to a stand, in the year 210 the state of affairs changed. A young man
of promise, who had, however, never been tried in positions of great trust, was sent out. It
was the great Scipio, who has been already mentioned. He captured New Carthage, made himself
master of Spain, and was ready by the year 207 to take the last step, as he thought it would
be, by carrying the war into Africa, and thus obliging Hannibal to withdraw from Italy.

At home, the aged Fabius was meantime the trusted leader in public counsels, and by his careful
generalship Campania had been regained. Capua, too, had been recaptured, though that enterprise
had been undertaken in spite of his cautious advice. Hannibal was thus obliged to withdraw
to Lower Italy, after he had threatened Rome by marching boldly up to its very gates. The Samnites
and Lucanians submitted, and Tarentum fell into the hands of Fabius, whose active career then
closed. He had opposed the more aggressive measures of Scipio which were to lead to success,
but we can hardly think that the old commander was led to do this because, seeing that victory
was to be the result, he envied the younger soldier who was to achieve the final laurels, though
Plutarch mentions that sinister motive. The career of Fabius, which had opened at the battle
of Cannæ, and had been successful ever since, culminated in his triumph after the fall of Tarentum,
which occurred in B.C. 209.

Now the Carthaginian army in Spain, under command of Hasdrubal, made an effort to go to the
help of Hannibal, and, taking the same route by the Little St. Bernard pass, arrived in Italy
(B.C. 208) almost before the enemy was aware of its intention. Hannibal, on his part, began
to march northward from his southern position, and after gaining some unimportant victories,
arrived at Canusium, where he stopped to wait for his brother. Tom could scarcely realize in
that bright morning light, that only seven or eight hours earlier he and his friend had spied
upon their companions prowling about in the abandoned wing of the inn.

Monsieur de Boisdhyver assented readily enough when Dan proposed that Jesse should take him
that day to Monday Port.

He was curious to see the old town, he said, having heard much of it from his friend; much also
from his celebrated compatriot, the Marquis de Lafayette.

Tom took occasion during the discussion to ask Nancy if she would walk across the woods with
him after dinner, that he might pay a visit to the Red Farm and see that all was going well
in the absence of his parents. He felt that the tones of his voice were charged with unwonted significance;
but Nancy accepted the invitation with a simple expression of pleasure. When Mrs. Frost was informed
of the plans for the day, she came near thwarting Dan's carefully laid schemes. She had counted
upon Jesse to do her bidding and had, she declared, arranged that Nancy should help her put together
the silken patches of the quilt upon which she was perennially engaged. Her foster-daughter's
glance of displeasure at this was tinder to the old lady's temper, and Dan entered most opportunely.

"So!"
she was exclaiming, "I am always the one to be sacrificed when it is a question of some one's
else pleasure."

"Mother, Mother," Dan protested good-naturedly, as he bent over to kiss her good-morning, "aren't
you ever willing to spend a day alone with me?"

"Danny dear," cried the old lady, as she began to smile again, "you know I'm always willing. Of
course, if Tom wants Nancy to go, the quilt can wait; it has waited long enough, in all conscience.
There, my dear," she added, turning to the girl, "order an early
dinner, and since you are going to the Red Farm, you might as well
come back by the dunes and enquire for old Mrs. Meath.

We have neglected that poor woman shamefully this winter."

"Yes, Mother,--if we have time."

"Take the time, my dear," added Mrs. Frost sharply.

"Yes, Mother."

The Marquis started off with Jesse at eleven o'clock, as eager for the excursion as a boy; and
by half-past twelve Nancy and Tom had set out across the woods for the Red Farm. Dan was impatient
for them to be gone. As soon as he saw them disappear in the woods back of the Inn, he made
excuses to his mother, and hurried to the north wing. He found the door of the bowling alley
securely locked, which convinced him that either the Marquis or Nancy
had taken the key from the closet of his chamber.

Having satisfied himself, he went directly to the Oak Parlour.

It was cold and dark there. He opened the shutters and drew back the curtains, letting in the
cheerful midday sun, which revealed all the antique, sombre beauty of the room, of the soft
landscapes and the exquisite carving of the Dorsetshire cabinet. But Dan was in no mood to appreciate
the old-world beauty of the Oak Parlour. In that cabinet he felt sure there was something concealed
which would reveal the mystery of the Marquis's stay at the inn and possibly the nature of his
influence over Nancy. Whatever had been the object of the Marquis's search, it had not been found:
his parting words to Nancy the night before showed that.

Dan took a long look at the cabinet first, estimating the possibility of its containing secret
drawers. Hidden compartments in old cabinets, secret chambers in old houses, subterranean passageways
leading to dungeons in romantic castles, had been the material of
many a tale that Dan and Tom had told each other as boys. For years
their dearest possession had been a forbidden copy of "The Mysteries
of Udolpho" which they read in the mow of the barn lying in the dusty
hay. However unusual, the situation was real; and he felt himself
confronted by as hard a problem as he had ever tried to solve in fiction.
He knew something about carpentry, so that his first step, after examining
the drawers and cupboards and finding them empty, was to take careful
measurements of the entire cabinet, particularly of the thicknesses
of its sides, back, and partitions. It proved a piece of furniture
of absolutely simple and straightforward construction. After long
examination and careful soundings he came to the conclusion that a
secret drawer was an impossibility.

Suddenly an idea occurred to
him and he returned to the sitting-room. "Mother," he said, "I have
been looking over the old cabinet in the Oak Parlour, thinking perhaps
that I would have it brought into the dining-room.

Of old time, the Romans had thought that women should keep at home, and that in the transaction
of private business even they should be under the direction of their parents, brothers, or
husbands. What had wrought so great a change that on these days the Roman matrons not only
ventured into the forum, but actually engaged in public business, and that, as has been said,
in many instances, in opposition to those parents, brothers, and husbands who were in those
old times their natural directors? We shall find the reason by going back to the days when
the cost of the Punic wars bore heavily upon the state. It was then that a law was passed that
no woman should wear any garment of divers colors, nor own more gold than a half-ounce in weight,
nor ride through the streets of a city in a carriage drawn by horses, nor in any place nearer
than a mile to a town, except for the purpose of engaging in a public religious solemnity.
The spirited matrons of Rome were ever ready to bear their share of the public burdens, and
though some thought this oppressive, but few murmurs escaped them as they read the Oppian law,
as it was called, when it was passed, for the days were dark, and the shadow of the defeat
at Cannæ was bowing down all hearts, and their brothers and parents and husbands were trembling,
strong men that they were, at the threatening situation of the state. Now, however, the condition
of affairs had changed. The conquests of the past few years had brought large wealth into the
city, and was it to be expected that women should not wish to adorn themselves, as of yore,
with gold and garments of richness?

When now the repeal of the law was to be discussed, the excitement became so intense that people
forgot that Spain was in a state of insurrection, and that war threatened on every side. Women
thronged to the city from towns and villages, and even dared, as has been said, to approach
the consuls and other magistrates to solicit their votes. Marcus Porcius Cato, a young man
of about forty years, who had been brought up on a farm, and looked with the greatest respect
upon the virtue of the olden times, before Grecian influences had crept in to soften and refine
the hard Roman character, represented the party of conservatism. Now, thought he, is an opportunity
for me to stand against the corrupting influence of Magna Græcia. He therefore rose and made
a long speech in opposition to the petition of the matrons. He thought they had become thus
contumacious, he said, because the men had not individually exercised their rightful authority
over their own wives. "The privileges of men are now spurned, trodden under foot," he exclaimed,
"and we, who have shown that we are unable to stand against the women separately, are now utterly
powerless against them as a body. Their behavior is outrageous. I was filled with painful emotions
of shame as I just now made my way into the forum through the midst of a body of women. Will
you consent to give the reins to their intractable nature and their uncontrolled passions?
The moment they had arrived at equality with you, they will have become your superiors. What
motive that common decency will allow is pretended for this female insurrection? Why, that
they may shine in gold and purple; that they may ride through our city in chariots triumphing
over abrogated law; that there may be no bounds to waste and luxury! So soon as the law shall
cease to limit the expenses of the wife, the husband will be powerless to set bounds to them."
As the uttermost measure of the abasement to which the women had descended, Cato declared with
indignation that they had solicited votes, and he concluded by saying that though he called
upon the gods to prosper whatever action should be agreed upon, he thought that on no account
should the Oppian law be set aside.

When Cato had finished, one of the plebeian tribunes, Lucius Valerius, replied to him sarcastically,
saying that in spite of the mild disposition of the speaker who had just concluded, he had
uttered some severe things against the matrons, though he had not argued very efficiently against
the measure they supported. He referred his hearers to a book of Cato's, [Footnote: Livy is
authority for this statement, but it has been doubted if Cato's book had been written at the
time.] called Origines, or "Antiquities," in which it was made clear that in the old times
women had appeared in public, and with good effect too. "Who rushed into the forum in the days
of Romulus, and stopped the fight with the Sabines?" he asked. "Who went out and turned back
the army of the great Coriolanus? Who brought their gold and jewels into the forum when the
Gauls demanded a great ransom for the city? Who went out to the sea-shore during the late war
to receive the Idæan mother (Cybele) when new gods were invited hither to relieve our distresses?
Who poured out their riches to supply a depleted treasury during that same war, now so fresh
in memory? Was it not the Roman matrons? Masters do not disdain to listen to the prayers of
their slaves, and we are asked, forsooth, to shut our ears to the petitions of our wives!

"I have shown that women have now done no new thing. I will go on and prove that they ask no
unreasonable thing. It is true that good laws should not be rashly repealed; but we must not
forget that Rome existed for centuries without this one, and that Roman matrons established
their high character, about which Cato is so solicitous, during that period, the return of
which he now seems to think would be subversive of every thing good. This law served well in
a time of trial; but that has passed, and we are enjoying the return of plenty. Shall our matrons
be the only ones who may not feel the improvement that has followed a successful war? Shall
our children, and we ourselves, wear purple, and shall it be interdicted to our wives? Elegances
of appearance and ornaments and dress are the women's badges of distinction; in them they delight
and glory, and our ancestors called them the women's world. Still, they desire to be under
control of those who are bound to them by the bonds of love, not by stern law, in these matters.
The consul just now used invidious terms, calling this a female 'secession' as though our matrons
were about to seize the Sacred Mount or the Aventine, as the plebeians did of yore; but their
feeble nature is incapable of such a thing. They must necessarily submit to what you think
proper, and the greater your power the more moderation should you use in exercising it. "Thus,
day after day, the men spoke and the women poured out to protest, until even stern and inflexible
Cato gave way, and women were declared free from the restrictions of the Oppian law.

[Figure: ROMAN HEAD-DRESSES.]

Cato and Scipio represented the two forces that were at this time working in society, the one
opposing the entrance of the Grecian influence, and the other encouraging the refinement in
manners and modes of living that came with it, even encouraging ostentation and the lavish
use of money for pleasures. When Scipio was making his arrangements to go to Africa, he was
governor of Sicily, and lived in luxury. Cato, then but thirty years old, had been sent to
Sicily to investigate his proceedings, and act as a check upon him; but Scipio seems to have
been little influenced by the young reformer, telling him that he would render accounts of
his actions, not of the money he spent. Upon this Cato returned to Rome, and denounced Scipio's
prodigality, his love of Greek literature and art, his magnificence, and his persistence in
wasting in the gymnasium or in the pursuit of literature time which should have been used in
training his troops. Joining Fabius, he urged that an investigating committee be sent to look
into the matter, but it returned simply astonished at the efficient condition of the army,
and orders were given for prompt advance upon Carthage.

The influences coming from Greece at this time were not all the best, for that land was in
its period of decadence, and Cato did well in trying to protect his countrymen from evil. While
literature in Greece had reached its highest and had become corrupt, there had been none in
Rome during the five centuries of its history. All this time, too, there had been but one public
holiday and a single circus; but during the interval between the first and second Punic wars
a demagogue had instituted a second circus and a new festival, called the plebeian games. Other
festivals followed, and in time their cost became exceedingly great, and their influence very
bad. Fights of gladiators were introduced just at the outbreak of the first Punic war, on the
occasion of the funeral of D. Junius Brutus, and were given afterward on such occasions, because
it was believed that the manes, the spirits of the departed, loved blood. Persons began to
leave money for this purpose in their wills, and by degrees a fondness for the frightful sport
increased, for the Romans had no leaning towards the ideal, and delighted only in those pursuits
which appealed to their coarse, strong, and, in its way, pious nature. Humor and comedy with
them became burlesque, sometimes repulsive in its grotesqueness. Dramatic art grew up during
this period. We have seen that dramatic exhibitions were introduced in the year 363, from Etruria,
at a time of pestilence, but they were mere pantomimes. Now plays began to be written. Trustworthy
history begins at the time of the Punic wars, and the annals of Fabius Pictor commence with
the year 216, after the battle of Cannæ.

Rome itself was changed by the increased wealth of these times. The streets were made wider;
temples were multiplied; and aqueducts were built to bring water from distant sources; the
same Appius who constructed the great road which now bears his name, having built the first,
which, however, disappeared long ago. Another, forty-three miles in length, was paid for out
of the spoils of the war with Pyrrhus, and portions of it still remain. With the increase of
wealth and luxury came also improvement in language and in its use, and in the year 254, studies
in law were formally begun in a school established for the purpose.

[Figure: ACTORS MASKS.]

The Romans had conquered Italy and Carthage, and the next step was to make them masters of
the East. Philip V., King of Macedon, was, as we have seen, one of the most eminent of monarchs
of that country. His treaty with Hannibal after the battle of Cannæ, involved him in war with
the Romans, which continued, with intermissions, until Scipio was about to go over into Africa.
Then the Romans were glad to make peace, though no considerable results followed the struggle,
and it had indeed been pursued with little vigor for much of the time. By the year 200, Philip
had been able to establish himself in Greece, and the Romans were somewhat rested from the
war with Carthage. The peace of 205 had been considered but a cessation of hostilities, and
both people were therefore ready for a new war. There were pretexts enough. Philip had made
an alliance with Antiochus the Great, of Syria, against Ptolemy Epiphanes, of Egypt, who applied
to Rome for assistance; and he had sent aid to soldiers to help Hannibal, who had fought at
the battle of Zama. Besides this he had attempted to establish his supremacy in the Ægean Sea
at the expense of the people of Rhodes, allies of Rome, who were assisted by Attalus, King
of Pergamus, likewise in league with Rome.

The senate proposed that war should be declared against Philip, but the people longed for rest
after their previous struggles, and were only persuaded to consent by being told that if Philip,
then at the pitch of his greatness, were not checked, he would follow the example of Hannibal,
as he had been urged to follow that of Pyrrhus. No great progress was made in the war until
the command of the Roman army in Greece was taken by a young man of high family and noble nature,
well acquainted with Greek culture, in the year 197. Flamininus, for this was the name of the
new commander, met the army of Philip that year on a certain morning when, after a rain, thick
clouds darkened the plain on which they were. The armies were separated by low hills known
as the Dog-heads (Cynocephalæ), and when at last the sun burst out it showed the Romans and
Macedonians struggling on the uneven ground with varying success. The Macedonians were finally
defeated, with the loss of eight thousand slain and five thousand prisoners. In 196 peace was
obtained by Philip, who agreed to withdraw from Greece, to give up his fleet, and to pay a
thousand talents for the expenses of the war.

At the Isthmian games, the following summer, Flamininus caused a trumpet to command silence,
and a crier to proclaim that the Roman senate and he, the proconsular general, having vanquished
Philip, restored to the Grecians their lands, laws, and liberties, remitting all impositions
upon them and withdrawing all garrisons. So astonished were the people at the good news that
they could scarcely believe it, and asked that it might be repeated. This the crier did, and
a shout rose from the people (who all stood up) that was heard from Corinth to the sea, and
there was no further thought of the entertainment that usually engrossed so much attention.
Plutarch says gravely that the disruption of the air was so great that crows accidentally flying
over the racecourse at the moment fell down dead into it! Night only caused the people to leave
the circus, and then they went home to carouse together. So grateful were they that they freed
the Romans who had been captured by Hannibal and had been sold to them, and when Flamininus
returned to Rome with a reputation second only, in the popular esteem, to Scipio Africanus,
these freed slaves followed in the procession on the occasion of his triumph, which was one
of the most magnificent, and lasted three days.

Scarcely had Flamininus left Greece before the Ætolians, who claimed that the victory at Cynocephalæ
was chiefly due to their prowess, made a combination against the Romans, and engaged Antiochus
to take their part. This monarch had occupied Asia Minor previously, and would have passed
into Greece but for Flamininus. This was while Hannibal was at the court of Antiochus. The
Romans declared war, and sent an army into Thessaly, which overcame the Syrians at the celebrated
pass of Thermopylæ, on the spot where Leonidas and his brave three hundred had been slaughtered
by the Persians two hundred and eighty-nine years before (B.C. 191). Lucius Cornelius Scipio,
brother of Africanus, closed the war by defeating Antiochus at Magnesia, in Asia Minor, at
the foot of Mount Sipylus (B.C. 190). The Syrian monarch is said to have lost fifty-three thousand
men, while but four hundred of the Romans fell. Antiochus resigned to the Romans all of Asia
west of the Taurus mountains, agreed to pay them fifteen thousand talents, and to surrender
Hannibal. The great Carthaginian, however, escaped to the court of Prusias, King of Bithynia,
where, as we have already seen, he took his own life. Scipio carried immense booty to Rome,
where he celebrated a splendid triumph, and, in imitation of his brother Africanus, added the
name Asiaticus to his others.

The succeeding year, the Ætolians were severely punished, their land was ravaged, and they
were required to accept peace upon humiliating terms. Never again were they to make war without
the consent of Rome, whose supremacy they acknowledged, and to which they paid an indemnity
of five hundred talents. At this time the most famous hero of later Grecian history comes before
us indirectly, just as the greatness of his country was sinking from sight forever. Philopoemen,
who was born at Megalopolis in Arcadia (not far from the spot from which old Evander started
for Italy), during the first Punic war, just before Hamilcar appeared upon the scene, raised
himself to fame, first by improving the armor and drill of the Achæan soldiers, when he became
chief of the ancient league, and then by his prowess at the battle of Mantinea, in the year
207, when Sparta was defeated. He revived the ancient league, which had been dormant during
the Macedonian supremacy; but in 188, he took fierce revenge upon Sparta, for which he was
called to account by the Romans; and five years later, in 183, he fell into the hands of the
Messenians, who had broken from the league, and was put to death by poison. It was in the same
year that both Hannibal and Scipio, the two other great soldiers of the day died. [Footnote:
See the Student's Merivale, ch. xxv., for remarks about these three warriors.]

Philip V. of Macedon followed these warriors to the grave five years later, after having begun
to prepare to renew the war with Rome. His son Perseus continued these preparations, but war
did not actually break out until 171, and then it was continued for three years without decisive
result. In 168 the Romans met the army of Perseus at Pydna, in Macedonia, north of Mount Olympus,
on the 22d June, [Footnote: This date is proved by an eclipse of the sun which occurred at
the time. It had been foretold by a scientific Roman so that the army should not see in it
a bad omen.] and utterly defeated it. Perseus was afterward taken prisoner and died at Alba.
From the battle of Pydna the great historian Polybius, who was a native of Megalopolis, dates
the complete establishment of the universal empire of Rome, since after that no civilized state
ever confronted her on an equal footing, and all the struggles in which she engaged were rebellions
or wars with "barbarians" outside of the influence of Greek or Roman civilization, and since
all the world recognized the senate as the tribunal of last resort in differences between nations;
the acquisition of Roman language and manners being henceforth among the necessary accomplishments
of princes. Rome had never before seen so grand a triumph as that celebrated by Æmilius Paulus,
the conqueror of Macedonia, after his return. Plutarch gives an elaborate account of it.

In pursuance of its policy of conquest a thousand of the noblest citizens of Achæa were sent
to Italy to meet charges preferred against them. Among them was the historian Polybius, who
became well acquainted with Scipio Æmilianus, son by adoption of a son of the conqueror of
Hannibal. For seventeen years these exiles were detained, their numbers constantly decreasing,
until at last even the severe Cato was led to intercede for them and they were returned to
their homes. Exasperated by their treatment they were ready for any desperate enterprise against
their conquerors, but Polybius endeavored to restrain them. The historian went to Carthage,
however, and while he was away disputes were stirred up which gave Rome an excuse for interfering.
Corinth was taken with circumstances of barbarous cruelty, and plundered of its priceless works
of art, the rough and ignorant Roman commander sending them to Italy, after making the contractors
agree to replace any that might be lost with others of equal value! With Corinth fell the liberties
of Greece; a Roman province took the place of the state that for six centuries had been the
home of art and eloquence, the intellectual sovereign of antiquity; but though overcome and
despoiled she became the guide and teacher of her conqueror.

When Carthage had regained some of its lost riches and population, Rome again became jealous
of her former rival, and Cato gave voice to the feeling that she ought to be destroyed. One
day in the senate he drew from his toga a bunch of early figs, and, throwing them on the floor,
exclaimed: "Those figs were gathered but three days ago in Carthage; so close is our enemy
to our walls!" After that, whenever he expressed himself on this subject, or any other, in
the senate, he closed with the words "Delenda est Carthago,"--"Carthage ought to be destroyed!"
Internal struggles gave Rome at last an opportunity to interfere, and in 149 a third Punic
war was begun, which closed in 146 with the utter destruction of Carthage. The city was taken
by assault, the inhabitants fighting with desperation from street to street. Scipio Æmilianus,
who commanded in this war, was now called also Africanus, like his ancestor by adoption.

For years the tranquillity of Spain, which lasted from 179 to 153, had been disturbed by wars,
and it was not until Scipio was sent thither that peace was restored. That warrior first put
his forces into an effective condition, and then laid siege to the city of Numantia, situated
on an elevation and well fortified. The citizens defended themselves with the greatest bravery,
and showed wonderful endurance, but were at last obliged to surrender, and the town was levelled
to the ground, most of the inhabitants being sold as slaves.

The great increase in slaves, and the devastation caused by long and exhaustive wars, had brought
about in Sicily a servile insurrection, before the Numantians had been conquered. It is said
that the number of those combined against their Roman masters reached the sum of two hundred
thousand. In 132, the strongholds of the insurgents were captured by a consular army, and peace
restored. The barbarism of Roman slavery had nowhere reached such extremes as in Sicily. Freedmen
who had cultivated the fields were there replaced by slaves, who were ill- fed and poorly cared
for. Some worked in chains, and all were treated with indescribable brutality. They finally
became bandits in despair, and efforts at repression of their disorders led to the open and
fearful war. The same year that this war ended, the last king of Pergamos died, leaving his
kingdom and treasures to the Roman people, as he had no children, and Pergamos became the "province"
of Asia. Besides this, Rome had the provinces of Sicily, Sardinia and Corsica, Spain, Gallia
Cisalpina, Macedonia, Illyricum, Southern Greece (Achæa), and Africa, to which was soon to
be added the southern portion of Gaul over the Alps, between those mountains and the Pyrenees
called Provincia Gallia (Provence).

XII.

A FUTILE EFFORT AT REFORM.

One day when the conqueror of Carthage, Scipio Africanus, was feasting with other senators
at the Capitol, the veteran patrician was asked by the friends about him to give his daughter
Cornelia to a young man of the plebeian family of Sempronia, Tiberius Gracchus by name. This
young man was then about twenty-five years old; he had travelled and fought in different parts
of the world, and had obtained a high reputation for manliness. Just at this time he had put
Africanus under obligations to him by defending him from attacks in public life, and the old
commander readily agreed to the request of his friends. When he returned to his home and told
his wife that he had given away their daughter, she upbraided him for his rashness; but when
she heard the name of the fortunate man, she said that Gracchus was the only person worthy
of the gift. The mother's opinion proved to be correct. The young people lived together in
happiness, and Cornelia became the mother of three children, who carried down the good traits
of their parents. One of these was a daughter named, like her mother, Cornelia, who became
the wife of Scipio Africanus the younger, and the others were her two brothers. Tiberius and
Caius, who are known as the Gracchi. Tiberius Gracchus lived to be over fifty years old, and
won still greater laurels in war and peace at home and in foreign lands. Cicero says that he
did a great service to the state by gathering together on the Esquiline the freedmen who had
spread themselves throughout the tribes, and restricting their franchise (B.C. 169). Thus,
Cicero thought, he succeeded for a time in checking the ruin of the republic. [Footnote: The
freedmen had been confined to the four city tribes in 220 B.C.]

There was sad need of some movement to correct abuses that had grown up in Rome, and the men
destined to stand forth as reformers were the two Gracchi, sons of Cornelia and Tiberius. Their
father did not live to complete their education, but their mother, though courted by great
men, and by at least one king, refused to marry again, and gave up her time to educating her
sons, whom she proudly called her "jewels" when the Roman matrons, relieved from the restrictions
of the Oppian law, boastfully showed her the rich ornaments of gold and precious stones that
they adorned themselves with. The brothers had eminent Greeks to give them instruction, and
grew up wise, able and eloquent, though each exhibited his wisdom and ability in a different way.

Tiberius, who was nine years older than his brother, came first into public life. He went to
Africa with his brother-in-law, when the younger Africanus completed the destruction of Carthage,
and afterward he took part in the wars in Spain. It is said that, as he went through Etruria
on his way to Spain, he noticed that the fields were cultivated by foreign slaves, working
in clanking chains, instead of by freemen; and that because the rich had taken possession of
great ranges of territory, the poor Romans had not even a clod to call their own, though they
had fought the battles by which the land had been made secure. The sight of so much distress
in a fertile country lying waste affected Tiberius very deeply, and when he returned to Rome,
he bethought himself that it was in opposition to law that the rich controlled such vast estates.
He remembered that the Licinian Rogation, which became a law more than two hundred years before
this time, forbade any man having such large tracts in his possession, and thought that so
beneficent a law should continue to be respected. He told the people of Rome that the wild
beasts had their dens and caves, while the men who had fought and exposed their lives for Italy
enjoyed in it nothing more than light and air, and were obliged to wander about with their
wives and little ones, their commanders mocking them by calling upon them to fight "for their
tombs and the temples of their gods,"-- things that they never possessed nor could hope to
have any interest in. "Not one among many, many Romans," said he, "has a family altar or an
ancestral tomb. They have fought to maintain the luxury of the great, and they are called in
bitter irony the 'masters of the world' while they do not possess a clod of earth that they
may call their own!"

It was a noble patriotism that filled the heart of Tiberius, but it was not easy to carry out
a reform like the one he contemplated. It may not have appeared difficult to re-enact the old
law, but we must remember that, during two centuries of its neglect, generations of men had
peaceably possessed the great estates, of which its enforcement would deprive them all at once.
Was it to be supposed that they would quietly permit this to be done? Was it just to deprive
men of possessions that they had received from their parents and grandparents without protest
on the part of the nation? Cornelia urged Tiberius to do some great work for the state, telling
him that she was called the "daughter of Scipio," while she wished to be known as the "mother
of the Gracchi." The war in Sicily emphasized the troubles that Tiberius wished to put an end
to, and in the midst of it he was elected one of the tribunes, the people hoping something
from him, and putting up placards all over the city calling upon him to take their part.

The people seemed to feel sure that Gracchus was intending to do something for them, and they
eagerly came together and voted for him, and when he was elected, they crowded into the city
from all the regions about to vote in favor of the re-establishment of the Licinian laws, with
some alterations. They were successful; much to the disgust of the aristocrats, [Footnote:
Aristocrat is a word of Greek origin, and means one of a governing body composed of the best
men (aristos, best) in the state. The aristocrats came to be called also optimatos, from optimus,
the corresponding Latin word for best.] who hated Gracchus, and thenceforth plotted to overthrow
him and his power. For a while, the lands that had been wrongfully occupied by the rich were
taken by a commission and returned to the government.

When Attalus, the erratic king of Pergamus, left his estates to Rome, Gracchus had an opportunity
to perform an act of justice, by refunding to the rich the outlays they had made on the lands
of which they had been deprived. This would have been politic as well as just, but Gracchus
did not see his opportunity. He proposed, on the other hand, to divide the new wealth among
the plebeians, to enable them to buy implements and cattle for the estates they had acquired.

It was easy at that excited time to make false accusations against public men, and to cause
the populace to act upon them, and, accordingly, the aristocrats now stirred up the people
to believe that Gracchus was aspiring to the power of king, which, they were reminded, had
been forever abolished ages before. No opportunity was given him to explain his intentions.
A great mob was raised and a street fight precipitated, in the midst of which three hundred
persons were killed with sticks and stones and pieces of benches. Among them was Gracchus himself,
who thus died a martyr to his patriotic plans for the Roman republic. [Footnote: The course
of Gracchus was not understood at the time by all good citizens; and even for ages after he
was considered a designing demagogue. It was not until the great Niebuhr, to whom we owe so
much in Roman history, explained fully the nature of the agrarian laws which Gracchus passed,
that the world accepted him for the hero and honest patriot that he was.]

Caius Gracchus was in Spain at the time of his brother's murder, and Scipio, his brother-in-law,
was there also. So little did Scipio understand Tiberius, that when he heard of his death he
quoted the words of Minerva to Mercury, which he remembered to have read in his Homer, "So
perish he who doth the same again!" The next year brother and brother-in-law returned from
Spain, but Caius did not seem to care to enter political life, and as he lived in quiet for
some years, it was thought that he disapproved his brother's laws. Little did the public dream
of what was to come.

Meantime Scipio became the acknowledged leader of the optimates, and in order to keep the obnoxious
law from being enforced, proposed to take it out of the hands of the commission and give it
to the senate. His proposition was vigorously opposed in the forum, and when he retired to
his home to prepare a speech to be delivered on the subject, a number of friends thought it
necessary to accompany him as protectors. The next morning the city was startled by the news
that he was dead. His speech was never even composed. No effort was made to discover his murderer,
though one Caius Papirius Carbo, a tribune, leader of the opposing party, was generally thought
to have been the guilty one.

The eloquence of young Gracchus proved greater than that of any other citizen, and by it he
ingratiated himself with the people to such an extent, that in the year 123 B.C. they elected
him one of their tribunes. Though the aristocrats managed to have his name placed fourth on
the list, his force and eloquence made him really first in all public labors, and he proceeded
to use his influence to further his brother's favorite projects. He was impetuous in his oratory.
As he spoke, he walked from side to side of the rostra, and pulled his toga from his shoulder
as he became warm in his delivery. His powerful voice filled the forum, and stirred the hearts
of his hearers, who felt that his persuasive words came from an honest heart.

The optimates were of course offended by the acts of the new tribune, who abridged the power
of the senate, and in all ways showed an intention of working for the people. He was exceedingly
active in works of public benefit, building roads and bridges, erecting mile-stones along the
principal routes, extending to the Italians the right to vote, and alleviating the distressing
poverty of the lower orders by directing that grain should be sold to them at low rates. The
laws under which he accomplished these beneficent changes are known, from the family to which
the Gracchi belonged, as the Sempronian Laws. In carrying out the necessary legislation and
in executing the laws, Caius labored himself with great assiduity, and his activity afforded
his enemies the opportunity to say falsely that he made some private gain from them.

The optimates soon saw that the labors of Gracchus had drawn the people close to him, and they
determined to weaken his influence by indirect means, rather than venture to make any immediate
display of opposition. They according adopted the sagacious policy of making it appear that
they wished to do more for the people than their own champion proposed. They allowed a rich
and eloquent demagogue, Marcus Livius Drusus, to act for them, and he deceived the people by
proposing measures that appeared more democratic than those of Gracchus, whose power over the
people was thus somewhat undermined. The next step was then taken. In the midst of an election
a tumult was excited, and Gracchus was obliged to flee, over the wooden bridge, to the Grove
of the Furies. Death was his only deliverance. The optimates tried to make it out that he had
been an infamous man, but the common people afterward loved both the brothers and esteemed
them as great benefactors who had died for them,

The fall of the Gracchi left the people without a leader, and the optimates easily kept possession
of the government, though they did not yet feel disposed to proceed at once to carry out their
own wishes fully, for fear that they might sting the populares beyond endurance. They stopped
the assignments of lands, however, allowing those who had occupied large tracts to keep them,
and thus the desolation and retrogression which had so deeply moved Gracchus continued and
increased even more rapidly than it had in his time. The state fell into a condition of corruption
in every department, and office was looked upon simply as a means of acquiring wealth, not
as something to be held as a trust for the good of the governed. The nation suffered also from
servile insurrections; the seas were overrun with pirates; the rich plunged into vice; the
poor were pushed down to deeper depths of poverty; judicial decisions were sold for money;
the inhabitants of the provinces were looked upon by the nobles as fit subjects for plunder,
and the governors obtained their positions by purchase; everywhere ruin stared the commonwealth
in the face, though there seems to have been no one with perceptions clear enough to perceive
the trend of affairs.

In this degenerate time there arose two men of the most diverse traits and descent, whose lives,
running parallel for many years, furnish at once instructive studies and involve graphic pictures
of public affairs. The elder of them was with Scipio when Numantia fell into his hands, and
with Jugurtha, a Numidian prince, won distinction by his valor on that occasion. Caius Marius
was the name of this man, and he belonged to the commons. He was twenty-three years of age,
and had risen from the low condition of a peasant to one of prominence in public affairs. Fifteen
years after the fall of Numantia we find him a tribune of the people, standing for purity in
the elections, against the opposition of the optimates. Rough, haughty, and undaunted, he carried
his measures and waited for the gathering storm to furnish him more enlarged opportunities
for the exercise of his strength and ambition.

The opponent and final conqueror of this commoner was but four years of age when Numantia fell,
and came into public life later than Marius. Lucius Cornelius Sulla was an optimate of illustrious
ancestry and hereditary wealth, a student of the literature and art of Greece and his native
land, and he united in his person all the vices as well as accomplishments that Cato had been
accustomed to denounce with the utmost vigor.

Marius and Sulla, the plebeian and the optimate, the man without education of the schools,
and the master of classic culture, were brought together in Africa in the year 107. Numidia
had long been an ally of Rome, but upon the death of one of its kings, Jugurtha, who had gained
confidence in himself during the Numantian campaign, attempted to gain control of the government.
Rome interfered, but so accessible were public men to bribes, that Jugurtha obtained from the
senate a decree dividing the country between him and the rightful claimant of the throne. Not
contented with this, he attempted to conquer his rival and obtain the undivided sway. He read
it attentively.

"The Inn at the Red Oak, Deal:

"14 October, '814.

"Madame:

"Political circumstances over which I have no control, patriotic considerations
which I cannot withstand, demand my immediate return to France.

In the conditions into which I am about to be plunged the care of my dear little daughter becomes
an impossibility. Inhuman as it must seem to you, lacking in all sense of Christian duty as it
must appear to you, I entrust, without the formality of consulting you, my beautiful little
Eloise to your humane and tender care. With this letter I deposit with you the sum of two thousand
dollars in gold, which will go a little way at least to compensate you for the burden I thus
unceremoniously, but of necessity, thrust upon you. I appeal to and confide in the goodness
of your heart, of which already I have such abundant testimony, that will take pity upon the misfortune
of a helpless infant and an equally helpless parent. May you be a mother to the motherless,
and may the Heavenly Father bless you for what you shall do.

"I embark, madame, upon a dangerous and uncertain mission. Should that mission prove successful
and restore the fortunes of my house, I will return and claim my daughter. Should fate overwhelm
me with disaster, I must beg that you will continue to regard her and love her as your own.
The issue will have been decided within five years. Permit me to add but one thing more,--in
the event that I fall in the cause I have embraced, I have made arrangements whereby communications
shall be established with you, madame, that will redound to your
own good fortune and that of the little Eloise.

"All effort to thwart my plans or to establish my identity in the meantime, will, I must warn
you, be fruitless.

"Adieu, madame: accept the assurance of my gratitude for all that you have already done to sweeten
exile and of my earnest prayer for the blessing of God upon your great good heart.

"I remain, madame, for the present, but always, under whatever name,

"Your grateful and sincere servant,

"GASTON POINTELLE,"

As Dan, with gathering brows, concluded the reading
of this extraordinary letter, Mrs. Frost resumed her story.

"We always imagined that the general and his companions had sailed in a French vessel that lay
at that time in the Passage and left that morning at dawn. There was nothing to do but adopt little
Eloise Pointelle for my own.

I changed her name, at your father's suggestion, to Nancy Frost; knowing that Pointelle was not
the general's real name. For five years we looked to see our guest return; and afterwards for years,
we hoped to receive some communication that would prove, as he promised, of advantage to Nancy
and ourselves. But from the night General Pointelle left our house to this day, I have not heard one
word to show that he still existed or, indeed, that he ever had existed. We brought Nancy up
as our own daughter, though, never concealing from her the fact that she was not of our blood.
Indeed, Dan, I have loved her dearly."

"Certainly, you have always treated her with the greatest kindness. But this is quite extraordinary,
Mother. I think it will throw light on Nancy's present disappearance."

"Do you think the father is alive, Dan? that he has communicated with
her?"

"Not that, mother; I am really in the dark. But I believe that the Marquis de Boisdhyver has
some connection with your General Pointelle, and that his stay with us this winter has something
to do with Nancy."

In response to Mrs. Frost's questions, he told of the meetings of Nancy and the marquis, but decided
to say nothing about the paper that he had found in the Oak Parlour.

"I want you to be careful, Mother, to give no hint to the Marquis that we suspect him in any way.
Tom and I are trying to solve the mystery, and secrecy is of the greatest importance. It is
a more complicated business than we imagined. I must go now and find Tom. May I keep this
letter?"

"Yes, but keep it under lock and key. I have guarded it for sixteen years; and it is the only
evidence I possess of Nancy's origin."

Dan returned to the bar, where he found the Marquis and Tom still reading their papers.

"Ah!" exclaimed Monsieur de Boisdhyver, "I trust, Monsieur Frost, you bring us the good news at
last of the return of Mademoiselle."

"Unfortunately, I do not, monsieur," Dan replied. "Our efforts to find out what has become of
her have been entirely unsuccessful. I am very anxious, as you may imagine."

"And to what mishap do you attribute Mademoiselle's so unceremonious departure?"

"I do not attribute it to any mishap," replied Dan. "I think that my sister has gone off on
a visit to some friends, and that her messages to us have been miscarried. I feel certain that to-morrow
we will be completely reassured."

"Ah! I hope so with all my heart," exclaimed the Marquis fervently. "It is a matter of deep distress
to me--monsieur. But if--to-morrow passes and still you do not hear--?"

"God knows, sir. We must do everything to find her."

"We shall find her," cried Tom, as he sprang to his feet, unable longer to repress his anxiety
or his irritation. "And if we do not find her safe and well, woe to the man who has harmed her."

"Bravo!"
cried the Marquis. "Permit me to adopt those words to express my own sentiments. I applaud
this determination, monsieur, de tout mon coeur."

Tom glared at the little old man with an expression of illconcealed rage. He was about to blurt
out some angry reply, when a warning gesture from Dan checked him. Without speaking, he flung himself
out of the room.

"Poor Tom!" said Dan quickly, to cover Pembroke's attitude toward the Marquis, "this takes him especially
hard. He is in love with Nancy."

"Eh bien! I sympathize with his good taste. It is that that accounts for his vigour of his expressions,
so much more emphatique than our good host."

"More emphatic, perhaps," said Dan, "though I do not feel less strongly."

The Marquis made a little bow, as he rose to retire. "If, chance, monsieur could require my
assistance--"

"Thank you," said Dan quickly. "In that case, sir, I shall be only too happy to call upon you."
He rose also, and courteously held the candle till the Marquis had reached the top of the stairs.

Tom
waited his friend impatiently in their common chamber. And when at last, having closed the
house for the night, Dan joined him, he told at once of the signals
which he supposed had been exchanged between the Marquis at the Inn
and someone at the House on the Dunes.

In return Dan repeated what he had learned about Nancy from Mrs.
Frost.

"There is no doubt in my mind," said Dan, "that the Marquis knows all about Nancy's disappearance
and where she is, and further I believe that Nancy's disappearance is part of a plot with the
Marquis here, Madame de la Fontaine at the House on the Dunes, and that schooner riding at
anchor in the Cove. I have a plan, Tom."

"Go ahead for heaven's sake. If we don't do something, I'll go in and choke the truth out of that
old reprobate. He applauds my sentiments, eh! Good God! If he knew them!"

"Yes, yes," said Dan. "But the time for choking has not come.

You nearly gave yourself away to-night, you will ruin our plans, and involve Nancy in some harm.
She is probably in that old villain's power. Now listen to me. The first thing to do is to
discover Nancy's whereabouts. The second is to get at the bottom of the Marquis's plot and the
secret of the torn scrap of paper. We will find the clew to both, I think, if we can discover
the meaning of the signals between the Marquis and the lady in the House on the Dunes."

"Right!" cried Tom. "But how?"

"One of us must stay at the Inn and watch the Marquis to-night, and the other investigate the
House on the Dunes. I have already been there and made the acquaintance of the lady, so I
had better do that, and you stay here. Do you agree?"

"Yes, of course; though I envy you the chance to be out and doing."

"You will be doing something here. I want you to hide yourself in the hallway near the Marquis's door
and watch all night--till dawn anyway. He cannot get out of his room without coming into the
hall, and we must know what he does to-night. If the Marquis can spend a sleepless night, we can afford
to do so. I don't know what I can do at the House on the Dunes but I shall take the pistol, and you
can keep my gun. To-morrow I will get more arms, for I shouldn't be surprised if we needed
them. Is everything clear?"

"Perfectly," said Tom. "I'll watch as soon as you are off."

"Good-night, old boy, good luck."

"Good-night," and Dan slipped out of the room and down the dark stairs.

CHAPTER X

MIDNIGHT VIGILS

As soon as Dan had gone Tom blew out his light and slipped into the
hallway.

This portion of the Inn was simple in design. A long corridor ran through the middle of the house
to meet a similar passage at the southern end extending at right angles to the main hall.
The South Chamber, occupied by the Marquis de Boisdhyver, opened into the southwest passage,
but the door was well beyond the juncture of the two corridors. It was Pembroke's intention
to conceal himself in the bedroom next the Marquis's chamber, from the door of which he could
look down the entire length of the main hall, and by stepping outside get a view of the branch
hallway into which the door of this room and that of the Marquis actually opened. A further advantage
was that the windows of this room, like those of the South Chamber, looked out upon the Dunes
and the Cove.

As Tom stepped from his chamber, the house seemed utterly deserted; save for the roaring of
the wind without and an occasional creak or crack in the time-worn boards, there were no sounds.

The
night was not a dark one, although the wind was rising and rain was threatening; for a full moon
lurked behind the thick veil of cloud and something of its weird weak light relieved the darkness
even of the great corridor of the Inn.

Tom stole softly down the hallway and gained the room next the Marquis's. He took his position
in a great chair, which he drew near the open door, and laid his
gun on the floor near at hand.

No one could enter the hall without his seeing him. Every few moments he would tiptoe to the
doorway, thrust his head into the corridor, and listen intently for any sound in the South Chamber.

It
was a lonely and unpleasant vigil. The night was wild, the storm was rising, the old Inn was
moaning as though in distress; and, despite his natural courage, fantastic terrors and dangers
thrust themselves upon his excited imagination. He would much have preferred, he felt, to be out in the
open as Dan was, even facing real dangers and greater difficulties.

Deeper than by these imaginary fears of the night, he was racked with anxiety to know what had
become of the girl he loved. Had she been decoyed away by the evil genius of the place; was
she in danger? Had she disappeared of her own free will; and didn't she really love him?

He was not in the least sleepy; but after a while the vigil began to tell upon his nerves.
He found it almost impossible to sit still and wait, perhaps in vain. He made innumerable trips
across the room to the windows to look out into the bleak night. The landscape was blotted out.
Not a light showed from the House on the Dunes; only the two lamps on the schooner at anchor in the
Cove gleamed across the night. Eleven o'clock, twelve o'clock struck solemnly from the old
clock on the stairs.

Once as he was looking out of the window, it seemed to him that the
green light on the Southern Cross was moving.

But it was impossible that she should weigh anchor in the teeth of the rising storm. He was mistaken.
Nay, he was sure. But it was rising, slowly, steadily, as though drawn by an invisible hand, to
about the height of the masthead. There at last it stopped, and swung to the wind, to and fro,
to and fro; high above its red companion, high above the deck.

And then, suddenly, as if to answer this mysterious manoeuvre, the green light, that earlier in
the evening had glowed from a north window of the House on the Dunes, now flashed from an east
window of the old farmhouse; flashed, then gleamed steadily. The light on the Southern Cross
was lowered slowly, then raised again. The light in the House on the Dunes vanished; soon flashed
again and then vanished once more. Slowly the light in the schooner descended to its normal position.
A moment later the green light appeared on the north side of the House on the Dunes, where
it had been earlier, and shone there steadily.

Was it a signal to the Marquis de Boisdhyver? Tom tiptoed to the partition between his room and
the South Chamber, and put his ear to the wall to listen. Not a sound reached him. He turned to the
door to go into the corridor, and stood suddenly motionless. For there, advancing ever so cautiously
down the hall, carrying a lighted candle in his hand, was the old
Marquis.

He was clad in night dress and cap, with a gayly-coloured dressing-gown worn over the white
shirt. Slowly, silently, pausing every instant to listen; he stole on, gun in hand, and Tom followed
him as cautiously and as quietly. Instead of turning to the right at the partition that divides
the north and south wings of the Inn and going down stairs, the Marquis turned to the left, into the
short hall that led directly to the great chamber occupied by Tom and Dan.

By the time Pembroke in pursuit had reached the turn and dared to peep around the corner of the
wall, the Marquis was at the door of Dan's room. He stood there, ear bent close to the panel,
intently listening.

Tom waited breathless. Not satisfied, Monsieur de Boisdhyver turned about and went into an adjoining
chamber, the door of which stood open. Pembroke was about to advance, when the Marquis emerged
again into the corridor, having left his lighted candle in the empty room. This manoeuvre, whatever
advantage it had for the Marquis, was fortunate for Pembroke, for
it left the end of the little hall, where he stood watching, in deep
shadow. He could now step boldly from behind the concealing wall without
fear of immediate detection.

Again the Marquis stood and listened
at the door of Dan's room, then cautiously turned the knob. The door
yielded and opened an inch or so. Monsieur de Boisdhyver put his ear
to the crack. Dissatisfied with the absolute silence that must have
met him, he pushed open the door a little further and thrust his head
inside. In a moment he disappeared within.

Tom realized that the
Marquis would soon discover the fact that the room was empty. He looked
about quickly for a place of concealment that would command a view
of all the halls. Fortunately the partition that divided the long
corridor between the north and south wings was hung with heavy curtains.
Deciding instantly, Pembroke slipped behind them, and ruthlessly slit
an opening in the thick green stuff, through which he could peek out.
He was just in time, as the Marquis came out of their bedroom and
softly closed the door. He stood irresolute; then, with even greater
caution, re-entered the room in which he had left his candle. To Tom's
chagrin, the candle was suddenly extinguished and the Inn left in
darkness.

For some moments, there was absolute silence. Then Tom
could hear faintly,--or feel rather than hear--the Marquis cautiously
finding his way back. Luckily, the old Frenchman was groping his way
next the other wall. Pembroke slipped from behind the curtains and
stole softly in pursuit. As he reached the south end of the corridor,
he heard the latch of the Marquis's door click softly. Alarmed by
discovering that they were not in bed, thought Tom, he had abandoned
whatever purpose he had in mind for his midnight prowl.

After waiting
a little and hearing no more, Tom went again to the window. The rain
had begun now and the wind was blowing a gale. Suddenly Pembroke discerned
a light shining from the window next the very one from which he was
peering into the darkness,--the steady glow of a deep red light.

"Another
signal!" he murmured; then waited to see if it would be answered by
the House on the Dunes. Perhaps fifteen minutes passed, and then,
suddenly, there gleamed through the rain and dark, a tiny bit of red
flame, just where the House on the Dunes must be. A little later the
red lamp on the Southern Cross performed a fantastic ascension to
what Pembroke took to be the masthead.

The red light in the neighbouring
window was extinguished. Almost instantly the red spark on the Dunes
disappeared, and in a few moments the schooner's lamp began its descent.
Simultaneously they glowed again and the ship's light danced upward;
then the two red lights on shore vanished and the lamp on the Southern
Cross sank to its proper place and stayed there.

Of one thing Tom
was sure: The Marquis, the lady at the House on the Dunes, and the
skipper of the schooner in the Cove, were in collusion. Of another
thing he felt almost equally certain: the red light was a signal of
danger, and the message of danger flashed across the night was the
fact that he and Dan were not safe asleep in bed.

For a long time
he watched, keen with excitement; listened patiently; started at every
sound. But nothing more unusual did he hear that night than the roar
of the wind, the dash of the brawling southeaster against the panes,
and the groans of the old house, shaken by the storm. Toward morning
he crept back to bed and fell instantly into a deep and dreamless
sleep.

While Tom was thus watching and sleeping a somewhat different
experience had fallen to the lot of Dan Frost. He had no definite
plan in making a midnight visit to the vicinity of the House on the
Dunes, but he hoped to discover some clue to the surrounding mysteries.
From time to time during the day he had taken his field glasses to
one of the upper rooms of the Inn, and scanned the countryside but
nothing unusual seemed astir in the white world without. The Southern
Cross had lain on the surface of the little cove all day, swaying
with wind and tide, no sign of activity upon her decks. It was after
ten when he started forth. The night was not quite dark, for the full
moon was shining somewhere behind the thick veil of clouds. Earlier
in the evening Dan had intended to go boldly to the House itself and
demand an interview with old Mrs. Meath; but he reflected that he
would probably be met with the excuse that Mrs. Meath was ill, and
he did not know how he could force himself in, particularly past the
barrier of Madame de la Fontaine's charming manner.

It was an unpleasant
walk with the wind in his face, and it was nearly eleven before he
turned into the long dune road, which branched from the Port Road
near the Rocking Stone and led directly to the old farmhouse on Strathsey
Neck. To his chagrin it appeared that all lights had been extinguished
as if the inmates of the house had gone to bed.

The old farmhouse
loomed before him, dark and forbidding. On either side there were
outhouses, and in the rear quite near the house a barn. There was
not a tree on the place; indeed, there was little vegetation upon
the entire Neck, save the grass of the middle meadows which in summer
furnished scant nourishment for the cattle and a flock of sheep. Now
all was bleak and covered with snow, and a freshening gale swept out
of the great maw of the Atlantic.

Keeping close to the fence, Frost
began to make a complete circuit of the farmhouse. As he turned a
corner of the south end, or rear of the house, he was relieved to
see a light burning in the kitchen. He stole cautiously to a position
within the shadow of the barn from which he could get a glimpse of
the interior. In the kitchen standing before a deal table, he saw
a young woman--not Jane, Mrs. Heath's maid-of-all-work, but a stranger,--with
her hands deep in a bowl of dough. Her back was toward him, but he
guessed that she was Madame de la Fontaine's maid, whom he had seen
in the morning. The door into the dining-room beyond stood open, and
by craning his neck, Dan could see that the room was lighter, but
he could not discover whether or not it were occupied. The shutters
of the dining-room were so closely barred and the curtains so tightly
drawn that not a ray of light penetrated to the outside.

The girl
in the kitchen proceeded busily about her work. She was evidently
engaged, despite the lateness of the hour, in mixing bread.

Once
while he waited patiently, to what end he hardly knew, Madame de la
Fontaine entered the kitchen. She was clad in black and held in her
hands what Dan took to be a ship's lamp. She stood for a moment in
the doorway and spoke to the servant maid.
The people rejoiced that they were freed from the cruelty of his ruthless tyranny, little knowing
what new horrors the grim future had in store for them.

We return now to Sulla. When he had driven Marius from Rome, he was obliged to hasten away
to carry on the war in Asia, though he marched first against Athens, which had become the head-quarters
of the allies of Mithridates in Greece. The siege of this city was long and obstinate, and
it was not until March I, 86, that it was overcome, when Sulla gave it up to rapine and pillage.
He then advanced into Boeotia, and success continued to follow his arms until the year 84,
when he crossed the Hellespont to carry the war into Asia. Mithridates had put to death all
Roman citizens and allies, wherever found, with all the reckless ferocity of an Asiatic tyrant,
but had met many losses and was now anxious to have peace. Sulla settled the terms at a personal
interview at Dardanus, in the Troad. Enormous sums (estimated at more than $100,000,000) were
exacted from the rich cities, and a single settled government was restored to Greece, Macedonia,
and Asia Minor. The soldiers were compensated for their fatigues by a luxurious winter in Asia,
and, in the spring of 83, they were transferred, in 1,600 vessels, from Ephesus to the Piraeus,
and thence to Brundusium. Sulla carried with him from Athens the valuable library of Apellicon
of Teos, which contained the works of Aristotle and his disciple, Theophrastus, then not in
general circulation, for he did not forget his interest in literature even in war. Thus it
was that the rich thoughts of the great philosopher came to the knowledge of the Roman students.
[Footnote: Aristoteles, sometimes called the Stagirite, because he was born in Stagira, in
Macedonia, lived at Athens in the fourth century before our era. Theophrastus was his friend
and disciple, both at Stagira and Athens.]

Sulla sent a letter to the senate, announcing the close of the war and his intention to return,
in the course of which he took occasion to recount his services to the republic, from the time
of the war with Jugurtha to the conquest of Mithridates, and announced that he should take
vengeance upon his enemies and upon those of the commonwealth. The senate was alarmed, and
proposed to treat with him for peace, but Cinna hastened to oppose the arrogant conqueror with
force. He was, however, assassinated by his own soldiers.

On the sixth of July, after the arrival of Sulla at Brundusium (B.C. 83), Rome was thrown into
a state of consternation by the burning of the capitol and the destruction of the temple of
Jupiter Capitolinus, with the Sibylline oracles, those valuable books which had directed the
counsels of the nation for ages, and the close of a historic era approached. [Footnote: Ambassadors
were afterwards sent to various places in Greece, Asia, and Italy, to make a fresh collection,
and when the temple was rebuilt it was put in the place occupied by the lost books.] Sulla
easily marched in triumph through lower Italy on his way to Rome, for his opponents were not
well organized, but it was not until months had passed that the fierce struggle was decided.
He was besieging Præneste, when the Samnites, after finding that they could not relieve it,
marched directly upon Rome. Sulla followed them, and a bloody battle was fought at the Colline
gate, on the northern side of the city. It was a fight for the very existence of Rome, for
Pontius Telesinus, commander of the Samnites, declared that he intended to raze the city to
the ground. Fifty thousand are said to have fallen on each side, and most of the leaders of
the party of Marius perished or were afterward put to death. All the Samnites (8,000) who were
taken were collected by Sulla in the Campus Martius and ruthlessly butchered.

If the former scenes had been terrible, much more so were those that now followed. Sulla was
made dictator, an officer that had been unknown for a century and a quarter, and proceeded
to show his adhesion to the optimates by attempting to blot out the popular party. He announced
that he would give a better government to Rome, but he found it necessary to kill all whom
he pretended to think her enemies. It was Marius who had brought on the era of carnage by attempting
to deprive Sulla of his command in the war against Mithridates, and accordingly the body of
the great plebeian was torn from its tomb and cast into the Anio. A list was drawn up of those
whose possessions were to be confiscated, and who were themselves to be executed in vengeance.
On this the names of the family of Marius came first. Fresh lists were constantly posted in
the forum. Each of these was called a tabula proscriptionis, a list of proscription, and it
presents the first instance of a proscription in Roman history. [Footnote: A proscription had
formerly been an offering for sale of any thing by advertisement; but Sulla gave it a new meaning,--the
sale of the property of those unfortunates who were put to death by his orders. The victims
were said to be proscribed. The meaning given by Sulla still lives in the English word.] Sulla
placed on these lists not only the names of enemies of the state, but his personal opponents,
those whose property he coveted, and those who were enemies of friends whom he desired to please.
No man was safe, for his name might appear at any time on the terrible lists, and then he would
be an outlaw, whom any one might kill with impunity. Especially were the rich and prominent
liable to find themselves in this position. Many thousands of unfortunate citizens perished
before Sulla was content to put a stop to the horrors. He then celebrated with exceeding magnificence
the postponed triumph on account of his victory over Mithridates, and received from a trembling
people the title Felix, the lucky.

It has been said that after having killed the men with his sword, Sulla made it his work to
kill the party that opposed him, by laws. He wished to have in Rome the silence and the autocracy
of a camp. He put some three hundred new members into the senate, and gave that body the power
to veto legislative enactments, while at the same time he restricted the authority of the tribunes
of the people and of the comitia tributa, the general convention of the tribes. On the other
hand, he reduced debts by one fourth, to conciliate the masses, and paid his soldiers for their
services in the civil strife with vast amounts of booty and great numbers of slaves. The pomoerium
was extended to embrace all Italy, and, as is supposed, the northern boundary of Roman territory
was extended to the Rubicon. New courts were established and the judicial system was reorganized;
the censors were practically shelved, but sumptuary laws were passed to prevent extravagance
and luxury. All of the laws of Sulla were submitted to the people for formal approval; but
as no one was hardy enough to differ from the dictator, it mattered little what the people thought.

By the beginning of the year 79, Sulla considered that his reforms were complete, and bethought
himself of retiring to see at a little distance the effect of his regulations. He felt that
no danger could overtake him, for he had settled his old veterans (called Cornelians), to the
number of more than a hundred thousand, in colonies scattered throughout Italy, on the estates
and in the cities that he had confiscated, and thought that they would prove his supporters
in any event. He boldly summoned the people and, announcing his purpose, offered to render
an account of his official conduct. He gave the crowd a congiarium, as it was called--that
is, he glutted them with the costliest meats and the richest wines, and so great was his profusion
that vast quantities that the gorged multitude were unable to eat were cast into the Tiber.
He then discharged his armed attendants, dismissed his lictors, descended from the rostra,
and retired on foot to his house, accompanied only by his friends, passing through the midst
of the populace which he had given every reason to desire to wreak vengeance upon him. It was
audacity of the supremest sort. Sulla afterwards withdrew to his estate at Puteoli, where he
spent the brief remainder of his life in the most remarkable alternation of nocturnal orgies
and cultured enjoyment, sharing his time with male and female debauchees and learned students
of Greek literature, and concluding the memoirs of his life and times, in which, through twenty-two
books, he recorded the story of his deeds, colored doubtless to a great extent by his own magnificent
self-love. In the last words of his "Memoirs" he characterized himself, with a certain degree
of truth from his own point of view, as "fortunate and all-powerful to his last hour."

The senate voted Sulla a gorgeous funeral, in spite of opposition on the part of the consul
Lepidus, and his body was carried to the Campus Martius, preceded by the magistrates, the senate,
the equites, the vestal virgins, and the veterans. There it was burned, that no future tyrant
could treat it as that of Marius had been, though up to that time the Cornelian gens, to which
Sulla belonged, had always buried their dead.

Thus lived and thus died the man who, though he relieved Rome of the last of her invaders,
infused into her system a malady from which she was to suffer in the future; for the pampered
veterans whom he had distributed throughout Italy in scenes of peace, all unwonted to such
a life, were to be the ones on which another oppressor was to depend in his efforts to subvert
the government.

XIV.

THE MASTER SPIRITS OF THIS AGE.

Rome was now ruled by an oligarchy,--that is, the control of public affairs fell into the hands
of a few persons. There was an evident tendency, however, towards the union of all the functions
of governmental authority in the person of a single man, whenever one should be found of sufficient
strength to grasp them. The younger Gracchus had exercised almost supreme control, and Marius,
Cinna, and Sulla had followed him; but their power had perished with them, leaving no relics
in the fundamental principles of the government, except as it marked stages in the general
progress. Now other strong men arise who pursue the same course, and lead directly up to the
concentration of supreme authority in the hands of one man, and he not a consul, nor a tribune,
nor a dictator, but an emperor, a titled personage never before known in Rome. With this culmination
the life of the populus Romanus was destined to end.

A dramatist endeavoring to depict public life at Rome during the period following the death
of Sulla, would find himself embarrassed by the multitude of men of note crowding upon his
attention. One of the eldest of these was Quintus Sertorius, a soldier of chivalric bravery,
who had come into prominence during the Marian wars in Gaul. He had at that time won distinction
by boldly entering the camp of the Teutones disguised as a spy, and bringing away valuable
information, before the battle at Aix. When Sulla was fighting Mithridates, Sertorius was on
the side of Cinna, and had to flee from the city with him. When the battle was fought at the
Colline gate, Sertorius served with his old comrade Marius, whom he did not admire, and with
Cinna, but we do not know that he shared the guilt of the massacre that followed. Certainly
he punished the slaves that surrounded Marius for their cruel excesses. When Sulla returned,
Sertorius escaped to Spain, where he raised an army, and achieved so much popularity that the
Romans at home grew very jealous of him. [Footnote: Sertorius is almost the only one among
the statesmen of antiquity who seems to have recognized the modern truth, that education is
a valuable aid in making a government firm. He established a school in Spain in which boys
of high rank, dressed in the garb of Romans, learned the languages that still form the basis
of a classical education, while they were also held as hostages for the good behavior of their
elders. He was not a philanthropist, but a sagacious ruler, and the author of Latin colonies
in the West. He was for a time accompanied by a white fawn, which he encouraged the superstitious
barbarians to believe was a familiar spirit, by means of which he communicated with the unseen
powers and ensured his success.] He did not intentionally go to live in Spain, but having heard
that there were certain islands out in the Atlantic celebrated since the days of Plato as the
abode of the blest; where gentle breezes brought soft dews to enrich the fertile soil; where
delicate fruits grew to feed the inhabitants without their trouble or labor; where the yellow-
haired Rhadamanthus was refreshed by the whistling breezes of Zephyrus; he longed to find them
and live in peace and quiet, far from the rush of war and the groans of the oppressed. From
this bright vision he was turned, but perhaps his efforts to establish a merciful government
in Spain may be traced to its influence.

Another prominent man on the stage at this time was a leader of the aristocratic party, Marcus
Crassus, who lived in a house that is estimated to have cost more than a quarter of a million
dollars. Probably he would not have been very prominent if his father had not left him a small
fortune, to which he had added very largely by methods that we can hardly consider noble. It
is said that when the Sullan proscription was going on, he obtained at ruinously low prices
the estates that the proscribed had to give up, and, whenever there was a fire, he would be
on the spot ready to buy the burning or ruined buildings for little or nothing. He owned many
slaves who were accomplished as writers, silversmiths, stewards, and table-waiters, whom he
let out to those who wished their services, and thus added largely to his income. He did not
build any houses, except the one in which he lived, for he agreed with the proverb which says
that fools build houses for wise men to live in, though "the greatest part of Rome sooner or
later came into his hands," as Plutarch observes. He was of that sordid, avaricious character
which covets wealth merely for the desire to be considered rich, for the vulgar popularity
that accompanies that reputation, and not for ambition or enjoyment. He was said to be uninfluenced
by the love of luxury or by the other passions of humanity. He was not a man of extensive learning,
though he was pretty well versed in philosophy and in history, and by pains and industry had
made himself an accomplished orator. He could thus wield a great influence by his speeches
to the people from the rostra.

Among the aristocrats who composed the oligarchy that ruled at about this time were two men
born in the same year (106 B.C.): the egotistic, vain, and irresolute, but personally pure
orator, Marcus Tullius Cicero; and the cold and haughty soldier, Cneius Pompeius Magnus, commonly
known as Pompey the Great. The philosophical, oratorical, and theological writings of Cicero
are still studied in our schools as models in their different classes. Inheriting a love of
culture from his father, a member of an ancient family, he was afforded every advantage in
becoming acquainted with all branches of a polite education; and travelled to the chief seats
of learning in Greece and Asia Minor with this end in view. When he was twenty-six years of
age, he made his first appearance as a public pleader, and soon gained the reputation of being
the first orator at the Roman bar. Besides these pursuits, Cicero had had a brief military
experience, during the war between Sulla and Marius.

Pompey, likewise, began to learn the art of war under his father, in the same struggle, but
he continued its exercise until he became a consummate warrior. For his success in pursuing
the remains of the Marian faction in Africa and Sicily, Pompey was honored with the name Magnus
(the Great), and with a triumph, a distinction that had never before been won by a man of his
rank who had not previously held public office.

Older than these men there was one whose character is forever blackened on the pages of history
by the relentless pen of Cicero, Caius Licinius Verres, who, if we may believe the only records
we have regarding him, was the most phenomenal freebooter of all time. The story of his career
is a vivid demonstration of the manner in which the people of the Roman provinces were outraged
by the officers sent to rule over them, and we shall anticipate our story a little in tracing
it. The provincial governors were, as a class, corrupt, and Verres was as vile as any of them,
but he was also brutal in his manners and natural instincts, rapacious, licentious, cruel,
and fond of low companions. At first, one of the Marian faction, he betrayed his associates,
embezzled the funds that had been entrusted to him, and joined himself to Sulla, who sent him
to Brundusium, allowing him a share in the confiscated estates. Thence he was transferred to
Cilicia, where again he proved a traitor to his superior officer, and stole from cities, private
persons, temples, and public places, every thing that his rapacity coveted. One city offered
him a vessel as a loan, and he refused to return it; another had a statue of Diana covered
with gold, and he scraped off the precious metal to put it in his pocket. Using the money thus
gained to ensure his election to office at Rome, Verres enjoyed a year at the Capitol, and
then entered upon a still more outrageous career as governor of the island of Sicily. Taking
with him a painter and a sculptor well versed in the values of works of art, he systematically
gathered together all that was considered choice in the galleries and temples. Allowing his
officers to make exorbitant exactions upon the farmers, he confiscated many estates to his
own use, and reaped the crops. Even travellers were attacked to enrich this extraordinary thief,
and six vessels were afterward dispatched to Rome with the plunder, which he asserted was sufficient
to permit him to revel in opulence the remainder of his life, even if he were obliged to give
up two thirds in fines and bribes.

The people Verres had outraged did not, however, suffer in quiet. They engaged Cicero to conduct
their case against him, and this the great orator did with overwhelming success. [Footnote:
The orations of Cicero against Verres are based upon information which the orator gathered
by personally examining witnesses at the scenes of the rascality he unveiled. The orator showed
a true Roman lack of appreciation of Greek art, and exercised his own love of puns to a considerable
extent, playing a good deal upon the name Verres, which meant a boar. The extreme corpulence
of the defendant, too, offered an opportunity for gross personal allusions. Cicero compared
him to the Erymanthean boar, and called him the "drag-net" of Sicily, because his name resembled
the word everriculum, a drag-net.] Though protected by Hortensius, an older advocate, who,
during the absence of Cicero, on his travels, had acquired the highest rank as an orator, so
terrible was the arraignment in its beginning that, at the suggestion of Hortensius, Verres
did not remain to hear its close, but hastened into voluntary exile. He precipitately took
ship for Marseilles, and for twenty-seven years was forced to remain in that city. Would that
every misdoer among the provincial governors had thus been followed up by the law!

The representative of the Sullan party at this time was Lucius Sergius Catiline, an aristocrat,
who, during the proscription, behaved with fiendish atrocity towards those of the opposite
party, torturing and killing men with the utmost recklessness. His early years had been passed
in undisguised debaucheries and unrestrained vice, but in spite of all his acts, he made political
progress, was prætor, governor of Africa, and candidate for the consulship by turn. Failing
in the last effort, however, he entered into a conspiracy to murder the successful candidates,
and was only foiled by his own impatience. We shall find that he was encouraged by this failure
which so nearly proved a success.

There was one man among the host of busy figures on the stage at this eventful period who seems
to stalk about like a born master, and the lapse of time since his days has not at all dimmed
the fame of his deeds, so deep a mark have they left upon the laws and customs of mankind,
and so noteworthy are they in the annals of Rome. Caius Julius Cæsar was six years younger
than Pompey and Cicero, and was of the popular or Marian party, both by birth and tastes. His
aunt Julia was wife of the great Marius himself, and though he had married a young woman of
high birth to please his father, he divorced her as soon as his father died, and married Cornelia,
daughter of Cinna, the devoted opponent of Sulla, to please himself.

When Sulla returned to Rome from the East, he ordered Pompey to put away his wife, and he obeyed.
He ordered Cæsar, a boy of seventeen, to give up his Cornelia, and he proudly replied that
he would not. Of course he could not remain at Rome after that, and he fled to the land of
the Sabines until Sulla was induced to grant him a pardon. Still, he did not feel secure at
Rome, and a second time he sought safety in expatriation. Upon the death of the dictator, he
returned, having gained experience in war, and having developed his talents as an orator by
study in a school at Rhodes. He plunged immediately into public life and won great distinction
by his effective speaking.

These are enough characters for us to remember at present. They represent four groups, all
striving for supreme power. There are the men of the oligarchy, represented by Pompey and Cicero,
actually holding the reins of government; and Crassus, standing for the aristocrats, who resent
their claims; Cæsar, foremost among the Marians, the former opponents of Sulla and his schemes;
and Catiline, at the head of the faction which included the host of warriors that Sulla had
settled in peaceful pursuits throughout Italy,--in peaceful pursuits that did not at all suit
their impetuous spirits, ever eager as they were for some revolution that would plunge them
again into strife, and perchance win for them some spoil.

The consuls at the time of the death of Sulla were Lepidus and Catulus, who now fell out with
one another, Lepidus taking the part of the Marians, and Catulus holding with the aristocrats.
This was the same Lepidus who had opposed the burial of the dictator Sulla in the Campus Martius.
As soon as the Marians saw that one consul was ready to favor them, there was great excitement
among the portion of the community that looked for gain in confusion. Those who had lost their
riches and civic rights, hoped to see them restored; young profligates trusted that in some
way they might find means to gratify their love of luxury; and the people in general, who had
no other reason, thought that after the three years of the calm of despotism, it would be refreshing
to see some excitement in the forum. Lepidus was profuse in promises; he told the beggars that
he would again distribute free grain; and the families deprived of their estates, that they
might soon expect to enjoy them again. Catulus protested in vain, and the civil strife constantly
increased, without any apparent probability that the Senate, now weak and inefficient, would
or could successfully interfere. Finally it was decreed that Lepidus and Catulus should each
be sent to the provinces under oath not to turn their swords against each other.

Lepidus slowly proceeded to carry out his part of this decree, but Catulus remained behind
long enough to complete a great temple, which towered above the forum on the Capitoline Hill.
The foundations only remain now, but they bear an inscription placed there by order of the
senate, testifying that Catulus was the consul under whom the structure was completed. Lepidus
did not consider his oath binding long, and the following year (B.C. 77) he marched straight
to Rome again, announcing to the senators that he came to re-establish the rights of the people
and to assume the dictatorship himself. He was met by an army under Pompey and Catulus, at
a spot near the Mulvian bridge and the Campus Martius, almost on the place where the fate of
the Roman Empire was to be determined four centuries later by a battle between Maxentius and
Constantine (A.D. 312). Lepidus was defeated and forced to flee. Shortly after, he died on
the island of Sardinia, overcome by chagrin and sorrow. One would expect to read of a new proscription,
after this success, but the victors did not resort to that terrible vengeance. Thus Pompey
found himself at the head of Roman affairs.

His first duty was to march against the remnant of the party of the Marians. They had joined
Sertorius in Spain. It was the year 76 when Pompey arrived on the scene of his new operations.
He found his enemy more formidable than he had supposed, and it was not until five years had
passed, and Sertorius had been assassinated, that he was able to achieve the victory and scatter
the army of the Marians. Meantime the Romans had been fearing that Sertorius would actually
prove strong enough to march upon the capital and perhaps overwhelm it. Hardly had their fears
in this respect been quieted than they found themselves menaced by a still more frightful catastrophe.

We remember how, in the year 264 B.C., two young Romans honored the memory of their father
by causing men to fight each other to the death with swords to celebrate his funeral, and hints
from time to time have shown how the Romans had become more and more fond of seeing human beings
hack and hew each other in the amphitheatres. The men who were to be "butchered to make a Roman
holiday," as the poet says, were trained for their horrid work with as much system as is now
used in our best gymnasiums to fit men to live lives of happy peace, if not with more. They
were divided into classes with particular names, according to the arms they wore, the hours
at which they fought, and their modes of fighting, and great were the pains that their instructors
took to make them perfect in their bloody work. Down at Capua, that celebrated centre of refinement
and luxury, there was a school of gladiators, kept by one Lentulus, who hired his fierce pupils
out to the nobles to be used at games and festivals.

While Pompey was away engaged with Sertorius, the enemies of Rome everywhere thought it a favorable
moment to give her trouble, and these gladiators conspired in the year 73 to escape to freedom,
and thus cheat their captors out of their expected pleasures, and give their own wives and
children a little more of their lives. So large was the school that two hundred engaged in
the plot, though only seventy-eight were successful in escaping. They hurried away to the mountains,
armed with knives and spits that they had been able to snatch from the stalls as they fled,
and, directed by one Spartacus who had been leader of a band of robbers, found their way to
the crater of Mount Vesuvius, not a comfortable resort one would think; but at that time it
was quite different in form from what it is now, the volcano being extinct, so that it afforded
many of the advantages of a fortified town. From every quarter the hard-worked slaves flocked
to the standard of Spartacus, and soon he found himself at the head of a large army. His plan
was to cross the Alps, and find a place of refuge in Gaul or in his native Thrace; but his
brutalized followers thought only of the present. They were satisfied if they could now and
then capture a rich town, and for a while revel in luxuries; if they could wreak their vengeance
by forcing the Romans themselves to fight as gladiators; or, if they had the opportunity to
kill those to whom they attributed their former distresses. They cared not to follow their
leader to the northward, and thus his wiser plans were baffled; but, in spite of all obstacles,
he laid the country waste from the foot of the Alps to the most southern extremity of the toe
of the Italian boot. For two years he was able to keep up his war against the Roman people,
but at last he was driven to the remotest limits of Bruttium, where his only hope was in getting
over to Sicily, in the expectation of gaining other followers; but his army was signally defeated
by Crassus, a small remnant only escaping to the northward, where they were exterminated by
Pompey, then returning from Spain (B.C. 71). From Capua to Rome six thousand crosses, each
bearing a captured slave, showed how carefully and ruthlessly the man- hunt had been pursued
by the frightened and exasperated Romans. Both Crassus and Pompey claimed the credit of the
final victory, Pompey asserting that though Crassus had scotched the serpent, he had himself
killed it.

On the last day of the year 71 Pompey entered Rome with the honor of a triumph, while Crassus
received the less important distinction of an ovation, [Footnote: In a triumph in these times,
the victorious general, clad in a robe embroidered with gold, and wearing a laurel wreath,
solemnly entered the city riding in a chariot drawn by four horses. The captives and spoils
went before him, and the army followed. He passed along the Via Sacra on the Forum Romanum,
and went up to the Capitol to sacrifice in the temple of Jupiter. In the ovation the general
entered the city on foot, wore a simple toga, and a wreath of myrtle, and was in other respects
not so conspicuously honored as in the triumph. The two celebrations differed in other respects
also.] as it was called, because his success had been obtained over slaves, less honorable
adversaries than those whom Pompey had met. Each desired to be consul, but neither was properly
qualified for the office, and therefore they agreed to overawe the senate and win the office
for both, each probably thinking that at the first good opportunity he would get the better
of the other. In this plan they were successful, and thus two aristocrats came to the head
of government, and the oligarchy, to which one of them belonged, went out of power, and soon
Pompey, who all the time posed as the friend of the people, proceeded to repeal the most important
parts of the legislation of Sulla. The tribunes were restored, and Pompey openly broke with
the aristocracy to which by birth he belonged, thus beginning a new era, for the social class
of a man's family was no longer to indicate the political party to which he should give his
adherence.

XV.

PROGRESS OF THE GREAT POMPEY.

The master spirits of this remarkable age were now in full action on the stage, and it is difficult
to keep the eye fixed upon all of them at once. Now one is prominent and now another; all are
pushing their particular interests, while each tries to make it appear that he has nothing
but the good of the state at heart. Whenever it is evident that a certain cause is the popular
one, the various leaders, opposed on most subjects, are united to help it, in the hope of catching
the popular breeze. During the consulship of Pompey and Catulus, Pompey was the principal Roman
citizen, and he tried to make sure that his prestige should not be lessened when he should
step down from his high office.

Crassus, aristocrat by birth and aristocrat by choice, had been a candidate for the senate
in opposition to Pompey, but he soon found that his interest demanded that he should make peace
with his powerful colleague, and as he did it, he told the people that he did not consider
that his action was in any degree base or humiliating, for he simply made advances to one whom
they had themselves named the Great. Crowds daily courted Pompey on account of his power; but
a multitude equally numerous surrounded Crassus for his wealth, and Cicero on account of his
wonderful oratory. Even Julius Cæsar, the strong Marian, who pronounced a eulogy upon his aunt,
the widow of Marius, seemed also to pay homage to Pompey, when, a year later, he took to wife
Pompeia, a relative of the great soldier (B.C. 67).

Both Cæsar and Pompey saw that gross corruption was practised by the chiefs of the senate when
they had control of the provinces, and knew that it ought to be exposed and effectually stopped,
but Cæsar was the first to take action. He was quickly followed by Pompey, however, who encouraged
Cicero to denounce the crimes of Verres with the success that we have already noticed. Cicero
loftily exclaimed that he did not seek to chastise a single wicked man who had abused his authority
as governor, but to extinguish and blot out all wickedness in all places, as the Roman people
had long been demanding; but with all his eloquence he was not able to make the people appreciate
the fact that the interests of Rome were identical with the well-being and prosperity of her
allies, distant or near at hand.

Both Crassus and Pompey retired from the consulship amid the plaudits of the people and with
the continued friendship of the optimates. Crassus, out of his immense income, spread a feast
for the people on ten thousand tables; dedicated a tenth of his wealth to Hercules; and distributed
among the citizens enough grain to supply their families three months. With all his efforts,
however, he could not gain the favor which Pompey apparently held with ease. For two years
Pompey assumed royal manners, and gave himself up to the enjoyment of his popularity, but then
beginning to fear that without some new evidence of genius he might lose the admiration of
the people, he began to make broad plans to astonish them.

For years the Mediterranean Sea had been infested by daring pirates, who at last made it unsafe
for a Roman noble even to drive to his sea- side villa, or a merchant to venture abroad for
purposes of trade. Cities had been ravaged, and the enemies of Rome had from time to time made
alliances with the marauders. The pirates dyed their sails with Tyrian purple, they inlaid
their oars with silver, and they spread gold on their pennants, so rich had their booty made
them. Nor were they less daring than rich; they had captured four hundred towns of importance,
they had once kidnapped Cæsar himself, and held him for enormous ransom, [Footnote: This occurred
in the year 76 B.C., when Cæsar, at the age of twenty-four, was on his way to Rhodes, intending
to perfect himself in oratory at the school of Apollonius Molo, the teacher of Cicero, lie
was travelling as a gentleman of rank, and was captured off Miletus. After a captivity of six
weeks, during which he mingled freely with the games and pastimes of the pirates, though plainly
assuring them that he should one day hang them all, Cæsar was liberated, on payment of a ransom
of some fifty thousand dollars. Good as his word, he promptly collected a fleet of vessels,
returned to the island, seized the miscreants as they were dividing their plunder, carried
them off to Pergamos, and had them crucified. He then went on to Rhodes, and practised elocution
for two years.] and now they threatened to cut off the entire supply of grain that came from
Africa, Sardinia, and Sicily,

The crisis was evident to all, and in it Pompey saw his opportunity. In the year 67, he caused
a law to be introduced by the tribune Gabinius, ordaining that a commander of consular rank
should be appointed for three years, with absolute power over the sea and the coasts about
it for fifty miles inland, together with a fleet of two hundred sail, with officers, seamen,
and supplies. When the bill had passed, Gabinius declared that there was but one man fit to
exercise such remarkable power, and it was conferred with acclamations upon Pompey, whom he
nominated. The price of grain immediately fell, for every one had confidence that the dread
crisis was passed. The people were right, for in a few weeks the pirates had all been brought
to terms. Pompey had divided the sea into thirteen parts, and in each of them the freebooters
had been encountered in open battle, driven into creeks and captured, or forced to take refuge
in their castles and hunted out of them, so that those who were not taken had surrendered.

The next move among the master spirits led to the still greater advancement of Pompey. His
supporters at Rome managed to have him appointed to carry on a war in the East. In the year
74, when other enemies of the republic seized the opportunity to rise against Rome, Mithridates,
never fully conquered, entered upon a new war. Lucius Licinius Lucullus, who had gained fame
in the former struggle with Mithridates, was sent again to protect Roman interests in Pontus.
He completely broke the power of the great monarch, in spite of his vast preparations for the
struggle, but, under a pretext, he was now superseded by Pompey, who went out with a feigned
appearance of reluctance, to pluck the fruit just ready to drop (B.C. 66). Cicero urged Pompey
to accept this new honor, [Footnote: When the Manilian law which enlarged the powers of Pompey
was under discussion, Cicero made his first address to the Roman people, and though vigorously
opposed by Hortensius and Catulus, carried the day against the senate and the optimates whom
they represented. This oration contains a panegyric of Pompey for suppressing piracy, and argues
that a public servant who has done well once deserves to be trusted again.] and Cæsar, who
enjoyed the precedents that Pompey had established, in adopting monarchical style, was now
glad to have a rival removed from the country, that he might have, better opportunity to perfect
his own plans.

The third or great Mithridatic war lasted from the year 74, when Lucullus was sent out, to
61. By the terms of the Manilian law, Pompey went out with unlimited power over the whole of
Asia, as far as Armenia, as well as over the entire Roman forces; and as he already was supreme
over the region about the Mediterranean Sea, he was practically dictator throughout all of
the dominions of the republic. He planned his first campaign with so much skill that he cut
Mithridates off from all help by sea, and destroyed every hope of alliances with other rulers.
So clearly did it appear to the Pontic monarch that resistance would be vain, that he sued
for peace. Pompey would accept no terms but unconditional surrender, however, and negotiations
were broken off. Mithridates determined to avoid battle, but Pompey finally surprised and defeated
him in Lesser Armenia, forcing him to flight. He found a retreat in the mountainous region
north of the Euxine Sea, where Pompey was unable to follow him. There he meditated grand schemes
against the Romans, which he was utterly unable to carry out, and at last he fell a victim
to the malevolence of one of his former favorites (B.C. 63).

Pompey continued his conquering progress throughout Asia Minor, and did not return to Rome
until he had subdued Armenia, Syria, Phoenicia, and Palestine, [Footnote: There was civil war
in Palestine at the time, and the king surrendered to Pompey, but the people refused, took
refuge in the stronghold of the temple, and were only overcome after a seige of three months.
Pompey explored the temple, examined the golden vessels, the table of shew bread, and the candlesticks
in their places, but was surprised to find the Holy of Holies empty, there being no representation
of a deity. He reverently refrained from touching the gold, the spices, and the money that
he saw, and ordered the place to be cleansed and purified that service might be resumed.] had
established many cities, and had organized the frontier of the Roman possessions from the Euxine
to the river Jordan. When he arrived at Rome, on the first of January, 61, he found that affairs
had considerably changed during his absence, and it was not easy for him to determine what
position he should assume in relation to the political parties. Cicero offered him his friendship;
Cato, grandson of the stern old censor, and an influential portion of the senate opposed him;
Crassus and Lucullus, too, were his personal enemies; and Cæsar, who appeared to support him,
had really managed to prepare for him a secondary position in the state. On the last day of
September, Pompey celebrated the most splendid triumph that the city had ever seen, and with
it the glorious part of his life ended. Over three hundred captive princes walked before his
chariot, and brazen tablets declared that he had captured a thousand fortresses, many small
towns, and eight hundred ships; that he had founded thirty-nine cities, and vastly raised the
public revenue.

The year following the departure of Pompey for the East was rendered noteworthy by the breaking
out of a conspiracy that will never be forgotten so long as the writings of Cicero and Sallust
remain. These were times of treasons, stratagems, and greed for spoils. Vice and immorality
were rampant, and among the vicious and debased none had fallen lower than Lucius Sergius Catiline,
a ferocious man of powerful body and strong mind, who first appears as a partisan of Sulla
and an active agent in his proscription. All his powers were perverted to evil, and when to
his natural viciousness there was added the intensity of disappointed political ambition, he
was ready to plunge his country into the most desperate strife to gratify his hate. He stands
for the worst vices of this wretched age. He had been a provincial governor, and in Africa
had perpetrated all the crimes that Cicero could impute to a Verres, and thus had proclaimed
himself a villain of the deepest dye, both abroad and at home.

Gathering about him the profligate nobles and the criminals who had nothing to lose and every
thing to gain by revolution, Catiline plotted to murder the consuls and seize the government;
but his attempt was foiled, and he waited for a more favorable opportunity. Two years later
he was defeated by Cicero as candidate for the consulship, and the plot was renewed, it being
then determined to add the burning of the city to the other atrocities contemplated. Cicero
discovered the scheme, and unveiled its horrid details in four orations; but again the miserable
being was permitted to escape justice. He was present and listened in rage to the invective
of Cicero until he could bear it no longer, and then rushed wildly out and joined his armed
adherents, an open enemy of the state. His plot failed in the city through imprudence of the
conspirators and the skill of Cicero, and he himself fled, hoping to reach Gaul. He was, however,
hemmed in by the Roman army and killed in a battle. Catiline's head was sent to Rome to assure
the government that he was no more. Cicero, who had caused nine of the conspirators to be put
to death, [Footnote: Under Roman law no citizen could legally be put to death except by the
sanction of the Comitia Curiata, the sovereign assembly of the people, though it often happened
that the regulation was ignored. If nobody dared or cared to object, no notice was taken of
the irregularity, but we shall see that Cicero paid dearly for his action at this time.] now
laid down his consular authority amid the plaudits of the people, who, under the lead of Cato
and Catulus, hailed him as the Father of his Country.

Cicero was apparently spoiled by his success. Carried away by his own oratorical ability, he
too often reminded the people in his long and eloquent speeches of the great deeds that he
had done for the country. They cheered him as he spoke, but after this they never raised him
to power again.

Just about this time a noble named Publius Clodius Pulcher, who was a demagogue of the worst
moral character, in the pursuance of his base intrigues, committed an act of sacrilege by entering
the house of Cæsar, disguised as a woman, during the celebration of the mysteries of the Bona
Dea, to which men were never admitted. He was tried for the impiety, and, through the efforts
of Cicero, was almost convicted, though he managed to escape by bribery. He was ever afterward
a determined enemy of the great orator, and, by the aid of Pompey, Cæsar, and Crassus, finally
succeeded in having him condemned for putting to death the Catilinian conspirators without
due process of law. Cicero does not appear manly in the story of this affair. He left Rome,
fearing to face the result; and after he had gone Clodius caused a bill to be passed by which
he was declared a public enemy, and every citizen was forbidden to give him fire or water within
four hundred miles of Rome (spring of 58). He found his way to Brundusium and thence to Greece,
where he passed his time in the most unmanly wailings and gloomy forebodings. His property
was confiscated, his rich house on the Palatine Hill and his villas being given over to plunder
and destruction. Strange as it appears, Cicero was recalled the next year, and entered the
city amid the hearty plaudits of the changeful people, though his self-respect was gone and
his spirit broken.

Meantime, Cæsar had been quietly pushing himself to the front. He had returned from Spain,
where he had been governor, at about the time that Pompey had returned from the East. He reconciled
that great warrior to Crassus (called from his immense wealth Dives, the rich), and with the
two made a secret arrangement to control the government. This was known as the First Triumvirate
[Footnote: Each of the three pledged himself not to speak nor to act except to subverse the
common interest of all, though of course they were not sincere in their promises of mutual
support.] or government of three men, though it was only a coalition, and did not strictly
deserve the name given it (B.C. 60). Cæsar reaped the first-fruits of the league, as he intended,
by securing the office of consul, through the assistance of his colleagues, whose influence
proved irresistible.

Entering upon his office in the year 59, Cæsar very soon obtained the good-will of all,--first
winning the people by proposing an agrarian law dividing the public lands among them. This
was the last law of this sort, as that of Cassius (B.C. 486) had been the first. [Footnote:
See page 83.] He rewarded Crassus by means of a law remitting one third of the sum that the
publicans who had agreed to farm the revenues in Asia Minor had contracted to pay to the state;
and satisfied Pompey by a ratification of all his acts in the East. The distribution of the
lands among the people was placed in the hands of Pompey and Crassus.

At the end of his term of office Cæsar was made governor of Gaul, an office which he sought
no more for the opportunity it afforded of gaining renown by conquering those ancient enemies
who had formerly visited Rome with such dire devastation, than because he hoped to win for
himself an army and partisans who would be useful in carrying out further ambitious ends.

Cæsar now entered upon a wonderful career of conquest, which lasted nine years. The story of
what he accomplished during the first seven is given in his "Commentaries," as they are called,
which are still read in schools, on account of the incomparable simplicity, naturalness, and
purity of the style in which they are written, as well as because they seem to give truthful
accounts of the events they describe. Sixty years before this time the Romans had possessed
themselves of a little strip of Gaul south of the Alps, which was known as the Province, [Footnote:
See pages 166 and 182.] and though they had ever since thought that there was a very important
region to the north and west that might be conquered, they made no great effort to gain it.
Cæsar was now to win imperishable laurels by effecting what had been before only vaguely dreamed
of. He first made himself master of the country of the Helvetii (modern Switzerland), defeated
the Germans under their famous general Ariovistus, and subjected the Belgian confederacy. The
frightful carnage involved in these campaigns cannot be described, and the thousands upon thousands
of brave barbarians who were sacrificed to the extension of Roman civilization are enough to
make one shudder. When the despatches of Cæsar announcing his successes reached Rome, the senate,
on motion of Cicero, though against the protestations of Cato, ordained that a grand public
thanksgiving, lasting fifteen days, should be celebrated (B.C. 57). This was an unheard-of
honor, the most ostentatious thanksgiving of the kind before--that given to Pompey, after the
close of the war against Mithridates--having lasted but ten days.

Pompey and Crassus had fallen out during the absence of Cæsar, and he now invited them to meet
and consult at Lucca, at the foot of the Apennines, just north of Pisa, where (April, 56) he
held a sort of court, hundreds of Roman senators waiting upon him to receive the bribes with
which he ensured the success of his measures during his absences in the field. [Footnote: Pompey
had left Rome ostensibly for the purpose of arranging for supplies of grain from Africa and
Sardinia. He was followed by many of his most noted adherents, the conference counting more
than two hundred senators and sixscore lictors. Cæsar, like a mighty magician, caused the discordant
spirits to act in concert. The power of the triumvirs is shown by the change that came over
public opinion, and the calmness with which their acts were submitted to, though it was evident
that the historic form of government was to be overturned, and a monarchy established. ] Here
the three agreed that Pompey should rule Spain, Crassus Syria, and Cæsar Gaul, which he had
made his own. Cæsar still kept on with his conquests, meeting desperate resistance, however,
from the hordes of barbarians, who would not remain conquered, but engaged in revolts that
caused him vast trouble and the loss of large numbers of soldiers. Incidentally to his other
wars, he made two incursions into Britain, the home of our forefathers (B.C. 55 and 54), and
nominally conquered the people, but it was not a real subjugation. Shakespeare did not make
a mistake when he put into the mouth of the queen-wife of Cymbeline the words:

  * * * "A kind of conquest
  Cæsar made here; but made not here his brag
  Of 'came' and 'saw' and 'overcame,'"

and certainly the brave Britons did not continue to obey their self- styled Roman "rulers."

In the sixth year of Cæsar's campaigns in Gaul, it seemed as if all was to be lost to the Romans.
There arose a young general named Vercingetorix, who was much abler than any leader the Gauls
had ever opposed to their enemies, and he united them as they had never been united before.
This man persuaded his countrymen to lay their own country waste, in order that it might not
afford any abiding place for the Romans, but contrary to his intentions one town that was strongly
fortified was left, and to that Cæsar laid siege, finally taking it and butchering all the
men, women, and children that it contained. Vercingetorix then fortified himself at Alesia
(southeast of Paris), where he was, of course, besieged by the Romans, but soon Cæsar found
his own forces attacked in the rear, and surrounded by a vast army of Gauls, who had come to
the relief of their leader. In the face of such odds, he succeeded in vanquishing the enemy,
and took the place, achieving the most wonderful act of his genius. The conquered chief was
reserved to grace a Roman triumph, and to die by the hand of a Roman executioner. The conqueror
treated the Gauls with mildness, and endeavored in every way to make them adopt Roman habits
and customs. As they had lost all hope of resisting him, they calmly accepted the situation,
and the foundation of the subsequent Romanizing of the west of Europe was laid. Three million
Gauls had been conquered, a million had been butchered, and another million taken captive,
while eight hundred cities, centres of active life and places of the enjoyment of those social
virtues for which the rough inhabitants of the region were noted, had been destroyed. Legions
of Roman soldiers had been cut to pieces in accomplishing this result, the influence of which
upon the history of Europe can hardly be over-estimated Cæsar had completely eclipsed the military
prestige of his rival, Pompey the Great.

XVI.

HOW THE TRIUMVIRS CAME TO UNTIMELY ENDS.

It was agreed at the conference of Lucca that Pompey should rule Spain, but it did not suit
his plans to go to that distant country. He preferred to remain at Rome, where he thought that
he might do something that would establish his influence with the people, and give him the
advantage over his colleagues that they were each seeking to get over him. "Nance, Nance ... please
..." His arms were about her.

"Tom, you make it so hard ... Remember, you promised me ... No word of love until I can think,
until I have time to know ... Please, Tom, let me go."

"I can't let you go. Oh sweetheart dear."

"Tom, we musn't--Dan, Mother! ..."

Unheeding her protest, he put his arms around her. An instant he felt her yield, then quickly thrusting
him aside, she ran from the room, leaving him standing alone there, trembling with excitement,
chagrin, happiness, alarm.

In a moment his friend returned and Tom pulled himself together. "Come on," said Dan, "I have
a lot to tell you."

"Did you find anything this afternoon?" exclaimed Pembroke.

"Sh! for heaven's sake be careful. Don't talk here. Let's go upstairs."

A few minutes later they were closeted in Dan's chamber. The curtains were tightly drawn and a
heavy quilt was hung over the door. Good Lord! thought Tom, could it be possible that these precautions
in part at least were taken against Nancy. The world seemed to have turned upside down for him
in the last twenty-four hours.

"Aren't we going to keep watch to-night?" he asked.

"Yes, but later. They are just getting to bed--or pretending to. Look here, this may throw
light on the mystery. I found this paper in a secret cubby-hole in the old cabinet in the
Oak Parlour. Draw a chair up to the table so that you can see."

"The cabinet," he continued, as he took the paper out of his strong-box and began to unfold it,
"was brought from some old manor house in England. She remembered fortunately a little about
them. They were all empty but one, and in that I found this torn scrap of paper."

He handed the yellowed bit of writing to Tom, who flattened it out on the table before him.

"Why it's written in French," Pembroke exclaimed, as he bent over to examine it.

"Yes, I know it is," said Dan. "I can't make head or tail of it. Besides it seems to be only a
part of a note or letter. I could hardly wait to give you a chance at it. You can make something
of it, can't you?"

"I don't know--I guess I can. It's hard to read the handwriting. The thing's torn in two--haven't
you the rest of it?"

"No, I tell you; that's all I could find; that's all, I am sure, that can be in the cabinet now.
My theory is that the old marquis has somehow come across the other half and is still looking
for this. God only knows who hid it there.

"How the deuce could the Marquis know about it. Ah! look--it's signed somebody, something de Boisdhyver--'ancois--that's
short for Francois, I guess. Evidently 't wasn't the Marquis himself. Wonder what it means?"

For
goodness' sake, try to read it."

"Wait. Get that old French dictionary out of the bookcase downstairs, will you? I'll see if I
can translate."

Dan crept softly out, leaving Tom bent over the paper. Again he smoothed it out carefully on
the table, bringing the two candles nearer, and tried to puzzle out the faint fine handwriting.

"I
can make out some of it," he remarked to Dan, when his friend returned with the dictionary. "Let
me have that thing; there are a few words I don't know at all, but I'll write out as good a translation
as I can."

While Tom was busy with the dictionary, Dan placed writing materials to his hand, and sat down
to wait as patiently as he could. His curiosity was intensified by Pembroke's occasional exclamations
and the absorption with which he bent over the task.

"There!" Tom exclaimed after half-an-hour's labour, "that's the best I can do with it. You see
the original note was evidently torn into two or three strips and we have only got the righthand
one, so we don't get a single complete sentence--, but what we have is mighty suggestive. Listen--This
is what it says: Make great efforts ... gap ... glorious, I am about
to leave' ... gap ... 'to offer my' ... gap ... 'that I should not
return' ... gap ... 'directions' ... gap ... 'this paper which I tear'
... gap ... 'the explanation' ... something missing ... 'to discover'
... that's the end of a sentence.

The next one begins, 'This treasure' ... than another gap ... 'jewels and money' ... 'secret
chamber' ... 'one can enter' ... something gone here ... 'by the salon de chene'--that's the
Oak Parlour, I suppose ... something missing again ... 'by a spring' ... 'hand of the lady
in the picture' ... 'chimney on the north side of the' ... 'side
a panel which reveals' ... 'one will find the directions' ... more
missing ... 'of the treasure in a golden chest' ... That's the end
of it.

And, as I said before it is signed,--'ancois de Boisdhyver.' There, you can read it. That's
the best I can make of it."

Dan bent over his friend's translation. "Whoever wrote it was about to leave here to offer something
to somebody, and if he did not return, apparently he is giving directions, in this paper, which he
tears in to two or three parts, how to discover--a treasure?--jewels and money, I guess,--that
he is about to hide or has hidden in a secret chamber, which is entered in some way from the
Oak Parlour--? ... pushes a spring,--Something to do with the hand of the lady in the picture,
near the chimney on the north side of the room ... then a panel which reveals ...where? ...
the directions will be found, for getting the treasure, in a golden chest in the secret chamber?
How's that for a version? I reckon the other half doesn't tell as much ...'ancois de Boisdhyver!--That
can't be the Marquis, for none of his names end 'ancois; do they? Let's see, what are they?--Marie,
Anne, Timelon, Armand ... Tom,"--and Dan faced his friend excitedly,--"that old devil is after
treasure! Who the deuce is 'ancois de Boisdhyver, and how did he come to leave money in the
Oak Parlour? Hanged if I believe there's any secret chamber! By gad, man, if I didn't hurt when
I pinch myself, I'd think I was asleep and dreaming. What do you make of it?"

"Pretty much what you do. Somebody sometime,--a good many years ago, concealed some valuables
here in the Inn. It must be some one who is connected with our marquis, for the last names are the
same. These are directions, or half the directions, for finding it. The Marquis knows enough
about it to have been hunting for this paper. Who the devil is the Marquis?"

"The Lord knows. But how does Nance come in?"

"Blamed if I can see; wish I could! This accounts for the Marquis's mysterious investigations,
anyway. Probably he's no right to the paper. Maybe he isn't a Boisdhyver at all. I'll be damned
if I can understand how he has got Nance to league with him."

"And now what the deuce are we going to do about it?" asked Dan.

"Hunt for the treasure ourselves, eh?"

"Well, why not? but to do that we've got to get rid of the Marquis. He'll be suspicious if we
begin to poke about the north wing. Hanged if I wouldn't like to have it all out with him!"

"Yes, but we'd better think and talk it over before we decide to do anything. We can watch them.
We'll watch to-night any way, and plan something definite to-morrow."

"I tell you one thing, Tom, I am going to make Mother tell me all she knows about Nancy. Perhaps
she is mixed up in some way with all this. But it's time to keep watch now. We'll put out the
candles and I'll watch for the first two hours. If you go to sleep, I'll wake you up to take
the next turn.

How about it?"

"Hang sleep!" Tom replied.

"All right, but we must blow out the light. Lucky it's clear. Let's whisper after this."

Tom threw himself on the bed, while Dan sat near the window and kept his eyes fixed on the door
of the bowling-alley. They talked for some time in low tones, but eventually Tom fell asleep.
Dan waked him at twelve for his vigil, and he in turn was wakened
at two.

During the third watch they both succumbed to weariness.

Tow awoke with a start about four, and sprang to the window. The moon was sinking low in the western
sky, but its light still flooded the deserted courtyard beneath.

He heard the patter of a horse's hoofs on the road beyond and the crunching of the snow beneath the
runners of a sleigh. Well, he thought, as he rubbed his eyes, it was too near morning for
anything to happen, so he turned in and was soon asleep, as though no difficult problems were puzzling
his mind and heart and no mysteries were being enacted around him.

CHAPTER VII

A DISAPPEARANCE

When Dan came downstairs in the morning Mrs. Frost called him to the door of her bedroom. "What
on earth is the matter with Nancy?" she exclaimed; "I have been waiting for her the past hour.
No one has been near me since Deborah came in to lay the fire. Call the girl Danny; I want
to get up."

"All right, mother. She has probably overslept; she had a long walk yesterday."

"But that is no excuse for sleeping till this time of day. Tell her to hurry."

"It is only seven, mother."

"Yes, Danny, dear, but I mean to breakfast with you all this morning if I ever succeed in getting
dressed."

Dan crossed the hall and knocked at Nancy's door. There was no response. He knocked again, then
opened the door and looked within. Nancy was not there, and her bed had not been slept in.

He went back to his mother. "Nancy is not in her room," he said. "She has probably gone out for
a walk. I'll go and look for her."

He went to the kitchens to enquire of the maids, but they had not seen their young mistress since
the night before.

"Spec she's taken dem dogs a walkin'," said black Deborah unconcernedly. "Miss Nance she like de
early morn' 'fore de sun come up."

Dan went out to the stables. The setters came rushing out, bounding and barking joyously about
him.

"Have you seen Miss Nancy this morning, Jess?" he asked.

"No, Mister Dan, ain't seen her this mornin'. Be n't she in the house?"

"She doesn't seem to be.

Take a look down the road, and call after her, will you? Down, Boy; down, Girl!" he cried to
the dogs.

Dan began to be thoroughly alarmed. If Nancy had gone out, the dogs would certainly have followed
her. She must be within!

He went back into the house, and searched room after room, but no trace of her was to be found.
He returned at last to his mother's chamber.

"I can't find Nancy," he said. "She must have gone off somewhere."

"Gone off! why, she must have left very early then. I have been awake these two hours--since
daylight--; I would have heard every sound."

"Well, she isn't about now, Mother. She will be back by breakfast time, I don't doubt. Just stay
abed this morning, I will send her to you as soon as she comes."

"I shall have to, I suppose. Really, Dan, it is extraordinary how neglectful of me that child
can sometimes be. She knew--"

"Mother, don't find fault with her. She is devoted to you, and you know it."

"I daresay she is. Of course she is, and I am devoted to her. Where would she be, I wonder, if
it hadn't been for me? Good heavens! Dan, can anything have happened to her?"

"No, no--of course not,--nothing."

"Search the house, boy; she may be lying some place in a faint. She isn't strong--I have always
been worried--"

"Don't get excited, Mother. We will wait until breakfast time. If she doesn't turn up then, you
may be sure I shall find her."

He looked at his watch. It was already nearly eight o'clock, so he decided to say nothing to
Pembroke until after breakfast. He found the Marquis and Tom chatting before the fire in the bar.

"Shall
we have breakfast?" said Dan. "Mother will not be in this morning."

"Ah!" exclaimed the Marquis, as they took their seats at table, "that is a disappointment.
And shall we not wait for Mademoiselle Nancy?"

"My sister has stepped out, monsieur; she may be late. Shall I give you some coffee?"

"If you please--. We have another of these so beautiful days, eh? This so glorious weather, these
moonlight nights, this snow--C'est merveilleux. Last night I sat myself for a long time in my
window. Ah la nuit--the moon past its full, say you not?--the sea superbly dark, superbly blue, the
wonderful white country! As I sat there, messieurs, a sight too beautiful
greeted my eyes.

A ship, with three great sails, appeared out on the sea and sailed as a bird up the river
to our little cove, Voila, mes amis"--he waved his hand toward the eastern windows--"She is anchored
at our feet."

The two young men looked in the direction in which the marquis pointed, and to their astonishment
they saw, riding securely at her moorings in the cove, a large sailing vessel. She was a three-masted
schooner of perhaps fifteen hundred tons, a larger ship than they
had seen at anchor in the Strathsey for many a year.

"By all that's good!" exclaimed Tom, "that is exactly the sort of ship my father used to have in
the West Indie trade, a dozen or fifteen years ago. What is she? I wonder; and why is she
anchored here instead of in the Port?"

The Marquis shrugged his shoulders. "That I can tell you not, my friend; but I am happy that
she is anchored there for the hours of beauty she has already given to me. On this strange coast
of yours one so rarely sees a sail."

"No, they go too far to the south... But what is she?" asked Dan. "We must find out." He went
to the cupboard, and got out his marine glass and took a long look at the stranger.

"What do you make her out?" asked Tom.

"There are men on deck, some swabbing out the roundhouse. One of them is lolling at the wheel. She flies
the British flag."

"Do you, perhaps, make out the name?" asked the Marquis.

"I don't know--yes," Dan replied, twisting the lens to suit his eyes better and spelling out the
letters, "S,O,U,T,H,E,R,N,C,R--the Southern Cross. By Jingo, Tom, we'll have to go down to
the beach and have a look at her."

Tom took the glasses; turning
them over presently to the Marquis. "She is a good fine boat, eh?"
exclaimed M. de Boisdhyver, as he applied his eye to the end of the
glass.

"She certainly is," said Dan.

They sat down at length and
resumed their breakfast. The ship had diverted Tom's attention for
the moment from the fact that Nancy had not appeared.

"Where is Nance,
Dan?" he asked at length, striving to conceal his impatience.

"I
don't know," Dan replied. "I think she has gone over to see Mrs. Meath
and stayed for breakfast."

"Madame Meath--?" enquired the Marquis.

"At
the House on the Dunes," Dan answered, a trifle sharply.

"A long
walk for Mademoiselle on a cold morning," commented Monsieur Boisdhyver,
as he sipped his coffee.

In a few moments Dan rose. "Going to the
Port to-day, Tom?"

"Not till later, any way; I am going down to the
beach to have a look at that ship."

"Wait a little, and I'll go with
you," He turned to the door and motioned Tom to follow him.

Outside
he took his friend's arm and drew him close. "Tom, something's up;
Nancy's not here."

"Nancy's not here;" exclaimed Pembroke. "What
do you mean? Where is she?"

"To tell the truth, I don't know where
she is; her bed has not been slept in. I thought at first she had
gone for a walk with the dogs as she does sometimes, but Boy and Girl
are both in the barn. It's half-past eight now, and she ought to be
back,"

"Good Lord! man, have you searched the house?"

"I've been
over it from garret to cellar."

"And you can't find her?"

"Not a
sign of her."

"Have you been through the north wing?"

"Yes, all
over it. I have been in every room in the house, boy. Nance isn't
there. You heard nothing in the night, did you?"

"Nothing."

"When
did you go to sleep?"

"Perhaps about half-past three. Come to think
of it, I awoke at four with a start, for I heard a sleigh on the Port
Road. After that I went to bed."

"The sleigh hadn't been at the Inn?"

"It
couldn't have been--I'd have heard of it if it had; you see it woke
me up just going along the road."

"I don't suppose we need worry.
But it is queer--none of the servants have seen her since last night."

"My
God, what can have happened to her?" cried Tom.

"Sh, boy! We have
nothing to go on, but I wager that old French devil knows more than
he will tell."

"Then, we'll choke it out of him."

"No, no, don't
be a fool! She may be back any minute. I'll get the sleigh and go
over to the House on the Dunes. In the meanwhile don't show that you
are anxious! I'll be back inside of an hour, and we can have a look
at the ship. If Nance isn't with Mrs. Meath, why I am sure I'll find
her here. Let's not worry till we have to."

Tom assented to this
proposition somewhat unwillingly. Despite his friend's reassuring
words, he did not feel that Nancy would be found at the House on the
Dunes or that she would immediately return. He remembered her telling
him of her desire to go away. He remembered how strangely she had
received the declaration of his love, and he feared almost as much
that she had fled from him, as that the Marquis, weird and evil as
he began to think him, had any hand in her disappearance.

After Dan's
departure in the sleigh, Tom wandered about restlessly. When half
an hour passed and Frost did not return, he went out to look down
the road and see if he were coming. The white open country was still
and empty, and the only sign of life was the great three-masted ship
riding at anchor in the cove, with seamen lolling about her deck.

As
Tom stood under the Red Oak, the Marquis stepped out of the front
door. He was wrapped in his great coat, about to take his morning
walk up and down the gallery.

"Why so pensive, Monsieur Pembroke?
Is it that you are moved by the beauty of the scene--, the land so
white, the sea so blue, and the Southern Cross shining as it were
in a northern sky!"

Tom grunted a scarcely civil reply, and turning
away to avoid further conversation, strolled down the avenue of maples
toward the road.

Monsieur de Boisdhyver raised his eyebrows slightly,
and began his walk. By and by, still more impatient, Pembroke walked
back toward the house. If Dan did not return soon, he determined he
would go after him. As he came up to the gallery again the Marquis
paused and spoke to him. "And Mademoiselle, she has not returned?"
he asked.

"No!" Pembroke replied sharply. "She has gone to the House
on the Dunes and her brother has driven over to fetch her."

"Ah!
pardon," exclaimed Monsieur de Boisdhyver; "I did not know... But
it is cold for me, Monsieur Pembroke; I seek the fire."

Tom did not
reply. The Marquis went inside, and presently Tom could see him standing
at the window, the marine glass in his hands, sweeping the countryside.

Pembroke
passed an anxious morning. Ten o'clock came; half-past; eleven struck.
Nancy had not appeared, or was there a sign of Dan. Unable to be patient
longer, he set out on the Port Road to meet his friend.

CHAPTER VIII

GREEN
LIGHTS

The smoke was curling from the chimneys of the House on the
Dunes as Dan drove up the long marsh road from the beach. He had half
convinced himself that Nancy would be there, and he hoped that she
herself would answer his knock. When at length the door was opened
it was not by Nancy nor by Mrs. Meath, but by a stranger whom he had
never seen before.

"Yes?" a pleasant voice questioned, but giving
an accent to the monosyllable that made Dan think instantly of France.

He
found himself facing a charming woman, her bright blue eyes looking
into his with a smile that instantly attracted him. She was well-dressed,
with a different air from the women he knew. And she was undeniably
pretty--of that Dan was convinced, and the conviction overwhelmed
him with shyness. He stood awkward and ill-at-ease; for the moment
forgetting his errand. "I suppose," he stammered, "--I beg your pardon--but
I suppose you are Mrs. Heath's new boarder,--Mrs. Fountain?"

"Yes,"
replied the strange lady with an amused smile, "that is what I imagine
that I am called. My name is Madame de La Fontaine. And you--?"

"I?--Oh,
yes--of course--I am Dan Frost from the Inn over yonder. I came to
see Mrs. Meath to ask if my sister Nancy is here."

"Alas!" replied
Madame de La Fontaine, "poor Mrs. Meath she this morning is quite
unwell. She is in her room, so that I am afraid you cannot see her.
But, I may tell you, there is no one else here, just myself and my
servants."

"You have not seen or heard anything then of my sister,
Nancy Frost?" repeated Dan.

"Nancy Frost?--your sister?--No, monsieur.
I am arrived only last night and have seen no one."

"I had hoped
my sister would be here. I am sorry about Mrs. Meath; perhaps I can
be of some service. If you should need me at any time, I can almost
always be found at the Inn at the Red Oak."

"The Inn at the Red Oak?"
repeated Madame de La Fontaine, "and is that near by?"

"It is about
a mile and a half by the road," Frost replied, "but you can see it
plainly from the doorstep here."

The foreign lady stepped out in
the crisp February air. "Can you point it out to me? I may need your
assistance some time."

"You see the woods and the oak at the edge
of them," said Dan, pointing across the Dunes. "That great tree is
the Red Oak, the rambling old building beneath it is the Inn."

"Ah!
one can see quite plainly from one house to the other, is it not so?"

"Quite,"
Dan replied.

"Thank you, monsieur. I trust there will be no need
for assistance. But it makes one glad to know where are neighbours,
especially--" she added, "while poor Mrs. Meath is ill."

As she spoke
she turned to the door with the air of dismissing him, but on second
thoughts she faced him again. "I wonder, Mr. Frost, will you do me
a favour?"

"I shall be delighted," Dan exclaimed.

"My luggage arrived
last night," said Madame de La Fontaine, "upon the ship that is at
anchor in the bay. They are to bring my boxes ashore. But before that
I desire to give directions to the captain at the beach, and I cannot
well do so by my servant. Will you be kind enough to walk with me
and show me the way?"

Dan forgot about Nancy in his eagerness to
assure this unusually attractive lady that he was at her disposal.
She disappeared within, and he heard her give some quick, sharp directions
in French to a maid. Then in a moment she reappeared on the little
porch, bonneted and wrapped for a walk in the cold.

As they set out
across the Dunes, she kept up a rapid fire of questions that might
have seemed inquisitive to one more accustomed to the world than Dan.
He found himself in the course of that quarter of an hour talking
quite freely with the charming stranger.

"No, I did not make the
journey from France in the Southern Cross," she replied to one of
his interrogations, "that would have been uncomfortable, I fear. But
she brings over my boxes. She is arrived somewhat sooner than I was
promised."

"Do you expect to signal her from the beach?"

"But yes."

"How
will they know who you are?"

"Oh, they have instructions. You must
think all this curious!" she commented with a smile. "You must think
me an odd person." Usage in America followed that of the mother country.] Three
hundred and fifty-five days had been called a year from the time of Numa Pompilius, but as
that number did not correspond with the actual time of the revolution of the earth around the
sun, it had been customary to intercalate a month, every second year, of twenty-two and twenty-three
days alternately, and one day had also been added to make a fortunate number. This made the
adaptation of the nominal year to the actual a matter of great intricacy, the duty being intrusted
to the chief pontiffs. These officers were often corrupted, and managed to effect political
ends from time to time by the addition or omission of the intercalary days and months. At this
time the civil calendar was some weeks in advance of the actual time, so that the consuls,
for example, who should have entered office January 1, 46, really assumed their power October
13, 47. The Julian calendar made the year to consist of 365 days and six hours, which was correct
within a few minutes; but, by the time of Pope Gregory XIII, this had amounted to ten days,
and a new reform was instituted. Cæsar now added ninety days to the year in order to make the
year 45 begin at the proper time, inserting a new month between the 23d and 24th of February,
and adding two new months after the end of November, so that the long year thus manufactured
(445 days) was very justly called the "year of confusion", or "the last year of confusion."

Cæsar had also in mind plans of conquest. He had not forgotten that the Roman arms had been
unsuccessful at Carrhæ, and he wished to subdue the Parthians, but the ghost of Pompey would
not down. His sons raised the banner of revolt in Spain, and the officers sent against them
did not succeed in their efforts to assert the supremacy of Rome. It was necessary that Cæsar
himself should go there, and accordingly he set out in September. Twenty-seven days later he
was on the ground, and though he found himself in the face of greater difficulties than he
had anticipated, a few months sufficed to completely overthrow the enemy, who were defeated
finally at the battle of Munda, not far from Gibraltar (March, 17, 45). Thirty thousand of
them perished. Cæsar did not return to Rome until September, because affairs of the province
required attention. Again he celebrated a triumph, marked by games and shows, and new honors
from the senate.

Cæsar's ambition now made him wish to continue the supreme power in his family, and he fixed
upon a great-nephew named Octavius as his successor. In the fifth year of his consulate (B.C.
44), on the feast of Lupercalia (Feb. 15th), he attempted to take a more important step. He
prevailed upon Marc Antony to make him an offer of the kingly diadem, but as he immediately
saw that it was not pleasing to the people that he should accept it, he pushed the glittering
coronet from him, amid their plaudits, as though he would not think of assuming any sign of
authority that the people did not freely offer him themselves. Casca's account, in Shakespeare's
Julius Cæsar, act i., sc. 2.] Cæsar still longed for the name of king, however, and became
irritated because it was not given him. This was shown in his intercourse with the nobles,
and they were now excited against him by one Caius Cassius Longinus (commonly called simply
Cassius), who had wandered and fought with Crassus in Parthia, but had escaped from that disastrous
campaign. He had been a follower of Pompey, and had fallen into Cæsar's hands shortly after
the battle of Pharsalia. Though he owed his life to Cæsar, he was personally hostile to him,
and his feelings were so strong that he formed a plot for his destruction, in which sixty or
eighty persons were involved. Among these was Marcus Junius Brutus, then about forty years
of age, who had also been with Pompey at Pharsalia. He was of illustrious pedigree, and claimed
to be descended from the shadowy hero of his name, who is said to have pursued the Tarquins
with such patriotic zeal. His life also had been spared by Cæsar at Pharsalia, and he had made
no opposition to his acts as dictator. Cato was his political model, and at about this time,
he divorced his wife to marry Portia, Cato's daughter. Cassius had married Junia Tertulla,
half- sister of Brutus, and now offered him the place of chief adviser of the conspirators,
who determined upon a sudden and bold effort to assassinate the dictator. They intended to
make it appear that patriotism gave them the reason for their act, but in this they failed.

The senate was to convene on the Ides of March, and Cæsar was warned that danger awaited him;
but he was not to be deterred, and entered the chamber amid the applause of the people. The
conspirators crowded about him, keeping his friends at a distance, and at a concerted signal
he was grasped by the hands and embraced by some, while others stabbed him with their fatal
daggers. He fell at the base of the statue of Pompey, pierced with more than a score of wounds.
It is said that when he noticed Brutus in the angry crowd, he exclaimed in surprise and sorrow:
"Et tu Brute!" (And thou, too, Brutus!).

Brutus had prepared a speech to deliver to the senate, but when he looked around, he found
that senators, centurions, lictors, and attendants, all had fled, and the place was empty.
He then marched with his accomplices to the forum. It was crowded with an excited multitude,
but it was not a multitude of friends. The assassins saw that there was no safety for them
in the city. Lepidus was at the gates with an army, and Antony had taken possession of the
papers and treasures of Cæsar, which gave him additional power; but all parties were in doubt
as to the next steps, and a reconciliation was determined upon as giving time for reflection.
Cassius went to sup with Antony, and Brutus with Lepidus. This shows plainly that the good
of the republic was not the cause nearest the hearts of the principal actors; but that each,
like a wary player at chess, was only anxious lest some adversary should get an advantage over him.

The senate was immediately convened, and under the direction of Cicero, who became its temporary
leader, it was voted that the acts of Cæsar, intended as well as performed, should be ratified,
and that the conspirators should be pardoned, and assigned to the provinces that Cæsar had
designated them for.

Antony now showed himself a consummate actor, and a master of the art of moving the multitude.
He prepared for the obsequies of the dictator, at which he was to deliver the oration, and,
while pretending to endeavor to hold back the people from violence against the murderers, managed
to excite them to such an extent that nothing could restrain them. He brought the body into
the Campus Martius for the occasion, and there in its presence displayed the bloody garment
through which the daggers of the conspirators had been thrust; identified the rents made by
the leader, Cassius, the "envious Casca," the "well-beloved Brutus," and the others; and displayed
a waxen effigy that he had prepared for the occasion, bearing all the wounds. He called upon
the crowd the while, as it swayed to and fro in its threatening violence, to listen to reason,
but at the same time told them that if he possessed the eloquence of a Brutus he would ruffle
up their spirits and put a tongue in every wound of Cæsar that would move the very stones of
Rome to rise in mutiny.

The oration had its natural effect. The people, stirred from one degree of frenzy to another,
piled up chairs, benches, tables, brushwood, even ornaments and costly garments for a funeral
pile, and burned the whole in the forum. Unable to restrain themselves, they rushed with brands
from the fire towards the homes of the conspirators to wreak vengeance upon them. Brutus and
Cassius had fled from the city, and the others could not be found, so that the fury of their
hate died out for want of new fuel upon which to feed.

Antony was now the chief man of Rome, and it was expected that he would demand the dictatorship.
To the astonishment of all, he proposed that the office itself should be forever abolished,
thus keeping up his pretence of moderation; but, on the other hand, he asked for a body- guard,
which the senate granted, and he surrounded himself with a force of six thousand men. He appointed
magistrates as he wished, recalled exiles, and freed any from prison whom he desired, under
pretence of following the will of Cæsar.

It soon became apparent that, in the words of Cicero addressed to Cassius, the state seemed
to have been "emancipated from the king, but not from the kingly power," for no one could tell
where Antony would stop his pretence of carrying out the plans of Cæsar. The republic was doubtless
soon to end, and it was not plain what new misery was in store for the distracted people.

XVII.

HOW THE REPUBLIC BECAME AN EMPIRE.

When Cæsar had planned to go to Parthia, he sent in that direction some of his legions, which
wintered at Apollonia, just over the Adriatic, opposite Brundusium, and with them went the
young and sickly nephew whom Cæsar had mentioned in his will as his heir. While the young man
was engaged in familiarizing himself with the soldiers and their life, a freedman arrived in
camp to announce from his mother the tragedy of the Ides of March. The soldiers offered to
go with him to avenge his uncle's death, but he decided to set out at once and alone for the
capital. At Brundusium he was received by the army with acclamations. He did not hesitate to
assume the name Cæsar, and to claim the succession, though he thus bound himself to pay the
legacies that Cæsar had made to the people. He was known as Caius Julius Cæsar Octavianus,
or, briefly, as Octavius. [Footnote: Octavius was son of Caius Octavius and Atia, daughter
of Julia, sister of Julius Cæsar, and was born Sept. 23, B.C. 63. His true name was the same
as that of his father, but he is usually mentioned in history as Augustus, an untranslatable
title that he assumed when he became emperor. His descent was traced from Atys, son of Alba,
an old Latin hero.] Cæsar had bequeathed his magnificent gardens on the opposite side of the
Tiber to the public as a park, and to every citizen in Rome a gift of three hundred sesterces,
equal to ten or fifteen dollars. These provisions could not easily be carried out except by
Antony, who had taken possession of Cæsar's moneys, and who was at the moment the most powerful
man in the republic. Next to him stood Lepidus, who was in command of the army. These two seemed
to stand between Octavius and his heritage.

Octavius understood the value of money, and took possession of the public funds at Brundusium,
captured such remittances from the provinces as he could reach, and sent off to Asia to see
how much he could secure of the amount provided for the Parthian expedition, just as though
all this had been his own personal property.

Thus the timid but ambitious youth began to prepare himself for supreme authority. When he
reached Rome his mother and other friends warned him of the risks involved in his course, but
he was resolute. He had made the acquaintance at Apollonia of Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa, then
twenty years of age, who afterwards became a skilful warrior and always was a valuable adviser,
and now he determined to make a friend of Cicero. This remarkable orator had already been intimate
with all the prominent men of his day; had at one time or another flattered or cajoled Curio,
Cassius, Crassus, Pompey, Antony, and Cæsar, and now, after thoroughly canvassing the probabilities,
he decided to take the side of Octavius, though he was loth to break with either Brutus or
Antony. His weakness is plainly and painfully presented by his own hand in his interesting
letters, which add much light to the story of this period. He artfully won the soldiers and
the people by his liberality (that could not fail to be contrasted with the grasping action
of Antony), and by the shows with which he amused them. Thus with it all he managed to make
the world believe that he was not laying plans of ambition, but simply wished to protect the
state from the selfish designs of his rival. In this effort he was supported by the oratory
of Cicero, who began to compose and deliver or publish a remarkable series of fourteen speeches
known as Philippics, from their resemblance to the four acrimonious invectives against Philip
of Macedon which the great Demosthenes launched at Athens during the eleven years in which
he strove to arouse the weakened Greeks from inactivity and pusillanimity (352-342 B.C.).

Cicero entered Rome on the first of September, and delivered his first Philippic the next day,
in the same Temple of Concord in which he had denounced Catiline twenty years before. He then
retired from the city, and did not hear the abusive tirade with which Antony attempted to blacken
his reputation. In October he prepared a second speech, which was not delivered, but was given
to the public in November. This is the most elaborate and the best of the Philippics, and it
is also much more fierce than the former. The last of the series was delivered April 22, 43.
Antony was soon declared a public enemy, and Cicero in his speeches constantly urged a vigorous
prosecution of the war against him.

Octavius gained the confidence of the army, and then demanded the consulate of the senate.
When that powerful office had been obtained, he broke with the senate, and marched to the northward,
ostensibly to conquer Antony and Lepidus, who were coming down with another great army. Instead
of precipitating a battle, Lepidus contrived to have a meeting on a small island in a tributary
of the Po, not far from the present site of Bologna, and there, toward the end of October,
it was agreed that the government of the Roman world should be peaceably divided between the
three captains, who were to be called Triumvirs for the settlement of the affairs of the republic.
They were to retain their offices until the end of December, 38, Lepidus ruling Spain; Octavius,
Sicily, Sardinia, and Africa; and Antony, the two Gauls; while Italy was to be governed by
the three in common, their authority being paramount to senate, consuls, and laws. This is
known as the Second Triumvirate, though we must remember that the former arrangement, made
by Cæsar, Pompey, and Crassus, was simply a private league without formal sanction of law.
The second triumvirate was proclaimed November, 27, 43 B.C.

The first work of the three rulers was to rid themselves of all whom they feared as enemies,
and we have to imagine them sitting down to make out a list of those who, like the sufferers
at the dreadful time of Marius and Sulla, were proscribed. Among the prominent men seventeen
were first chosen to be butchered, and on the horrid list are found the names of a cousin of
Octavius, a brother of Lepidus, and an uncle of Antony. To the lasting execration of Octavius,
he consented that Cicero, who had so valiantly fought for him, should be sacrificed to the
vengeance of Antony, whom the orator had scarified with his burning words.

This was but the beginning of blood-shedding, for when the triumvirs reached Rome they issued
list after list of the doomed, some names being apparently included at the request of daughters,
wives, and friends to gratify private malice. The head and hands of Cicero were cut off and
sent to be affixed to the rostra, where they had so often been seen during his life. It is
said that on one occasion a head was presented to Antony, and he exclaimed: "I do not recognize
it, show it to my wife"; and that on another, when a man begged a few moments of respite that
he might send his son to intercede with Antony, he was told that it was that son who had demanded
his death. The details are too horrible for record, and yet it is said that the massacre was
not so general as in the former instance. In this reign of terror, three hundred senators died,
and two thousand knights.

While these events had occurred in Rome, Brutus and Cassius had been successfully pursuing
their conquests in Syria and Greece, and were now masters of the eastern portion of the Roman
world. When they heard of the triumvirate and the proscription, they determined to march into
Europe; but Antony and Octavius were before them, and the opposed forces met on the field of
Philippi, which lies nine miles from the Ægean Sea, on the road between Europe and Asia, the
Via Egnatia, which ran then as now from Dyrrachium and Apollonia in Illyricum, by way of Thessalonica
to Constantinople, or Byzantium, as it was then called. Brutus engaged the forces of Octavius,
and Cassius those of Antony. Antony made head against his opponent; but Octavius, who was less
of a commander, and fell into a fit of illness on the beginning of the battle, gave way before
Brutus, though in consequence of misinformation of the progress of the struggle, Cassius killed
himself just before a messenger arrived to tell him of his associate's success. Twenty days
afterwards the struggle was renewed on the same ground, and Brutus was defeated, upon which
he likewise put an end to his own life. If the murderers of Cæsar had fought for the republic,
there was no hope for that cause now. The three rulers were reduced to two, for Lepidus was
ignored after the victory of his associates, and it only remained to eliminate the second member
of the triumvirate to establish the monarchy. For the present, Octavius and Antony divided
the government between them, Antony taking the luxurious East, and leaving to Octavius the
invidious task of governing Italy and allotting lands to the veterans.

Thousands of the inhabitants of Cisalpine Gaul were expelled from their homes to supply the
soldiers with farms, but still they remained unsatisfied, and Italy was filled with complaints
which Octavius was unable to allay. Antony, on the other hand, gave himself up to the grossest
dissipation, careless of consequences. At Tarsus, he had an interview with Cleopatra, then
twenty-eight years of age, whom he had seen years before when he had accompanied Gabinius to
Alexandria, and later, when she had lived at Rome the favorite of Cæsar. Henceforth he was
her willing slave. She sailed up the river Cydnus in a vessel propelled by silver oars that
moved in unison with luxurious music, and filled the air with fragrance as she went, while
beautiful slaves held the rudder and the ropes. The careless and pleasure-loving warrior forgot
every thing in his wild passion for the Egyptian queen. He forgot his wife, Fulvia, but she
was angry with Octavius because he had renounced his wife Claudia, her daughter, and stirred
up a threatening revolt against him, which she fondly hoped might also serve to recall Antony
from the fascinations of Cleopatra. With her supporters she raised a considerable army, by
taking the part of the Italians who had been dispossessed to give farms to the veterans, and
by pretending also to favor the soldiers, to whom rich spoils from Asia were promised. They
were, however, pushed from place to place until they found themselves shut up in the town of
Perusia, in Etruria, where they were besieged and forced to surrender, by the military skill
of Agrippa, afterwards known as one of the ablest generals of antiquity.

Meantime, Antony's fortunes in the East were failing, and he determined upon a brave effort
to overthrow Octavius. He sailed for Brundusium, and laid siege to it; but the soldiers on
both sides longed for peace. Fulvia had died, and mutual friends prevailed upon Octavius and
Antony to make peace and portion out the world anew. Again the East fell to Antony and the
West to his colleague. Antony married Octavia, sister of Octavius, and both repaired to the
capital, where they celebrated games and festivities in honor of the marriage and the reconciliation.
This was at the end of the year 40 B.C.

The next year peace was effected with Sextus, a son of the great Pompey, who had been proscribed
as one of the murderers of Cæsar, though he had really had no share in that deed. He had been
engaged in marauding expeditions having for their purpose the injury of the triumvirs, and
at this time had been able to cut off a considerable share of the supply of grain from Sicily
and Africa. He was indemnified for the loss of his private property and was given an important
command for five years. This agreement was never consummated, for Antony had not been consulted
and refused to carry out a portion of it that depended upon him. Again Pompey entered upon
his marauding expeditions, and the price of grain rose rapidly at Rome. Two years were occupied
in preparing a fleet, which was placed under command of Agrippa, who defeated Pompey off Naulochus,
on the northwestern coast of Sicily (Sept. 3, 36.)

In the midst of the preparations for the war with Pompey, (B.C. 37) discord had arisen between
Antony and Octavius, and the commander of the Eastern army set out for Italy with a fleet of
three hundred sail. Octavius forbade his landing, and he kept on his course to Tarentum, where
a conference was held. There were present on this memorable occasion, besides the two triumvirs,
Agrippa, the great general; Octavia, sister of one triumvir and wife of the other, one of the
noblest women of antiquity; and Caius Cilnius Mæcenas, a wealthy patron of letters, who had
also been present when the negotiations were made previous to the peace of Brundusium, three
years before. Probably the satiric poet Horace was also one of the group, for he gives, in
one of his satires, an account of a journey from Rome to Brundusium, which he is supposed to
have made at the time that Mæcenas was hurrying to the conference.

Horace says that he set out from Rome accompanied by Heliodorus, a rhetorician whom he calls
by far the most learned of the Greeks, and that they found a middling inn at Aricia, the first
stopping-place, on the Appian Way, sixteen miles out, at the foot of the Alban mount.

Next they rested, or rather tried to rest, at Appii Forum, a place stuffed with sailors, and
then took a boat on the canal for Tarracina. He gives a vivid picture of the confusion of such
a place, where the watermen and the slaves of the travellers were mutually liberal in their
abuse of each other, and the gnats and frogs drove off sleep. Drunken passengers, also, added
to the din by the songs that their potations incited them to. At Feronia the passengers left
the boat, washed their faces and hands, and crawled onward three miles up to the heights of
Anxur, where Mæcenas and others joined the party. Slowly they made their way past Fundi, and
Formiæ, where they seem to have been well entertained. The next day they were rejoiced by the
addition of the poet Virgil and several more friends to the party, and pleasantly they jogged
onwards until their mules deposited their pack- saddles at Capua, where Mæcenas was soon engaged
in a game of tennis, while Horace and Virgil sought repose. The next stop was not far from
the celebrated Caudine Forks, at a friend's villa, where they were very hospitably entertained,
and supplied with a bountiful supper, at which buffoons performed some droll raillery. Then having
given her his hand to help her down, he kept hold of it as they went along the free path to the
open meadows. The feeling of Nancy's cool little hand in his gave Tom an odd and conscious sense
of pleasure.

"You have been uncommonly silent, Nance, even for you," he said at
last.

"Oh, I'm always silent, Tom," she replied. "It is because I am stupid and have nothing to say."

"Nonsense,
my dear, you always have a lot to say to me. But you are forever
reading, thinking ... what's it all about?"

"Oh, I think, Tom, because
I have little else to do; but my thoughts aren't often worth the telling.
In truth there is no one, not even you, who particularly cares to
hear them. Tom," she said, "I am restless and discontented. Hence for twenty-four miles the party was bowled away in chaises
to a little town that the poet does not name, where water was sold, the worst in the world,
he thought it, but where the bread was very fine. Through Canusium they went to Rubi, reaching
that place fatigued because they had made a long journey and had been troubled by rains. Two
days more took them through Barium and Egnatia to Brundusium, where the journey ended.

At this conference it was agreed that the triumvirate should continue five years longer, Antony
agreeing to assist Octavius with 120 ships against Pompey, and Octavius contributing a large
land force to help Antony against the Parthians. After Pompey had been overcome, Lepidus claimed
Sicily, but Octavius seduced his soldiers from him, and obliged him to throw himself upon his
rival's mercy. He was permitted to retire into private life, but was allowed to enjoy his property
and dignities. He lived in the ease that he loved until 13 B.C., first at Circeii, not far
from Tarracina, and afterwards at Rome, where he was deprived of honors and rank. Lepidus had
not been a strong member of the triumvirate for a long time, but after this he was not allowed
to interfere even nominally in affairs of government. Antony and Octavius were now to wrestle
for the supremacy, and the victor was to be autocrat.

For three years after his marriage with Octavia, Antony seems to have been able to conquer
the fascinations of the Egyptian queen, but then, when he was preparing to advance into Parthia,
he allowed himself to fall again into her power, and the chances that he could hold his own
against Octavius were lessened (B.C. 37). He advanced into Syria, but called Cleopatra to him
there, and delayed his march to remain with her, overwhelming her with honors. When at last
he did open the campaign, he encountered disaster, and, hardly escaping the fate of Crassus,
retreated to Alexandria, where he gave himself up entirely to his enchantress. He laid aside
the dress and manners of a Roman, and appeared as an Eastern monarch, vainly promising Cleopatra
that he would conquer Octavius and make Alexandria the capital of the world. The rumors of
the mad acts of Antony were carried to Rome, where Octavius was growing in popularity, and
it was inevitable that a contrast should be made between the two men. Octavius easily made
the people believe that they had every thing to fear from Antony. The nobles who sided with
Antony urged him to dismiss Cleopatra, and enter upon a contest with his rival untrammelled;
but, on the contrary, in his infatuation he divorced Octavia.

War was declared against Cleopatra, for Antony was ignored, and Octavius as consul was directed
to push it. Mæcenas was placed in command at Rome, Agrippa took the fleet, and the consul himself
the land forces. The decisive struggle took place off the west coast of Greece, north of the
islands of Samos and Leucas, near the promontory of Actium, which gained its celebrity from
this battle (September 2, B.C. 31). The ships of Agrippa were small, and those of Antony large,
but difficult of management, and Cleopatra soon became alarmed for her safety, She attempted
to flee, and Antony sailed after her, leaving those who were fighting for them. Agrippa obtained
a decisive victory, and Octavius likewise overcame the forces on land.

Agrippa was sent back to Rome, and for a year Octavius busied himself in Greece and Asia Minor,
adding to his popularity by his mildness in the treatment of the conquered. He had intended
to pass the winter at Samos, but troubles among the veterans called him to Italy, where he
calmed the rising storm, and returned again to his contest, after an absence of only twenty-seven
days.

Both Cleopatra and Antony sent messengers to solicit the favor of Octavius, but he was cold
and did not satisfy them, and calmly pushed his plans. An effort was made by Cleopatra to flee
to some distant Arabian resort, but it failed: Antony made a show of resistance, but found
that his forces were not to be trusted, and both then put an end to their lives, leaving Octavius
master of Egypt, as he was of the rest of the world. He did not hasten back to Rome, where
he knew that Mæcenas and Agrippa were faithfully attending to his interests, but occupied himself
another year away from the capital in regulating the affairs of his new province.

In the summer of the year 29, however, Octavius left Samos, where he had spent the winter in
rest, and entered Rome amid the acclamations of the populace, celebrating triumphs for the
conquest of Dalmatia, of Actium, and of Egypt, and distributing the gold he had won with such
prodigality that interest on loans was reduced two thirds and the price of lands doubled. Each
soldier received a thousand sesterces (about $40), each citizen four hundred, and a certain
sum was given to the children, the whole amounting to some forty million dollars.

Octavius marked the end of the old era by himself closing the gates of the temple of Janus
for the third time in the history of Rome, and by declaring that he had burned all the papers
of Antony. Several months later, by suppressing all the laws of the triumvirate he emphasized
still more the fact which he wished the people to understand, that he had broken with the past.

The Roman Republic was ended. The Empire was not established in name, but the government was
in reality absolute. The chief ruler united in himself all the great offices of the state,
but concealed his strength and power, professing himself the minister of the senate, to which,
however, he dictated the decrees that he ostentatiously obeyed.

XVIII.

SOME MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF THE ROMAN PEOPLE.

We have now traced the career of the people of Rome from the time when they were the plain
and rustic subjects of a king, through their long history as a conquering republic, down to
the period when they lost the control of government and fell into the hands of a ruler more
autocratic than their earlier tyrants. The heroic age of the republic had now long since passed
away, and with it had gone even the admiration of those personal qualities which had lain at
the foundation of the national greatness.

History at its best is to such an extent made up of stories of the doings of rulers and fighting-men,
who happen by their mere strength and physical force to have made themselves prominent, that
it is often read without conveying any actual familiarity with the people it is ostensibly
engaged with. The soldiers and magistrates of whom we have ourselves been reading were but
few, and we may well ask what the millions of other citizens were doing all these ages. How
did they live? What were their joys and griefs? We have, it is true, not failed to get an occasional
glimpse of the intimate life of the people who were governed, as we have seen a Virginia passing
through the forum to her school, and a Lucretia spinning among her maidens, and we have learned
that in the earliest times the workers were honored so much that they were formed into guilds,
and had a very high position among the centuries (see pages 31 and 50), but these were only
suggestions that make us all the more desirous to know particulars.

Rome had not become a really magnificent city, even after seven hundred years of existence.
We know that it was a mere collection of huts in the time of Romulus, and that after the burning
of the principal edifices by the Gauls, it was rebuilt in a hurried and careless manner, the
houses being low and mean, the streets narrow and crooked, so that when the population had
increased to hundreds of thousands the crowds found it difficult to make their way along the
thoroughfares, and vehicles with wheels were not able to get about at all, except in two of
the streets. The streets were paved, it is true, and there were roads and aqueducts so well
built and firm that they claim our admiration even in their ruins.

The Roman house at first was extremely simple, being of but one room called the atrium, or
darkened chamber, because its walls were stained by the smoke that rose from the fire upon
the hearth and with difficulty found its way through a hole in the roof. The aperture also
admitted light and rain, the water that dripped from the roof being caught in a cistern that
was formed in the middle of the room. The atrium was entered by way of a vestibule open to
the sky, in which the gentleman of the house put on his toga as he went out. [Footnote: When
Cincinnatus went out to work in the field, he left his toga at home, wearing his tunic only,
and was "naked" (nudus), as the Romans said. The custom illustrates MATT, xxiv., 18. (See p.
86.)] Double doors admitted the visitor to the entrance-hall or ostium. There was a threshold,
upon which it was unlucky to place the left foot; a knocker afforded means of announcing one's
approach, and a porter, who had a small room at the side, opened the door, showing the caller
the words Cave canem (beware of the dog), or Salve (welcome), or perchance the dog himself
reached out toward the visitor as far as his chain would allow. Sometimes, too, there would
be noticed in the mosaic of the pavement the representation of the faithful domestic animal
which has so long been the companion as well as the protector of his human friend. Perhaps
myrtle or laurel might be seen on a door, indicating that a marriage was in process of celebration,
or a chaplet announcing the happy birth of an heir. Cypress, probably set in pots in the vestibule,
indicated a death, as a crape festoon does upon our own door-handles, while torches, lamps,
wreaths, garlands, branches of trees, showed that there was joy from some cause in the house.

In the "black room" the bed stood; there the meals were cooked and eaten, there the goodman
received his friends, and there the goodwife sat in the midst of her maidens spinning. The
original house grew larger in the course of time: wings were built on the sides, and the Romans
called them wings as well as we (ala, a wing). Beyond the black room a recess was built in
which the family records and archives were preserved, but with it for a long period the Roman
house stopped its growth.

Before the empire came, however, there had been great progress in making the dwelling convenient
as well as luxurious. Another hall had been built out from the room of archives, leading to
an open court, surrounded by columns, known as the peristylum (peri about, stulos, a pillar),
which was sometimes of great magnificence. Bedchambers were made separate from the atrium,
but they were small, and would not seem very convenient to modern eyes.

The dining-room, called the triclinium (Greek, kline, a bed) from its three couches, was a
very important apartment. In it were three lounges surrounding a table, on each of which three
guests might be accommodated. The couches were elevated above the table, and each man lay almost
flat on his breast, resting on his left elbow, and having his right hand free to use, thus
putting the head of one near the breast of the man behind him, and making natural the expression
that he lay in the bosom of the other. [Footnote: In the earliest times the Romans sat at table
on benches. The habit of reclining was introduced from Greece, but Roman women sat at table
long after the men had fallen into the new way.] As the guests were thus arranged by threes,
it was natural that the rule should have been made that a party at dinner should not be less
in number than the Graces nor more than the Muses, though it has remained a useful one ever since.

Spacious saloons or parlors were added to the houses, some of which were surrounded with galleries
and highly adorned. In these the dining- tables were spread on occasions of more ceremony than
usual. After the capture of Syracuse, and the increase of familiarity with foreign art, picture-rooms
were built in private dwellings; and after the second Punic war, book-rooms became in some
sort a necessity. Before the republic came to an end, it was so fashionable to have a book-room
that ignorant persons who might not be able to read even the titles of their own books endeavored
to give themselves the appearance of erudition by building book-rooms in their houses and furnishing
them with elegance. The books were in cases arranged around the walls in convenient manner,
and busts and statues of the Muses, of Minerva, and of men of note were used then as they are
now for ornaments. [Footnote: The books were rolls of the rind (liber) of the Egyptian papyrus,
which early became an article of commerce, or of parchment, written on but one side and stained
of a saffron color on the other. Slaves were employed to make copies of books that were much
in demand, and booksellers bought and sold them.] House-philosophers were often employed to
open to the uninstructed the stores of wisdom contained in the libraries.

As wealth and luxury increased, the Romans added the bath-room to their other apartments. In
the early ages they had bathed for comfort and cleanliness once a week, but the warm bath was
apparently unknown to them. In time this became very common, and in the days of Cicero there
were hot and cold baths, both public and private, which were well patronized. Some were heated
by fires in flues, directly under the floors, which produced a vapor bath. The bath was, however,
considered a luxury, and at a later date it was held a capital offence to indulge in one on
a religious holiday, and the public baths were closed when any misfortune happened to the republic.

Comfort and convenience united to take the cooking out of the atrium (which then became a reception-room)
into a separate apartment known as the culina, or kitchen, in which was a raised platform on
which coals might be burned and the processes of broiling, boiling, and roasting might be carried
on in a primitive manner, much like the arrangement still to be seen at Rome. On the tops of
the houses, after a while, terraces were planned for the purpose of basking in the sun, and
sometimes they were furnished with shrubs, fruit-trees, and even fishponds. Often there were
upwards of fifty rooms in a house on a single floor; but in the course of time land became
so valuable that other stories were added, and many lived in flats. A flat was sometimes called
an insula, which meant, properly, a house not joined to another, and afterwards was applied
to hired lodgings. Domus, a house, meant a dwelling occupied by one family, whether it were
an insula or not.

The floors of these rooms were sometimes, but not often, laid with boards, and generally were
formed of stone, tiles, bricks, or some sort of cement. In the richer dwellings they were often
inlaid with mosaics of elegant patterns. The walls were often faced with marble, but they were
usually adorned with paintings; the ceilings were left uncovered, the beams supporting the
floor or the roof above being visible, though it was frequently arched over. The means of lighting,
either by day or night, were defective. The atrium was, as we have seen, lighted from above,
and the same was true of other apartments--those at the side being illuminated from the larger
ones in the middle of the house. There were windows, however, in the upper stories, though
they were not protected by glass, but covered with shutters or lattice-work, and, at a later
period, were glazed with sheets of mica. Smoking lamps, hanging from the ceiling or supported
by candelabra, or candles, gave a gloomy light by night in the houses, and torches without.

The sun was chiefly depended upon for heat, for there were no proper stoves, though braziers
were used to burn coals upon, the smoke escaping through the aperture in the ceiling, and,
in rare cases, hot- air furnaces were constructed below, the heat being conveyed to the upper
rooms through pipes. There has been a dispute regarding chimneys, but it seems almost certain
that the Romans had none in their dwellings, and, indeed, there was little need of them for
purposes of artificial warmth in so moderate a climate as theirs.

Such were some of the chief traits of the city houses of the Romans. Besides these, there were
villas in the country, some of which were simply farm-houses, and others places of rest and
luxury supported by the residents of cities. The farm villa was placed, if possible, in a spot
secluded from visitors, protected from the severest winds, and from the malaria of marshes,
in a well-watered place near the foot of a well-wooded mountain. It had accommodations for
the kitchen, the wine- press, the farm-superintendent, the slaves, the animals, the crops,
and the other products of the farm. There were baths, and cellars for the wine and for the
confinement of the slaves who might have to be chained. Here they speak no evil against their
neighbors.

The pleasure villa had many of the appointments of the town house, but was outwardly more attractive,
of course. It stood in the midst of grassy slopes, was approached through avenues of trees
leading to the portico, before which was a terrace and ornaments made of box-trees cut into
fantastic forms representing animals. The dining-room stood out from the other buildings, and
was light and airy. Perhaps a grand bedchamber was likewise built out from the others, so that
it might have the warmth of the sun upon it through the entire day. Connected with the establishment
were walks ornamented with flowerbeds, closely clipped hedges, and trees tortured into all
sorts of unnatural shapes. There were shaded avenues for gentle exercise afoot or in litters;
there were fountains, and perhaps a hippodrome formed like a circus, with paths divided by
hedges and surrounded by large trees in which the luxurious owner and his guests might run
or exercise themselves in the saddle. [Footnote: Roman extravagance ran riot in the appointments
of the villa. One is mentioned that sold for some $200,000, chiefly because it comprised a
desirable fish-pond. A late writer says of the site of Pompey's villa on a slope of the Alban
hills: "It has never ceased in all the intervening ages to be a sort of park, and very fine
ruins, from out of whose massive arches grow a whole avenue of live oaks, attest to the magnificence
which must once have characterized the place. The still beautiful grounds stretch along the
shore of the lake as far as the gate of the town of Albano.... The house in Rome I occupy,
stands in the old villa of Mæcenas, an immense tract of land comprising space enough to contain
a good-sized city.... Where did the Plebs live? and what air did they and their children breathe?
Who cared or knew, so long as Pompey or Cæsar fared sumptuously? What marvel that there were
revolutions!"]

In such houses the Roman family lived, composed as families must be, of parents and children,
to which were usually added servants, for after the earlier times of simplicity had passed
away it became so fashionable to keep slaves to perform all the different domestic labors,
that one could hardly claim to be respectable unless he had at least ten in his household.
The first question asked regarding a stranger was: "How many slaves does he keep?" and upon
its answer depended the social position the person would have in the inquirer's estimation.
The son did not pass from his father's control while that parent lived, but the daughter might
do so by marriage. The power of the father over his children and grandchildren, as well as
over his slaves was very great, and the family spirit was exceedingly strong.

When a man and a woman had agreed to marry, and the parents and friends had given their consent,
there was sometimes a formal meeting at the maiden's house, at which the marriage-agreement
was written out on tablets and signed by the engaged persons. It seems, too, that in some cases
the man placed a ring on the hand of his betrothed. It was no slight affair to choose the wedding-day,
for no day that was marked ater on the calendar would be considered fit for the purpose of
the rites that were to accompany the ceremony. The calends (the first day of the month), the
nones (the fifth or seventh), and the ides (the thirteenth or fifteenth), would not do, nor
would any day in May or February, nor many of the festivals.

In early times, the bride dressed herself in a long white robe, adorned with ribbons, and a
purple fringe, and bound herself with a girdle on her wedding day. She put on a bright yellow
veil and shoes of the same color, and submitted to the solemn religious rites that were to
make her a wife. The pair walked around the altar hand in hand, received the congratulations
of their friends, and the bride, taken with apparent force from the arms of her mother, as
the Sabine women were taken in the days of Romulus, was conducted to her new home carrying
a distaff and a spindle, emblems of the industry that was thought necessary in the household
work that she was to perform or direct. Strong men lifted her over the threshold, lest her
foot should trip upon it, and her husband saluted her with fire and water, symbolic of welcome,
after which he presented her the keys. A feast was then given to the entire train of friends
and relatives, arid probably the song was sung of which Talasia was the refrain. [Footnote:
See page 22.] Sometimes the husband gave another entertainment the next day, and there were
other religious rites after which the new wife took her proud position as mater-familias, sharing
the honors of her husband, and presiding over the household.

The wives and daughters made the cloth and the dresses of the household, in which they had
ample occupation, but their labors did not end there. [Footnote: Varro contrasts the later
luxury with past frugality, setting in opposition the spacious granaries, and simple farm arrangements
of the good old times, and the peacocks and richly inlaid doors of a degenerate age. Formerly
even the city matron turned the spindle with her own hand, while at the same time she kept
her eye upon the pot on the hearth; now the wife begs the husband for a bushel of pearls, and
the daughter demands a pound of precious stones: then the wife was quite content if the husband
gave her a trip once or twice in the year in an uncushioned wagon; now she sulks if he go to
his country estate without her, and as she travels my lady is attended to the villa by the
fashionable host of Greek menials and singers.] The grinding of grain and the cooking was done
by the servants, but the wife had to superintend all the domestic operations, among which was
included the care of the children, though old Cato thought it was necessary for him to look
after the washing and swaddling of his children in person, and to teach them what he thought
they ought to know. The position of the woman was entirely subordinate to the husband, though
in the house she was mistress. She belonged to the household and not to the community, and
was to be called to account for her doings by her father, her husband, or her near male relatives,
not by her political ruler. She could acquire property and inherit money the same as a man
could, however. When the pure and noble period of Roman history had passed, women became as
corrupt as the rest of the community. The watering-places were scenes of unblushing wickedness;
women of quality, but not of character, masquerading before the gay world with the most reckless
disregard of all the proprieties of life. [Footnote: Cato the Elder, who enjoyed uttering invectives
against women, was free in denouncing their chattering, their love of dress, their ungovernable
spirit, and condemned the whole sex as plaguy and proud, without whom men would probably be
more godly.]

The garments of Roman men and women were of extreme simplicity for a long period, but the desire
of display and the love of ornament succeeded in making them at last highly adorned and varied.
Both men and women wore two principal garments, the tunic next to the body, and the pallium
which was thrown over it when going abroad; but they also each had a distinctive article of
dress, the men wearing the toga (originally worn also by women), a flowing outer garment which
no foreigner could use, and the women the stola, which fell over the tunic to the ankles and
was bound about the waist by a girdle. Boys and girls wore a toga with a broad border of purple,
but when the boy became a man he threw this off and wore one of the natural white color of
the wool.

Sometimes the stola was clasped over the shoulder, and in some instances it had sleeves. The
pallium was a square outer garment of woollen goods, put on by women as well as men when going
out. It came into use during the civil wars, but was forbidden by Augustus. Both sexes also
wore in travelling a thick, long cloak without sleeves, called the pænula, and the men wore
also over the toga a dark cloak, the lacerna.

On their feet the men wore slippers, boots, and shoes of various patterns. The soccus was a
slipper not tied, worn in the house; and the solea a very light sandal, also used in the house
only. The sandalium proper was a rich and luxurious sandal introduced from Greece and worn
by women only. The baxa was a coarse sandal made of twigs, used by philosophers and comic actors;
the calcæus was a shoe that covered the foot, though the toes were often exposed; and the cothurnus,
a laced boot worn by horsemen, hunters, men of authority, and tragic actors, and it left the
toes likewise exposed.

An examination of the mysteries of the dressing-rooms of the ladies of Rome displays most of
the toilet conveniences that women still use. They dressed their hair in a variety of styles
(see page 155), and used combs, dyes, oils, and pomades just as they now do. They had mirrors,
perfumes, soaps in great variety, hair-pins, ear-rings, bracelets, necklaces, gay caps and
turbans, and sometimes ornamental wigs.

The change that came over Rome during the long period of the kingdom and the republic is perhaps
as evident in the table customs as in any respect. For centuries the simple Roman sat down
at noon to a plain dinner of boiled pudding made of spelt (far), and fruits, which, with milk,
butter, and vegetables, formed the chief articles of his diet. His table was plain, and his
food was served warm but once a day. When the national horizon had been enlarged by the foreign
wars, and Asiatic and Greek influences began to be felt, hot dishes were served oftener, and
the two courses of the principal meal no longer sufficed to satisfy the fashionable appetite.
A baker's shop was opened at the time of the war with Perseus, and scientific cookery rapidly
came into vogue.

We cannot follow the course of the history of increasing luxury in its details. Towards the
end of the republic, breakfast (jentaculum), consisting of bread and cheese, with perhaps dried
fruit, was taken at a very early hour, in an informal way, the guests not even sitting down.
At twelve or one o'clock luncheon followed (prandium). There was considerable variety in this
meal. The principal repast of the day (cæna) occurred late in the afternoon, some time just
before sunset, there having been the same tendency to make the hour later and later that has
been manifested in England and America. There were three usual courses, the first comprising
stimulants to the appetite, eggs, olives, oysters, lettuce, and a variety of other such delicacies.
For the second course the whole world was put under requisition. There were turbots and sturgeon,
eels and prawns, boar's flesh and venison, pheasants and peacocks, ducks and capons, turtles
and flamingoes, pickled tunny-fishes, truffles and mushrooms, besides a variety of other dishes
that it is impossible to mention here. After these came the dessert, almonds and raisins and
dates, cheese-cakes and sweets and apples. Thus the egg came at the beginning, and the apple,
representative of fruit in general, at the end, a fact that gave Horace ground for his expression,
ab ovo usque ad mala, from the egg to the apple, from the beginning to the end. Book IV., chap.
12.]

The Roman dinner was served with all the ostentatious elegance and formality of our own days,
if not with more. The guests assembled in gay dresses ornamented with flowers; they took off
their shoes, lest the couch, inlaid with ivory, perhaps, or adorned with cloth of gold, should
be soiled; and laid themselves down to eat, each one adjusting his napkin carefully, and taking
his position according to his relative importance, the middle place being deemed the most honorable.
About the tables stood the servants, dressed in the tunic, and carrying napkins or rough cloths
to wipe off the table, which was of the richest wood and covered by no cloth. While some served
the dishes, often of magnificent designs, other slaves offered the feasters water to rinse
their hands, or cooled the room with fans. At times music and dances were added to give another
charm to the scene.

The first occupation of the Romans was agriculture, in which was included the pasturage of
flocks and herds. In process of time trades were learned, and manufactures (literally making
with the hand, manus, the hand, facere, to make) were introduced, but not, of course, to any
thing like the extent familiar in our times. There were millers and shoe-makers, butchers and
tanners, bakers and blacksmiths, besides other tradesmen and laborers. In the process of time
there were also artists, but in this respect Rome did not excel as Greece had long before.
There were also physicians, lawyers, and teachers, besides office-holders. [Footnote: There
were office-seekers, also, and of the most persistent kind, throughout the whole history of
the republic, and they practised the corrupt arts of the most ingenious of the class in modern
times. The candidate went about clad in a toga of artificial whiteness (candidus, white), accompanied
by a nomenclator, who gave him the names of the voters they might meet, so that he could compliment
them by addressing them familiarly, and he shook them by the hand. He "treated" the voters
to drink or food in a very modern fashion, though with a more than modern profusion; and he
went to the extreme of bribing them if treating did not suffice. Against these practices Coriolanus
haughtily protests, in Shakespeare's play. Sometimes candidates canvassed for votes outside
of Rome, as Cicero proposed in one of his letters to Atticus.]

When the Roman wished to go from place to place he had a variety of modes among which to choose,
as we have already had suggested by Horace in his account of the trip from Rome to Brundusium.
He might have his horse saddled, and his saddle-bags packed, as our fathers did of yore; he
could do as one of the rich provincial governors described by Cicero did when, at the opening
of a Sicilian spring, he entered his rose- scented litter, carried by eight bearers, reclining
on a cushion of Maltese gauze, with garlands about his head and neck, applying a delicate scent-bag
to his nose as he went. There were wagons and cars, in which he might drive over the hard and
smooth military roads, and canals; and along the routes, there were, as Horace has told us,
taverns at which hospitality was to be expected.

The Roman law was remarkable for embodying in itself "the eternal principles of freedom and
of subordination, of property and legal redress," which still reign unadulterated and unmodified,
as Mommsen says; and this system this strong people not only endured but actually ordained
for itself, and it involved the principle that a free man could not be tortured, a principle
which other European peoples embraced only after a terrible and bloody struggle of a thousand
years.

One of the punishments is worthy of mention here. We have already noticed its infliction. It
was ordered that a person might not live in a certain region, or that he be confined to a certain
island, and that he be interdicted from fire and water, those two essentials to life, in case
he should overstep the bounds mentioned. These elements with the Romans had a symbolical meaning,
and when the husband received his bride with fire and water, he signified that his protection
should ever be over her. Thus their interdiction meant the withdrawal of the protection of
the state from a person, which left him an outlaw. Such a law could only have been made after
the nation had become possessed of regions somewhat remote from its centre of power. England
can now exile its criminals to another hemisphere, and Russia to a distant region of deserts
and cold, but neither country could have punished by exile before it owned such regions.

XIX.

THE ROMAN READING AND WRITING.

In the earliest times the education of young Romans was probably confined to instruction in
dancing and music, though they became acquainted with the processes of agriculture by being
called upon to practise them in company with their elders. It was not long before the elementary
attainments of reading, writing, and counting were brought within their reach, even among the
lower orders and the slaves, and we know that it was thought important to make the latter class
proficient in many departments of scholarship.

The advance in the direction of real mental culture was, however, not great until after the
contact with Greece. So long as the Romans remained a strong and self-centred people, deriving
little but tribute from peoples beyond the Italian peninsula, and looking with disdain upon
all outside that limit, there was not much to stimulate their mental progress; but when contrast
with another civilization showed that there was much power to be gained by knowledge, it was
naturally more eagerly sought. The slaves and other foreigners, to whom the instruction of
the children was assigned, were familiar with the Greek language, and it had the great advantage
over Latin of being the casket in which an illustrious literature was preserved. For this reason
Roman progress in letters was founded upon that of Greece.

The Roman parent for a long time made the Twelve Tables the text-book from which his children
were taught, thus giving them a smattering of reading, of writing, and of the laws of the land
at once. Roman authorship and the study of grammar, however, were about coincident in their
beginnings with the temporary cessation of war and the second closing of the temple of Janus.
Cato the elder prepared manuals for the instruction of youth (or, perhaps, one manual in several
parts), which gave his views on morals, oratory, medicine, war, and agriculture (a sort of
encyclopædia), and a history entitled Origines, which recounted the traditions of the kings,
told the story of the origin of the Italian towns, of the Punic wars, and of other events down
to the time of his own death. [Footnote: See page 153. "Cato's encyclopædia... was little more
than an embodiment of the old Roman household knowledge, and truly when compared with the Hellenic
culture of the period, was scanty enough."--MOMMSEN, bk. IV., ch. 12.] This seems to have originated
in the author's natural interest in the education of his son, a stimulating cause of much literature
of the same kind since.

The Roman knowledge of medicine came first from the Etruscans, to whom they are said to have
owed so much other culture, and subsequently from the Greeks. The first person to make a distinct
profession of medicine at Rome, however, was not an Etruscan, but a Greek, named Archagathus,
who settled there in the year 219, just before the second Punic war broke out. He was received
with great respect, and a shop was bought for him at the public expense; but his practice,
which was largely surgical, proved too severe to be popular. In earlier days the father had
been the family physician, and Cato vigorously reviled the foreign doctors, and like the true
conservative that he was, strove to bring back the good old times that his memory painted;
but his efforts did not avail, and the professional practice of the healing art not only became
one of the most lucrative in Rome, but remained for a long period almost a monopoly in the
hands of foreigners. Science, among the latest branches of knowledge to be freed from the swaddling-clothes
of empiricism, received, in its applied form, some attention, though mathematics and physics
were not specially favored as subjects of investigation.

The progress of Roman culture is distinctly shown by a comparison of the curriculum of Cato
with that of Marcus Terentius Varro, a long-time friend of Cicero, though ten years his senior.
[Footnote: Varro is said to have written of his youth. Still, he utters warnings against over-feeding
and over- sleeping, as well as against cakes and high living, pointing to his own youthful
training, and says that dogs were in his later years more judiciously cared for than children.]
Varro obtained from Quintilian the title "the most learned of the Romans," and St. Augustine
said that it was astonishing that he could write so much, and that one could scarcely believe
that anybody could find time even to read all that he wrote. He was proscribed by the triumvirs
at the same time that Cicero was, but was fortunate enough to escape and subsequently to be
placed under the protection of Augustus. Cato thought that a proper man ought to study oratory,
medicine, husbandry, war, and law, and was at liberty to look into Greek literature a little,
that he might cull from the mass of chaff and rubbish, as he affected to deem it, some serviceable
maxims of practical experience, but he might not study it thoroughly. Varro extended the limit
of allowed and fitting studies to grammar, logic, rhetoric, geometry, arithmetic, astronomy,
music, medicine, and architecture.

Young children were led to their first studies by the kindergarten path of amusement, learning
their letters as we learned them ourselves by means of blocks, and spelling by repeating the
letters and words in unison after the instructor. Dictation exercises were turned to account
in the study of grammar and orthography, and writing was taught by imitation, though the "copy-book"
was not paper, but a tablet covered with a thin coating of wax, and the pen a stylus, pencil-shaped,
sharp at one end and flat at the other, so that the mark made by the point might be smoothed
out by reversing the instrument. Thus vertere stilum, to turn the stylus, meant to correct
or to erase. [Footnote: See illustrations on pages 23 and 219.] The first school-book seems
to have been an Odyssey, by one Livius Andronicus, probably a Tarentine, who was captured during
the wars in Southern Italy. He became a slave, of course, and was made instructor of his master's
children. He familiarized himself with the Latin language, and wrote dramas in it. Thus though
he was a native of Magna Græcia, he is usually mentioned as the first Roman poet. It is not
known whether his Odyssey and other writings were imitations of the Greek or translations,
but it matters little; they were immediately appreciated and held their own so well that they
were read in schools as late as the time of Horace. This first awakener of Roman literary effort
was born at the time of Pyrrhus and died before the battle of Zama.

A few other Roman writers of prominence claim our attention. With some reason the Romans looked
upon Ennius as the father of their literature. He, like Andronicus, was a native of Magna Græcia,
claiming lordly ancestors, and boasting that the spirit of Homer, after passing through many
mortal bodies, had entered his own. His works remain only in fragments gathered from others
who had quoted them, and we cannot form any accurate opinion of his rank as a poet; but we
know that his success was so great that Cicero considered him the prince of Roman song, that
Virgil was indebted to him for many thoughts and expressions, and that even the brilliance
of the Augustan poets did not lessen his reputation. His utterances were vigorous, bold, fresh,
and full of the spirit of the brave old days. He found the language rough, uncultivated, and
unformed, and left it softer, more harmonious, and possessed of a system of versification.
He was born in 239 B.C., the year after the first plays of Andronicus had been exhibited on
the Roman stage, and died just before the complete establishment of the universal empire of
Rome as a consequence of the battle of Pydna. [Footnote: See Page 164.]

At the head of the list of Roman prose annalists stands the name of Quintus Fabius Pictor,
at one time a senator, who wrote a history of his nation beginning, probably, like other Roman
works of its class, with the coming of Æneas, and narrating later events, to the end of the
second Punic war, with some degree of minuteness. He wrote in Greek, and made the usual effort
to preserve and transmit a sufficiently good impression of the greatness of his own people.
That Pictor was a senator proves his social importance, which is still further exemplified
by the fact that after the carnage of Cannæ, he was sent to Delphi to learn for his distressed
countrymen how they might appease the angry gods. We only know that his history was of great
value from the frequent use that was made of it by subsequent investigators in the antiquities
of the Roman people, because no manuscript of it has been preserved.

Titus Maccius, surnamed, from the flatness of his feet, Plautus, was the greatest among the
comic poets of Rome. Of humble origin, he was driven to literature by his necessities, and
it was while turning the crank of a baker's hand-mill that he began the work by which he is
now known. He wrote three plays which were accepted by the managers of the public games, and
he was thus able to turn his back upon menial drudgery. Born at an Umbrian village during the
first Punic war, not far from the year when Regulus was taken, [Footnote: See page 133.] he
came to Rome at an early age, and after he began to write, produced a score or more of plays
which captivated both the learned and the uneducated by their truth to the life that they depicted,
and they held their high reputation long after the death of the author. Moderns have also attested
their merit, and our great dramatist in his amusing Comedy of Errors imitated the Menoechmi
of this early play-wright. [Footnote: Rude farces, known as Atellanæ Fabula, were introduced
into Rome after the contact with the Campanians, from one of whose towns, Atella, they received
their name. Though they were at a later time divided into acts, they seem to have been at first
simply improvised raillery and satire without dramatic connection. I am but thankful it has exhausted
itself at last. And Monsieur Frost, he has also over-slept, you say?"

"No. He got up early without disturbing me. I guess he will be in any minute now."

The Marquis stirred his coffee and slowly sipped it.

Tom made a hasty breakfast, and then went outside to reconnoitre. He discovered no trace of his
friend. There was but one inference in his uneasy mind: Dan had met with some misadventure
at the House on the Dunes. At last, after wandering about aimlessly for some time, he decided
to tell Jesse of his uneasiness.

"If Mr. Dan is not back by dinner time, I shall go over to the House on the Dunes and try to find
out what has become of him. Heaven knows what has become of Miss Nancy. I don't like that schooner,
Jess, and its ugly crew, lying there in the Cove. It's all a darn queer business."

"They're certainly a rough-looking lot, Mr. Tom, as I saw when I was on the beach yesterday.
And she don't appear to have any particular business anchoring there. I hope they've nothing to
do with Miss Nancy's and Mr. Dan's being away."

"I don't know, Jess, what to think. But listen here I want you to go into the Port this morning
and engage Ezra Manners to come out here and stay with us for a week or so. Don't tell him too
much, but I guess Ezra won't balk at the notion of a scrap. Bring him out with you, and offer
to pay him enough to make sure of his coming. And I want you to go to Breeze's on the Parade
and get some guns and powder, enough to arm every blessed soul of us in the Inn. Charge the
stuff to me. And be careful how you bring it back, for I don't want any one here to know about
it, particularly the old Frenchman. Understand? You ought to get back by dinner-time, if you
start at once. I'll stay here till you return."

"I'll start right off, sir. Guess I'll have to drive, for the rain'll have washed the snow off the roads.
I'll be back by halfpast twelve, Mr. Tom."

"All right," said Pembroke. "Be sure not to let any one know what you are doing."

"Sure I won't, sir. I've been pretty much worried myself about Miss Nancy. Didn't seem a bit like Miss
Nance to go off without sayin' a word to anybody.

"Well, hurry along now, Jesse."

"Yes, sir."

Tom's next task was to try to explain to Mrs. Frost without alarming her. She happily jumped
to the idea that Dan had gotten trace of Nancy, had gone to fetch her, and would return with
her before nightfall. So Tom left her quite cheerfully knitting in her room for the day.

From time to time during the morning Tom wandered into the bar always to find Monsieur de Boisdhyver
absorbed in his writing before the fire. The morning passed--a long restless morning for Pembroke--and
nothing had happened. Dan had not returned. He tried to think out a plan of action. He went
into the north wing of the Inn and barricaded the door leading from the bowling alley into the
hallway. He made sure that all other doors and windows were fastened, and he put the key of
the door that opened from the bar into the old wing into his pocket. Then he looked at the doors
and windows in the south wing.

About noon, as he was standing at an upper window anxiously scanning the landscape for any sign
of his friend, Tom saw the Marquis, wrapped in his great black cloak, emerge from the gallery,
go down the steps by the Red Oak, and walk rapidly down the avenue of maples. He went along the
Port Road, to the point where a little road branched off and led to the beach of the Cove; here
he turned and walked in the direction of the beach. With the field glass Tom could follow him
quite easily as he picked his way through the slush.

Beyond, on the waters of the Cove, the Southern Cross rode at anchor. A small boat had put
off from the schooner, two seamen at the oars, and a woman seated in the stern. The boat reached
the shore, the lady was lifted out upon the sands, the men jumped in again, pushed off and rowed
briskly back to the schooner. Tom could not distinguish the lady's features, but from the style
of her dress, cut in so different a fashion than that the ladies of Caesarea were wont to
display, and from the character of her easy graceful walk, he judged that that was the Madame de
la Fontaine, of whom Dan had told him the day before. The lady, whoever she might be, advanced
along the beach and turned into the road down which the Marquis de Boisdhyver was going to meet
her. Tom could see her extend her hand, and the old gentleman, bending ceremoniously, lift it
to his lips.

Then leaning against a stone wall beside a meadow of bedraggled snow, they engaged in animated
conversation. The lady talked, the Marquis talked. They shrugged their shoulders, they nodded
their heads, they pointed this way and then that. Poor Tom felt he must know what was being said.
At last, their conference ended, they parted as ceremoniously as they had met, the lady starting
across the Dunes and the Marquis retracing his steps toward the Inn.

In the meantime, fortunately before the Marquis reached the Port Road, Jesse had returned, accompanied
by the able-bodied Ezra Manners, and laden with the supply of arms and ammunition that Pembroke
had ordered.

Within half-an-hour Tom and Monsieur de Boisdhyver were seated together in the dining-room.

"Ah, and where is Monsieur Dan?" asked the Marquis, with an affectation of cheerfulness. "Is
he not returned?"

"Not yet, monsieur," Tom replied grimly.

"But you have heard from him?"

"Oh, yes," was Tom's answer; "I have heard from him of course."

"And from Mademoiselle Nancy, I trust, also?"

"Yes, from Nancy also."

"Ah, I am so relieved, Monsieur Pembroke. I was most anxious for their safety. One knows not
what may happen. We shall have a charming little reunion at supper, n'est-ce pas?"

"Delightful," said Tom, but in a tone of voice that did not encourage the Marquis to ask further
questions or to continue his comments.

After dinner, Tom slipped the field glass beneath his jacket, and ran upstairs to take another
view of the countryside. To his great satisfaction he saw a dark spot moving across the snowy
dunes and recognized the lady of the morning. Apparently she was on her way to the Cove again.

He
took a loaded pistol, ran down stairs, gave Jesse strict orders to keep his eye on the Marquis,
saddled his horse, and galloped off madly for Mrs. Meath's house.

When he reached the gate of the farmhouse, Tom hitched his horse to the fence, went rapidly up the little
walk, and knocked boldly and loudly on the front door. Repeated and prolonged knocking brought no
response. He tried the door and found it fastened. He walked about the house. Every window on
the ground floor was tightly closed and barred. There was no sign of life. He knocked at the
door of the kitchen, but with no result. He tried it, and found it also locked. Determined
not to be thwarted in his effort to see Mrs. Meath, he kicked vigourously against the door with
his great hob-nailed boots. Unsuccessful in this, he detached a rail from the top of the fence
and used it against the door as a battering-ram. At the first crash of timbers, the sash of
a window in the second story, directly above the kitchen, was thrown open, and a dark-eyed, dark-haired,
excessively angry-looking, young woman thrust her head out.

"Qui va la?" she exclaimed.

"Well," said Tom, smiling a little in spite of himself, for the young woman was in a state of great
indignation. "I want to see Mrs. Meath. I may say, I am determined to see Mrs. Meath."

"Peste! Je ne parle pas anglais!" snapped the damsel.

"Very well then, mademoiselle, I'll try you in French," said Tom. And in very bad French indeed,
scarcely even the French of Dr. Watson's school for the sons of gentlemen, Pembroke repeated
his remarks.

"Je ne comprend pas," said the young woman.

Tom essayed his explanation again, but whether the youthful female in the window could or would
not understand, she kept repeating in the midst of his every sentence "Je ne parle pas anglais,"
till Tom lost his temper.

"Bien, my fine girl," he exclaimed at last; "I am going to enter this house. If you won't open the
door, I will batter it down. Understand? Comprenez-vous?"

"Je ne parle pas anglais."

"As you will." He raised the fence-rail again and made as if to ram the door. "Ouvrez la porte!
Do you understand that?"

"Bete!" cried the girl, withdrawing her head and slamming down the window.

Tom waited a moment to see if his threats had been effective, and was relieved by hearing the
bar within removed and the key turned in the lock. The door was opened, and the young woman stood
on the sill and volleyed forth a series of French execrations that made Tom wince, though he
did not understand a word she was saying. Despite her protests, he brushed her aside and stalked
into the house. He went rapidly from room to room, upstairs and down, from garret to cellar,
the girl following him with her chorus of abusive reproach. She might have held her peace, thought Tom,
for within half-an-hour he was convinced that there was not a person in the House on the Dunes
save himself and his excited companion. All he discovered for his pains was that old Mrs. Meath
was also among the missing.

"Ou est Madame Meath?"

"Madame Meath! Que voulez vous? Je ne connais pas Madame Meath...." And infinitely more of
which Tom could gather neither head nor tail.

Satisfied at last that there was nothing to be gained by further search or parley with the woman,
he thanked her civilly enough and went out. He unhitched his horse, vaulted into the saddle, and
dashed back, as fast as his beast could be urged to carry him, to the Inn. He was certain now
that the schooner held the secret of his vanished friends, and it occurred to him to play their own
game and turn the tables on Monsieur the Marquis de Boisdhyver.

Arrived at the Inn, Tom turned his horse, white with lather, over to Jesse; made sure that the Marquis
was in the bar; and then, with the help of Manners, rapidly made a few preparations.

It was about five o'clock when, his arrangements completed, he returned to the bar, where Monsieur
de Boisdhyver was quietly taking his tea.

Tom bowed to the old gentleman, seated himself in a great chair about five feet away, and
somewhat ostentatiously took from his pocket a pistol, laid it on the arm of his chair, and
let his fingers lightly play upon the handle. The old marquis watched Pembroke's movements out
of the corner of his eye, still somewhat deliberately sipping his tea. Manners, meanwhile, had
entered, and stood respectfully in the doorway, oddly enough also with a pistol in his hand.

Suddenly
Monsieur de Boisdhyver placed his teacup on the table, and leaning back in his chair, surveyed
Tom with an air of indignant astonishment.

"Monsieur Pembroke," he said, "to what am I to attribute these so unusual attentions? Is it that
you are mad?"

"You may attribute these unusual attentions, marquis, to the fact that from now on, you are not a
guest of the Inn at the Red Oak, but a prisoner."

"Ah!" exclaimed the Marquis with a start, as he made a spasmodic motion toward the pocket of
his coat. But if his intention had been to draw a weapon, Tom was too quick for him. The Marquis
found himself staring into the barrel of a pistol and heard the unpleasant click of the trigger
as it was cocked.

The old gentleman paled, whether with fright or indignation, Tom was not concerned to know. "You will please
keep perfectly still, marquis."

"Monsieur Pembroke," exclaimed the old gentleman, "C'est abominable, outrageous, Mon Dieu, what
insult!"

"Manners," said Tom, "kindly search that gentleman and put his firearms
out of his reach."

"Monsieur, c'est extraordinaire. I protest."

"Quick,
Ezra," replied Tom, "or one of us is likely to know how it feels to
have a bullet in his skin. Up with your hands, marquis."

Monsieur
de Boisdhyver obeyed perforce, while Manners quickly searched him,
removed a small pistol from his coat pocket and a stiletto from his
waistcoat, and handed them to Tom.

"I thought as much," said Pembroke,
slipping them into his pocket. "Now, sir, you will oblige me by dropping
that attitude of surprised indignation."

"Monsieur," said the Marquis,
"What is it that you do? Why is it that you so insult me?"

"Monsieur,
I will explain. You are my prisoner. I intend to lock you up safely
and securely until my friend and his sister return, unharmed, to the
Inn. When they are safe at home, when Madame de la Fontaine has taken
her departure from the House on the Dunes, and when the Southern Cross
has sailed out of the Strathsey, we shall release you and see you
also safely out of this country. Is that clear?"

"Mais, monsieur--"

"I
am quite convinced that you know where Nancy is and what has happened
to Dan. As my friends are probably in your power or in the power of
your friends, so, dear marquis, you are in mine. If you wish to regain
your own liberty, you will have to see that they have theirs. Now
kindly follow Manners; it will give him pleasure to show you to your
apartment. There you may burn either red or green lights, and I am
sure the snowbirds and rabbits of Lovel's Woods will enjoy them. After
you, monsieur."

"Sir, I refuse."

"My dear marquis, do not make me
add force to discourtesy. After you."

The Marquis bowed ironically,
shrugged his shoulders, and followed Manners up the stairs. He was
ushered into a chamber on the west side of the Inn, whose windows,
had they not been heavily barred, would have given him a view but
of the thick tangles of the Woods.

"I trust you will be able to make
yourself comfortable here," said Tom. "Your meals will be served at
the accustomed hours. I shall return myself in a short time, and perhaps
by then you will have reconciled yourself to the insult I have offered
you and be prepared to talk with me."

With that Tom bowed as ironically
as the Marquis had done, went out and closed the door, and securely
locked and barred it outside. Monsieur de Boisdhyver was left to his
reflections.

CHAPTER XIII

MADAME DE LA FONTAINE

For several hours
after his return to the little cabin Dan had ample leisure in which
to think over his extraordinary interview. There could be no doubt
that the conspirators, for such he had come to call them to himself,
were determined and desperate enough to go to any lengths in accomplishing
their designs. Whether his suspicions and activity in seeking Nancy
had precipitated their plans, his unexpected capture seemed to embarrass
his captors as much as it did himself. At least, he gathered this
from Madame de la Fontaine's conversation. Whatever might be the motive
of the lady's proposed confidence, poor Frost could see nothing for
it but to await their disclosure and then seize whatever advantage
they might open to him. Notwithstanding the fact that Dan had cautioned
himself against trusting the flattery of his charming visitor, notwithstanding
that he told himself to be forewarned, even by his own suspicions,
was to be forearmed, he was in reality unconscious of the degree to
which he had proved susceptible to the lady's blandishments, if indeed
she had employed blandishments and had not merely given him the evidence
of a good heart upon which his youth and naivete had made a genuine
impression.

Dan's experiences with girls up to this time had been
limited. His emotional nature had never, as yet, been deeply stirred.
But no one could be insensible to Madame de la Fontaine's beauty and
charm, and her delightfully natural familiarity; and, finally, her
fleeting kiss had seemed to Dan but evidence of a warm impulsive heart.
To be sure, with all the good will in the world, he could not acquit
her of being concerned in a mysterious plot--indeed, had she not admitted
so much?--though, also, he must in justice remember that he knew very
little of the nature of the plot in question.

As he paced restlessly
back and forth the length of his prison, he tried to think clearly
of the accumulating mystery. Was there a hidden treasure and how did
the Marquis know about it? What part had the Southern Cross to play
with its diabolical looking captain, and what could have become of
Nancy? Then why had Madame de la Fontaine--but again his cheek would
burn and remembrance of the bewitching Frenchwoman blotted out all
else.

At half-past twelve Captain Bonhomme appeared again. This time
he invited Dan to partake of luncheon with him on the condition once
more of a parole. And Dan accepted. He and the Captain made their
luncheon together, attended by the faithful Jean; and, though no mention
was made to their anomalous position, the meal was not altogether
a comfortable one. Captain Bonhomme asked a great many questions about
the country, to which Frost was inclined to give but the briefest
replies; nor, on his part, did he show more disposition to be communicative
in response to Dan's questions about France. Jean regarded the situation
with obviously surly disapproval. When the meal was finished, Frost
was conducted back to his little cabin.

About two o'clock he saw
the small boat put off for shore, and glancing in that direction,
he was relieved to see Madame de la Fontaine already waiting upon
the beach. Within half-an-hour he was again in her presence in the
Captain's saloon, where their conversation had taken place in the
morning.

The lady received him graciously. "Ah! monsieur Dan, I fear
you have had a weary day of it; but it was impossible for me to return
sooner."

"It is very kind of you to return at all," replied Dan,
gallantly enough.

"Now, Monsieur, you are anxious, I know, that I
keep my promise of the morning."

"Most anxious," said Dan.

"Without
doubt. Come here, my friend, sit near me and listen attentively to
a long story."

"You have consulted with the Marquis?"

"Mais oui.
It was difficult, but I have brought him to my way of thinking. I
am certain that it was an error in the first place not taking you
into our confidence. Eh bien! Tell me, do you know how your foster-sister
came to be in the charge of your mother at the Inn at the Red Oak?"

"Yes,
I know what my mother has told me. The child was abandoned to her
rather than left in her charge."

Though always a sufferer from poor health, and therefore debarred from entering upon an oratorical
or a military career, Virgil was exceptionally fortunate in his friendships and enjoyed extraordinary
patronage which enabled him to cultivate literature to the greatest advantage. He was fortunate,
too, in his fame, for he was a favorite when he lived no less than after his death. Before
the end of his own generation his works were introduced as text-books into Roman schools; during
the Middle Age he was the great poet whom it was heresy not to admire; Dante owned him as a
master and a model; and the people finally embalmed him in their folk-lore as a mysterious
conjurer and necromancer. His Æneid, written in imitation of the great Greek poem on the fall
of Troy, is a patriotic epic, tracing the wanderings, the struggles, and the death of Æneas,
and vaunting the glories of Rome and the greatness of the royal house of the emperor.

Thus, through long ages the Roman wrote, and thus he was furnished with books to read. For
centuries he had no literature excepting those rude ballads in which the books of all countries
have begun, and all trace of them has passed away. When at last, after the conquest of the
Greek cities in Southern Italy, the Tarentine Andronicus began to imitate the epics of his
native language in that of his adoption, the progress was still quite slow among a people who
argued with the sword and saw little to interest them in the fruit of the brain. As the republic
totters to its fall, however, the cultivators of this field increase, and we must suppose that
readers also were multiplied. At that time and during the early years of the empire, a Mæcenas
surrounded himself with authors and stimulated them to put forth all their vigor in the effort
to create a native literature.

On the Esquiline Hill there was a spot of ground that had been a place of burial for the lower
orders. This the hypochondriacal invalid Mæcenas bought, and there he laid out a garden and
erected a lofty house surmounted by a tower commanding a view of the city and vicinity. Effeminate
and addicted to every sort of luxury, Mæcenas calmed his sometimes excited nerves by the sweet
sound of distant symphonies, gratified himself by comforting baths, adorned his clothing with
expensive gems, tickled his palate with dainty confections of the cook, and regaled himself
with the loftier delights afforded by the companionship of the wits and virtuosi of the capital.
Magnificent was the patronage that he dispensed among the men of letters; and that he was no
mean critic, his choice of authors seems to prove. They were the greatest geniuses and most
learned men of the day. At his table sat Virgil, Horace, and Propertius, besides many others,
and his name has ever since been proverbial for the patron of letters. No wealthy public man
has since arisen who could rival him in this respect.

XX.

THE ROMAN REPUBLICANS SERIOUS AND GAY.

It is easier to think of the old Roman republicans as serious than gay, when we remember that
they considered that their very commonwealth was established upon the will of the gods, and
that no acts--at least no public acts--could properly be performed without consulting those
spiritual beings, which their imagination pictured as presiding over the hearth, the farm,
the forum--as swarming throughout every department of nature. The first stone was not laid
at the foundation of the city until Romulus and Remus had gazed up into the heavens, so mysterious
and so beautiful, and had obtained, as they thought, some indication of the fittest place where
they might dig and build. The she-wolf that nurtured the twins was elevated into a divinity
with the name Lupa, or Luperca (lupus, a wolf), and was made the wife of a god who was called
Lupercus, and worshipped as the protector of sheep against their enemies, and as the god of
fertility. On the fifteenth of February, when in that warm clime spring was beginning to open
the buds, the shepherds celebrated a feast in honor of Lupercus. Its ceremonies, in some part
symbolic of purification, were rude and almost savage, proving that they originated in remote
antiquity, but they continued at least down to the end of the period we have considered, and
the powerful Marc Antony did not disdain to clothe himself in a wolfskin and run almost naked
through the crowded streets of the capital the month before his friend Julius Cæsar was murdered.
[Footnote: see page 248*] It was a fitting festival for the month of which the name was derived
from that of the god of purification (februare, to purify).

It was at the foot of a fig-tree that Romulus and Remus were fabled to have been found by Faustulus,
and that tree was always looked upon with special veneration, though whenever the Roman walked
through the woods he felt that he was surrounded by the world of gods, and that such a leafy
shade was a proper place to consecrate as a temple. A temple was not an edifice in those simple
days, but merely a place separated and set apart to religious uses by a solemn act of dedication.
When the augur moved his wand aloft and designated the portion of the heavens in which he was
to make his observations, he called the circumscribed area of the ethereal blue a temple, and
when the mediæval astrologer did the same, he named the space a "house." On the Roman temple
an altar was set up, and there, perhaps beneath the spreading branches of a royal oak, sacred
to Jupiter, the king of the gods, or of an olive, sacred to Minerva, the maiden goddess, impersonation
of ideas, who shared with him and his queen the highest place among the Capitoline deities,
prayers and praises and sacrifices were offered. 

When Tom and Dan were eighteen--they were born within a day of each other one bitter February--old
Peter died, leaving the Inn to his wife. Mrs. Frost pretended to carry on the business, but the actual
task of doing so soon devolved upon her son. And in this he was subjected to little interference;
for the poor lady, kindly inefficient soul that she was, became almost helpless with rheumatism.
But indeed it was rather on the farm than to the Inn that more and more they depended for
their living. In the social hierarchy of Caesarea the Pembrokes held themselves as vastly superior
to the Frosts; but thanks to the easy-going democratic customs of the young republic, more
was made of this by the women than the men.

The two boys loved each other devotedly, though love is doubtless the last word they would have
chosen to express their relation. Dan was tall, dark, muscular; he had a well-shaped head on
his square shoulders; strong well-cut features; a face that the sun had deeply tanned and dark
hair that it had burnished with gold.

Altogether he was a prepossessing lad, though he looked several years older than he was, and
he was commonly treated by his neighbours with a consideration that his years did not merit. Tom
Pembroke was fairer; more attractive, perhaps, on first acquaintance; certainly more boyish
in appearance and behaviour. He was quicker in his movements and in his mental processes; more aristocratic
in his bearing. His blue eyes were more intelligent than Dan's, but no less frank and kindly. Young
Frost admired his friend almost as much as he cared for him; for Dan, deprived of schooling, had
a reverence for learning, of which Tom had got a smattering at Dr.
Watson's establishment for "the sons of gentlemen" on the nearby hill.

One stormy night in early January, the eve of Dan Frost's twenty-second birthday, the two young
men had their supper together at the Inn, and afterwards sat for half-an-hour in the hot, stove-heated
parlour until Mrs. Frost began to nod over her knitting.

"Off with you, boys," she said at length; "you will be wanting to smoke your dreadful pipes.
Nancy will keep me company."

They took instant advantage of this permission and went into the deserted bar, where they made
a roaring fire on the great hearth, drew their chairs near, filled their long clay pipes with
Virginia tobacco, and fell to talking.
"Think of it!" exclaimed young Frost, as he took a great whiff at
his pipe; "here we are--the middle of the winter--and not a guest
in the house. Why we used to have a dozen travellers round the bar
here, and the whole house bustling. I've known my father to serve
a hundred and more with rum on a night like this. Now we do a fine
business if we serve as many in a winter. Times have changed since
we were boys."

"Aye," Tom agreed, "and it isn't so long ago, either.
It seemed to me as if the whole county used to be here on a Saturday
night."

"I'm thinking," resumed Dan musingly, "of throwing up the
business, what's the use of pretending to keep an inn? As Vesta was remembered
at every meal, so also the Lares and Penates, divinities of the fireside, were worshipped,
for there was a purification at the beginning of the repast and a libation poured upon the
table or the hearth in their honor at its close. When one went abroad he prayed to the Penates
for a safe return, and when he came back, he hung his armor and his staff beside their images,
and gave them thanks. In every sorrow and in every joy the indefinite divinities that went
under these names were called upon for sympathy or help.

In the month of June the mothers celebrated a feast called Matralia, to impress upon themselves
their duties towards children; and at another they brought to mind the good deeds of the Sabine
women in keeping their husbands and fathers from war. [Footnote: see page 26] This was the
Matronalia, and the epigrammatist Martial, who lived during the first century of our era, called
it the Women's Saturnalia, on account of its permitted relaxation of manners. At that time
husbands gave presents to their wives, lovers to their sweethearts, and mistresses feasted
their maids.

The Lemuria was a family service that the father celebrated on the ninth, eleventh, and thirteenth
of May, when the ghosts of the departed were propitiated. It was thought that these spirits
were wont to return to the scenes of their earthly lives to injure those who were still wrestling
with the severe realities of time, and specially did they come up during the darkness of night.
Therefore it was that at midnight the father rose and went forth with cabalistic signs, skilfully
adapted to keep the spectres at a distance. After thrice washing his hands in pure spring water,
he turned around and took certain black beans into his mouth, and then threw them behind him
for the ghosts to pick up. The goodman then uttered other mystic expressions without risking
any looks towards the supposed sprites, after which he washed his hands, and beat some brazen
basins, and nine times cried aloud: "Begone, ye spectres of the house!" Then could he look
around, for the ghosts were harmless.

Thus the Roman forefathers worshipped personal gods, but they did not, in the early times,
follow the example of the imaginative Greeks, and represent them, as possessing passions like
themselves, nor did they erect them into families and write out their lines of descent, or
create a mythology filled with stories of their acts good and bad. The gods were spiritual
beings, but the religion was not a spiritual life, nor did it have much connection with morality.
It was mainly based on the enjoyment of earthly pleasures. If the ceremonious duties were done,
the demands of Roman religion were satisfied. It was a hard and narrow faith, but it seemed
to tend towards bringing earthly guilt and punishment into relation with its divinities, and
it contained the idea of substitution, as is clearly seen in the stories of Curtius, Decius
Mus, and others. Thus the colleges of priests naturally grew up to care for the national religion,
the most ancient of them bearing reference to Mars the killing god. They were the augurs and
the pontifices, and as the religion grew more and more formal and the priests less and less
earnest, the observances fell into dull and insipid performances, in which no one was interested,
and in time public service became not only tedious, but costly, penny collections made from
house to house being among the least onerous expedients resorted to for the support of the
new grafts on the tree of devotion.

As early as the time of the first Punic war, a consul was bold enough to jest at the auspices
in public. Superstitions and impostures flourished, the astrology of ancient Chaldea spread,
the Oriental ceremonies were introduced with the pomps that accompanied the reception of the
unformed boulder which the special embassy brought from Pessinus when the weary war with Hannibal
had rendered any source of hope, even the most futile, inspiring. [Footnote: B.C. 204. See
page 153.] Then the abominable worship of Bacchus came in, and thousands were corrupted and
made vicious throughout Italy before the authorities were able to put a stop to the midnight
orgies and the crimes that daylight exposed.

Cato the elder, who would have nothing to do with consulting Chaldeans or magicians of any
sort, asked how it were possible for two such ministers to meet each other face to face without
laughing at their own duplicity and the ridiculous superstition of the people they deceived.
[Footnote: It had been in early times customary to dismiss a political gathering if a thunder-storm
came up, and the augurs had taken advantage of the practice to increase their own power by
laying down an occult system of celestial omens which enabled them to bring any such meeting
to a close when the legislation promised to thwart their plans. They finally reached the absurd
extreme of enacting a law, by the terms of which a popular assembly was obliged to disperse,
if it should occur to a higher magistrate merely to look into the heavens for signs of the
approach of such a storm. The power of the priests under such a law was immeasurable. (See
pages 236 and 247). ] Cato was very much shocked by the preaching of three Greek philosophers:
Diogenes, a stoic; Critolaus, a peripatetic; and Carneades, an academic, who visited Rome on
a political mission, B.C. 155; because it seemed to him that they, especially the last, preached
a doctrine that confounded justice and injustice, a system of expediency, and he urged successfully
that they should have a polite permission to depart with all speed. The philosophers were dismissed,
but it was impossible to restrain the Roman youth who had listened to the addresses of the
strangers with an avidity all the greater because their utterances had been found scandalous,
and they went to Athens, or Rhodes, to hear more of the same doctrine.

Thus in time the simplicity of the people was completely undermined, and while they became
more cosmopolitan they also grew more lax. They used the Greek language, and employed Greek
writers, as we have seen, to make their books for them, which, though bearing Greek titles,
were composed in Latin. The public men performed in the forenoon their civil and religious
acts; took their siestas in the middle of the day; exercised in the Campus Martius, swimming,
wrestling, and fencing, in the afternoon; enjoyed the delicacies of the table later, listening
to singing and buffoonery the while, and were thus prepared to seek their beds when the sun
went down. At the bath, which came to be the polite resort of pleasure-seekers, all was holiday;
the toga and the foot- coverings were exchanged for a light Greek dressing-gown, and the time
was whiled away in gossip, idle talk, lounging, many dippings into the flowing waters, and
music. Pleasure became the business of life, and morality was relaxed to a frightful extent.

When we consider the gay moods of the Roman people we turn probably first to childhood, and
try to imagine how the little ones amused themselves. We find that the girls had their dolls,
some of which have been dug out of ruins of the ancient buildings, and that the boys played
games similar to those that still hold dominion over the young English or American school-boy
at play. In their quieter moods they played with huckle-bones taken from sheep, goats, or antelopes,
or imitated in stone, metal, ivory, or glass. From the earliest days these were used chiefly
by women and children, who used five at a time, which they threw into the air and then tried
to catch on the back of the hand, their irregular form making the success the result of considerable
skill. The bones were also made to contribute to a variety of amusements requiring agility
and accuracy; but after a while the element of chance was introduced. The sides were marked
with different values, and the victor was he who threw the highest value, fourteen, the numbers
cast being each different from the rest. This throw obtained at a symposium or drinking party
caused a person to be appointed king of the feast.

One of the oldest games of the world is that called by the Romans little marauders (latrunculi),
because it was played like draughts or checkers, there being two sets of "men," white and red,
representing opposed soldiers, and the aim of each player being to gain advantage over the
other, as soldiers do in a combat. This game is as old as Homer, and is represented in Egyptian
tombs, which are of much greater antiquity than any Grecian monuments. In this game, too, skill
was all that was needed at first, but in time spice was given by the addition of chance, and
dice (tessera, a die) were used as in backgammon; but gambling was deemed disreputable, and
was forbidden during the republic, except at the time of the Saturnalia, though both Greeks
and Romans permitted aged men to amuse themselves in that way. [Footnote: A gambler was called
aleator, and sometimes his implement was spoken of as alea, which meant literally gaming. When
Suetonius makes Cæsar say, before crossing the Rubicon, "The die is cast," he uses the words
Jacta alea est!]

The games of the Romans range from the innocent tossing of huckle-bones to the frightful scenes
of the gladiatorial show. Some were celebrated in the open air, and others within the enclosures
of the circus or the amphitheatre. Some were gay, festive, and abandoned, and others were serious
and tragic. Some were said to have been instituted in the earliest days by Romulus, Servius
Tullius, or Tarquinius Priscus, and others were imported from abroad or grew up naturally as
the nation progressed in experience or in acquaintance with foreign peoples. The great increase
of games and festivals and their enormous cost were signs of approaching trouble for the republic,
and foretold the terrible days of the empire, when the rabblement of the capital, accustomed
to be amused and fed by their despotic and corrupt rulers, should cry in the streets: "Give
us bread for nothing and games forever!" It was gradually educating the populace to think of
nothing but enjoyment and to abhor honest labor, and we can imagine the corruption that must
have been brought into politics when honors were so expensive that a respectable gladiatorical
show cost more than thirty-five thousand dollars (£7,200). If money for such purposes could
not be obtained by honest means, the nobles, who lived on popular applause, would seek to force
it from poor citizens of the colonies or win it by intrigue at home. 

Jesse carried the bill to the Marquis, then came down and went to the barn to harness the horse.
A little later he drove round to the courtyard, hitched the horse to a ring in the Red Oak,
and ran upstairs to fetch the Marquis's boxes.

Perhaps half-an-hour had passed when he returned to Dan in the Bar. "The old gentleman's gone,
sir," he said.

"Gone!--where?" cried Dan.

"Don't know, sir," Jesse replied. "To the schooner, I guess. He left this money on his dressing-bureau."

Dan
took the gold which Jesse held out to him. "Well, well," he murmured, "quite on his dignity, eh?
All right, Jess, take his stuff to the beach and hail the schooner.

He will probably have given directions. I hope we've seen the last of him."

PART IV

THE ATTACK ON THE INN

CHAPTER XVIII

THE AVENUE OF MAPLES

The Marquis's belongings were sent after him to the schooner, where, however, it appeared that they
had not been expected, for it was some time before Jesse could obtain an answer to his hail
from the shore, and still longer before he could make the men on the ship understand what it was
he wanted with them. Eventually Captain Bonhomme had rowed ashore, and the Marquis's bags, boxes,
writing-desk, and fiddle were loaded into the small boat and taken off to The Southern Cross.

It
appeared from Jesse's report that the Captain had been sufficiently
polite, and had attributed the misunderstanding of his men to their
inability to speak English.

They had not gotten their orders for the Marquis. He had asked no further questions about Monsieur
de Boisdhyver or about his recent prisoners, but had feed Jesse liberally, and dismissed him,
with his own and the Marquis's thanks.

"Well," said Tom, who had returned an hour before and had been exchanging experiences with Dan, "that
seems to be the end of him for the present. I don't know that I did right in promising your French lady
that I should release him, but there seemed no other way to make
sure of getting you back."

"I am glad you promised," replied Dan. "It is a relief not to have him under our roof. For the last
week I've felt as if the place were haunted by an evil spirit."

"So it has been, and so it still will be, I am afraid," was Tom's
reply. "If there is treasure here, you may be sure that gang won't
sail away without making a desperate effort to get it. I move that
we beat them out by hunting for it ourselves. Why not begin to-night?"

"Not
to-night," protested Dan. "I am tired to death. You can imagine that
I didn't get much sleep cooped up on that confounded ship."

"No more
have I, old boy. But I believe in striking while the iron is hot.
Every day's delay gives them a better chance for their plans, if they
mean to attack the Inn."

"I doubt if they'll do that. I don't think
force is precisely their line. You know, I believe that the story
Madame de la Fontaine told isn't altogether a fiction."

"Pshaw!"
exclaimed Tom. "I don't believe a word of it. Naturally they wouldn't
use force, if they could help it. But their plans have all been upset,
and a gang like that won't stop at anything."

"But we live in a civilized
community, my boy. This isn't the middle ages."

"We live in a civilized
community, perhaps; but if you can find a more isolated spot, a place
more remote from help, in any other part of the civilized world, I'd
be glad to see it. We might as well be in the middle of the Sahara
desert. Find the treasure and get it out of harm's way--that's my
idea."

"All right, but to-morrow; I swear I'm not up to it to-night."

"To-morrow!
Well, then to-morrow. Though for the life of me, I don't see why you
want to delay things. Jesse and Ezra can keep watch tonight."

"But
we must get some sleep, Tom."

"The devil with sleep! However, you're
the boss now.
That of Cæsar was, however, of wood, which material was used in constructing theatres also;
the first one of stone was not erected until 30 B.C., when Augustus was consul. [Footnote:
History gives an account of one edifice of this kind made of wood that fell down owing to imperfect
construction, killing many thousand spectators, and of another that was destroyed by fire.
Pompey's theatre of stone, built B.C. 55, has already been mentioned (page 231).]

Variety was given to the exhibitions of the amphitheatre by introducing sufficient water to
float ships, and by causing the same wretched class that fought the wild beasts to represent
two rival nations, and to fight until one party was actually killed, unless preserved by the
clemency of the ruler.

It must not be supposed that all these exhibitions were known in early times, for, in reality,
they were mostly the fruit of the increased love of pleasure that characterized the close of
the period of the republic, and reached their greatest extravagance only under the emperors.

The departure of a Roman from this world was considered an event of great importance, and was
attended by peculiar ceremonies, some of which have been imitated in later times. At the solemn
moment the nearest relative present tried to catch in his mouth the last expiring breath, and
as soon as life had passed away, he called out the name of the departed and exclaimed "Vale!"
(farewell). The ring had been previously taken from the finger, and now the body was washed
and anointed by undertakers, who had been called from a place near the temple of Venus Libitina,
where the names of all who died were registered, and where articles needed for funerals were
hired and sold. [Footnote: Libitina was an ancient Italian divinity about whom little is known. We've
been too busy watching things to talk much. We got Ezra Manners out from the Port to help do
guard duty."

"Guard?--what?"

"Why, the Inn, sir. Mister Tom he's been sort of expectin' some kind of attack. That's the
reason he took the women folks over to the Red Farm."

"I see--and where's the old Marquis?"

Jesse chuckled. "The old Marquis's where he hasn't been doin' any harm for the last twenty-four
hours, sir. Mister Tom he locked him up last night in one of the south bedrooms. That reminds
me, I was to let him out just as soon as you come back."

"Why lock him up, and then let him out? Things have been moving at the Inn, Jess, since I've
been gone!"

"Moving--yes, sir. But them's my orders--first thing I was to do soon as you come back was
to let the old Frenchy out and do as he pleased. Mister Tom was to
arrange everything else with you, sir."

"Seems as if Tom had a whole
campaign planned out. All right--we'll obey orders, Jess. Let the
Marquis out, and tell him he can find me in the bar if he wants to
see me. What time will Tom be back?"

"Before dark, sir, I'm sure.
He's been gone over an hour."

Dan ran up to his bedroom, made a quick
toilet, took the torn scrap of paper from his strong-box, and put
it in his wallet. Then he went down stairs into the bar. The Marquis,
released from his confinement, was awaiting him.

"Ah, Monsieur Frost!"
the old gentleman exclaimed, coming forward with outstretched hands,
"I rejoice at your return. Now this so horrible nightmare will end...
Ah!"

Musicians playing doleful strains headed the procession, followed by hired mourners who united
lamentations with songs in praise of the virtue of the departed. Players, buffoons, and liberated
slaves followed, and of the actors one represented the deceased, imitating his words and actions.
The couch on which the body rested as it was carried was often of ivory adorned with gold,
and was borne by the near relatives or freedmen, though Julius Cæsar was carried by magistrates
and Augustus by senators.

Behind the body the relatives walked in mourning, which was black or dark blue, the sons having
their heads veiled, and the daughters wearing their hair dishevelled, and both uttering loud
lamentations, the women frantically tearing their cheeks and beating their breasts. As the
procession passed through the forum it stopped, and an oration was delivered celebrating the
praises of the deceased, after which it went on through the city to some place beyond the walls
where the body was burned or buried. We have seen that burial was the early mode of disposing
of the dead, and that Sulla was the first of his gens to be burned. [Footnote: See page 197.]
In case of burning, the body was placed on a square, altar-like pile of wood, still resting
on the couch, and the nearest relative, with averted face, applied the torch. As the flames
rose, perfumes, oil, articles of apparel, and dishes of food were cast into them. Sometimes
animals, captives, or slaves were slaughtered on the occasion, and, as we have seen, gladiators
were hired to fight around the flaming pile. [Footnote: See pages 158 and 210]

When the fire had accomplished its work, and the whole was burned down, wine was thrown over
the ashes to extinguish the expiring embers, and the remains were sympathetically gathered
up and placed in an urn of marble or less costly material. A priest then sprinkled the ashes
with pure water, using a branch of olive or laurel, the urn was placed in a niche of the family
tomb, and the mourning relatives and friends withdrew, saying as they went Vale, vale! When
they reached their homes they underwent a process of purification, the houses themselves were
swept with a broom of prescribed pattern, and for nine days the mourning exercises, which included
a funeral feast, were continued. In the case of a great man this feast was a public banquet,
and gladiatorial shows and games were added in some instances, and they were also repeated
on anniversaries of the funeral.

The public buried the illustrious citizens of the nation, and those whose estates were too
poor to pay such expenses; the former being for a long time laid away in the Campus Martius,
until the site became unhealthy, when it was given to Mæcenas, who built a costly house on
it. "Monsieur, te me comprends pas; this abuse, this insult--it is impossible that I understand."

"Pray,
Monsieur de Boisdhyver," replied Dan, with dignity, "Let us have done with make-believe and sham. For
two days I have been in prison on that confounded ship yonder, whose villainous crew are in
your pay."

"You in prison--the ship--the villainous crew!" repeated the Marquis.
"What is it that you say?"

"Come, Marquis, your protests are useless,"
Dan interrupted. The Romans ornamented their tombs in a variety of
ways, but did not care to represent death in a direct manner. The place of burial of a person,
even a slave, was sacred, and one who desecrated it was liable to grave punishment--even to
death,-- if the bodies or bones were removed. Oblations of flowers, wine, and milk were often
brought to the tombs by relatives, and sometimes they were illuminated.

Almost every country lying under a southern sun is accustomed to rejoice at the annual return
of flowers, and ancient Rome was not without its May-day. Festivals of the sort are apt to
degenerate morally, and that, also, was true of the Floralia, as these feasts were called at
Rome. It is said that in the early age of the republic there was found in the Sibylline books
a precept commanding the institution of a celebration in honor of the goddess Flora, who presided
over flowers and spring-time, in order to obtain protection for the blossoms. He hesitated...
"If you care for me, I don't mind what you think of the Marquis."

"Remember, Tom--you promised to say nothing until I gave you leave. You're not fair..."

"But you do love me?"
Nancy was silent.

"There is nothing between you and the old Frenchman--no
mystery?"

There was no reply. Nancy sat with compressed lips and
drawn brows, gazing fixedly at the distant House on the Dunes at the
end of their road. For a long while they drove on in silence. Probably no particular deity was honored at these festivals at first. They were
simply the unbending of the rustics after the cold of winter, the rejoicings natural to man
in spring; but finally the personal genius of the flowers was developed and her name given
to the gay festival.

The rustic simplicity represented well the primal homeliness of the nation during the heroic
ages; the orgies of the crowded city may be put for the growing decay of the later period when,
enriched and intoxicated by foreign conquest and maddened by civil war, the republic fell,
and the way was made plain for the great material growth of the empire, as well as for the
final fall of the vast power that had for so many centuries been invincible among the nations
of the earth;--a power which still stands forth in monumental grandeur, and is to-day studied
for the lessons it teaches and the warnings its history utters to mankind.

