Equally resolved, but in a thing of minor importance, is Ian about his headgear. As a baby
of three, when he first tasted the liberty of going out of garden bounds daily into the daisy
field beyond the wild walk, while Richard clung to his protecting baby sunbonnet, Ian spurned
head covering of any kind, and blinked away at the sun through his tangled curls whenever he
had the chance, in primitive directness until his cheeks glowed like burnished copper; and
his present compromise is a little cap worn visor backward.

When the twins were very young, people were most funny in the way in which they seemed to think
it necessary to feel carefully about to make sure whether condolence or congratulations were
in order. The Severely Protestant was greatly agitated, as, being himself the possessor of
an overflowing quiverful, his position was difficult. After making sure which was the right
side of the fence, and placing himself on it, he tugged painfully at his starved red beard,
and made an elaborate address ending in a parallel,--the idea of the complete Bible being in
two volumes, the Old and New Testament, each being so necessary to the other, and so inseparable,
that they were only comparable to twins!

Father and Evan were present at the time,--I dared not look at either,--and as soon as we were
again alone, the room shook with laughter, until Martha Corkle, who was then in temporary residence,
popped in to be sure that I was not being unduly agitated.

"The Old and New Testament, I wonder which is which?" gasped father, going upstairs to look
at the uninteresting if promising woolly bundles by light of this startling suggestion.

Now, however, the joke has developed a serious side, as their two characters, though in no
wise precocious, have become distinctive. Ian represents the Old, primitive and direct, the
"sword of the Lord and Gideon" type, while Richard is the New, the reconciler and peacemaker.

       *       *       *       *       *

The various congratulations that the twins were boys, from my standpoint I took as a matter
of course, even though I had always heard that boys gave the most worry and girls were referred
to among our friends and neighbours as the greatest comforts in a home unless they did something
decidedly unusual, fitting into nooks, and often taking up and bearing burdens the brothers
left behind. But when many people who had either daughters or nieces of their own, and might
be said to be in that mystic ring called "Society," congratulated me pointedly about the boys,
I began to ponder about the matter mother-wise. Then, three years ago the New York Colony seized
upon the broad acres along the Bluffs, and dotted two miles with the elaborate stone and brick
houses they call cottages; not for permanent summer homes (the very rich, the spenders, have
no homes), but merely hotels in series. These, for the spring and fall between seasons and
week-end parties and golfing, men and girls gay in red and green coats, replaced the wild flowers
in the shorn outlying fields. I watched these girls, and, beginning to understand, wondered
if I had grown old before my time, or if I were too young to comprehend their point of view,
for, to their strange enlightenment I was practically as yet unborn.

Lavinia Dorman says caustically that I really belong with her in the middle of the last century,
and she, born to what father says was really the best society and privilege of New York life,
like his college chum Martin Cortright, is now swept quite aside by the swirl.

"Yes, dear child," she insists (how different this use of the word sounds from when the Lady
of the Bluffs uses the universal "my dear" impartially to mistress and maid, shopgirl and guest),
"you not only belong to the last century, but as far back in it as myself, and I am fifty-five,
full measure.

"The new idea among the richer and consequently more privileged classes is, that girls are
to be fitted not only to go out into the world and shine in different ways unknown to their
grandmothers, but to be superior to home, which of necessity unfits them for a return trip
if the excursion is unsuccessful.

"What with high ideas, high rents, and higher education, the home myth is speedily following
Santa Claus out of female education, and, argue as one may, New York is the social pace-maker
'East of the Rockies,' as the free delivery furniture companies advertise. I congratulate you
anew that the twins are boys!"

I laughed to myself over Miss Lavinia's letter; she is always so deliciously in earnest and
so perturbed over any change in the social ways of her dearly beloved New York, that I'm wondering
how she finds it, on her return after two years or more abroad (she was becoming agitated before
she left), and whether she will ask me down for another of those quaint little visits, where
she so faithfully tours me through the shops and a few select teas, when, to wind it up, Evan
buys opera box seats so that she may have the satisfaction of having her hair dressed, wearing
her point lace bertha and aigret, and showing us who is who, and the remainder who are not.
For she is well born, intricately related to the original weavers of the social cobweb, and
knows every one by name and sight; but has found lately, I judge, that this knowledge unbacked
by money is no longer a social power that carries beyond mixed tea and charity entertainments.
Never mind, Lavinia Dorman is a dear! Ah, if she would only come out here, and return my many
little visits by a long stay, and act as a key to the riddle the Whirlpool people are to me.
But of course she will not; for she frankly detests the country,--that is, except Newport and
Staten Island,--is wedded even in summer to her trim back-yard that looks like a picture in
a seed catalogue, and, like a faithful spouse, declines to leave it or Josephus for more than
a few days. Josephus is a large, sleek, black cat, a fence-top sphinx, who sits all day in
summer wearing a silver collar, watching the sparrows and the neighbourhood's wash with impartial
interest, while at night he goes on excursions of his own to a stable down a crooked street
in "Greenwich Village," where they still keep pigeons. Some day he won't come back!

Yet Martin Cortright, the Bookworm, was a pavement worshipper too, and he came last fall for
over a Sunday to wake father up; for I believe men sometimes need the society of others of
their own age and past, as much as children need childlife, and Martin stayed a month, and
is promising to return next spring.  I wonder if the Sylvia Latham who has been travelling
with Miss Lavinia is any kin of the Lathams who are building the great colonial home above
the Jenks-Smiths. I have never seen any of the family except Mrs. Latham, a tall, colourless
blonde, who reminds one of a handsome unlit lamp. She seems to be superintending the work by
coming up now and then, and I met her at the butcher's where she was buying sweetbreads--"a
trifle for luncheon." Accusation No. 1, against the Whirlpoolers: Since their advent sweetbreads
have risen from two pairs for a quarter, and "thank you kindly for taking them off our hands,"
to fifty cents to a dollar a "set." We no longer care for sweetbreads!

       *       *       *       *       *

I was therefore amused, but no longer surprised, at the exaggerated way in which the childless
Lady of the Bluffs,--her step-daughter having ten years back made a foolish foreign marriage,--gave
me her views upon the drawbacks of the daughters of her world, when she made me, on her return
from a European trip, a visit upon the twins' first birthday,--bearing, with her usually reckless
generosity, a pair of costly gold apostle spoons, as she said, "to cut their teeth on." I admired,
but frugally popped them into the applewood treasure chests that father has had made for the
boys from the "mother tree," that was finally laid low by a tornado the winter of their birth
and is now succeeded by a younger one of Richard's choice.

"My dear woman," she gasped, turning my face toward the light and dropping into a chair at
the same time, "how well you look; not a bit upset by the double dose and sitting up nights
and all that. But then, maybe, they sleep and you haven't; for it's always the unexpected and
unusual that happens in your case, as this proves. But then, they are boys, and that's everything
nowadays, the way society's going, especially to people like you, whose husband's trade, though
pretty, is too open and above-board to be a well-paying one, and yet you're thoroughbreds underneath."
(Poor vulgar soul, she didn't in the least realize how I might take her stricture any more
than she saw my desire to laugh.)

"Of course here and there a girl in society does turn out well and rides an elephant or a coronet,--of
course I mean wears a coronet,--though ten to one it jams the hairpins into her head, but mostly
daughters are regular hornets,--that is, if you're ambitious and mean to keep in society. Of
course you're not in it, and, being comfortably poor, so to speak, might be content to see
your girls marry their best chance, even if it wasn't worth much a year, and settle down to
babies and minding their own business; but then they mightn't agree to that, and where would
you and Evan be?

"This nice old house and garden of yours wouldn't hold 'em after they got through with dolls,
and some girls don't even have any doll-days now. It would be town and travel and change, and
you haven't got the price of that between you all, and to keep this going, too. You'd have
to go to N'York, for a couple of months at least, to a hotel, and what would that Evan of yours
do trailing round to dances? For you're not built for it, though I did once think you'd be
a go in society with that innocent-wise way, and your nose in the air, when you don't like
people, would pass for family pride. I'd wager soon, in a few years, he'd stop picking boutonnières
in the garden every morning and sailing down to that 8:15 train as cool as if he owned time,
if those boys were girls! Though if Jenks-Smith gets the Bluff Colony he's planned under way
next spring, there'll soon be some riding and golfing men hereabouts that'll shake things up
a bit,--bridge whist, poker, and perhaps red and black to help out in the between-seasons."
(I little thought then what this colony and shaking would come to mean.)

"Money or not, it's hard lines with daughters now--work and poor pay for the mothers mostly.
You know that Mrs. Townley that used to visit me? He was a banker and very rich; died four
years ago, and left his wife with one son, who lived west, and five daughters, four that travelled
in pairs and an odd one,--all well fixed and living in a big house in one of those swell streets,
east of the park, where never less than ten in help are kept. Well, if you'll believe it, she's
living alone with a pet dog and a companion, except in summer, when the Chicago son and his
wife and babies make her a good visit down at North East, the only home comfort she has.

"All the girls married to foreigners? Not a blessed one. Two were bookish and called literary,
but not enough to break out into anything; they didn't agree with society (had impossible foreheads
that ran nearly back to their necks, and thin hair); they went to college just to get the name
of it and to kill time, but when they got through they didn't rub along well at home; called
taking an interest in the house beneath them and the pair that liked society frivolous; so
they took a flat (I mean apartment--a flat is when it's less than a hundred a month and only
has one bathroom), and set up for bachelor girls. The younger pair did society for a while,
and poor Mrs. Townley chaperoned round after them, as befitted her duty and position, and had
gorgeous Worth gowns, all lace and jets, that I do believe shortened her breath, until one
night in a slippery music-room she walked up the back of a polar bear rug, fell off his head,
and had an awful coast on the floor, that racked her knee so that she could stay at home without
causing remark, which she cheerfully did. The two youngest girls were pretty, but they were
snobs, and carried their money on their sleeves in such plain sight that they were too suspicious,
and seemed to expect every man that said 'good evening' was waiting to grab it. So they weren't
popular, and started off for Europe to study art and music. Of course when they came back they
had a lot of lingo about the art atmosphere and all that; home was a misfit and impossible,
so they went to live in a swell studio with two maids and a Jap butler in costume, and do really
give bang-up musicals, with paid talent of course. I went to one.

"That left Georgie, the odd one, who was the eldest, with poor Mrs. Townley. By this time the
old lady was kind of broken-spirited, and worried a good deal as to why all her girls left
her,--'she'd always tried to do her duty,'--and all that. This discouraged Georgie; she got
blue and nervous, had indigestion, and, mistaking it for religion, vamoosed into a high-church
retreat. And I call it mighty hard lines for the old lady."

I thought "too much money," but I didn't say it, for this brutally direct but well-meaning
woman could not imagine such a thing, and she continued: "Yet Mrs. Townley had a soft snap
compared to some, for she was in the right set at the start, with both feet well up on the
ladder, and didn't have to climb; but Heaven help those with daughters who have thin purses
and have to stretch a long neck and keep it stiff, so, in a crowd at least, nobody'll notice
their feet are dangling and haven't any hold.

"Ah, but this isn't the worst yet; that's the clever 'new daughter' kind that sticks by her
ma, who was herself once a particular housekeeper, and takes charge of her long before there's
any need; regulates her clothes and her food and her callers, drags her around Europe to rheumatism
doctors, and pushes her into mud baths; jerks her south in winter and north in summer, for
her 'health and amusement,' so she needn't grow narrow, when all the poor soul needs and asks
is to be let stay in her nice old-fashioned country house, and have the village children in
to make flannel petticoats; entertain the bishop when he comes to confirm, with a clerical
dinner the same as she used to; spoil a lot of grandchildren, of which there aren't any; and
once in a while to be allowed to go into the pantry between meals, when the butler isn't looking,
and eat something out of the refrigerator with her fingers to make sure she's got them!

"No, my dear, rather than that, I choose the lap dog and poor relation, who is generally too
dejected to object to anything. Besides, lap dogs are much better now than in the days when
the choice lay only between sore-eyed white poodles and pugs. Boston bulls are such darlings
that for companions they beat half the people one knows!"

I am doubly glad that the twins are boys! Well, so be it, for women do often frighten me and
I misunderstand them, but men are so easy to comprehend and love. While now, when Richard and
Ian puzzle me, all I need to do is to point to father and Evan, and say, "Look! ask them, for
they can tell you all you need to know!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Almost sunset, the boys climbing up stairs, and Effie bringing a letter? Yes, and from Lavinia
Dorman, pages and pages--the dear soul! I must wait for a light. What is this?--she wishes
to see me--will make me a long visit--in May--if I like--has no longer the conscience to ask
me to leave the twins to come to her--boys of their age need so much care--then something about
Josephus! Yes, Sylvia Latham is the daughter of the new house on the Bluffs, etc. You blessed
twins! here is another advantage I owe to you--at last a promised visit from Lavinia Dorman!

Ah, as I push my book into the desk the reason for its title turns up before me, worded in
Martin Cortright's precise language:--

"Everything, my dear Barbara, has a precedent in history or the basis of it. It is well known
that the Indian tribes have taken their distinctive names chiefly from geographical features,
and these often in turn control the pace of the people. The name for the island since called
New Amsterdam and York was Mon-ah-tan-uk, a phrase descriptive of the rushing waters of Hell
Gate that separated them from their Long Island neighbours, the inhabitants themselves being
called by these neighbours Mon-ah-tans, anglice Manhattans, literally, People of the Whirlpool,
a title which, even though the termagant humour of the waters be abated, it beseems me as aptly
fits them at this day."

II

MISS LAVINIA'S LETTERS TO BARBARA

NEW YORK, "GREENWICH VILLAGE,"  January 20, 19--.

"So you are glad that I have returned? I wish that I could say so also, in your hearty tone
of conviction. Every day of the two years that I have been scattering myself about Europe I
have wished myself at home in the house where I was born, and have wandered through the rooms
in my dreams; yet now that I am here, I find that I was mixing the past impossibly with the
present, in a way common to those over fifty. Yes, you see I no longer pretend, wear unsuitable
headgear, and blink obliviously at my age as I did in those trying later forties. I not only
face it squarely, but exaggerate it, for it is so much more comfortable to have people say
'Fifty-five! Is it possible?'

"By the way, do you know that you and I share a distinction in common? We are both living in
the houses where we were born, for the reason that we wish to and not because we cannot help
ourselves. Since I have been away it appears that every one I know, of my own age, has made
a change of some sort, and joined the two streams that are flowing steadily upward, east and
west of the Park; while the people who were neither my financial nor social equals thirty years
ago are dividing the year into quarters, with a house for each. A few months in town, a few
of hotel life for 'rest' in the south, then a 'between-season' residence near by, seaside next,
mountains in early autumn, and the 'between-season' again before the winter cruise through
the Whirlpool.

"I like that name that your Martin Cortright gives to New York. Before I went abroad I should
have resented it bitterly, but the two months since my return have convinced me of its truth,
which I have fought against for many years; for even the most staid of us who, either of choice
or necessity, give the social vortex a wide berth, cannot escape from the unrest of it, or
sight of the wreckage it from time to time gives forth. It is strange that I have not met this
Cortright, or never even knew that he shared your father's admiration of your mother, though
owing to our school tie we were like sisters. Yet it was like her to regret and hold sacred
any pain she might have caused, no matter how unwillingly. Did his elder sister marry a Schuyler,
though not one of the well-known branch, and did he as a boy live in one of those houses on
the west side of Lafayette Place that were later turned into an hotel?

"The worst of it all appears to me to be that the increase of wealth in the upper class is
exterminating the home idea, to which I cling, single woman as I am; and consequently the middle
classes, as blind copyists, also are tending to throw it over.

"The rich, having no particular reason for remaining in any particular place until they become
attached to it, live in half a dozen houses, which seems to have a deteriorating effect upon
their domesticity; just as the Sultan, with fifty wives that may be dropped or replaced according
to will, cannot prize them as does the husband of only one.

"Your letters are so full of questions and wonderments about ways in your mother's day, that
they set me rambling in the backwoods of the sixties, when women were sending their lovers
to the Civil War, and then bravely sitting down and rolling their own hearts up with the bandages
with which they busied their fingers. I suppose you are wondering if I lost a lover in those
days, or why I have not married, as I am in no wise opposed to the institution, but consider
it quite necessary to happiness. The truth is, I never saw but two men whose tastes so harmonized
with mine that I considered them possible as companions, and when I first met them neither
was eligible, one being my own father and the other yours! I shall have to list your queries,
to be answered deliberately, write my letters in sections, day by day, and send them off packet-wise,
like the correspondence of the time of two-shilling post and hand messengers. To begin with,
I will pick out the three easiest:--

"1. What is it in particular that has so upset me on my home-coming?

"2. Do I think that I could break through my habits sufficiently to make you a real country
visit this spring or early summer, before the mosquitoes come? (Confessing with your altogether
out-of-date frankness that there are mosquitoes, a word usually dropped from the vocabulary
of commuters and their wives, even though they live in Staten Island or New Jersey.)

"3. Is the Sylvia Latham, to whom I have been a friendly chaperon during my recent travels,
related to the Lathams who are building the finest house on the Bluffs? You have never seen
the head of the house, but his initials are S.J.; he is said to be a power in Wall Street,
and the family consists of a son and daughter, neither of whom has yet appeared, although the
house is quite ready for occupancy.

"(My German teacher has arrived.)"

       *        *       *       *       *

"January 22d.

"1. Why am I upset? For several reasons, some of which have been clouding the horizon for many
years, others crashing up like a thunder-storm.

"I have for a long time past noticed a certain apathy in the social atmosphere of the little
circle that formed my world. I gave up any pretensions to general New York society after my
father's death, which came at a time when the social centre was splitting into several cliques;
distances increased, New Year's calling ceased, going to the country for even midwinter holidays
came in vogue, and cosmopolitanism finally overcame the neighbourhood community interest of
my girlhood. People stopped making evening calls uninvited; you no longer knew who lived in
the street or even next house, save by accident; the cosey row of private dwellings opposite
turned to lodging houses and sometimes worse; friends who had not seen me for a few months
seemed surprised to find me living in the same place. When I began to go about again, one day
Cordelia Martin (she was a Bleecker--your father will remember her) met me in the street and
asked me to come in the next evening informally to dinner and meet her sister, an army officer's
wife, who would be there en route from one post to another, and have an old-time game of whist.

"I went, glad to see old friends, and anticipating a pleasant evening. I wore a new soft black
satin gown slightly V in front, some of my best lace, and my pearl ornaments; I even wondered
if the latter were in good taste at a family dinner. You know I never dwell much upon attire,
but it is sometimes necessary when it is in a way epoch making.

"A butler had supplanted Cordelia's usual cordial waitress; he presented a tray for the card
that I had not brought and said 'second story front.' This seemed strange to me, as Cordelia
herself had always come to the stairway to greet me when the door opened.

"The 'second story front' had been done over into a picturesque but useless boudoir, a wood
floor polished like glass was dotted by white fur islands; the rich velvet carpets, put down
a few years before, had in fact disappeared from the entire house. A maid, anything but cordial,
removed my wrap, looking me and it over very deliberately as she did so. I wondered if by mistake
I had been bidden to a grand function--no, there were no visible signs of other guests.

"Not a word was spoken, so I made my way down to where the library living-room had been, not
a little curious to see what would come next. Thick portières covered the doorway, and by them
stood the butler, who asked my name. Really, for a moment I could not remember it, I was so
startled at this sudden ceremony in the house of a friend, of such long standing that I had
jumped rope on the sidewalk with her, making occasional trips arm-in-arm around the corner
to Taffy John's little shop for molasses peppermints and 'blubber rubbers.'

"My hesitation seemed to add to the distrust that my appearance had in some way created. The
butler also swept me from head to foot with his critical stare, and at the same moment I became
internally aware that I had forgotten to remove my arctic over-boots. Never mind, my gown was
long, I would curl up my toes, but return to the dressing-room in full sight of that man, I
whose forbears had outbowled Peter Stuyvesant, and, I fear, outdrunk him--never! Then the portières
flew apart, and facing a glare of bilious-hued electric light, I heard the shouted announcement
of 'Miss Doormat' as I stumbled over a tiger rug into the room. I believe the fellow did it
on purpose. However, it was very funny, and my rubber-soled arctics probably prevented my either
coasting straight across into the open fireplace, or having a nasty fall, while the laugh that
the announcement created on the part of my host, Archie Martin, saved me from an awkward moment,
for from a sort of gilt throne-like arrangement at one side of the hearth, arrayed in brocaded
satin gowns cut very low and very long, heads crimped to a crisp, and fastened to meagre shoulders
by jewelled collars, the whole topped by a group of three 'Prince of Wales' feathers, Cordelia
and her sister came forward two steps to greet me.

"Of course, I thought to myself, they are going to a ball later on. I naturally made no comment,
and we went in to dinner. The dining room was very cold, as extensions usually are, and the
ladies presently had white fur capes brought to cover their exposure, while I, sitting in the
draught from the butler's pantry, was grateful for my arctics. The meal was more pretentious
than edible,--a strange commentary upon many delightful little four or at most five course
affairs I had eaten in the same room. I soon found that there was no ball in prospect, also
that Cordelia and her sister seemed ill at ease, while Archie had a look of suppressed mischief
on his face, which in spite of warning signals broke forth as soon as, the coffee being served,
the butler left.

"One great comfort about men is that they do not take easily to being unnatural. Archie and
I, having been brought up like brother and sister from the time we went to a little mixed school
over in old Clinton Hall, were always on cordial terms.

"'Well, Lavvy,' he began, 'I see you're surprised at the change of base here, and I'm going
to let you in on the ground floor, if Cordelia won't. You see, Janet (she's not in town to-night,
by the way) is coming out next month, and we are getting in training for what her mother thinks
is her duty toward her, or else what they both think is their duty to society, or something
else equally uncomfortable.'

"'Archie!' remonstrated Cordelia, but he good-naturedly ignored her and continued: 'Now I want
Janet to have a jolly winter and marry a good fellow when the time comes, but as we've got
the nicest sort of friends, educated and all that, who have travelled along with us, as you
have, from the beginning, why should we change our habits and feathers and try to fly for a
different roost?'

"'Archibald,' said Cordelia, in such a tone that she was not to be gainsaid, 'Lavinia, as a
woman of the world, will understand what you refuse to: that it is very important that our
daughter should have the surroundings that are now customary to the social set with whom she
has been educated, and into which, if she is to be happy, she must marry. If she is to meet
the right people, she must be rightly presented. All her set wear low gowns at dinner, whether
guests are present or not, just as much as men wear their evening dress at night and their
business suits in the morning. That we have kept up our old-fogy habits so long has nothing
to do with the present question.'

"'Except that I have to strain my purse to bring up everything else to suit the clothes, as
naturally gaslight, a leg of mutton, and two vegetables do not make a good foreground to bare
shoulders and a white vest! And I'd rather fund the cash as a nest-egg for Jenny.'

"'Archie, you are too absurd!' snapped Cordelia, yet more than half inclined to laugh; for
she used to be the jolliest woman in the world before the spray of the Whirlpool got into her eyes.

"'As to meeting suitable people to marry, and all that rubbish,' pursued Archie, relentlessly,
'I was considered fairly eligible in my time, and did you meet me at any of the dances you
went to, or at the Assemblies at Fourteenth Street Delmonico's that were the swell thing in
those days? No; I pulled you out of an old Broadway stage that had lost a wheel and keeled
over into a pile of snow opposite father's office, when you were practically standing on your
head. You didn't fuss, and I got to know you better in five minutes than any one could in five
years of this rotten fuss and feathers.'

"'That was purely accidental, and I wish you wouldn't mention it so often,' said Cordelia,
flushing; and so the conversation, at first playful, gradually working toward a painful dispute,
went on, until my faithful Lucy came to escort me home, without our having our game of whist,
that excuse for intelligent and silent companionship."

       *       *       *       *       *

"January 25th.

"I dwelt on that little dinner episode, my dear Barbara, because in it you will find an answer
to several questions I read between your lines. Since my return I find that practically all
my old friends have flown to what Archie Martin called 'a different roost,' or else failing,
or having no desire so to do, have left the city altogether, leaving me very lonely. Not only
those with daughters to bring out, but many of my spinster contemporaries are listed with the
buds at balls and dinner dances, and their gowns and jewels described. Ah, what a fatal memory
for ages one has in regard to schoolmates! Josephine Ponsonby was but one class behind us,
and she is dancing away yet.

"The middle-aged French women who now, as always, hold their own in public life have better
tact, and make the cultivation of some intellectual quality or political scheme at least the
excuse for holding their salons, and not the mere excuse of rivalry in money spending.

"I find the very vocabulary altered--for rest read change, for sleep read stimulation, etc,
ad infin.

"Born a clergyman's daughter of the old regime, I was always obliged to be more conservative
than was really natural to my temperament; even so, I find myself at middle life with comfortable
means (owing to that bit of rock and mud of grandma's on the old Bloomingdale road that father
persistently kept through thick and thin), either obliged to compromise myself, alter my dress
and habits, go to luncheons where the prelude is a cocktail, and the after entertainment to
play cards for money, contract bronchitis by buzzing at afternoon teas, make a vocation of
charity, or--stay by myself,--these being the only forms of amusement left open, and none offering
the intimate form of social intercourse I need.

"I did mission schools and parish visiting pretty thoroughly and conscientiously during forty
years of my life,--on my return an ecclesiastical, also, as well as a social shock awaited
me. St. Jacob's has been made a free church, and my special department has been given in charge
of two newly adopted Deaconesses, 'both for the betterment of parish work and reaching of the
poor.' So be it, but Heaven help those who are neither rich nor poor enough to be of consequence
and yet are spiritually hungry.

"The church system is necessarily reduced to mathematics. The rector has office hours, so have
the curates, and they will 'cheerfully come in response to any call.' It was pleasant to have
one's pastor drop in now and then in a sympathetic sort of way, pleasant to have a chance to
ask his advice without formally sending for him as if you wished to be prayed over! But everything
has grown so big and mechanical that there is not time. The clergy in many high places are
emancipating themselves from the Bible and preaching politics, history, fiction, local sensation,
and what not, or lauding in print the moral qualities of a drama in which the friendship between
Mary Magdalene and Judas Iscariot is dwelt on and the latter adjudged a patriot. I don't like
it, and I don't like hurrying to church that I may secure my seat in the corner of our once
family pew, where as a child I loved to think that the light that shone across my face from
a particular star in one of the stained-glass windows was a special message to me. It all hurts,
and I do not deny that I am bitter. Those in charge of gathering in new souls should take heed
how they ignore or trample on the old crop!

"So I attend to my household duties, marketing, take my exercise, and keep up my French and
German; but when evening comes, no one rings the bell except some intoxicated person looking
for one of the lodging houses opposite, and the silence is positively asphyxiating--if they
would only play an accordion in the kitchen I should be grateful. I'm really thinking of offering
the maids a piano and refreshments if they will give an 'at home' once a week, as the only
men in the neighbourhood seem to be the butchers and grocery clerks and the police. There is
an inordinate banging going on in the rear of the house, and I must break off to see what it is."

       *       *       *       *       *

"January 3th.

"MY DEAR CHILD:--

"Your second question, regarding visiting you the coming season, was answering itself the other
day when I was writing. Life here, except in winter, is becoming impossible to me. I have lost
not only Josephus, but my back yard! The stable where they keep the pigeons has changed hands.
Yes, you were right,--he did haunt the place, the postman says; and I suppose they did not
understand that he was merely playful, and not hungry, or who he was, else maybe he was too
careless about sitting on the side fence by the street. I could replace Josephus, but not the
yard,--there are no more back yards to be had; their decadence is complete. I've closed my
eyes for years to the ash heap my neighbour on the right kept in hers; also to the cast-off
teeth that came over from the 'painless' dentist's on the left.

