BY HUGH WALPOLE

STUDIES IN PLACE
  THE SECRET CITY
  THE DARK FOREST
  THE GOLDEN SCARECROW
  THE WOODEN HORSE
  MARADICK AT FORTY
  THE GODS AND MR. PERRIN

TWO PROLOGUES
  THE PRELUDE TO ADVENTURE
  FORTITUDE

THE RISING CITY
  1. THE DUCHESS OF WREXE
  2.
The morning cock at Ju-nan mounts the wall and crows.
The songs are over, the clock run down, but still the feast is set.
The Moon grows dim and the stars are few; morning has come to the world.
At a thousand gates and ten thousand doors the fish-shaped keys turn;
Round the Palace and up by the Castle, the crows and magpies are flying.

Cock-Crow Song. Anon. (1st Century B.C.).

CONTENTS

PART I Vera And Nina

PART II Lawrence

PART III Markovitch And Semyonov

PART I

VERA AND NINA

THE SECRET CITY

VERA AND NINA

I

There are certain things that I feel, as I look through this bundle of manuscript, that I must
say. The first is that of course no writer ever has fulfilled his intention and no writer ever
will; secondly, that there was, when I began, another intention than that of dealing with my
subject adequately, namely that of keeping myself outside the whole of it; I was to be, in
the most abstract and immaterial sense of the word, a voice, and that simply because this business
of seeing Russian psychology through English eyes has no excuse except that it is English.
That is its only interest, its only atmosphere, its only motive, and if you are going to tell
me that any aspect of Russia psychological, mystical, practical, or commercial seen through
an English medium is either Russia as she really is or Russia as Russians see her, I say to
you, without hesitation, that you don't know of what you are talking.

Of Russia and the Russians I know nothing, but of the effect upon myself and my ideas of life
that Russia and the Russians have made during these last three years I know something. You
are perfectly free to say that neither myself nor my ideas of life are of the slightest importance
to any one. To that I would say that any one's ideas about life are of importance and that
any one's ideas about Russian life are of interest... and beyond that, I have simply been compelled
to write. I have not been able to help myself, and all the faults and any virtues in this story
come from that. The facts are true, the inferences absolutely my own, so that you may reject
them at any moment and substitute others. It is true that I have known Vera Michailovna, Nina,
Alexei Petrovitch, Henry, Jerry, and the rest--some of them intimately--and many of the conversations
here recorded I have myself heard. Nevertheless the inferences are my own, and I think there
is no Russian who, were he to read this book, would not say that those inferences were wrong.
In an earlier record, to which this is in some ways a sequel,[1] my inferences were, almost
without exception, wrong, and there is no Russian alive for whom this book can have any kind
of value except as a happy example of the mistakes that the Englishman can make about the Russian.

But it is over those very mistakes that the two souls, Russian and English, so different, so
similar, so friendly, so hostile, may meet.... And in any case the thing has been too strong
for me. I have no other defence. For one's interest in life is stronger, God knows how much
stronger, than one's discretion, and one's love of life than one's wisdom, and one's curiosity
in life than one's ability to record it. At least, as I have said, I have endeavoured to keep
my own history, my own desires, my own temperament out of this, as much as is humanly possible....

And the facts are true.

[Footnote 1: The Dark Forest.]

II

They had been travelling for a week, and had quite definitely decided that they had nothing
whatever in common. As they stood there, lost and desolate on the grimy platform of the Finland
station, this same thought must have been paramount in their minds: "Thank God we shan't have
to talk to one another any longer. Whatever else may happen in this strange place that at least
we're spared." They were probably quite unconscious of the contrast they presented, unconscious
because, at this time, young Bohun never, I should imagine, visualised himself as anything
more definite than absolutely "right," and Lawrence simply never thought about himself at all.
But they were perfectly aware of their mutual dissatisfaction, although they were of course
absolutely polite. I heard of it afterwards from both sides, and I will say quite frankly that
my sympathy was all with Lawrence. Young Bohun can have been no fun as a travelling companion
at that time. If you had looked at him there standing on the Finland station platform and staring
haughtily about for porters you must have thought him the most self-satisfied of mortals. "That
fellow wants kicking," you would have said. Good-looking, thin, tall, large black eyes, black
eyelashes, clean and neat and "right" at the end of his journey as he had been at the beginning
of it, just foreign-looking enough with his black hair and pallor to make him interesting--he
was certainly arresting. But it was the self-satisfaction that would have struck any one. And
he had reason; he was at that very moment experiencing the most triumphant moment of his life.

He was only twenty-three, and was already as it seemed to the youthfully limited circle of
his vision, famous. Before the war he had been, as he quite frankly admitted to myself and
all his friends, nothing but ambitious. "Of course I edited the Granta for a year," he would
say, "and I don't think I did it badly.... But that wasn't very much."

No, it really wasn't a great deal, and we couldn't tell him that it was. He had always intended,
however, to be a great man; the Granta was simply a stepping-stone. He was already, during
his second year at Cambridge, casting about as to the best way to penetrate, swiftly and securely,
the fastnesses of London journalism. Then the war came, and he had an impulse of perfectly
honest and selfless patriotism..., not quite selfless perhaps, because he certainly saw himself
as a mighty hero, winning V.C.'s and saving forlorn hopes, finally received by his native village
under an archway of flags and mottoes (the local postmaster, who had never treated him very
properly, would make the speech of welcome). The reality did him some good, but not very much,
because when he had been in France only a fortnight he was gassed and sent home with a weak
heart. His heart remained weak, which made him interesting to women and allowed time for his
poetry. He was given an easy post in the Foreign Office and, in the autumn of 1916 he published
Discipline: Sonnets and Poems. This appeared at a very fortunate moment, when the more serious
of British idealists were searching for signs of a general improvement, through the stress
of war, of poor humanity.... "Thank God, there are our young poets," they said.

The little book had excellent notices in the papers, and one poem in especial "How God spoke
to Jones at Breakfast-time" was selected for especial praise because of its admirable realism
and force. One paper said that the British breakfast-table lived in that poem "in all its tiniest
most insignificant details," as no breakfast-table, save possibly that of Major Pendennis at
the beginning of Pendennis has lived before. One paper said, "Mr. Bohun merits that much-abused
word 'genius.'"

The young author carried these notices about with him and I have seen them all. But there was
more than this. Bohun had been for the last four years cultivating Russian. He had been led
into this through a real, genuine interest. He read the novelists and set himself to learn
the Russian language. That, as any one who has tried it will know is no easy business, but
Henry Bohun was no fool, and the Russian refugee who taught him was no fool. After Henry's
return from France he continued his lessons, and by the spring of 1916 he could read easily,
write fairly, and speak atrociously. He then adopted Russia, an easy thing to do, because his
supposed mastery of the language gave him a tremendous advantage over his friends. "I assure
you that's not so," he would say. "You can't judge Tchehov till you've read him in the original.
Wait till you can read him in Russian." "No, I don't think the Russian characters are like
that," he would declare. "It's a queer thing, but you'd almost think I had some Russian blood
in me... I sympathise so." He followed closely the books that emphasised the more sentimental
side of the Russian character, being of course grossly sentimental himself at heart. He saw
Russia glittering with fire and colour, and Russians, large, warm, and simple, willing to be
patronised, eagerly confessing their sins, rushing forward to make him happy, entertaining
him for ever and ever with a free and glorious hospitality.

"I really think I do understand Russia," he would say modestly. He said it to me when he had
been in Russia two days.

Then, in addition to the success of his poems and the general interest that he himself aroused
the final ambition of his young heart was realised. The Foreign Office decided to send him
to Petrograd to help in the great work of British propaganda.

He sailed from Newcastle on December 2, 1916....

III

At this point I am inevitably reminded of that other Englishman who, two years earlier than
Bohun, had arrived in Russia with his own pack of dreams and expectations.

But John Trenchard, of whose life and death I have tried elsewhere to say something, was young
Bohun's opposite, and I do not think that the strange unexpectedness of Russia can he exemplified
more strongly than by the similarity of appeal that she could make to two so various characters.
John was shy, self-doubting, humble, brave, and a gentleman,--Bohun was brave and a gentleman,
but the rest had yet to be added to him. How he would have patronised Trenchard if he had known
him! And yet at heart they were not perhaps so dissimilar. At the end of my story it will be
apparent, I think, that they were not.

That journey from Newcastle to Bergen, from Bergen to Torneo, from Torneo to Petrograd is a
tiresome business. There is much waiting at Custom-houses, disarrangement of trains and horses
and meals, long wearisome hours of stuffy carriages and grimy window-panes. Bohun I suspect
suffered, too, from that sudden sharp precipitance into a world that knew not Discipline and
recked nothing of the Granta. Obviously none of the passengers on the boat from Newcastle had
ever heard of Discipline. They clutched in their hands the works of Mr. Oppenheim, Mr. Compton
Mackenzie, and Mr. O'Henry and looked at Bohun, I imagine, with indifferent superiority. He
had been told at the Foreign Office that his especial travelling companion was to be Jerry
Lawrence. If he had hoped for anything from this direction one glance at Jerry's brick-red
face and stalwart figure must have undeceived him. Jerry, although he was now thirty-two years
of age, looked still very much the undergraduate. My slight acquaintance with him had been
in those earlier Cambridge days, through a queer mutual friend, Dune, who at that time seemed
to promise so magnificently, who afterwards disappeared so mysteriously. You would never have
supposed that Lawrence, Captain of the University Rugger during his last two years, Captain
of the English team through all the Internationals of the season 1913-14, could have had anything
in common, except football, with Dune, artist and poet if ever there was one. But on the few
occasions when I saw them together it struck me that football was the very least part of their
common ground. And that was the first occasion on which I suspected that Jerry Lawrence was
not quite what he seemed....

I can imagine Lawrence standing straddleways on the deck of the Jupiter, his short thick legs
wide apart, his broad back indifferent to everything and everybody, his rather plump, ugly,
good-natured face staring out to sea as though he saw nothing at all. He always gave the impression
of being half asleep, he had a way of suddenly lurching on his legs as though in another moment
his desire for slumber would be too strong for him, and would send him crashing to the ground.
He would be smoking an ancient briar, and his thick red hands would be clasped behind his back....

No encouraging figure for Bohun's aestheticism.

I can see as though I had been present Bohun's approach to him, his patronising introduction,
his kindly suggestion that they should eat their meals together, Jerry's smiling, lazy acquiescence.
I can imagine how Bohun decided to himself that "he must make the best of this chap. After
all, it was a long tiresome journey, and anything was better than having no one to talk to...."
But Jerry, unfortunately, was in a bad temper at the start. He did not want to go out to Russia
at all. His father, old Stephen Lawrence, had been for many years the manager of some works
in Petrograd, and the first fifteen years of Jerry's life had been spent in Russia. I did not,
at the time when I made Jerry's acquaintance at Cambridge, know this; had I realised it I would
have understood many things about him which puzzled me. He never alluded to Russia, never apparently
thought of it, never read a Russian book, had, it seemed, no connection of any kind with any
living soul in that country.

Old Lawrence retired, and took a fine large ugly palace in Clapham to end his days in....

Suddenly, after Lawrence had been in France for two years, had won the Military Cross there
and, as he put it, "was just settling inside his skin," the authorities realised his Russian
knowledge, and decided to transfer him to the British Military Mission in Petrograd. His anger
when he was sent back to London and informed of this was extreme. He hadn't the least desire
to return to Russia, he was very happy where he was, he had forgotten all his Russian; I can
see him, saying very little, looking like a sulky child and kicking his heel up and down across
the carpet.

"Just the man we want out there, Lawrence," he told me somebody said to him; "keep them in order."

"Keep them in order!" That tickled his sense of humour. He was to laugh frequently, afterwards,
when he thought of it. He always chewed a joke as a cow chews the cud.

So that he was in no pleasant temper when he met Bohun on the decks of the Jupiter. That journey
must have had its humours for any observer who knew the two men. During the first half of it
I imagine that Bohun talked and Lawrence slumbered. Bohun patronised, was kind and indulgent,
and showed very plainly that he thought his companion the dullest and heaviest of mortals.
Then he told Lawrence about Russia; he explained everything to him, the morals, psychology,
fighting qualities, strengths, and weaknesses. The climax arrived when he announced: "But it's
the mysticism of the Russian peasant which will save the world. That adoration of God...."

"Rot!" interrupted Lawrence.

Bohun was indignant. "Of course if you know better--" he said.

"I do," said Lawrence, "I lived there for fifteen years. Ask my old governor about the mysticism
of the Russian peasant. He'll tell you."

Bohun felt that he was justified in his annoyance. As he said to me afterwards: "The fellow
had simply been laughing at me. He might have told me about his having been there." At that
time, to Bohun, the most terrible thing in the world was to be laughed at.

After that Bohun asked Jerry questions. But Jerry refused to give himself away. "I don't know,"
he said, "I've forgotten it all. I don't suppose I ever did know much about it."

At Haparanda, most unfortunately, Bohun was insulted. The Swedish Customs Officer there, tired
at the constant appearance of self-satisfied gentlemen with Red Passports, decided that Bohun
was carrying medicine in his private bags. Bohun refused to open his portmanteau, simply because
he "was a Courier and wasn't going to be insulted by a dirty foreigner." Nevertheless "the
dirty foreigner" had his way and Bohun looked rather a fool. Jerry had not sympathised sufficiently
with Bohun in this affair.... "He only grinned," Bohun told me indignantly afterwards. "No
sense of patriotism at all. After all, Englishmen ought to stick together."

Finally, Bohun tested Jerry's literary knowledge. Jerry seemed to have none. He liked Fielding,
and a man called Farnol and Jack London.

He never read poetry. But, a strange thing, he was interested in Greek. He had bought the works
of Euripides and Aeschylus in the Loeb Library, and he thought them "thundering good." He had
never read a word of any Russian author. "Never Anna? Never War and Peace? Never Karamazov?
Never Tchehov?"

No, never.

Bohun gave him up.

IV

It should be obvious enough then that they hailed their approaching separation with relief.
Bohun had been promised by one of the secretaries at the Embassy that rooms would be found
for him. Jerry intended to "hang out" at one of the hotels. The "Astoria" was, he believed,
the right place.

"I shall go to the 'France' for to-night," Bohun declared, having lived, it would seem, in
Petrograd all his days. "Look me up, old man, won't you?"

Jerry smiled his slow smile. "I will," he said. "So long."

We will now follow the adventures of Henry. He had in him, I know, a tiny, tiny creature with
sharp ironical eyes and pointed springing feet who watched his poses, his sentimentalities
and heroics with affectionate scorn. This same creature watched him now as he waited to collect
his bags, and then stood on the gleaming steps of the station whilst the porters fetched an
Isvostchick, and the rain fell in long thundering lines of steel upon the bare and desolate
streets.

"You're very miserable and lonely," the Creature said; "you didn't expect this."

No, Henry had not expected this, and he also had not expected that the Isvostchick would demand
eight roubles for his fare to the "France." Henry knew that this was the barest extortion,
and he had sworn to himself long ago that he would allow nobody to "do" him. He looked at the
rain and submitted. "After all, it's war time," he whispered to the Creature.

He huddled himself into the cab, his baggage piled all about him, and tried by pulling at the
hood to protect himself from the elements. He has told me that he felt that the rain was laughing
at him; the cab was so slow that he seemed to be sitting in the middle of pools and melting
snow; he was dirty, tired, hungry, and really not far from tears. Poor Henry was very, very
young....

He scarcely looked at the Neva as he crossed the bridge; all the length of the Quay he saw
only the hunched, heavy back of the old cabman and the spurting, jumping rain, the vast stone
grave-like buildings and the high grey sky. He drove through the Red Square that swung in the
rain. He was thinking about the eight roubles.... He pulled up with a jerk outside the "France"
hotel. Here he tried, I am sure, to recover his dignity, but he was met by a large, stout,
eastern-looking gentleman with peacock feathers in his round cap who smiled gently when he
heard about the eight roubles, and ushered Henry into the dark hall with a kindly patronage
that admitted of no reply.

