ROUGHING IT

                             by Mark Twain

                                 1880

                                Part 5.

CHAPTER XLI.

Captain Nye was very ill indeed, with spasmodic rheumatism.  But the old gentleman was himself--which
is to say, he was kind-hearted and agreeable when comfortable, but a singularly violent wild-cat
when things did not go well.  He would be smiling along pleasantly enough, when a sudden spasm
of his disease would take him and he would go out of his smile into a perfect fury.  He would
groan and wail and howl with the anguish, and fill up the odd chinks with the most elaborate
profanity that strong convictions and a fine fancy could contrive.  With fair opportunity he
could swear very well and handle his adjectives with considerable judgment; but when the spasm
was on him it was painful to listen to him, he was so awkward.  However, I had seen him nurse
a sick man himself and put up patiently with the inconveniences of the situation, and consequently
I was willing that he should have full license now that his own turn had come.  He could not
disturb me, with all his raving and ranting, for my mind had work on hand, and it labored on
diligently, night and day, whether my hands were idle or employed.  I was altering and amending
the plans for my house, and thinking over the propriety of having the billard-room in the attic,
instead of on the same floor with the dining-room; also, I was trying to decide between green
and blue for the upholstery of the drawing-room, for, although my preference was blue I feared
it was a color that would be too easily damaged by dust and sunlight; likewise while I was
content to put the coachman in a modest livery, I was uncertain about a footman--I needed one,
and was even resolved to have one, but wished he could properly appear and perform his functions
out of livery, for I somewhat dreaded so much show; and yet, inasmuch as my late grandfather
had had a coachman and such things, but no liveries, I felt rather drawn to beat him;--or beat
his ghost, at any rate; I was also systematizing the European trip, and managed to get it all
laid out, as to route and length of time to be devoted to it --everything, with one exception--namely,
whether to cross the desert from Cairo to Jerusalem per camel, or go by sea to Beirut, and
thence down through the country per caravan.  Meantime I was writing to the friends at home
every day, instructing them concerning all my plans and intentions, and directing them to look
up a handsome homestead for my mother and agree upon a price for it against my coming, and
also directing them to sell my share of the Tennessee land and tender the proceeds to the widows'
and orphans' fund of the typographical union of which I had long been a member in good standing.
[This Tennessee land had been in the possession of the family many years, and promised to confer
high fortune upon us some day; it still promises it, but in a less violent way.]

When I had been nursing the Captain nine days he was somewhat better, but very feeble.  During
the afternoon we lifted him into a chair and gave him an alcoholic vapor bath, and then set
about putting him on the bed again.  We had to be exceedingly careful, for the least jar produced
pain.  Gardiner had his shoulders and I his legs; in an unfortunate moment I stumbled and the
patient fell heavily on the bed in an agony of torture.  I never heard a man swear so in my
life.  He raved like a maniac, and tried to snatch a revolver from the table--but I got it.
He ordered me out of the house, and swore a world of oaths that he would kill me wherever he
caught me when he got on his feet again.  It was simply a passing fury, and meant nothing.
I knew he would forget it in an hour, and maybe be sorry for it, too; but it angered me a little,
at the moment.  So much so, indeed, that I determined to go back to Esmeralda.  I thought he
was able to get along alone, now, since he was on the war path.  I took supper, and as soon
as the moon rose, began my nine-mile journey, on foot.

Even millionaires needed no horses, in those days, for a mere nine-mile jaunt without baggage.

As I "raised the hill" overlooking the town, it lacked fifteen minutes of twelve.  I glanced
at the hill over beyond the canyon, and in the bright moonlight saw what appeared to be about
half the population of the village massed on and around the Wide West croppings.  My heart
gave an exulting bound, and I said to myself, "They have made a new strike to-night--and struck
it richer than ever, no doubt."  I started over there, but gave it up.  I said the "strick"
would keep, and I had climbed hill enough for one night.  I went on down through the town,
and as I was passing a little German bakery, a woman ran out and begged me to come in and help
her.  She said her husband had a fit.  I went in, and judged she was right--he appeared to
have a hundred of them, compressed into one. Two Germans were there, trying to hold him, and
not making much of a success of it.  I ran up the street half a block or so and routed out
a sleeping doctor, brought him down half dressed, and we four wrestled with the maniac, and
doctored, drenched and bled him, for more than an hour, and the poor German woman did the crying.
He grew quiet, now, and the doctor and I withdrew and left him to his friends.

It was a little after one o'clock.  As I entered the cabin door, tired but jolly, the dingy
light of a tallow candle revealed Higbie, sitting by the pine table gazing stupidly at my note,
which he held in his fingers, and looking pale, old, and haggard.  I halted, and looked at
him.  He looked at me, stolidly.  I said:

"Higbie, what--what is it?"

"We're ruined--we didn't do the work--THE BLIND LEAD'S RELOCATED!"

It was enough.  I sat down sick, grieved--broken-hearted, indeed.  A minute before, I was rich
and brimful of vanity; I was a pauper now, and very meek.  We sat still an hour, busy with
thought, busy with vain and useless self-upbraidings, busy with "Why didn't I do this, and
why didn't I do that," but neither spoke a word.  Then we dropped into mutual explanations,
and the mystery was cleared away.  It came out that Higbie had depended on me, as I had on
him, and as both of us had on the foreman.  The folly of it!  It was the first time that ever
staid and steadfast Higbie had left an important matter to chance or failed to be true to his
full share of a responsibility.

But he had never seen my note till this moment, and this moment was the first time he had been
in the cabin since the day he had seen me last. He, also, had left a note for me, on that same
fatal afternoon--had ridden up on horseback, and looked through the window, and being in a
hurry and not seeing me, had tossed the note into the cabin through a broken pane.  Here it
was, on the floor, where it had remained undisturbed for nine days:

      "Don't fail to do the work before the ten days expire.  W.
      has passed through and given me notice.  I am to join him at
      Mono Lake, and we shall go on from there to-night.  He says
      he will find it this time, sure.  CAL."

"W."  meant Whiteman, of course.  That thrice accursed "cement!"

That was the way of it.  An old miner, like Higbie, could no more withstand the fascination
of a mysterious mining excitement like this "cement" foolishness, than he could refrain from
eating when he was famishing.  Higbie had been dreaming about the marvelous cement for months;
and now, against his better judgment, he had gone off and "taken the chances" on my keeping
secure a mine worth a million undiscovered cement veins.  They had not been followed this time.
His riding out of town in broad daylight was such a common-place thing to do that it had not
attracted any attention.  He said they prosecuted their search in the fastnesses of the mountains
during nine days, without success; they could not find the cement.  Then a ghastly fear came
over him that something might have happened to prevent the doing of the necessary work to hold
the blind lead (though indeed he thought such a thing hardly possible), and forthwith he started
home with all speed.  He would have reached Esmeralda in time, but his horse broke down and
he had to walk a great part of the distance.  And so it happened that as he came into Esmeralda
by one road, I entered it by another.  His was the superior energy, however, for he went straight
to the Wide West, instead of turning aside as I had done--and he arrived there about five or
ten minutes too late! The "notice" was already up, the "relocation" of our mine completed beyond
recall, and the crowd rapidly dispersing.  He learned some facts before he left the ground.
The foreman had not been seen about the streets since the night we had located the mine--a
telegram had called him to California on a matter of life and death, it was said.  At any rate
he had done no work and the watchful eyes of the community were taking note of the fact.  At
midnight of this woful tenth day, the ledge would be "relocatable," and by eleven o'clock the
hill was black with men prepared to do the relocating.  That was the crowd I had seen when
I fancied a new "strike" had been made--idiot that I was.

[We three had the same right to relocate the lead that other people had, provided we were quick
enough.] As midnight was announced, fourteen men, duly armed and ready to back their proceedings,
put up their "notice" and proclaimed their ownership of the blind lead, under the new name
of the "Johnson."  But A. D. Allen our partner (the foreman) put in a sudden appearance about
that time, with a cocked revolver in his hand, and said his name must be added to the list,
or he would "thin out the Johnson company some."  He was a manly, splendid, determined fellow,
and known to be as good as his word, and therefore a compromise was effected.  They put in
his name for a hundred feet, reserving to themselves the customary two hundred feet each. 
Such was the history of the night's events, as Higbie gathered from a friend on the way home.

Higbie and I cleared out on a new mining excitement the next morning, glad to get away from
the scene of our sufferings, and after a month or two of hardship and disappointment, returned
to Esmeralda once more. Then we learned that the Wide West and the Johnson companies had consolidated;
that the stock, thus united, comprised five thousand feet, or shares; that the foreman, apprehending
tiresome litigation, and considering such a huge concern unwieldy, had sold his hundred feet
for ninety thousand dollars in gold and gone home to the States to enjoy it. If the stock was
worth such a gallant figure, with five thousand shares in the corporation, it makes me dizzy
to think what it would have been worth with only our original six hundred in it.  It was the
difference between six hundred men owning a house and five thousand owning it.  We would have
been millionaires if we had only worked with pick and spade one little day on our property
and so secured our ownership!

It reads like a wild fancy sketch, but the evidence of many witnesses, and likewise that of
the official records of Esmeralda District, is easily obtainable in proof that it is a true
history.  I can always have it to say that I was absolutely and unquestionably worth a million
dollars, once, for ten days.

A year ago my esteemed and in every way estimable old millionaire partner, Higbie, wrote me
from an obscure little mining camp in California that after nine or ten years of buffetings
and hard striving, he was at last in a position where he could command twenty-five hundred
dollars, and said he meant to go into the fruit business in a modest way. How such a thought
would have insulted him the night we lay in our cabin planning European trips and brown stone
houses on Russian Hill!

CHAPTER XLII.

What to do next?

It was a momentous question.  I had gone out into the world to shift for myself, at the age
of thirteen (for my father had endorsed for friends; and although he left us a sumptuous legacy
of pride in his fine Virginian stock and its national distinction, I presently found that I
could not live on that alone without occasional bread to wash it down with).  I had gained
a livelihood in various vocations, but had not dazzled anybody with my successes; still the
list was before me, and the amplest liberty in the matter of choosing, provided I wanted to
work--which I did not, after being so wealthy.  I had once been a grocery clerk, for one day,
but had consumed so much sugar in that time that I was relieved from further duty by the proprietor;
said he wanted me outside, so that he could have my custom.  I had studied law an entire week,
and then given it up because it was so prosy and tiresome.  I had engaged briefly in the study
of blacksmithing, but wasted so much time trying to fix the bellows so that it would blow itself,
that the master turned me adrift in disgrace, and told me I would come to no good.  I had been
a bookseller's clerk for awhile, but the customers bothered me so much I could not read with
any comfort, and so the proprietor gave me a furlough and forgot to put a limit to it.  I had
clerked in a drug store part of a summer, but my prescriptions were unlucky, and we appeared
to sell more stomach pumps than soda water.  So I had to go.  I had made of myself a tolerable
printer, under the impression that I would be another Franklin some day, but somehow had missed
the connection thus far.  There was no berth open in the Esmeralda Union, and besides I had
always been such a slow compositor that I looked with envy upon the achievements of apprentices
of two years' standing; and when I took a "take," foremen were in the habit of suggesting that
it would be wanted "some time during the year."

I was a good average St. Louis and New Orleans pilot and by no means ashamed of my abilities
in that line; wages were two hundred and fifty dollars a month and no board to pay, and I did
long to stand behind a wheel again and never roam any more--but I had been making such an ass
of myself lately in grandiloquent letters home about my blind lead and my European excursion
that I did what many and many a poor disappointed miner had done before; said "It is all over
with me now, and I will never go back home to be pitied--and snubbed."  I had been a private
secretary, a silver miner and a silver mill operative, and amounted to less than nothing in
each, and now--

What to do next?

I yielded to Higbie's appeals and consented to try the mining once more. We climbed far up
on the mountain side and went to work on a little rubbishy claim of ours that had a shaft on
it eight feet deep.  Higbie descended into it and worked bravely with his pick till he had
loosened up a deal of rock and dirt and then I went down with a long-handled shovel (the most
awkward invention yet contrived by man) to throw it out. You must brace the shovel forward
with the side of your knee till it is full, and then, with a skilful toss, throw it backward
over your left shoulder.  I made the toss, and landed the mess just on the edge of the shaft
and it all came back on my head and down the back of my neck. I never said a word, but climbed
out and walked home.  I inwardly resolved that I would starve before I would make a target
of myself and shoot rubbish at it with a long-handled shovel.

I sat down, in the cabin, and gave myself up to solid misery--so to speak.  Now in pleasanter
days I had amused myself with writing letters to the chief paper of the Territory, the Virginia
Daily Territorial Enterprise, and had always been surprised when they appeared in print. My
good opinion of the editors had steadily declined; for it seemed to me that they might have
found something better to fill up with than my literature.  I had found a letter in the post
office as I came home from the hill side, and finally I opened it.  Eureka!  [I never did know
what Eureka meant, but it seems to be as proper a word to heave in as any when no other that
sounds pretty offers.] It was a deliberate offer to me of Twenty-Five Dollars a week to come
up to Virginia and be city editor of the Enterprise.

I would have challenged the publisher in the "blind lead" days--I wanted to fall down and worship
him, now.  Twenty-Five Dollars a week--it looked like bloated luxury--a fortune a sinful and
lavish waste of money. But my transports cooled when I thought of my inexperience and consequent
unfitness for the position--and straightway, on top of this, my long array of failures rose
up before me.  Yet if I refused this place I must presently become dependent upon somebody
for my bread, a thing necessarily distasteful to a man who had never experienced such a humiliation
since he was thirteen years old.  Not much to be proud of, since it is so common--but then
it was all I had to be proud of.  So I was scared into being a city editor.  I would have declined,
otherwise. Necessity is the mother of "taking chances."  I do not doubt that if, at that time,
I had been offered a salary to translate the Talmud from the original Hebrew, I would have
accepted--albeit with diffidence and some misgivings--and thrown as much variety into it as
I could for the money.

I went up to Virginia and entered upon my new vocation.  I was a rusty looking city editor,
I am free to confess--coatless, slouch hat, blue woolen shirt, pantaloons stuffed into boot-tops,
whiskered half down to the waist, and the universal navy revolver slung to my belt.  But I
secured a more Christian costume and discarded the revolver.

I had never had occasion to kill anybody, nor ever felt a desire to do so, but had worn the
thing in deference to popular sentiment, and in order that I might not, by its absence, be
offensively conspicuous, and a subject of remark.  But the other editors, and all the printers,
carried revolvers.  I asked the chief editor and proprietor (Mr. Goodman, I will call him,
since it describes him as well as any name could do) for some instructions with regard to my
duties, and he told me to go all over town and ask all sorts of people all sorts of questions,
make notes of the information gained, and write them out for publication.  And he added:

"Never say 'We learn' so-and-so, or 'It is reported,' or 'It is rumored,' or 'We understand'
so-and-so, but go to headquarters and get the absolute facts, and then speak out and say 'It
is so-and-so.'  Otherwise, people will not put confidence in your news.  Unassailable certainly
is the thing that gives a newspaper the firmest and most valuable reputation."

It was the whole thing in a nut-shell; and to this day when I find a reporter commencing his
article with "We understand," I gather a suspicion that he has not taken as much pains to inform
himself as he ought to have done.  I moralize well, but I did not always practise well when
I was a city editor; I let fancy get the upper hand of fact too often when there was a dearth
of news.  I can never forget my first day's experience as a reporter.  I wandered about town
questioning everybody, boring everybody, and finding out that nobody knew anything.  At the
end of five hours my notebook was still barren.  I spoke to Mr. Goodman.  He said:

"Dan used to make a good thing out of the hay wagons in a dry time when there were no fires
or inquests.  Are there no hay wagons in from the Truckee?  If there are, you might speak of
the renewed activity and all that sort of thing, in the hay business, you know.

"It isn't sensational or exciting, but it fills up and looks business like."

I canvassed the city again and found one wretched old hay truck dragging in from the country.
But I made affluent use of it.  I multiplied it by sixteen, brought it into town from sixteen
different directions, made sixteen separate items out of it, and got up such another sweat
about hay as Virginia City had never seen in the world before.

This was encouraging.  Two nonpareil columns had to be filled, and I was getting along.  Presently,
when things began to look dismal again, a desperado killed a man in a saloon and joy returned
once more.  I never was so glad over any mere trifle before in my life.  I said to the murderer:

"Sir, you are a stranger to me, but you have done me a kindness this day which I can never
forget.  If whole years of gratitude can be to you any slight compensation, they shall be yours.
I was in trouble and you have relieved me nobly and at a time when all seemed dark and drear.
Count me your friend from this time forth, for I am not a man to forget a favor."

If I did not really say that to him I at least felt a sort of itching desire to do it.  I wrote
up the murder with a hungry attention to details, and when it was finished experienced but
one regret--namely, that they had not hanged my benefactor on the spot, so that I could work
him up too.

Next I discovered some emigrant wagons going into camp on the plaza and found that they had
lately come through the hostile Indian country and had fared rather roughly.  I made the best
of the item that the circumstances permitted, and felt that if I were not confined within rigid
limits by the presence of the reporters of the other papers I could add particulars that would
make the article much more interesting. However, I found one wagon that was going on to California,
and made some judicious inquiries of the proprietor.  When I learned, through his short and
surly answers to my cross-questioning, that he was certainly going on and would not be in the
city next day to make trouble, I got ahead of the other papers, for I took down his list of
names and added his party to the killed and wounded.  Having more scope here, I put this wagon
through an Indian fight that to this day has no parallel in history.

My two columns were filled.  When I read them over in the morning I felt that I had found my
legitimate occupation at last.  I reasoned within myself that news, and stirring news, too,
was what a paper needed, and I felt that I was peculiarly endowed with the ability to furnish
it. Mr. Goodman said that I was as good a reporter as Dan.  I desired no higher commendation.
With encouragement like that, I felt that I could take my pen and murder all the immigrants
on the plains if need be and the interests of the paper demanded it.

CHAPTER XLIII.

However, as I grew better acquainted with the business and learned the run of the sources of
information I ceased to require the aid of fancy to any large extent, and became able to fill
my columns without diverging noticeably from the domain of fact.

I struck up friendships with the reporters of the other journals, and we swapped "regulars"
with each other and thus economized work.  "Regulars" are permanent sources of news, like courts,
bullion returns, "clean-ups" at the quartz mills, and inquests.  Inasmuch as everybody went
armed, we had an inquest about every day, and so this department was naturally set down among
the "regulars."  Come along."

