A NIGHT IN THE SNOW; OR, A Struggle for Life.

BY THE REV. E. DONALD CARR.

INTRODUCTION.

In publishing the following account of "A Night in the Snow," which has already been given
as a Lecture before the Society for the Promotion of Religious and Useful Knowledge at Bridgnorth,
I feel that some apology is due.

My preservation through the night of the 29th of January last was doubtless most wonderful,
and my experience perhaps almost without precedent, in this country at least; for, though many
people have at different times been lost in the snow, scarcely any one has passed through the
ordeal of such a day and night as that undergone by myself, and lived to tell the tale.  Still
I should never have thought that the matter was of sufficient importance to justify me in printing
an account of it, had I not discovered that my adventure has created a public interest, for
which I was totally unprepared.  I have been so repeatedly asked to write a detailed account
of all the circumstances connected with my wanderings on the Long Mynd in the snow during that
night and the following day, and to have it published, that I have at last (though, I must
confess, somewhat reluctantly) consented to do so, and with that view have drawn up the following
account.

In writing my story, I have been obliged to go into many very small matters of detail, which
may perhaps appear trivial; but it seemed to me that the interest of a story of this kind,
if there be any interest attached to it, generally turns upon minor circumstances.  I have
also been obliged to speak of myself in a very personal manner, but I did not see how I could
put the reader in possession of the geographical points of the case, without describing the
duties I had to perform, and the country I had to traverse.

E. DONALD CARR.

WOLSTASTON RECTORY, April 17, 1865.

A NIGHT IN THE SNOW. 

See here, my poor fellow, you owe ---- pounds: it's a very large sum for a man like you, to be
sure; and if you had run into debt to anything like this amount through extravagance, or even
thoughtlessness, I should have regarded it as an act of dishonesty on your part, and I might
have felt it right to discharge you. But you are to be pitied, and not to be blamed. Cold pity
alone goes for nothing, so let us see how you can be helped out of your troubles. Now, do you
think your creditors, considering all the circumstances, would take one-half, and be satisfied?
Here's Dr Edwards--his bill is the heaviest; if we can get him to take one-half"----

"One-half, master!" exclaimed the poor man, "but if they would take half, where's the money to
come from?  On first hearing it, this sounds an improbable statement; but any
one who has been upon the mountain in a good "whinberry season" as it is called, will readily
understand that this is no exaggeration.  To the poor people for miles around, the "whinberry
picking" is the great event of the year.  The whole family betake themselves to the hill with
the early morning, carrying with them their provisions for the day; and not unfrequently a
kettle to prepare tea forms part of their load.  I know no more picturesque sight than that
presented by the summit of the Long Mynd towards four o'clock on an August afternoon, when
numerous fires are lit among the heather, and as many kettles steaming away on the top of them,
while noisy, chattering groups of women and children are clustered round, glad to rest after
a hard day's work.  A family will pick many quarts of bilberries in the day, and as these are
sold at prices varying from 3d. to 5d. a quart, it will be readily understood that it is by
no means impossible that the large sum of 400 or 500 pounds should thus be realised in a single
season.

The appearance of this Long Mynd mountain on the northern side, looking towards Shrewsbury,
presents no feature of striking interest, and the ascent is a gradual one, leading chiefly
through cultivated ground; but the aspect of the south-eastern or Stretton side is wild in
the extreme, the whole face of the mountain being broken up into deep ravines, with precipitous
sides, where purple rocks project boldly through the turf, and in many places even the active
sheep and mountain ponies can scarcely find a footing.  Down each of these ravines runs a small
stream of exquisitely pure water, one of which, near the entrance of the valley, becomes considerable
enough to turn a mill for carding wool.  This stream falls over rocks at the head of the ravine,
in a small cascade of a considerable height called the Light Spout.

Many people have lost their lives among these hills at different times, and places here and
there bear such suggestive names, as "Dead Man's Beach," "Dead Man's Hollow," &c.  The last
fair, too, which is held at Church Stretton before Christmas is locally known as "Dead Man's
Fair," several men have perished whilst attempting to return home after it across the hill
in the dark November night.  No one, however, till this winter has been lost for many years.
Two drovers were the last persons who perished here, and they lost their lives near a place
called "The Thresholds," in a deep snow which fell in April thirty-seven years ago.

The western slope of the Long Mynd is less strikingly picturesque and more desolate, but the
view from the top in this direction is the finest of any. The day is not wasted on which one
has seen the sun rise--perhaps some of us changed the old saying, and felt the day would be well
spent for him who saw the sun set,--for in war, however sure the victory, so also is the toll
of killed and wounded, and the attack of an enemy entrenched in this country, as bare and open
as the African veld, is done readily, gladly, but not without losses; and the time one thinks
of these is not in the charge, not in the advance, but in the empty period of waiting beforehand.
The needle pricks before, not during, the race.

"Remember only the happy hours," and if the most glorious hour in life is the hour of victory
in battle, so are the hours preceding battle among the most depressing. I confess, as we sat
there idle in the chill dawn, my mind was filled not only with the hope of victory and captured
trenches, but with memories of past scenes in France and Mesopotamia, and of a strip of ground
the evening after Magersfontein, each battlefield dotted with little groups of men lying rigid,
each marked with lines of motionless forms.

Action quickly dispels such thoughts, and we all welcomed the definite news that was at last brought
of the enemy, and our orders for a farther advance. One brigade was immediately sent forward
on the east side of the railway in order to press back the advanced parties of the enemy on their
main position, some six miles north of our present halting place. A brave sight it is to see
a brigade deploying for action. Even though the scarlet doublet has given place to the khaki
jacket, though no pipes sound and no colours are unfurled, the spirit still remains; the spirit
that in old days led the British line to victory still fills these little columns scattered
at wide intervals over the plain, these little columns of Englishmen, Highlanders, Indians,
and Gurkhas. The brigade pushed forward for a mile or two without opposition, then little puffs
of white smoke bursting in the air showed that the Turk had opened the battle with salvoes of
shrapnel; the little columns quickly spread out into thin lines, and our batteries trotted
forward and were soon themselves engaged in action. So far the scene had been clear in every
detail, but now as the day advanced, the dust from advancing batteries,
the smoke and mirage, formed a fog of war that telephones and signallers
could only in part dispel.

The mirage in Mesopotamia does not so much hide as distort the truth. The enemy are seldom altogether
hidden from view, the trouble is rather to tell whether one is observing a cavalry patrol
or an infantry regiment, or if the object moving forward is not in
reality a sandhill or a bunch of reeds. The mirage here has certainly
a strange power of apparently raising objects above the ground-level.
It not unfrequently happened in winter, when the snow was very deep, or much drifted, that
it was impossible to ride across the hill, and the expedition then had to be performed on foot;
still I always managed to cross somehow, in spite of wind or weather, so that during the last
eight years and a half the little mountain church has never been without one Sunday service.
I find that during that time I have crossed the Long Mynd (in round numbers) nearly two thousand
five hundred times; consequently my knowledge of the country became so intimate, that I felt
equally at home upon the hill in all weathers, and at all hours of the day and night.  On one
occasion, I had to cross it late on a November night and in a dense fog, when returning home
from Ratlinghope, and met with no accident; and I think that this and similar experiences made
me somewhat over confident.  I mention this to show how little the most perfect acquaintance
with country will avail any one when overtaken by such a blinding snow storm as that of the
29th of January last.

During the preceding week the snow fell heavily, and accumulated on the hills to a greater
depth than had been known for fifty-one years.  Public opinion was unanimous that there had
been nothing like it since 1814.  A strong wind, moreover, had so drifted it that the roads
were impassable, and the communication between neighbouring villages, and even between houses
in the same village, almost ceased.  Letters wont to be received in the morning arrived late
in the day, or not at all; and unhappy folk who were unprovided with a good store of food and
coals had either to borrow of their neighbours or starve.  The morning service at Wolstaston
on Sunday the 29th was of necessity but thinly attended, and it seemed probable that I should
not even be expected at Ratlinghope.  As, however, the service there had never been omitted
owing to bad weather, I was anxious to get to my little church if possible; in fact, I considered
it my duty to make the attempt, though I felt very doubtful whether I should succeed.

Accordingly, very soon after morning service at Wolstaston was over, I started on the expedition.
I was in such a hurry to be off that I could not stay to take my usual luncheon, but swallowed
a few mouthfuls of soup, and put a small flask containing about three ounces of brandy in my
pocket.  My taking anything of the kind with me was a most unprecedented circumstance.  I only
remember one other occasion in which I did so, and that was also in a very deep snow; but now
foreseeing a walk of no common difficulty, I thought the precaution a wise one, and saw reason
afterwards to be thankful that I had adopted it.

I started on horseback, though I knew that I could only ride a short distance, but thought
it advisable to save myself all unnecessary fatigue.  I was of course accompanied by a servant
to bring back the horses when they were of no further use.  By leaving the lane and making
our way across the fields over hedge and ditch, we contrived to ride about half a mile.  The
horses then became useless, as the drifts were so deep against the hedges and gates, that the
poor animals became imbedded in them, and were unable to find any firm footing to leap from.
The servant therefore had to return with them long before I reached the unenclosed mountain
land, and I proceeded on my way alone.

The journey proved more difficult even than I had expected.  The snow was for the most part
up to the knees and very soft, and the drifts were so deep that they could only be crossed
by crawling on hands and knees, as any one will readily understand who has attempted to cross
deep snow when in a soft state.  When I reached the open moorland the day was bright and fine,
and the snow stretched around me for miles in a dazzling expanse very painful to the eyes,
and unbroken by track, landmark, or footprint of any living creature.  The form of the country,
however, was a sufficient guide to my destination, and after a severe struggle over and through
the drifts, I reached my little church at a quarter-past three o'clock, just two hours and
a quarter from the time I had left Wolstaston.  A few people were assembled together, though
no one had really expected me, and after a short service I started on my homeward journey,
having refused the invitations of my kind people to stay the night amongst them, as I was anxious
to get back to Wolstaston in time for my six o'clock evening service, and I did not anticipate
that I should encounter any greater difficulties in my return home than I had done in coming
to Ratlinghope.

During the three quarters of an hour, however, that we had been in church, the aspect of the
weather had completely changed.  A furious gale had come on from E.S.E., which, as soon as
I got on the open moorland, I found was driving clouds of snow and icy sleet before it.  It
was with considerable difficulty that I made my way up the western ascent of the hill, as I
had to walk in the teeth of this gale.  The force of the wind was most extraordinary.  I have
been in many furious gales, but never in anything to compare with that, as it took me off my
legs, and blew me flat down upon the ground over and over again.  The sleet too was most painful,
stinging one's face, and causing such injury to the eyes, that it was impossible to lift up
one's head.  I contrived, however, to fight my way through it, and at length reached the crest
of the hill.  Though I could not see many yards in any direction, I knew at this time exactly
where I was, as I passed the carcase of a mountain pony which I had previously noticed.  The
poor thing had no doubt been famished to death, and was fast wasting to a skeleton.  Numbers
of these hardy little animals have perished during the severe weather from hunger, having been
previously reduced to the lowest condition through lack of pasturage during the dry season
of 1864.  One man, who owned fourteen of them, has lost every one.

Leaving this solitary waymark, the half buried skeleton, by which I had rested for a few minutes
and taken a little of my brandy, I started again, having first made a careful observation of
the direction in which I should go.  After a further struggle across the level summit of the
hill, I reached my second landmark, a pool in a little hollow between the hills, which is well
known to the inhabitants of the district, and interesting to naturalists, as the resort of
curlews and other rare birds; here again I took a short rest, and then started upon what I
fondly dreamed would be the last difficult stage of my journey.

My way from the pool lay first up a steep ascent for rather less than half a mile to the top
of the hill, and then across a level flat for some three or four hundred yards, when a fir
plantation would be reached at the edge of the enclosed ground.  Once within the friendly shelter
of those firs, I knew that the remainder of my walk, though still tedious and fatiguing, would
be comparatively easy.  It pleased God, however, that I should never reach them that night.
Doubtless I had been too confident in my own powers, and at the very time when I thought the
difficulties and dangers of my task were well nigh accomplished, I was taught a lesson which
I shall remember to the latest hour of my life.  I ascended the hill to the flat already spoken
of, though it was a very slow process, for owing to the depth of the drifts, which were now
increasing rapidly, and the force of the wind, I was compelled to crawl a great part of the
way.  The storm now came on, if possible, with increased fury.  It was quite impossible to
look up or see for a yard around, and the snow came down so thick and fast that my servant,
who had come some distance up the lane from Wolstaston in hopes of seeing something of me,
describing it to me afterwards, said, "Sir, it was just as if they were throwing it on to us
out of buckets."  I fought on through it, however, expecting soon to come to the fir wood.
On and on I went, but not a glimpse of its friendly shelter could I see, the real fact being
that I had borne away a great deal too much to the right, almost at right angles to my proper
course.  Having been blown down over and over again, I had probably, in rising to my feet,
altered my direction unconsciously.  The wind too, by which I had been trying to steer, proved
a treacherous compass; for, as I have been told, about this time it went more round into the
south.  It was, moreover, becoming very dark.  After a while I became aware that the ground
under my feet was of a wrong shape, sloping downwards when it should have been level, and I
then knew that I had missed my way.  This, however, gave me no great uneasiness, as I imagined
that I had only gone a little too much to the south of the wood, and that I should soon reach
an inhabited district at the bottom of it, known as Bullock's Moor, from which a somewhat circuitous
route would bring me safely home.  Under this impression I walked cheerfully on, but only for
a few steps further.  Suddenly my feet flew from under me, and I found myself shooting at a
fearful pace down the side of one of the steep ravines which I had imagined lay far away to
my right.  I thought to check myself by putting my stick behind me, and bearing heavily upon
it in the manner usual under such circumstances in Alpine travelling.  Before, however, I could
do so I came in contact with something which jerked it out of my hand and turned me round,
so that I continued my tremendous glissade head downwards, lying on my back.

The pace I was going in this headlong descent must have been very great, yet it seemed to me
to occupy a marvellous space of time, long enough for the events of my whole previous life
to pass in review before me, as I had often before heard that they did in moments of extreme
peril.  I never lost my consciousness, but had time to think much of those I should leave behind
me, expecting every moment as I did to be dashed over the rocks at the bottom of the ravine;
knew in fact that such must be my fate, unless I could stop myself by some means.  Owing to
the softness of the snow, I contrived to accomplish this by kicking my foot as deep into the
snow as I could, and at the same time bending my knee with a smart muscular effort, so as to
make a hook of my leg; this brought me to a stand still, but my position was anything but agreeable
even then, hanging head downwards on a very steep part, and never knowing any moment but what
I might start again.  With much difficulty, however, I at length succeeded in getting myself
the right way up, and then descended with great care to the bottom of the ravine, intending
if possible to walk along the course of the stream in its hollow till it should lead me to
the enclosed country.  The ravine, however, was so choked up with snow, that to walk along
the valley was utterly impossible.  The drifts were many feet over my head, in several places
they must have been at least twenty feet in depth; and having once got into them, I had the
greatest difficulty, by scratching and struggling, to extricate myself from them again.  It
was now dark.  I did not know into which of the ravines I had fallen, for at this part there
is a complete network of them intersecting each other in every direction.  The only way by
which I had thought to escape was hopelessly blocked up, and I had to face the awful fact that
I was lost among the hills, should have to spend the night there, and that, humanly speaking,
it was almost impossible that I could survive it.

The instinct of self-preservation, however, is strong, even when a fearful death seems close
at hand, and there were others for whose sake, even more than my own, I desired that night
that my life might be spared, if such were God's will.  I knew that, under Providence, all
depended on my own powers of endurance, and that the struggle for life must be a very severe
one.  The depth of the snow made walking a very exhausting effort. It was always up to my knees,
more often up to my waist; but my only chance, as I was well aware, was to keep moving; and
having extricated myself at last from the drifts in the ravine, I began to climb the opposite
side of the hill, though I had not the least idea in which direction I ought to go.  As I made
my way upwards, I saw just in front of me what looked like a small shadow flitting about, for
owing to the white ground it was never completely dark.  I was much surprised at this, especially
as when I came close to it, it disappeared into the snow, with the exception of one round dark
spot, which remained motionless.  I put my hand down upon this dark object to ascertain what
it could possibly be, and found that I had got hold of a hare's head!  I saw many of these
little animals in the course of the night.  They made holes in the snow for shelter, and sat
in them well protected by their warm coats, happier far than their human fellow-sufferer, who
knew that for him there must be no rest that night if he would see the light of another day.

Having climbed the hill, I walked along its crest for some distance, till suddenly I again
lost my footing, and shot down the hill, as far as I can judge, on the opposite side into another
ravine.  This was, if possible, a more fearful glissade than my previous one; it was a very
precipitous place, and I was whirled round and round in my descent, sometimes head first, sometimes
feet first, and again sideways, rolling over and over, till at last, by clutching at the gorse
bushes, and digging my feet into the snow as before, I once more managed to check my wild career,
and bring myself to a stand; but I had lost my hat and a pair of warm fur gloves, which I had
on over a pair of old dogskins.  The loss of these fur gloves proved very serious to me, as
my hands soon began to get so numbed with the cold, that they were comparatively useless.

At the bottom of the ravine into which I had now fallen, I found myself again involved in snow
drifts, and had still more difficulty than before in getting out of them.  I had tumbled into
a very soft one far over my head, and had to fight, and scratch, and burrow for a long time
before I could extricate myself, and became more exhausted than at any other time during the
night.  I only ventured to take my brandy very sparingly, wishing to husband it as much as
possible, and there was but a very tiny drop left.  My hands, as I have said, were so numbed
with cold as to be nearly useless.  I had the greatest difficulty in holding the flask, or
in eating snow for refreshment, and could hardly get my hands to my mouth for the masses of
ice which had formed upon my whiskers, and which were gradually developed into a long crystal
beard, hanging half way to my waist.  Icicles likewise had formed about my eyes and eyebrows,
which I frequently had to break off, and my hair had frozen into a solid block of ice.  After
the loss of my hat, my hair must, I suppose, have become filled with snow, while I was overhead
in the drifts.  Probably this was partially melted by the warmth of my head, and subsequently
converted into ice by the intense frost.  Large balls of ice also formed upon my cuffs, and
underneath my knees, which encumbered me very much in walking, and I had continually to break
them off.  I tried to supply the place of my hat by tying my handkerchief over my head, but
found that by no possible effort could I make a knot, and that I could only keep it on my head
by holding the corners between my teeth.  It was equally impossible to refasten my overcoat,
only a thin tweed (for I had dressed lightly, in expectation of hard exercise), which had become
unbuttoned in my last fall.  It may seem absurd to mention it, but the cravings of hunger grew
so keen, stimulated as they were by the cold and the great exertion, that it actually occurred
to me whether I could eat one of my old dogskin gloves.  I was, however, deterred from making
the attempt, partly by the prospect of its toughness, and partly by the fear of greater injury
to my hands from frost bite, if they were deprived of their last covering.  My exhaustion was
so great that I fell down every two or three steps, and the temptation to give in and lie down
in the snow became almost irresistible, and had to be struggled against with every power of
mind and body.  I endeavoured to keep constantly before me the certain fact, that if sleep
once overcame me I should never wake again in this life. The night seemed interminably long.
Again and again I tried to calculate the time, but always came to the same conclusion, that
many hours must elapse before the return of daylight.  The wind had gone down, and the stillness
became so oppressive, that I often spoke aloud for the sake of hearing my own voice, and to
ascertain that the cold, which was intense, had not deprived me of the power of speech.  The
hares still sported and burrowed on the hill sides, but excepting these there were no signs
of life whatever.

Never did shipwrecked mariner watch for the morning more anxiously than did I through that
weary, endless night, for I knew that a glimpse of the distance in any one direction would
enable me to steer my course homewards.  Day dawned at last, but hope and patience were to
be yet further tried, for a dense fog clung to the face of the hill, obscuring everything but
the objects close at hand.  Furthermore, I discovered that I was rapidly becoming snow blind.
My eyes, which had been considerably injured already by the sharp sleet of the evening before,
were further affected by the glare of the snow, and I was fast losing all distinctness of vision.
I first learned the extent of this new calamity when endeavouring, with the earliest light,
to look at my watch.  It was a work of great difficulty to get it out of my pocket; and when
this was done, I found that I could not tell the face from the back.  The whole thing was hazy
and indistinct, and I can only describe it as looking like an orange seen through a mist. 
Such sight as remained rapidly became all confusion as regarded the form, colour, and proportion
of objects.  Again and again I thought I saw before me trees and enclosures, but these, when
I came up to them, invariably turned out to be only portions of gorse bushes projecting through
the snow.  My optical delusions as to colour were perhaps the most remarkable; the protruding
rocks invariably appeared of a strange orange yellow, with black lines along them, producing
a short of tortoise-shell effect.  I took these mysterious appearances at first for dead animals,
ponies or sheep, and touched them to try to ascertain the fact.  My hands, however, were so
utterly devoid of sensation, that they were of no more use than my eyes in identifying objects.
I was therefore quite in the dark as to their nature, till experience proved them to be rocks
with tufts of heather on them.  Owing to my failing eyesight, my falls became very frequent,
and several of them were from heights so great that it would scarcely be believed were I to
attempt to describe them.  I may, however, say, that they were such as perfectly to appal those
who, a few days afterwards, visited the spots where they occurred, and saw the deep impressions
in the snow where I had plunged into it from the rocks above.  One fall especially I well remember.
I had just crossed the ridge of a hill, and saw, as I imagined, close below me a pool covered
with ice, which seemed free from snow.  I thought I would walk across this, and, accordingly,
made a slight jump from the rock on which I stood in order to reach it.  In a moment, however,
I discovered that, instead of on to a pool, I had jumped into empty space.  I must have fallen
on this occasion a considerable distance, but I was caught in a deep snow-drift, so that, although
considerably shaken and bewildered for the moment by what had happened, I was not seriously hurt.

I have been enabled by various circumstances, and by the help of those who followed my tracks
before the snow melted, to make out with tolerable accuracy the course of my wanderings.  Those
who tracked me say that, "If there was one part of the hill more difficult and dangerous than
another, that is the line which Mr. Carr took."  When the morning light first dawned, I could
see that I was walking along the side of a ravine of great depth, and more than usually perpendicular
sides; it was so steep that I could not climb to the top of the ridge and get out of it, and
the snow was in such a very loose, soft state, that I expected every moment it would give way
beneath me, and I should be precipitated into the depths below. The flood season on the Tigris is
at its height about May and continues so till about the end of June. The river gradually falls
in July and August and is at its lowest level during the months of September, October and November.
It rises during the rains in December and January, sometimes as much as four or five feet, and
this keeps the river fairly high during the following two months. In April the river rises
still higher owing to the melting of the snow on the mountains in the north. These are the
normal changes that come as regularly as winter follows autumn. There may be slight variations
such as more rain one winter season than another, for instance, January 1916 was far wetter than
January 1917. There are occasional high floods owing to the rain, and in January 1896 the river
rose eight feet in one night at Baghdad.

The men crowded on to the barges attached to the side of the paddle boats and of course everything
was of interest, everything was new in this, the oldest country in the world. Because Kurnah at
the junction of the Tigris and the Euphrates has the reputation of being the site of the Garden
of Eden, many and various are the jokes which have been made against this most unfortunate of
places by members of the Expeditionary Force, but all amount to the one thing--that Adam and
Eve had very little to lose in being driven out, if it is unchanged since those days.

The belt of Palm trees which so attracted our attention along the banks from the mouth of the
Gulf to Basrah still continues, but they are thinning down very considerably and by the time Kurnah
is reached the belt has no depth at all. There is no question of a halt, no question of a rest,
"Push On" is the order of the day. It may seem somewhat absurd now, but it brings home to one
the eagerness of all to share in the relief of Kut, that the first thing the Colonel did on
landing at Basra was to wire to the Corps Commander at the front asking him to arrange for the
Battalion to follow up the Relieving Column if it had passed Ali Garbi before the Regiment arrived.
Regardless of risk, regardless of orders, urged on by the Colonel, the two steamers bearing
the battalion pushed forward by night as by day for fear of not overtaking the Relieving Column.
The winding of the river seemed interminable to those eager to be at the front, and there is little
to relieve the monotony of the flat plain, save the colouring at dawn and dusk, and the appearance
of a few mahelas floating down stream with their broad sails outspread to catch the north-west
wind.

At Kurnah the Palm belt ceases and only at odd places and around villages
are trees again to be seen.

One cannot fail to be struck with the enormous possibilities the country offers for cultivation
if only properly irrigated. Thousands and thousands of acres of the best of soil, and everywhere
as flat as Salisbury Plain.

We now begin to see small Arab villages
along the banks of the river; they look dirty and dilapidated. The
Arabs look filthy, but some have very pleasant faces, and both men
and women impress one with their strength. This campaign is of course
not only an eye-opener to them but also a God-send. They beg and steal
on every possible occasion and on going through the narrows a lot
of amusement is obtained in bargaining with them.  I
had observed before that one was getting loose, but was unable to do anything to it from the
numbness of my hands; and after struggling out of a deep drift previous to reascending the
hill, I found that I had left this boot behind.  There was nothing for it but to go on without,
and as my feet were perfectly numbed from the cold, and devoid of feeling, I did not experience
any difficulty or pain on this account.  That boot was afterwards found on a ledge of rock
near the waterfall.  I soon after lost the other one, or rather, I should say, it came off,
and I could not get it on again, so I carried it in my hand some time, but lost it in one of
my many severe falls.  The fact of the loss of my boots has astonished all those who have heard
of it, and I believe has excited more comment than any other part of my adventure.  I have
even heard of its being a matter of fierce dispute, on more than one occasion, whether laced
boots could come off in this way.  They do not seem to have become unlaced, as the laces were
firmly knotted, but had burst in the middle, and the whole front of the boot had been stretched
out of shape from the strain put upon it whilst laboriously dragging my feet out of deep drifts
for so many hours together, which I can only describe as acting upon the boots like a steam-power
boot-jack.

And so for hours I walked on in my stockings without inconvenience.  Even when I trod upon
gorse bushes, I did not feel it, as my feet had become as insensible as my hands.  It had occurred
to me now that I might be in the Carding Mill valley, and that I would steer my course on that
supposition.  It was fortunate that I did so, for I was beginning to think that I could not
now hold out much longer, and was struggling in a part where the drifts were up nearly to my
neck, when I heard what I had thought never to hear again--the blessed sound of human voices,
children's voices, talking and laughing, and apparently sliding not very far off.  I called
to them with all my might, but judge of my dismay when sudden and total silence took the place
of the merry voices I had so lately heard!  I shouted again and again, and said that I was
lost, but there was no reply.  It was a bitter disappointment, something like that of the sailor
shipwrecked on a desert island, who sees a sail approaching and thinks that he is saved, when
as he gazes the vessel shifts her course and disappears on the horizon, dashing his hopes to
the ground.  It appeared, as I learned afterwards, that these children saw me, though I could
not see them, and ran away terrified at my unearthly aspect. Doubtless the head of a man protruding
from a deep snow drift, crowned and bearded with ice like a ghastly emblem of winter, was a
sight to cause a panic among children, and one cannot wonder that they ran off to communicate
the news that "there was the bogie in the snow."  Happily, however, for the bogie, he had noticed
the direction from which these voices came, and struggling forward again, I soon found myself
sufficiently near to the Carding Mill to recognise the place, blind as I was.  A little girl
now ventured to approach me, as, true to the instincts of her nature, the idea dawned upon
her that I was no goblin of the mountains, no disagreeable thing from a world beneath popped
up through the snow, but a real fellow-creature in distress.  I spoke to her and told her that
I was the clergyman of Ratlinghope, and had been lost in the snow on the hill all night.  As
she did not answer at once, I suppose she was taking a careful observation of me, for after
a few moments she said, "Why, you look like Mr. Carr of Wolstaston."  "I am Mr. Carr," I replied;
whereupon the boys, who had previously run away, and, as I imagine, taken refuge behind the
girl, came forward and helped me on to the little hamlet, only a few yards distant, where some
half dozen cottages are clustered together round the Carding Mill.

I was saved, at any rate, from immediate peril, though I fully expected that serious illness
must follow from my violent exertions and long exposure.  I was saved at all events from the
death of lonely horror against which I had wrestled so many hours in mortal conflict, and scarcely
knew how to believe that I was once more among my fellow-men, under a kindly, hospitable roof.
God's hand had led me thither.  No wisdom or power of my own could have availed for my deliverance,
when once my sight was so much gone.  The Good Shepherd had literally, in very deed, led the
blind by a way that he knew not to a refuge of safety and peace.

The good kind people at the Carding Mill, you may be sure, soon gathered round me in sympathising
wonder, and I was quickly supplied with such comforts as they could give.  I told them that
I had had scarcely anything to eat since breakfast the day before (as I had been too much hurried
to eat my luncheon before starting to Ratlinghope), and so tea and bread and butter were at
once provided. The journey up is of interest as none have been here before, and everything is new.
Both sides of the river the banks are covered with palm trees, stretching inland for distances
varying from 500 yards to three miles, and after that all is desert. We pass Abadan on our right
where the pipes of the oil fields belonging to the Anglo-Persian Oil Coy. reach the river from Ahwaz.
It has been said that the Mesopotamian Campaign was started in the first place to protect these
oil-fields.
  They also discovered that the middle finger of my right hand was terribly
lacerated, and that the skin was completely stripped off the back of it.  This I knew to be
a much more serious affair, as the frost had evidently got fast hold of it, and I thought it
very likely that I should lose it.  This, however, seemed a very trifling matter to me then.
Had it been my right arm I should have thought nothing of it, after so marvellous an escape.
I was provided at the Carding Mill with a hat, boots, and dry stockings; and having rested
about a quarter of an hour, set out again to Church Stretton, about a mile distant.  A man
from the cottage came with me, and gave me his arm, and with this assistance I accomplished
the walk with comparative ease.  I was so anxious to get home, that I almost felt as if I could
have walked the whole way, though I do not suppose that I could really have done so, my home
being rather more than five miles off. Arrived at the town, I sent my companion for medical
assistance, and myself made my way to the Crown Inn.  I could discern large objects sufficiently
to find my way along the street, though all was blurred and indistinct, and the admission of
light to my eyes was beginning to cause me extreme pain.  I ordered a fly immediately to take
me as far as possible on my road home.  No vehicle of any description had been along the turnpike
road that day, and it was very doubtful how far a fly could go, so it was arranged that we
should be accompanied by a man on a saddle horse, that I might ride when the fly could go no
further, as I knew that, under the most favourable circumstances, the last mile and a half
of the road to Wolstaston would be inaccessible to wheels.

Of course my adventure excited great interest at the Crown Hotel, when it was fully understood
what had happened to me. He sees an order for ten pounds; and retires as full of admiration as
he had approached full of anxiety.

"Now, what is the next thing?" This time a porter is summoned. He
comes forward as if he expected rebuke. "Oh! I have got such a complaint
reported against you.  My good friends at the hotel discovered that my clothes were very wet, for they
had been frozen before and were now thawed, so I was dressed up in the landlord's garments.
The effect must have been very ludicrous, for he was a much stouter man than I was at any time,
and now I had shrunk away to nothing.  It will not therefore be wondered at that people when
they saw me declared they should not have known who I was.

The surgeon having come and dressed my finger, and warned me to keep away from the fire and
hot water, and having prescribed some hot brandy and water, I started in my fly on my homeward
journey.  Very slow was our progress.  We had taken spades with us, and many times the driver
and the man who accompanied him had to dig a way for the fly to get through.  Most trying was
the long delay thus caused to a man who knew that in his own home he must probably be reckoned
among the dead; but there was no help for it, and at last Leebotwood was reached, the place
where the lane to Wolstaston turned off from the main road, and where I was to leave the fly,
and, as I hoped, ride home.

The Post Office is at Leebotwood, and having given orders there that any letters coming from
my house should be stopped, I was helped on my horse, and, accompanied by the man, began to
ascend the hill.  I had not gone a hundred yards, when it became evident that it would be impossible
to ride far, and that I should be obliged to walk again, so the horse was sent back to Leebotwood
by a man whom we met, and I started again on my own feet. The Commonwealth submitted its case,
not on the testimony of any eye witnesses but on the depositions of one Levi Waller who read Turner's
Confession[17] and Colonel Trezevant the committing magistrate corroborated it by referring to
the same confession. Turner introduced no testimony in defense and his counsel made no argument
in his behalf. He was promptly found guilty and sentenced to be hanged Friday, November 11,
1831, twelve days after his capture.  This news reached the village about half an hour before I could get
up there myself, and as may be supposed there was great rejoicing.  So completely had all hope
of my safety been given up, that to my people it seemed almost like a resurrection from the dead.

They had made the greatest efforts to find me.  Twice a party had gone up the hill on the Sunday
night to the limit of the enclosed ground, and stayed there calling and shouting, till, as
one of them said to me, they felt that if they had stayed there another ten minutes, they would
have been frozen to death.  The second time they went up that night, they actually got on to
the open moorland some two or three hundred yards, but here they were in imminent danger of
being lost themselves.  One of them indeed declared that he could not return, and would have
been lost had not his companions insisted on his struggling back with them.  Human effort could
do no more, and they made their toilsome way home prostrated with fatigue.

It was a fearful moment, they tell me, when the Rectory house was closed up for the night,
the shutters fastened, and curtains drawn, with the fate of its master unknown.  The helpless
watchers could only wait and count the weary hours, keeping food hot for the wanderer, who
they feared would never return, and unable till the morning to plan any further efforts for
his rescue.  The awful wind raged on, sometimes assuming to the ears of the excited listeners
the sound of rolling wheels and horses' feet, startling them into expectation, though they
knew that the tramp of an army would have fallen noiseless on that depth of snow. I now saw a veritable
gold mine before me and he too was willing to back his knowledge against mine. We decided to
refer the matter to the Colonel, so when he came in we asked his
opinion.

The Colonel was not only a gallant soldier but he was a cautious
Scotchman.  Morning came and the men prepared
to resume their almost hopeless search once more. They started, about twenty strong, armed
with spades and shovels, and determined first of all to cut their way to Ratlinghope, thinking
that perhaps I had remained there all night.  They worked with all their might, but the snow
was deeper than ever, and their progress was laborious and very slow.  Though they had started
as soon as it was light in the morning, they did not reach Ratlinghope till noon, and then
their last hope was dashed to the ground, for they heard that I had started the previous afternoon,
though pressed to remain in the village for the night.  Great was the consternation of the
Ratlinghope people when they heard the news.  They knew the hill well, and said with one consent,
"If Mr. Carr was on the Long Mynd last night, he is a dead man."  This conviction too was strengthened
by the sad fact, that that very morning the dead body of a man, whom we all knew well, had
been found in the road frozen to death, not more than one hundred and fifty yards from a small
hamlet in the parish of Ratlinghope, known as "The Bridges."  Poor Easthope, for such was his
name, was a journeyman shoemaker by trade.  He owned a few ponies which were on the hill, and
he had been looking after these on the Sunday.  I suppose he was much exhausted by this, but
he had safely reached his daughter's house in the evening, which he subsequently left to go
to the place where he worked, no great distance off. That he was finally captured was more the
result of accident than of design. A dog belonging to some of Nat Turner's acquaintances scented
some meat in the cave and stole it one night while Turner was out. Shortly after, two Negroes,
one the owner of the dog, were hunting with the same animal. The dog barked at Turner who had
just gone out to walk.

Thinking himself discovered, Turner begged these men to conceal his whereabouts, but they, on
finding out who it was, precipitately fled. Concluding from this that they would betray him, Turner
left his hiding place, but he was pursued almost incessantly. At one time he was shot at by
one Francis near a fodder stack in a field, but happening to fall at the moment of the discharge,
the contents of the pistol passed through the crown of his hat.  I need not say that they
failed to discover any trace of me, and about three o'clock in the afternoon, worn out and
exhausted, they returned to the Rectory with the worst tidings.  "He must be dead," they said,
"he must be dead; it is not possible that any human creature could have lived through such
a night."  And it was upon the receipt of these tidings that the letters were sent off which
I so fortunately succeeded in stopping.  Half-an-hour after, the news came that I was returning,
and in another half-hour I was at home.  This was between four and five o'clock in the afternoon,
rather more than twenty- seven hours from the time I had left Wolstaston.

My friends tell me that had they not known who it was, they would scarcely have recognised
me.  Dressed in another man's clothes, exceedingly thin, with eyes fearfully bloodshot, and
fingers stiff and shrunken, the middle finger more resembling a dead stick, they say, with
the gray and wrinkled bark on, than the living member of a human body, this is scarcely to
be wondered at.  I was glad to go to bed at once, and to have my feet and hands well rubbed
with snow.  This, it should be well known, is the only thing to be done in cases of frost bite.
Had I put them in hot water, I should in all probability have lost my fingers and toes; they
would have sloughed off.  I know of several cases where this has happened; indeed, I heard
of one quite lately, for the gardener of a friend of mine in Warwickshire had his hands frost-bitten
while throwing the snow off the roof of a house during this last winter, and injudiciously
putting them into hot water, the result has been that he has lost the ends of all his fingers,
to the first joint.  In my case, I am thankful to say I knew better than to do this, and by
the use of cold water and continued friction have succeeded in restoring my hands in a great
measure.  They have still not nearly as much sensation in them as before, but this will return
with time.  During the last few weeks, gorse pricks have been working out of my hands and feet
and legs by hundreds, though at first, from the numbness of the skin, I was quite unconscious
of them. For the Turk had intended to hold this line of entrenchments, of which the Redoubt was the
key, and the main defence of the two bridges, throughout the summer, and he was not going to
surrender the position without further struggle.

Such are the details of my "Night in the Snow," and my most wonderful preservation through
it and the following day.  I trust that no one who may chance to read these pages will ever
be placed in a similar position; but should it so happen, I hope that the remembrance of my
adventure will occur to them; for surely it teaches, as plainly as anything can, that even
in the most adverse circumstances no one need ever despair; and shows how an individual of
no unusual physical powers may, by God's help, resist the overwhelming temptation to sleep
which is usually so fatal to those who are lost in the snow.

LORIMER AND CHALMERS, PRINTERS, EDINBURGH.

