AN APPEAL TO THE BRITISH NATION,

ON THE Humanity and Policy

OF FORMING A NATIONAL INSTITUTION,

FOR THE PRESERVATION OF LIVES AND PROPERTY

FROM SHIPWRECK.

BY SIR WILLIAM HILLARY, BARONET.

AUTHOR OF "A PLAN FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF A STEAM LIFE BOAT AND FOR THE EXTINGUISHMENT OF FIRE
AT SEA;" "SUGGESTIONS FOR THE IMPROVEMENT AND EMBELLISHMENT OF THE METROPOLIS," AND "A SKETCH
OF IRELAND IN 1824."

THIRD EDITION.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR GEO. B. WHITTAKER, AVE-MARIA-LANE.

1825.

TO

THE KING.

SIRE,

From Your Majesty's exalted station as Sovereign of the greatest maritime power on earth, and
from the ardent zeal with which You have graciously extended Your Royal patronage to every
measure which could promote the welfare and the glory of the British Navy, I have presumed,
with the utmost deference, to dedicate the following pages to Your Majesty.

With the most dutiful respect, I have the honour to subscribe myself,

SIRE,

Your Majesty's Most devoted subject and servant,

WILLIAM HILLARY.

INTRODUCTION

TO THE

SECOND EDITION[A].

The few pages of which the present edition is composed, were principally written under the
circumstances there stated, which had forcibly called my attention to the fatal effects of
those ever-recurring tempests, which scatter devastation and misery round our coasts, where
the veteran commander and his hardy crew, with their helpless passengers of every age and station
in life, are left wretchedly to perish from the want of that succour which it has become my
object earnestly to solicit for these destitute victims of the storm.

Another winter has scarcely yet commenced, and our coasts are spread over with the shattered
fragments of more than two hundred vessels, which, in one fatal tempest, have been stranded
on the British shores, attended with an appalling havoc of human life, beyond all present means
to ascertain its extent, besides the loss of property to an enormous amount. And shall these
fearful warnings also be without avail? Shall we still close our eyes on conviction, until
further catastrophes wring from us those reluctant efforts, which ought to spring spontaneously
from a benevolent people? With the most ample means for the rescue of thousands of human beings
from a watery grave, shall we still leave them to their fate? Shall we hear unmoved of this
widely-spread destruction, and not each contribute to those exertions, to which the common
charities of human nature, and the certainty of the direful evils we might avert, and the sufferings
we might assuage, ought to incite us to lend our utmost aid?

The conflicting fury of the elements, the darkness of night, the disasters of the sea, and
the dangers of the adjacent shores, but too frequently combine to place the unhappy mariner
beyond the power of human relief. But if all cannot be rescued, must all therefore be left
to perish? If every effort cannot be attended with success, must not any attempt be made to
mitigate these terrible calamities, which bring home the evil to our very doors, and force
conviction on us by their desolating effects, and by the destruction of hundreds of our countrymen,
whose wretched remains perpetually strew our shores?--Whilst we pause, they continue to perish;
whilst we procrastinate, the work of destruction pursues its course; and each delay of another
winter, in the adoption of measures more commensurate with the extent of these deplorable events,
is attended with the sacrifice--perhaps of a thousand human lives.

Even were the preservation of the vessels and their cargoes alone the objects of our care,
the present want of all system for such a purpose is, in its consequences, as lavish of property
as it is of life; and from the vast amount now annually lost on our shores, infinitely more
might unquestionably be preserved to the commercial interests of the country, by the establishment
of the Institution proposed, than its support would cost to the nation on its most extended scale.

Actuated by these impressions, I have sought by every argument to rouse the dormant energies
of a brave and a humane people to the rescue of their fellow-creatures; and through the ardent
zeal, the generous enterprise, and the liberal bounty of a great nation, to awaken every feeling
which can stimulate to the effort, and provide every means which can insure its success.

In our great insular empire, almost all individuals, from the most exalted and powerful in
the land to the lowly and obscure, are at some period of their lives induced, by their various
avocations and pursuits, to leave their own coasts. The brave seamen, the gallant soldiers,
and the various subjects of these realms, of all ranks and degrees, are to be found traversing
every stormy sea, and exposed to peril on every dangerous shore. This is not then an object
for which the great and the affluent are called on for the relief of the humble and the destitute
alone--the cause is individual, national, and universal, perhaps beyond any other which has
ever yet been addressed to a country for support. It appeals equally to personal interest and
to national policy--to private benevolence and to public justice; and each who thus extends
the benefits of his efforts and his bounty to his countrymen and to mankind, may also be contributing
to the future safety of his family, his friends, or himself.

In the pursuit of this arduous undertaking, I have felt it to be a duty I owed to the cause
of which I have thus become an advocate, to offer my views to those of every class and department,
who, from their humanity, their talents, or their station, are the most calculated, or the
best enabled, to promote this great object of national benevolence.

I have dedicated this cause, with all deference, to a most gracious sovereign; I have addressed
myself in its behalf to his ministers; and I have appealed to various distinguished individuals,
to almost all the great national and benevolent institutions in the kingdom, to the commercial
and shipping interests, and to the public at large, for the support of an object well worthy
the deep attention of the greatest naval power of the present or of any former age, for the
rescue of her numerous seamen and subjects from one of the most frequent and most awful of
all the various calamities which desolate the human race.

From the same motives, I have most respectfully submitted this national and international system
to the sovereigns and governments of the principal maritime powers of Europe and of America;
and I avail myself with pleasure of the present occasion, to express my grateful acknowledgments
for the promptitude with which several of their ministers, resident at this court, have transmitted
it to their respective governments.

Encouraged to persevere in my endeavours, by the flattering support and approbation of many
distinguished and enlightened characters, I am induced to hope that the day is not remote,
when this contemplated institution may be established on a permanent basis, by the united energies
of a noble and a benevolent nation, to whose support such a cause has never yet been addressed
in vain.

The interest which this subject has already excited, has induced me to commit another edition
of my pamphlet to the press; whilst the magnitude and vital importance of these objects, to
our country and to mankind,--on our own and every foreign shore,--in the present and every
future age,--will, I trust, best plead my excuse as a retired individual, and acquit me from
the charge of presumption, in having had the temerity to submit my views to the consideration
of so many illustrious personages, and for the earnest solicitude with which I have addressed
myself to the humanity, the benevolence, and the justice of the British nation.

10th November, 1823.

FOOTNOTE:

[A] The introduction to the second edition and the following pamphlet were published previously
to the formation of "the Royal National Institution for the Preservation of Life from Shipwreck,"
which it originally projected, as will be obvious by reference to dates and to the accompanying
Appendix.

AN APPEAL,

&c.

For many years, and in various countries, the melancholy and fatal shipwrecks which I have
witnessed, have excited a powerful interest in my mind for the situation of those who are exposed
to these awful calamities; but the idea of the advantages which would result from the establishment
of a national institution, for the preservation of human life from the perils of the sea, first
suggested itself to me during my residence on a part of the coast, often exposed to the most
distressing scenes of misery, and where the dreadful storms of the last autumn prevailed with
unusual violence.

On some occasions, it has been my lot to witness the loss of many valuable lives, under circumstances,
where, had there been establishments previously formed for affording prompt relief, and encouragement
given to those who might volunteer in such a cause, in all probability the greater part would
have been rescued from destruction. 

Anyway, on the day the second way to win something with the letters is the only way. The princes
are not lords of life and property, is just a tyrant, nice or not nice, which might have to protect
the public wealth to the poets and writers, and most natural is to make them pay for the public work,
for no be confused by any the old-style patronage of the princes with what is now called officially
protected. This by many guarantees are given and most exquisite precautions are taken, has all
disadvantages of the other two modes of protection. Regarding low subservience to the lowest,
because it is not already flatter the Medici or the distinguished and sympathetic Duke Weimar,
but the Minister, perhaps uncouth and obscure, the Director, may lay, perhaps, perhaps the sad
business officer. The courtly elegance, the beauties of style, groomed composure, that to gain
the protection of the Court is required, are here in abundance. For all of which understand that
this official protection granted under prosaic records, literature only born sickly and emaciated,
as raised in greenhouse plant: shoddy books, elevation and freedom of spirit in the poster, and also
deprived of that that distinction and aristocratic neatness, which is always a merit, with no other
more substantial.

So I tend to believe me it is useless if not harmful in the extreme,
protection official literature, and in particular to the fun, and
just understand that protect and subsidize the State certain products
so deep, subtle and dark, which can be reasonably assumed they do
not have a nation, not even half educated, with an audience that over
one hundred people, for example, a math book sublime, bristling with
formulas, symbols and figures and crowded with figures, mysterious
to the layman.

The rest, or say to yourself novels, poetry, history, politics, and even philosophy, the public
must pay, and if you do not pay, better not be written or you write for nothing.

You can almost say that this is the case in Spain.

Here the question is reborn. Is this a bad or a good? I, despite my hesitations, and Despite the personal
interest that leads me to believe otherwise, I think is good.

Anyone who has or imagine having something pilgrim, beautiful and
new to say, surely not it is silent, he says, even if not paid.

To say it is quite capable of paying, if you have money. Is there more charm than listen to
us or we read?

Relied on this spell, he drew Leopardi the funny and lucrative project for a company or society
of listeners, who would pay to hear the authors. The philosopher who invented a system, the
seer who perceives the numen waving his soul, and the poet who injures estrus and spurs with invincible
spirit, written their philosophies, their poems and visions, but they are worth nothing. The
write time will really priesthood some great devotion and sacred will not be taken by trade.
Be written few books middle. Only write some good.

And they write many terrible, by the hallucinating from the glory, but it does not, because the
river of forgetfulness in the drag current, some have come to light
and while no footprint.

That the books are not worth money will be that all those men of understanding,
count for something, do a thousand useful things and not write.

Only the truly written inspired lovers of glory, the pierced and impelled by oestrus, those something
big and new to say, or absolutely good for nothing, and, as has often literary career, becomes
a writer, desperate not to be otherwise and for consolation their misfortune.

I infer from this that do not reflect those straight, full of terror that has both lawyer in Spain,
say they have become difficult races so that many take office or
used in more humble necessities, because our interests aristocratic
noblemen or not never consent to it, and if you study something, however
little, today becomes author when not study anything, and do not expect
gifts and favors of the muses, as many do not have studied at the
universities, will become financier, and things get worse.

A poet, however perversely, is to do less harm than any candidate for finance minister or banker
or director of the Treasury.


Wretched, exhausted, and in the last extremity of danger, on whom does their rescue devolve?
to what body or class of men, or to which of our numerous departments, does it now become an
honourable and an imperative duty to afford them assistance in this their utmost need?--where
are the national funds for such an object, to supply ample means for the hazardous attempt,
to reward the brave efforts of those who succeed, or to relieve the destitute families of those
who perish in so honourable a cause?

The melancholy catastrophe closed, every human being on board having perished, or having quitted
their shattered vessel in despair; the laws and usages of recompense are clearly defined;--salvage
for the property preserved, in proportion to its amount.

But in the dreadful crisis between these two extremes, does one law of the land, or one National
Institution, hold out the established claim to certain reward for a life saved?

In the nineteenth century, surrounded by every improvement and institution which the benevolent
can suggest, or the art of man accomplish for the mitigation or prevention of human ills, will
it for a moment be capable of belief, that there does not, in all our great and generous land,
exist one National Institution which has for its direct object the rescue of human life from
shipwreck?

The protection of property is in every stage a subject of legislation and of care;--the rescue
of life from shipwreck has never yet been adopted as a national and a legislative object.

With the exception of the recompenses voluntarily given by the liberal institution of Lloyd's,
the very few associations scattered thinly on the coasts, and the valuable inventions and gallant
efforts of those brave and enlightened individuals who do honour to their country, our shipwrecked
seamen are left in this awful situation, to the spontaneous exertions of enterprise and humanity,
the chance of the moment, or the mercy of the winds and waves;--or rather let us say, to a
greater mercy, and a higher Power.

It may be thought that this picture is overcharged; but unhappily, I believe it will be found
too faithfully correct.

I am firmly convinced, that these appalling facts have never yet reached the great majority
of the nation; but the veil once withdrawn, the honour, the justice, and the humanity of Britain
will be deeply compromised, if the evil is not promptly and effectually redressed;--not any
human means should be spared to atone for the past, and to alleviate the future. Maybe mutter, as he murmured the mob
on board the ships on the eve of that happy and memorable dawn in which first appeared to the
frightened eyes of Europeans the smiling and fertile shores the New World. Perhaps murmur as
the Israelites murmured in the wilderness because got to see the Promised Land, and why the
Manna and the quails that gave his Moses not cost anything, and the millions who gives us our
Moses cost a lot.

Anyway, anyway, I venture to publish this devilish Meditation. After all, I am Spartan to kill
my children sickly, but has to be Spartan and have to be Spanish
Spartans swallowing all black sauce, if things go well.

Consider the pious reader that this meditation is like a hobby and
nothing more, and is truly peep that sick case required.

Read my meditation on the money as he reads a book cooking when hungry, and find some comfort
in my meditation and healing.

If by that, which is not expected, my meditation is not very bad,
maybe I would encourage I write another on contributions and loans
in Spain, always saying that says nothing but vulgar and what is in
the crowd, without getting into Honduras.

THE WRITERS IN SPAIN

AND PRAISE OF SANTA TERESA (b).

Nothing could be flatter and please me more than the task you have
given me the beautiful answer speech we just heard.

Its author, today received within this corporation, is attached to me by ties of kinship, and,
what is more estimable and agreeable, friendship a long time unbroken so far and promises not
ever be.

(B) Address read at the Royal Spanish Academy, the March 30, 1879, at the reception Conde de
Casa-Valencia.

If the state of mind, that this affection is born, does not distort my view, inclined to benevolence,
I dare say that the literary work, the new Academic has read, confirms the reasons for electing
you had, being happy example of sobriety, smoothness and simple elegance of style and model of judicious
criticism fulfilled.

But, however much it is worth his speech, the Earl of Home-Valencia
had displayed before other more titles claim to aspire to a seat between
you.

Not infrequently I have discussed with him about a very important point in the history of all
literature, and particularly the Spanish, today. Fundábase our dispute in this assertion, we took for
granted: in our Spain just have the incentive writer profit, or is it ruin the incentive should
not be assumed that he is not the love of glory who encourages writing.

The dispute was therefore whether such a deficiency, inefficiency
or lack of incentive was good or bad for literature.

Since I did not come here to make public confession of my sins, I
will not say if I hesitate character; but I confess that, except in
certain issues of prime importance that always hold the same opinion,
tenacity bordering on my result, soil in many others, I consider secondary,
with too much hesitation and we never decide, ranging from the most
opposite views.

Perceive or imagine what I perceive there are many arguments for and against, and I already
am requested by some, and others drawn in opposite directions.

In this case of low-paid points I can think a thousand times more than others, so pitiful fluctuation.

I
waive the interest as a writer makes me wish that the books are sold to found in half compose
honored to make a living. And free my opinion of this seduction, in short sentences say what the
two views towards presents to my mind.

When I was young, I loved reading a treatise of the celebrated Alfieri,
whose title is The Prince and letters. Nothing seemed more reasonable
than what is stated there. Yet, author's time, poets, philosophers,
making up stories, all writers, In short, they had little with the
crowd, and enjoyed expected or paid for their work a mogul, monarch,
tyrant or Mr. splendid, that protected them. Against this furious
Alfieri, eloquence declaims severe breaks in streams of invective
and indignation. To please the prince, mogul or tyrant, who is served
and who all expected or fear, flattery matter, often concealing the
truth more helpful to mankind and to use a style without nerve.

From the peculiarly interesting nature of this Institution, it is to be presumed, that this
part of their duty would be found easy in its progress, and successful in its results.

When we see long columns filled with the first names in the country, with large sums placed
opposite to them, for objects temporary in their nature, and small in importance compared with
the present, which contemplates the rescue of thousands of human beings now in existence, and
an incalculable number yet unborn, from one of the most tremendous of all perils,--who is there,
to whom such an Institution once became known, that would refuse his aid? It is a cause which
extends from the palace to the cottage, in which politics and party cannot have any share,
and which addresses itself with equal force to all the best feelings of every class in the state.

The names of every branch of the Royal Family are to be found at the head of all the benevolent
Institutions of the empire.

From the nobility and gentry large donations and subscriptions may naturally be expected. The
clergy of every class will, no doubt, be foremost in the cause of humanity. To the whole body
of the navy, the marines, and to the army, who, in the prosecution of their professional duties,
encounter so many of the dangers of the sea, such an appeal will never be made in vain. Can
it be supposed that there is one East India Director, one member of Lloyd's, an under-writer,
a merchant, a shipowner, or commander in the India or merchants' service, from whom a subscription,
liberal in proportion to his means, will not be obtained? Nor will the generous aid of any
class of society, I am persuaded, be wanting for such a purpose; and as a stimulus to the whole,
by example in their donations, and by the widely-extended circle of their influence, the British
females of every station in life will, I am convinced, particularly distinguish themselves
in aid of this cause.

From these opinions, which I so confidently entertain of the humanity and liberality of the
British people, I rest firmly persuaded, that the most ample means will be easily and speedily
obtained for every possible expenditure which can attend the objects of this Institution.

When the funds shall have been once established, the duty of the Committee will be, to have
the permanent superintendence and regulation of their finance under the proper control of the
whole society.

A second Board, or Committee, should be formed from the most experienced and enlightened officers
of the navy, seamen, engineers, and scientific men, for the purpose of carrying the direct
objects of the Institution into effect.

One of the most important duties of this Committee will be to combine, in a clear, concise,
and well-digested system, the result of the joint knowledge and experience of the whole body,
in plain and simple language, divested as much as possible of technical phraseology, and capable
of being understood by every individual. This code of instruction should comprise the best
and most prompt measures to be adopted in every sort of danger to which a vessel can be exposed,
and on whatever kind of coast, in order that the most effectual assistance may be given, with
the least possible loss of time, and with such means as in remote situations can most probably
be obtained; and the Committee should be requested to report, from time to time, the result
of those measures which they had found from experience to be most successful; whilst every
friend to such a cause, who might suggest an invention or a means to facilitate these objects,
would be certain, that in this Committee his plans would receive the most attentive consideration
from those who would possess the power and the inclination to carry them into effect.

It will be desirable that this Committee should suggest the most eligible plans for permanent
establishments in all sea-ports, road-steads, and resorts for shipping, and particularly on
remote, wild, and exposed parts of the coast, where lifeboats, anchors, cables, hawsers, and
the beneficial inventions of those enlightened and highly patriotic officers, Sir William Congreve,
Captains Marryat, Manby, Dansey, Mr. Trengrouse, and various other meritorious individuals,
should be kept in constant readiness for use, with every means for the preservation of lives
in danger, and the assistance of vessels in distress, according to the nature of the coasts
on which the respective depôts may be established. The purchase, safe custody, and control
over the stores of the Institution, their being deposited in places best situated for instant
issue on every emergency, and always in a state fit for immediate service, are objects which
demand the utmost circumspection and care.

This department is perhaps the most important of the whole--it is the operative; and on its
judicious arrangements, the means of prompt and effectual efforts, the success of the most
hazardous undertakings, the safety of those employed, and the rescue of those in peril, will
unquestionably depend.

For these purposes, as well as every other connected with the Institution, the respective Committees
proposed to be formed, in every port, and on every coast, will be of the most essential use.
The zeal, and other requisite qualities, which the members of such Committees may naturally
be supposed to possess, point them out as the most eligible persons to have the immediate direction
of the measures to be adopted. From them also it is to be expected that the most experienced
in nautical affairs may be selected to command.

To that department under which boats are to go out, and men are to risk their lives, for the
rescue of those who may be in danger, the utmost attention is due: that, when they are so employed,
it shall be under the direction of the most skilful advice which the occasion can afford; that
their boats and equipments shall be such as best to insure their safety; and that the crews
shall be selected from the bravest and most experienced persons who can be found.

To insure order and promptitude on these occasions, where the least delay or indecision may
cause the loss of all opportunity of acting with effect, a previous and, as far as practicable,
a permanent arrangement should be formed. Volunteers should be invited to enrol themselves
from amongst the resident pilots, seamen, fishermen, boatmen, and others, in sufficient numbers
to insure the greatest probability of having every aid at hand, which, in the moment of danger,
may be requisite. Each man should have his department previously assigned, and the whole should
act under their respective leaders.

To these regulations might be added a system of signals, equally available by night or by day,
through which persons on board of vessels in distress could communicate the nature of the assistance
of which they stood in need; and those on shore warn them of any danger, inform them of the
succour they were going to afford, or give them any instructions requisite to their safety.

In addition to these means, a great source of assistance to vessels in distress might be secured
to be at all times within reach, by permanent and judicious arrangements with pilot companies,
steam vessels, anchor vessels, harbour boats, trawl and other fishing boats, which, under proper
indemnities, and for reasonable remuneration, would doubtless at all times contribute their
aid, and act under the regulations of the Institution; it might also be advantageous, on many
parts of the coast, to give premiums to those owners of boats who should have them fitted up
with air tight cases, casks or cork, so as to answer the purpose of life boats, and who should
constantly keep them in that state, ready for immediate service.

At the same time care should be taken not to trammel by unnecessary regulations the spontaneous
efforts of those, who, actuated by a generous ardour, on the emergency of the moment, seize
on the first means which present themselves, and often accomplish their object in a manner
which, to a cooler calculation, would appear impracticable.

To expect a large body of men to enrol themselves, and be in constant readiness to risk their
own lives for the preservation of those whom they have never known or seen, perhaps of another
nation, merely because they are fellow-creatures in extreme peril, is to pay the highest possible
compliment to my countrymen; and that on every coast there are such men, has been fully evinced,
even under the present want of system, when the best means for their purpose are not supplied;
when they are without any certainty of reward; and act under the peculiarly appalling consideration,
that if they perish, they may leave wives, children, and every one destitute who depend on
them for support. What that would prohibit, for example, the Duke of
Weimar Herder, Wieland, Lessing, Goethe and Schiller? I am inclined to think that they said
whatever they wished, and that without fear of losing favor with the monarch who stayed friendly
and generously gave to magnificence, allow me the familiar phrase, were sent to your liking.

He
was not opposed to this general Alfieri was right, but we need to
extend its argument not only the writer who submits to a prince, but
also the writer that public submits.

Whence come to infer that true independence and nobility of the writer is in the very being
of his soul and not the external circumstances of living paid by a merchant prince or a book
that pays so that the public charge.


Nor will I suppose that those whom I have specified are the only persons who will take an active
part on such occasions. There is another class, who, from what I have individually seen, will,
I am certain, become able and zealous leaders,--not only the employed, but the half-pay officers
of the navy, now so widely spread over the coasts of the United Kingdom. Living in retirement
in time of peace, they would not allow their energies to sleep when their brother seamen were
in danger, but come forward with the conscious feeling, that those distinguished characters
who preside over the British navy, would regard such meritorious services as being in the direct
path of honour; and that to rescue a human being from the perils of shipwreck would not be
less acceptable to their country than to subdue her enemies in battle.

The Romans rewarded with the civic crown those who had saved the life of a fellow citizen.
Our late venerable sovereign conferred the baronetage on the gallant Viscount Exmouth, then
Captain Pellew, for his noble and successful efforts, at the extreme hazard of his own life,
to save the crew of an East Indiaman, wrecked at Plymouth, when the situation of every one
on board appeared beyond the reach of human aid.

The whole class of the preventive service, with many departments of the revenue, could not
be more honourably employed, and they must naturally feel that their brave exertions, on such
occasions, would be fully estimated. But among the crowds who shall, no doubt, this noble instinct and the writer who
goes to them, always or almost always brought a certain social stratum, though slight and subtle,
very dense, where the voice is dull and off or the writing stops, without reach the eyes or
without penetrating into the ears of the vulgar or the people that free prejudice and with unerring
candor know just decide what, if the voice or the letter is put at your fingertips.
 

The Spanish are more fans to the tumult of public spectacle that loneliness and retirement,
and more agrees to use the ears to listen, to read eyes creations the mill, where it tends to show,
better than the book in the stage and in the stands. Hence, our Academy choose many of its members
among playwrights and speakers.

In the past there are several that have barely left writings, for lack of time and incentive
to write, but from what little is left easy to track and how much would descry successful in
doing so, if they had zealously devoted to such work clothes writers high that adorned.


In time of war, it might be advisable that a limited number of known, steady, and brave seamen,
who had already distinguished themselves on these occasions, should be protected from the impress,
by belonging to this service. The number need not be large, as the retired veterans of the
navy, and the fishermen on the coast, would constitute the majority to be employed.

The nature and extent of the recompenses for time and trouble, and the reward of those who
hazard their own lives in the rescue of others, would form another important branch of the
Institution for the labours of this Committee.

The qualifications for these rewards naturally form themselves into classes.

First, in case of successful efforts, where persons, at the risk of their own lives, save from
imminent peril those of their fellow-creatures,--it should be established, beyond all doubt,
that they should receive such reward for each life saved, as the Institution, on mature consideration,
may determine. This might be fixed at not less than a certain sum, with power to extend it
to a greater amount, to be decided by the Committee, according to the nature of the case; but,
at all events, to the smallest of these rewards the parties to have an absolute claim, on furnishing
unquestionable evidence of having saved a life.

In many cases of persons rescued from the wreck, saved amongst rocks, or when found washed
by the breakers on shore, particularly on remote coasts, but too often exposed to scenes of
lawless depredation, the parties should equally be entitled to reward.

Where lives are saved, without those employed hazarding their own, they should at least receive
the smaller of the premiums conferred.

Rewards should also be given where every possible effort has been made, though unhappily without
success.

When vessels are actually in distress, proportionate premiums should be given to the first,
second, and other boats which get alongside, and for other assistance.

Remunerations should be given, and every inducement held out, for the prevention of plunder,
and for the preservation of lives and vessels, in every situation of danger to which they may
become exposed.

When a life is saved by a person who had been equally fortunate on a former occasion, his reward
should be larger, and increase progressively for other successful efforts. In case of crime,
the second offence is punished more severely than the first, and the third than the second.
In meritorious acts, it were only sound policy that the rewards should bear a similar proportion.

Where an individual perishes in his attempts to rescue lives from shipwreck, or when assisting
vessels in distress, his wife, children, or aged parents, if dependent on him for support,
should have every relief which it may become practicable to give, and according to the particular
circumstances of the case.

The Institution should also recompense for severe injuries, ascertained to have been unquestionably
sustained in the actual performance of such services.

Ample and general powers should be given to confer rewards for such other acts as the Committee
may consider justly entitled to them.

It might, perhaps, also be worthy the consideration of the Institution at large, whether any
badge or medal conferred on a man who had saved a life from shipwreck at the hazard of his
own, might not have a very powerful effect. Is it possible that the human spirit, for it is fertile, has sufficient workmanship,
new and nice things to say, to fill many volumes, or will be sick of repeats and talk? I confess: to
see this vicious freshness, this intricate jungle or bush books, which are born where they
are paid, I almost accepts that this is not paid or paid wrong to write only the illusion that
watermelon believe geniuses, or those who have something geniuses and can not fail to write.
Will those books and few of them be, as it is to remain, without mixing in the welter of so
much as dull job type.

On the other hand, where no literary worth money, the authors might not be as neat in writing, and
this is a great advantage. Although I disto be infinitely deep wellspring depth although I keep confusing
me with the diffuse deep. And today a serious sin in this, where the books are worth. There Verbigratia,
a History of England, which is taken per model. But not the narrative begins two hundred years
ago. The author died, leaving written in eight volumes of the Tauchnitz edition cited eight years
of more or less than that history. To write it all up today would have been necessary in the author's
facility Tan and the life of Methuselah, to write two hundred volumes. And up to read all a
history that does not read much in a hurry would have to consume the best of his life.

If these reasons do I have to not feel the writer's craft is well paid, there are also disinterested
reasons for wanting it to be. And it's a great weight to consider not manages to write well
and bring forth immortal works with a long meditation and study, but the best works often emerge
suddenly, and the author are produced as by a miracle and if God, writing twenty things wrong
before to target medium to good.

In the fertile land, where wheat is planted and grows well, wheat is born in abundance; but
they are born pernicious weeds and other plants, and yet is no reason that in order to prevent
weeds is born, is to cultivate the ground and not take it good seed. It will come in its day and
season who the feat or weed seed, and start it there born-again,
so that the wheat grow, thrive and expand without drowning.

This, in points, so does criticism.

How far it may be desirable to apply for an act of parliament, or to establish the Institution
into a chartered association, will remain for the general Committee to decide, when the whole
has assumed a distinct form. It is also probable that great advantages might result from the
investigations of a Committee of the House of Commons into the insufficiency of the enactments
and regulations now in force for the preservation of life, and the prevention of plunder, from
vessels which may be wrecked within the jurisdiction of our laws.

I also venture, with deference, to recommend, that other maritime nations should be invited
to form similar establishments, so far as accords with their respective laws and usages, and
to concur in mutual arrangements with Great Britain for the reciprocal aid of the subjects
and vessels of each other.

Nor is the universal adoption of this system more imperatively demanded, by those feelings
which should incite us to afford the most prompt assistance to the people of every country
who may be in danger of shipwreck on our shores, than it is consistent with a wise and enlightened
policy, which should extend our views from our own immediate coasts, to the most remote quarters
of the globe, and to every neighbouring state; more particularly from the entrance of the English
Channel to the frozen regions of the North. And when we recollect the vast commercial fleets
which the enterprise of our merchants adventures into every sea, and during every season; when
more than a thousand sail of British vessels pass the sound of the Baltic each year; ought
we not to bear in mind to what hazards the subjects and vessels of Great Britain are constantly
exposed, on the whole of so extended a coast, and in every stormy and dangerous sea? and shall
we not be wanting to them and to humanity, if we do not endeavour to obtain for our own shipwrecked
countrymen, in every foreign land, the same effectual aid in the hour of danger, which, I doubt
not, it will become one of the proudest objects of this Institution to extend to the vessels
of every nation which may be in distress on the British shores?--Even during the most arduous
prosecution of war, the cause of humanity, and the progress of civilization, would be eminently
promoted by these noble and generous efforts, for the rescue of those, whom the fury of the
elements had divested of all hostile character, and thrown helpless and powerless on a foreign
coast.

Thus would nations be drawn by mutual benefits into more strict bonds of amity during peace,
and thus might the rigours of war be ameliorated, by having one common object of benevolence
remaining; in the exercise of which the jealousies and angry passions incident to a state of
hostility could not have any part with a generous and a high-minded people; whilst the experience
and penetration of liberal and enlightened governments could, without difficulty, form such
arrangements as would prevent that which was intended as a benefit to mankind, from being made
subservient to any political abuse.

My utmost wishes would be accomplished by seeing these international regulations established,
in connexion with one great Institution, to extend to the most remote province of the empire,
on the exalted principle, that wherever the British flag should fly, her seamen should be protected;
and that those who risked their own lives to save their fellow-creatures from the perils of
shipwreck should be honoured and rewarded; whilst every stranger, whom the disasters of the
sea may cast on her shores, should never look for refuge in vain.

DOUGLAS, ISLE OF MAN, 28th Feb. 1823.

APPENDIX.

A year had scarcely elapsed after the first edition of the preceding Pamphlet was committed
to the press, when the great object it recommended was accomplished, with an unanimity and
a promptitude which the irresistible power of such a cause could alone effect, by the establishment
of the Royal National Institution for the Preservation of Life from Shipwreck;--district associations
on a very extended scale have also been formed in the county of Norfolk, and on various other
important parts of the coast, avowedly founded on the plan which this work had projected.

It has therefore become expedient, in the future circulation of this Pamphlet, to add a few
pages, containing authentic statements of those proceedings by which the Institution was organized--how
cordially this measure has been received and adopted, and how much in conformity with that
outline which I had ventured to offer to the consideration of my country, these documents will
best evince.

It will at the same time be seen, that the resolutions of the General Meeting do not extend
to the remuneration of the Salvors of property in cases of shipwreck, where not immediately
connected with the preservation of life, it having been the opinion of the Provisional Committee
that the existing laws had already made such regulations as to render that measure unnecessary.

In reference to those passages which treat of the rewards to be conferred for services which
may be performed, and more particularly as to the relief to be afforded to the destitute families
of those who unhappily may perish in their attempts to preserve the lives of others, it will
be obvious that the extent of such recompenses and relief must of necessity be guided by those
means, which the liberality of the nation may supply--at the same time, I have the utmost satisfaction
in stating the humane declaration of the Institution, that their operations will be limited
only by the amount of those funds which may be placed at their disposal, or the number of cases
calling for assistance; and I most sincerely concur in the confident hope which the Central
Committee express, that the contributions may be so general as not only to give present effect,
but also permanence, to this great national undertaking.

Honoured, as this Institution has been, by the high patronage of the King, and of his illustrious
family--constituted a Royal Institution by his Majesty's gracious command--sanctioned by many
of the most distinguished characters in the church and state, and sustained by the bounty of
a generous nation--it is not for me to have the presumption to offer my acknowledgements, for
that support which the cause of our shipwrecked fellow-creatures has obtained from the sovereign
and the people of this great country. 

I gather everything I said that Spain could now go by the laws of free failed However, because at
last there is no law or rule without exception, and that, unless another law more powerful European
law of affinity, which makes us follow the upward movement of all this great republic or confederation
of nations, the agonies that we could become death. Meanwhile, it is clear to me, and for anyone
who is not blinded by empty theories, Spain now consumes more than it produces. And this, not
only the state but also society. In vain we strive to cover the deficit. It must work harder
or spend much less. It is necessary, above all, do not borrow, do not continue cheating.

Apart from the honor of Spain which has been pilloried and taken to shame recruitment in many
homes, the conditions that give us money are horrific, Jewish, usurious by heroically. Every million
cost us more than four, that if we are nominal may be effective, if by some miracle of Providence
we leave the present misery. Random we contract, we play with our future, so that, if we ever have
improve the taste of fortune, this taste is embittered to the chagrin of duty actually four who gave
us no more than one, to provide a moderate gain of 400 100 in the capital. Meanwhile, the
interest we pay is at least 12 per 100. Maybe we fix for that art to be a 16 or a 18.

Any deal or negotiation to be done, or has been or is being done,
for money, perhaps the sacrifice dissimulate to profane eyes, but
did not diminish.

It is safe that the money we make, and convoluted that the method of take, it must cost us same
or more than the simple and expedient to issue Threes. Transmitted operation the picturesque
language of the common people will always pull the feet of a hanged man.


I have the honour to be,

Sir,

Your most obedient servant,

S. COCK.

No. II.

Proceedings of a preliminary Meeting of Noblemen and Gentlemen, held at the City of London
Tavern, on Thursday, the 12th of February, 1824.

Thomas Wilson, Esq. M.P. was called to the Chair.

Resolved unanimously,

That this Meeting, taking into consideration the frequent loss of human life by shipwreck,
and believing that by the preconcerted exertions of practical men, and the adoption of practical
means, such calamities might often be averted, are of opinion that a National Institution should
be formed (to be supported by voluntary donations and subscriptions) for the preservation of
life in cases of shipwreck on the coasts of the united kingdom; for affording such immediate
assistance to the persons rescued, as their necessities may require; for conferring rewards
on those who preserve their fellow-creatures from destruction; and for granting relief to the
destitute families of any who may unfortunately perish in their attempts to save the lives
of others.

Resolved unanimously,

That, with a view to the formation of such an Institution, a general Meeting of the Nobility,
Gentry, Merchants, Traders, and others, be convened for Wednesday, the 25th instant, at twelve
for one o'clock precisely, or such other day as may be found more convenient.

Resolved unanimously,

That the following be a provisional Committee in the interim, with power to add to their number.

THOMAS WILSON, Esq. M.P. Chairman.

Henry Baring, Esq. M.P. Vice-Admiral Lord Amelius Beauclerk, K.C.B. John Blackburn, Esq. Henry
Blanchard, Esq. John William Buckle, Esq. James Cazenove, jun. Esq. Simon Cock, Esq. Captain
J. W. Deans Dundas, R.N. David C. Guthrie, Esq. Samuel Gurney, Esq. George Hibbert, Esq. Sir
William Hillary, Bart. Samuel Hoare, Esq. George Lyall, Esq. Rev. H. H. Norris. John Clark
Powell, Esq. Joseph Pulley, Esq. John Vincent Purrier, Esq. Christopher Richardson, jun. Esq.
Benjamin Shaw, Esq. Right Honourable Lord Suffield. Christopher Tenant, Esq. Mr. Alderman Thompson,
M.P. William Vaughan, Esq. Joshua Walker, Esq. M.P. Joshua Watson, Esq. Thomas Wilkinson, Esq.
George Frederick Young, Esq.

Resolved unanimously,

That the thanks of this Meeting be given to Sir William Hillary, Bart. for his exertions in
bringing this interesting subject before the Meeting, and for his assistance in its deliberations.

Mr. Wilson having left the chair,

It was resolved unanimously,

That the best thanks of this Meeting be given to Thomas Wilson, Esq. for his able conduct in
the chair, and for his zeal in the support of the objects in contemplation.

No. III.

ROYAL NATIONAL INSTITUTION

FOR

THE PRESERVATION OF LIFE FROM SHIPWRECK.

LONDON, MARCH 4, 1824.

PATRON--THE KING.

Vice-Patrons.

His Royal Highness the Duke of York. His Royal Highness the Duke of Clarence. His Royal Highness
the Duke of Sussex. His Royal Highness the Duke of Cambridge. His Royal Highness the Duke of
Gloucester. His Royal Highness Prince Leopold of Saxe Cobourg.

PRESIDENT--The Earl of Liverpool, K.G.

Vice-Presidents.

His Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury.
His Grace the Archbishop of York.
His Grace the Duke of St. Alban's.
The Most Noble the Marquis of Lansdowne.
The Most Noble the Marquis of Hertford, K.G. Vice-Admiral of Cornwall,
    and of the Coast of Suffolk.
The Most Noble the Marquis of Camden, K.G.
The Right Hon. the Earl Spencer, K.G.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Craven.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Lonsdale, K.G.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Harrowby.
The Right Hon. Earl Brownlow.
The Right Hon. Lord Amelius Beauclerk, K.C.B.
The Right Hon. Lord John Russell, M.P.
The Right Hon. Viscount Torrington.
The Right Hon. Viscount Melville, K.T.
The Right Hon. Viscount Exmouth, G.C.B.
The Lord Bishop of London.
The Lord Bishop of Durham.
The Lord Bishop of Chester, now Bath and Wells.
The Lord Bishop of Bristol.
The Right Hon. Lord Suffield.
The Right Hon. Lord Braybrooke.
The Right Hon. Lord Amherst, Governor-General of India.
The Right Hon. Lord Stowell.
The Right Hon. Robert Peel.
The Right Hon. George Canning.
The Right Hon. Frederick John Robinson.
The Right Hon. William Huskisson.
Sir William Hillary, Bart.
Sir Claude Scott, Bart.
Sir Charles Forbes, Bart. M.P.
William Haldimand, Esq. M.P.
George Hibbert, Esq.
William Manning, Esq. M.P.
The Chairman of the Hon. East India Company.
The Deputy Master of Trinity House.
The Chairman for Lloyd's.
N. M. Rothschild, Esq.
Thomas Wilson, Esq. M.P.

Central Committee.

Thomas Wilson, Esq. M.P. Chairman.

Captain Astley, R.N. Henry Blanchard, Esq. Richardson Borradaile, Esq. Captain William Bowles,
R.N. John William Buckle, Esq. John Capel, Esq. David Carruthers, Esq. James Cazenove, jun.
Esq. Jonathan Chapman, Esq. G. R. Clarke, Esq. Simon Cock, Esq. William Cotton, Esq. Captain
Ed. Henry a'Court, R.N. M.P. Captain C. C. Dansey, R.A. John Deacon, Esq. Captain Joseph Dowson.
Captain Deans Dundas, R.N. Captain John Foulerton. Charles Francis, Esq. James Halford, Esq.
Edward Hurry, Esq. Captain John Locke, H.C.S. Edward Hawke Locker, Esq. George Lyall, Esq.
W. A. Madocks, Esq. M.P. John Marshall, Esq. John Petty Muspratt, Esq. John Clark Powell, Esq.
Christoper Richardson, jun. Esq. Captain R. Saumarez, R.N. K.L. Thomas Snodgrass, Esq. Christopher
Tennant, Esq. Mr. Alderman Thompson, M.P. Mr. Alderman Venables. John Wild, Esq. H. S. H. Wollaston,
Esq. George Frederick Young, Esq.

Treasurer.

William Sikes, Esq. 5, Mansion House Street.

Trustees.

Thomas Wilson, Esq. M.P. James Cazenove, jun. Esq. John Clark Powell, Esq.

Auditors.

Timothy A. Curtis, Esq. Henry Sikes, Esq. Mr. Alderman Thompson, M.P.

Secretary.

Thomas Edwards, Esq.

Office of the Institution, No. 12, Austin Friars, London. But
even when we think about what had just happened, and there were not the mulatto, Leonardo had
disappeared along with the coach.

In Merced Street, near the convent of that name, like going to the mall Paula, on the right
hand, there is a house roof, the one on the block. The input although extensive, as he admitted
to two carriages in a row, was not properly calls the hall. Before the door had parked a bad wheel
which was engaged between poles, a horse that does not contradict the former had more than Rocinante
that Bucephalus. Perched in the altered past chair, made so by the multitude of sweatshirts for better
backup from the loins of the beast, lay astride the black coachman, whose dress and appearance
desdecían not a point of the other luggage. While waiting for the owner, or slept, or had more
liquor in his pate than necessary, because it was hard to keep your head erect and high, sometimes
given before the front on the horse's neck, which by its immobility seemed of stone.

He approached the side Josefa sign in and spoke to him several times, without get awake or showed
signs of life. It is she, out of respect or natural timidity, or rather the voice rose, and
dare to touch. I did not know his name either, but suspecting named Joseph, said it repeatedly in
an affectionate tone: - Joseph, Joseph, Joseíto, is Hence the Doctor?

Medium black incorporated in the chair, and grinned horrible in the rush to open my eyes, nearly
blinded by the white powder on the street, and finally said: - I do not Nama Jose, I Ciliro Nama,
and my master is there AEntry Dotor, if you have not left.

Inside, inside.

After giving thanks to the friendly coachman, came, in fact, the old lady. Had in room several poor-looking
people waiting for the male and female doctor, who at that time was not present. Password
Josefa knew him, and since then I looked everywhere with some concern, because perhaps he had
gone, but the fact of the steering wheel to the door and the presence of patients in the room
indicated that if he was out, it was not for Regular visits of patients who spun every day
after lunch. Finally reached to see him in the yard, leaning over a man sitting in a chair,
issued from time then moans off, more painful, where it was known that the Doctor ran a surgery difficult.
Montes de Oca was skilled surgeon, no doubt, at least atrevidísimo in handling the knife,
chopping human flesh like someone chopping loaves of bread, always is true, quite rightly,
perhaps by the same blood ran cold with which such operations butchers. Auditors, in fact that
once you opened the womb to an individual to remove an abscess that had formed in the liver, which
was executed with the greatest fortune it is not the patient died in his hands, but healed, at
least for that ailment. Yes, it was so clever as interested and greedy for money. No one cure
for nothing, or moved from his house but to pay cash visits violent or explicit promise that
would be paid well his ability, generally recognized, sooner or later.

Josefa sign came after he had finished the operation, because he had
ceased to complain the patient, such as the Doctor, holding the instrument
with which he had executed, said:

- Hey!

You already, dispatched. See what he had in his ear: a bean, like a pea, because with the moisture
in that part grew two goals of his natural size.

- Thank you, Doctor, thank you. God bless him and grant him good health.

I do not know how much you has plagued the bean in his ear. For more than ten days without sleep,
not eating or ...

- I believe, the Doctor interrupted him with a triumphant air and not a little suspicious. Good
job me it cost to extract the foreign body.

Then, the part that is so delicate, that little pulse fails I could slip the clamps and damage
your eardrums and leave you deaf ear for the rest of his days. Well.

Now you pay me my job, goes home and gives a Cook bañito of mauve
with a few drops of laudanum to soothe irritation ...

- How much
is it Doctor? asked the trembling man, not of pain but the fear of
beg Him that much money for a transaction executed, and that briefly.

-
Half an ounce of gold, Montes de Oca said dryly and impatience. Moved by Captain Deans Dundas, R.N.; seconded by John Wilson, Esq.--That the grateful thanks
of this Meeting be respectfully offered to their Royal Highnesses the Dukes of York, Clarence,
Sussex, and Gloucester, and Prince Leopold of Saxe Cobourg, for their readiness to become the
vice-patrons of the Institution.

XVI. Moved by John William Buckle, Esq.; seconded by John Vincent Purrier, Esq.--That the thanks
of this Meeting be given to the Earl of Liverpool, for his acceptance of the presidency of
the Institution.

XVII. Moved by William Cotton, Esq.; seconded by Jonathan Chapman, Esq.--That the thanks of
this Meeting be also given to his Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the other noble and
distinguished personages who have accepted the office of vice-presidents of the Institution.

XVIII. Moved by George Lyall, Esq.; seconded by Thos. Wilson, Esq. M.P.--That the best thanks
of this Meeting are due to Sir William Hillary, Bart. for his patriotic efforts in bringing
this subject before the public, and for his zealous endeavours to promote the establishment
of the Institution.

XIX. Moved by Thomas Wilkinson, Esq.; seconded by Thomas Maltby, Esq.--That copies of the resolutions
entered into this day be transmitted to the Admiralty, to the Trinity House, and to Lloyd's;
and that copies of the resolutions be published in several of the provincial papers.

XX. Moved by John William Buckle, Esq.; seconded by Sir Charles Flower, Bart.--That the warmest
thanks of this Meeting be presented to Thomas Wilson, Esq. M.P. for his humane, zealous, and
persevering exertions in the establishment of this Institution.

His Grace the Archbishop having left the chair, Thomas Wilson, Esq. was unanimously called
upon to take it.

Moved by Thomas Wilson, Esq. M.P. seconded by Sir Chas. Flower, Bart. and resolved unanimously,--That
the best thanks of this Meeting be given to his Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury, for the
important service which he has rendered the Institution, and particularly for his condescension
in taking the chair this day.

(Signed) THOMAS WILSON, Chairman.

At a General Court of the Subscribers and Friends to the Royal National Institution for the
Preservation of Life from Shipwreck, held at the City of London Tavern, on the 10th of March, 1825.

The Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells in the Chair.

It was moved by George Hibbert, Esq.

Seconded by Thomas Wilson, Esq. M.P.

And resolved unanimously,

That the Gold Medallion of the Institution be presented to Sir William Hillary, Bart., by whom
this NATIONAL INSTITUTION was first suggested, and ably recommended by his publications on
the subject.

(Signed) THOMAS WILSON,

Chairman of the Committee.

Having thus shown, by official documents, the great outline of the Royal National Institution,
now happily established for the preservation of Life from Shipwreck, a brief recapitulation
of the important nature of its objects and its plans, will perhaps be the best conclusion I
can offer to those pages, which have already been received by the public in a manner so gratifying
to my own feelings.

From the most early periods, and in every state of society, shipwreck has been one of those
never ceasing evils which has excited the commiseration of mankind; but, until recently, appears
scarcely ever to have called forth their humane efforts to mitigate its deplorable consequences.
For centuries our mariners have been left, unassisted, to endure every peril of the sea, as
if shipwreck were a calamity in every instance utterly beyond all reach of mortal succour,
and in every age, thousands of our fellow-creatures have thus miserably perished, who unquestionably
might have been rescued.

Of late years, various efforts have been made on parts of our coasts for the preservation of
life from impending peril, and some excellent inventions have been introduced for that purpose;
these had however hitherto been only a means, not a system--local, not national.

But when we reflect on the great waste of human life attendant on these dreadful catastrophes,
and the vital importance to their country of those who have thus been abandoned to their wretched
fate, it cannot fail to excite our astonishment that amongst all the noble Institutions of
this great empire, which have been patronized by the crown, promoted by the government, or
sustained by the bounty of the people, there never before has been established, in this the
most powerful maritime state of ancient or of modern days, one general association, or national
Institution for the preservation of Life from Shipwreck.

The humane attention of the British nation has at length been roused to this important object,--this
void in our benevolent establishments has been supplied, by the formation of the Royal National
Institution, under the immediate patronage of the King.

The objects contemplated by this Institution are, in their nature, deeply interesting to the
cause of humanity--important to the naval and the commercial interests of the nation, and calculated
to extend their beneficial influence to every age and every country.

It will be seen by the preceding documents that it takes within the scope of its efforts, the
preservation from shipwreck--not only of the seamen and the subjects of these kingdoms, but
those of every nation who may become exposed to that misfortune on the British shores, equally
in peace and in war. Easy and discreet As
he says, joins the Conde, the elegance of the phrase, sharpness, correction and method worth
much to be understood, the amenity and grace, which attract the audience; gain the will, the
strength that inspires the belief, and caution, restraint and the serene repose, that fit and
fit well with the nature of the statesman.

But the new Academic has not worn only in political assemblies and the gifts that he distinguish
it, but for three years, and pleased to numerous competitions and has given Ateneo interesting
lesson about political freedom in England, which, with general applause and no small fruits of
those who study politics seriously, are printed in three volumes. In them, more than hobble the
excellence that I have praised, are treasured do not know much history, for the majority of
our fellow unknown, and many warnings and maximum, drawn with skill
and acumen of the same facts which they relate.

Among other works of the Count, is also praising quite large, published in magazine in Spain,
with the title The Don Jorge Juan Embassy in Morocco, which, not only find excellent conditions for
the style of historical narrative but teaching fitness, brainy and
thoughtful that the author gives many signs in the aforementioned
lessons.

In his acceptance speech would be arrogance in me to do here eulogy.

What better your applause? What clearer proof of his merit to the delight and interest in continuing
with have you heard?

Great is my desire to respond with dignity to this speech, but neither
the lack of time, or serious illness and dislikes, which these days
have troubled me, or my lack of serenity and inner peace, would consent,
but the poverty of my scholarship and shortness of my knowledge had
not prevented.

The topic at issue in the discourse can not Serme nicer, but this
is not enough.

Every class must feel how deeply it is connected with the national honour, and the maritime
interest of their country, that all the means which the bounty of a wealthy and a liberal people
can supply, and all the efforts which experience and humanity can prompt, should be devoted
to so sacred a cause.

Each in his respective sphere is earnestly solicited to bear a part--the great and the affluent,
and those residing in the interior of the kingdom, by their influence and their contributions--the
active and the zealous, by their energetic efforts--those on the coasts, by the more hazardous
exertions of enterprise and bravery--and all, according to their power and their stations,
to promote the success, and to recompense the endeavours of those who voluntarily encounter
the greatest perils, for the rescue of the unhappy mariner, of every nation, who may be in
danger of shipwreck on our coasts.

The accomplishment of so many and such important objects, on a scale commensurate with the
frequency and the extent of the misfortunes they are intended to alleviate, requires the combined
efforts of numerous public bodies and zealous individuals--preconcerted arrangements on every
dangerous coast, and considerable pecuniary resources.

Under these convictions, I presume most earnestly to recommend, that public meetings should
be held in those maritime counties and great sea ports of the united kingdom which have not
yet come forward in this cause, for the formation of district or local associations on all
our coasts, regulated in their internal concerns by their own committees, as departments of,
and in direct communication with, the parent Institution, having an union of funds, of object
and of effort, for the most extended adoption of every means which the magnitude of the evil
to be averted imperatively demands at our hands.

Nor are those whose residence is the most remote from the scenes of these disasters, less interested
in the universal establishment of this system.--Where is to be found that family, of any station,
even in the very interior of the kingdom, which has not some near and dear connexions, some
valued relatives or friends, who, from their professions or their pursuits, may become exposed
to the hazard of shipwreck, and who may be thus preserved, through the very means to which
their bounty may contribute? Themselves distant from the scene of danger, they may, without
effort or toil, become instrumental in the rescue of those they most value in life--equally
then are they called on to take measures for the collection of funds in the midland counties
as on the coasts, in order to give increased resources to the Institution, for the most effectual
prosecution of its plans.

As this great national measure shall continue to establish itself in the public mind, the adoption
of more extended and systematic plans will naturally impress themselves on our consideration.

From an almost universal want of foresight in our seamen, and a carelessness in providing against
future dangers, naturally arising from the reckless bravery of their character, they would
turn with contempt from any proposition that each should always take with him to sea, some
one of those simple but practicable means by which his rescue from shipwreck might be greatly
facilitated. In like manner the owners or masters of vessels, some from an ill timed parsimony,
but far more, from thoughtlessness or prejudice, neglect to provide their vessels with any
of the apparatus which would, in many instances, insure the safety of the passengers and crews.

What is thus the duty of every one, will, amongst such a numerous class of individuals, be
either entirely neglected or imperfectly executed, and a continued sacrifice of life be the
certain consequence.

Our seamen constitute one of the most valuable properties of the state. The preservation of
the life of the subject is one of the most imperative duties of an enlightened government--it
has therefore become indispensably requisite, in this great maritime nation, that these evils,
arising from causes which no unity of opinion or of action, in the parties most interested,
can ever be expected to remove, should as far as possible be obviated by legislative enactment--and
that vessels should not, after a given period, be permitted to clear out at the ports from
which they are to sail, until, according to their tonnage, the number of their passengers and
crews, and the nature of the voyage on which they are bound, it shall have been ascertained
that they have been provided by the owners, and according to established regulations, with
those means of safety which shall be required. It was always said that the reason of things is inaveriguable,
therefore, does not mean anything. Put on now in prayer, and say, for example, "What about now?
What do you do now? "Nothing. Both are therefore invalid words, and good, therefore. Combine
together now, and say, for now, and will be the effect pilgrim of the sum of all the annulments.

Few
words are so good, so useful in the day, so fashionable, that few
good words can so easily turn into good words.



The extent and nature of these precautionary measures require mature consideration, and would
best be ascertained by a committee of experienced and scientific officers and individuals selected
from the navy, the Trinity House, Lloyd's, the Ship-owners' Society, and other departments
connected with maritime affairs, on whose reports, and after minute and deliberate investigation,
perhaps an enactment could alone be founded to produce the much desired effect.--It is only
by reducing into a system those measures which are now left to chance, or to the forethought
or the caprice of thousands, that such effectual precautions can be taken, as will insure that
at all times the danger may be promptly met by adequate means of rescue. A flattery are so prone as the most arrogant
tyrant. And they generally lack the good taste of some tyrants, protectors of letters, have proved
brilliant. It may be doubted that there was never quite enlightened middle class to compete
in tact, to protect the poetry and the other Humane Letters, with Pericles, Augustus, Maecenas,
Bembo, Tenth Leon, Lorenzo the Magnificent, Luis XIV of France and the Duke of Weimar.


We have only stedfastly and undeviatingly to persevere in our course,--the greatness of our
objects--the goodness of our cause--the conviction to the public mind, which time and experience
cannot fail to bring, of the practicability of our means; and above all, the benevolent feelings
of a gallant nation, excited by the continued rescue of their fellow creatures, will combine
irresistibly to advocate this system, and ultimately to insure its complete success.

Much has recently been accomplished--several noble establishments have already been formed
on our coasts--rewards for many lives preserved have already been bestowed--infinitely more
remains yet to be done--nor should we for one moment desist from our exertions, nor relax from
their ardent pursuit, until the whole of the British coasts shall be surrounded by well organized
branches of the Institution--until every mariner, who may be in danger of shipwreck on our
shores, may feel assured that his rescue will be attempted by all the efforts which a generous
enterprise can make, supported by every means which human foresight can arrange--and until,
prompted by our example, and witnessing that succour which their own shipwrecked seamen will
have received on the shores of these kingdoms, the governments and the people of every maritime
nation may become impressed with the vital importance of this cause; and joining their efforts
to ours, by the formation of similar establishments in their respective countries, thus essentially
contribute to the adoption of an inter-national and universal system for the mitigation of
the calamity of shipwreck, on every coast of the civilised world. 

Make yourself a visit to Don Timoteo, in good time, but do not expect you to pay it. Don Timothy
did not visit anyone. He is so busy! The state of health does not allow use of compliments; in a word, is
not for Don Timoteo good parenting.