While the details of the change were being planned in the offices of The Museion, the burning
question for the proprietors was this: would their editor, their great, their unique and lonely
editor, be prepared to go with them? Or would he (and with him his brilliant and enthusiastic
staff) insist on standing by the principles that had been the glory of the paper and its ruin?
Mr. Jewdwine had shown himself fairly amenable so far, but would he be any use to them when
it really came to the point?

To Jewdwine that point was the turning-point in his career. He had had to put that burning
question to himself. Was he, after all, prepared to stand by his principles? It was pretty
certain that if he did, his principles would not stand by him. Was there anything in them that
would stand at all against the brutal pressure that was moulding literature at the present
hour? No organ of philosophic criticism could (at the present hour) exist, unless created and
maintained by Jewdwine single-handed and at vast expense. His position was becoming more unique
and more lonely every day, quite intolerably lonely and unique. For Jewdwine after all was
human. He longed for eminence, but not for such eminence as meant isolation. Isolation is not
powerful; and even more than for eminence he longed for power. He longed for it with the passion
of a weak will governed despotically by a strong intellect. It amounted to a positive obsession,
the tyranny of a cold and sane idea. He knew perfectly well now what his position as editor
of The Museion was worth. Compared with that great, that noble but solitary person, even Maddox
had more power. But the editor of Metropolis, by a few trifling concessions to the spirit of
modernity, would in a very short time carry all before him. He must then either run with the
race or drop out of it altogether; and between these two courses, Jewdwine, with all his genius
for hesitation, could not waver. After much deliberation he had consented (not without some
show of condescension) to give his name and leadership to Metropolis; and he reaped the reward
of his plasticity in a substantial addition to his income.

This great change in the organization of the review called for certain corresponding changes
in its staff. And it was here that Rickman came in. He had been retained on The Museion partly
in recognition of his brilliance, partly by way of satisfying the claims of Jewdwine's magnanimity.
On The Museion he had not proved plastic either as sub-editor or as contributor. He did not
fit in well with the traditions of the paper; for he was, to Jewdwine, modernity incarnate,
the living spirit of revolt, to be bound down with difficulty by the editorial hand. Looking
back on the record of the past four years Jewdwine marvelled how and why it was that he had
kept him. A score of times he had been tempted to dismiss him after some fresh enormity; and
a score of times Rickman had endeared himself by the seductive graces of his style. But Rickman
on the staff of Metropolis was, Jewdwine considered, Rickman in the right place. Not only could
he now be allowed to let loose his joyous individuality without prejudice to the principles
of that paper (for the paper strictly speaking would have no principles), but he was indispensable
if it was to preserve the distinction which its editor still desired. Jewdwine had no need
of the poet; but of the journalistic side of Rickman he had endless need. It was a baser faculty,
but his care must be to develop it, to train it, to handle it judiciously, until by handling
he had made it pliable to all the uses of his paper. Jewdwine had a genius for licking young
men into shape. He could hardly recognize that band of awkward and enthusiastic followers in
his present highly disciplined and meritorious staff. None of them were like Rickman; none
of them had done anything to rouse an uneasy suspicion of their genius. Still, none of them
were precisely fitted for his present purpose. Rickman the poet, of course, you could not lick
into shape. His shape, plastic only under the divine fire, was fashioned by the fingers of
the god. But Rickman the journalist, once get him on to the right journal, would prove to be
made of less unmanageable stuff. If he had not hitherto proved manageable, that was no doubt
because hitherto he had been employed on the wrong journal.

And yet, when he came to discuss the change of programme with the different members of his
staff (some of whom he was giving their dismissal), it was with Rickman (whom he proposed to
retain) that he felt the most acute embarrassment. Rickman, although at the moment dining with
Jewdwine, was so abominably direct.

"I see," he said, after listening to a lengthy exposition of the proprietors' view; "they want
to popularize the thing."

Jewdwine winced perceptibly. "Well, hardly," said he. "In that case they would have been obliged
to change their editor. We certainly want to draw a rather larger public than we have done;
and to do that we must make some concessions to modernity. There's no doubt that the paper's
interests have suffered from its tradition. We have been too exclusive, too detached. We can
no longer afford to be detached. We propose to abandon the tradition in favour of--well--of
a somewhat broader attitude." He looked keenly at Rickman, as if he defied him to put it any
other way.

"I see. We've either got to take a more genial view of our contemporaries--or scoot."

"You may put it that way if you like. It simply means that if we are to appeal to a wider public,
we must take a wider view. It's surely in the interests of the public, and of literature, that
we should not narrow the influence of the paper any more than we can help. Not make the best
criticism inaccessible." He continued to take the lofty and the noble view. The habit was inveterate.
But his last remark started him on the way of self-justification. "Of course I couldn't go
on with the paper if I hadn't come to see this for myself. The fact is, you cannot run a leading
review on abstract principles."

Rickman forbore to smile at the fulfilment of his prophecy. Jewdwine's "Absolute" had been
obliged to "climb down."

"Not," said Jewdwine, "if that review is really to lead public opinion."

"And certainly not," said Rickman, "if public opinion is to lead the review."

"In either case," said Jewdwine nobly, "the principles remain."

"Only they're not applied?"

"They are not applied, because there is nothing to apply them to. In the present state of literature
a review like The Museion has no reason for its existence."

"I don't know. It was a very useful protest against some forms of modernity."

"My dear fellow, modernity simply means democracy. And when once democracy has been forced
on us there's no good protesting any longer."

"All the same, you'll go on protesting, you know."

"As a harmless private person, yes. As a critic I must accept a certain amount of defeat at
the hands of the majority."

"But you don't happen to believe in the majority?"

"I do believe in it," said he, bitterly. "I believe that it has destroyed criticism by destroying
literature. A critic only exists through the existence of great men. And there are no great
men nowadays; only a great number of little men."

"I see. Othello's occupation's gone."

"Not at all. Othello's occupation's only beginning. You can't criticize these people, but you
must review them. And I assure you it means far more labour and a finer discrimination to pick
out your little man from a crowd of little men than to recognize your great man when you see him."

"When you see him--"

"Ah yes--when I see him. But where is he? Show me," said Jewdwine, "one work of unmistakable
genius published any time in the last five, the last ten years."

Rickman looked at him and said nothing. And to Jewdwine his silence was singularly uncomfortable.
He would have been more uneasy still but for his conviction that the serenity in Rickman's
eyes was reflected from the eyes of Fielding. Rickman, he thought, was rather too obviously
elated at the great man's praise; and the exhibition of elation was unpleasant to him. Worse
than all, he realized that Rickman, in spite of his serenity, was hurt. On the top of that
came a miserable misgiving as to the worthiness of his own attitude to his friend.

As for Rickman, he had no feeling that he could have put into words, beyond owning in his heart
that he was hurt. He had never before had any occasion for such a confession; he felt it to
be humiliating both to Jewdwine and himself. Sometimes, in moments of depression he had suspected
that it was Jewdwine's coldness that preserved his incorruptibility; but he had so sincere
a desire for purity in their relations, that he had submitted without resentment to the freezing
process that ensured it. He had in reserve his expectation of the day when, by some superlative
achievement, he would take that soul, hitherto invincible, by storm. But now, in his inmost
heart he owned that he was hurt.

Jewdwine changed the subject.

CHAPTER LII

When Jewdwine changed the subject, it was to intimate that his friend might now expect a salary
rising steadily with the fortunes of Metropolis.

That promise to marry Flossie in the autumn had made Rickman very uneasy on this head. The
sources of his income had been hitherto uncertain; for The Planet might at any moment cease
to be, and only indomitable hope could say that The Museion would be long for this world.

The amount of his income, too, depended on conditions which were, to some extent, beyond his
own control. It had never sunk below a hundred and fifty, and had never risen above three hundred,
even in the years when he wrote more articles than poems. Whereas, if he wrote more poems than
articles, two hundred was the highest figure it had yet attained. And supposing the poems came
and the articles didn't? For in these things he was in the hands of the god. Therefore he had
long been a prey to devastating anxiety. But he hoped great things from the transformation
of The Museion. It certainly promised him a larger and more certain revenue in the future,
almost justifying his marriage in the autumn. It had been expressly understood that his promise
to Flossie was to be fulfilled only if possible. But meanwhile he had got to make it possible,
for Flossie (in spite of her promise) kept the terror of her wine-merchant perpetually dangling
above his head. He had visited Messrs. Vassell & Hawkins' detestable establishment; and it
made him shudder to think of his pretty Beaver shut up in a little mahogany cage, with her
bright eyes peeping sad and shy through the brass netting, and her dear little nostrils sniffing
the villainous alcoholic air.

But as the time approached and their marriage grew every day more certain and more near, the
joy and excitement of the bridegroom were mingled with an inexplicable terror and misgiving.
He had been disagreeably impressed by the manner of Flossie's insistence on his poverty. He
had not missed the fine contempt conveyed by all her references to his profession, which she
not unjustly regarded as the cause of the poverty. He was well aware that his genius was a
heavy burden for so small a thing to bear; and his chivalry had determined that it should lie
lightly on her lest it should crush or injure her. It was part of her engaging innocence that
she knew nothing of the world in which his supremacy began and hers ended, that she had not
even suspected its existence. If he had any illusions about her it was his own mind that created
and controlled them. He delighted in them deliberately, as in a thing of his creating; seeing
through them with that extraordinary lucidity of his, yet abandoning himself all the more.
Flossie's weakness made him tender, her very faults amused him. As for his future, he could
not conceive of his marriage as in any way affecting him as a poet and a man of letters. While
the little suburban Eros lit his low flame upon the hearth, his genius would still stand apart,
guarding with holy hands the immortal fire. For those two flames could never mingle. In that
dream he saw himself travelling with ease and rapidity along two infinite lines that never
touched and never diverged; a feat only possible given two Rickmans, not one Rickman. There
used to be many more of him; it was something that he had reduced the quantity to two. And
in dreams nothing is absurd, nothing impossible.

Pity that the conditions of waking life are so singularly limited. At first it had been only
a simple question of time and space. Not that Flossie took up so very much space; and he owned
that she left him plenty of time for the everyday work that paid. But where was that divine
solitude? Where were those long days of nebulous conception? Where the days when he removed
himself, as it were, and watched his full-orbed creations careering in the intellectual void?
The days when Keith Rickman was as a god? He was hardly aware how fast they were vanishing
already; and where would they be in two months' time? It was on his tragedy that he based his
hopes for his future; the future, in which Flossie had no part. He knew that the plea of art
sounded weak before the inexorable claims of nature; he felt that something ought to be sacrificed
to the supreme passion; but he couldn't give up his tragedy. He was consumed by two indomitable
passions; and who was to say which of them was supreme? Still, tragedies in blank verse were
a luxury; and Flossie had more than once pointed out to him he couldn't afford luxuries. He
would sit up working on the tragedy till long past midnight; and when he woke in the morning
his sense of guilt could not have been greater if he had been indulging in the most hateful
orgies. But you can't burn even genius at both ends; and his paying work began to suffer. Jewdwine
complained that it was not up to his usual level. Maddox had returned several articles. So
at last he stuffed his tragedy into a drawer to wait there for a diviner hour. "That would
have been a big expensive job," he said to himself. "I suppose it's possible to put as good
work into the little things that pay; but I shall have to cut myself in pieces." That was what
he was doing now; changing his gold into copper as fast as he could, so many pennies for one
sovereign. Nobody was cheated. He knew that in his talent (his mere journalistic talent) there
was a genius that no amount of journalism had as yet subdued. But he had an awful vision of
the future, when he saw himself swallowed up body and soul in journalism. The gods were dead;
but there were still men and columns.

That would be the inevitable surrender to reality. To have no part in the triumph of the poetic
legions; but to march with the rank and file, to a detestable music not his own; a mere mercenary
ingloriously fighting in a foreign cause.

To Jewdwine, Jewdwine once incorruptible, it seemed that Rickman was preparing himself very
suitably for the new campaign. But Maddox mourned as he returned those articles; and when he
heard of the approaching marriage which explained them he was frantic. He rushed up on Sunday
afternoon, and marched Rickman out into the suburbs and on to a lonely place on Hampstead Heath.
And there, for the space of one hour, with his arm linked in Rickman's, he wrestled with Rickman
for his body and his soul. Jewdwine's cry had been, "Beware of the friendship of little men";
the burden of Maddox was, "Beware of the love of little women."

"That's all you know about it, Maddy. The love of great women absorbs you, dominates you. The
little women leave you free."

Maddox groaned.

"A fat lot of freedom you'll get, Ricky, when you're married." Rickman looked straight before
him to the deep blue hills of the west, as if freedom lay on the other side of them. "Good
God," he said, "what am I to do? I must marry. I can't go back to Poppy Grace, and her sort."

"If that's all," said Maddox, "I don't see much difference. Except that marriage is worse.
It lasts longer." Whereupon Rickman blushed, and said that wasn't all, and that Maddox was
a brute. He would change his opinion when he knew Miss Walker.

Before very long he had an opportunity of changing it.

Rickman had been in error when he told Flossie that if she would consent to marry him he would
never again be ill. For he was ill the first week in September, not two years after he had
made that ill-considered statement. The Fielding episode, when the first fine stimulus was
over, had left him miserable and restless. It was as if he had heard the sound of Lucia Harden's
voice passing through the immeasurable darkness that divided them. And now he seemed to be
suffering from something not unlike the nervous fever that had attacked him once before at
Harmouth; complicated, this time, by a severe cold on the chest, caught by walking about through
pouring rain in great agony of mind.

For Flossie (who may have felt latterly that she had chanced upon another season of depression
in her woman's trade) that illness was a piece of amazing good luck, coming as it did at the
moment of Keith's misgivings. It not only drew them together, just as they were drifting insensibly
apart, but it revealed them to each other in a tenderer and serener light. There was a little
hard spot in Flossie which was impervious to the subtler charm of Rickman when he was well.
But Rickman ill and at her mercy, confined to the bed where (so long as Flossie waited on him)
he lay very quietly, with the sheet drawn tight up to his chin, in a state of touching dependence
and humiliation, was a wholly different person from the stormy and incomprehensible Rickman
who for more than two years had struggled so madly in her toils. And if, to the eye of Mrs.
Downey, Flossie appeared untouched by the really heartrending pathos of his attitude in sleep;
beholding unmoved his huddled boyish form under the blankets, one half-naked arm laid slack
along the bed, the other thrust out straight into the cold outside it; if she left Mrs. Downey
to cover the poor fellow up, wondering why on earth the girl could sit there and never do it;
if, when he woke, she missed the extreme poignancy of appeal in the murmurs that followed her
as she went Beaver-like about her business in the room, it may be that in that unaccustomed
service the hidden prescient motherhood in her was awakened and appeased (Flossie being still
under the dominion of her dream). As yet it struggled blindly with her invincible propriety;
a struggle poor Rickman was made aware of by the half-averted manner of her approaches, the
secrecy and hesitation of her touch. But the little clerk undoubtedly found that patting pillows,
straightening coverlets, and making mustard plasters, was an employment more satisfying to
her nature than the perpetual handling of bank notes. And to Rickman lying there with his hungry
heart filled for the time quite full with its own humility and gratitude, lying in a helplessness
that had in it something soothing and agreeable, feeling the soft shy woman's hands about his
bed, following with affectionate, remorseful eyes her coming and going, or watching as she
sat patiently mending his socks, it came with the freshness of a new discovery that she was,
after all, a very engaging little Beaver. He had never for one instant glorified his love for
her; he understood it too thoroughly. It was love as Nature loves to have it; honest enough,
too, but of its kind singularly devoid of any inspiring quality. Flossie had never moved him
to the making of sonnets or of songs. Moreover, he had discovered in her a certain lack of
tenderness, or of the outward signs of tenderness. Not but what Flossie commanded all the foolish
endearing language of young love; only she was apt to lavish it on little details of attire,
on furniture, on things seen in shop-windows and passionately desired. But there was something
very transfiguring in the firelight of his bedroom hearth. As he lay in it, enjoying the pure
sweet foretaste of domestic felicity, it was as if he saw more clearly into himself and her
and the life that would so soon make them one. If it was not the best life, he told himself
that of its kind it would be very good. He had no doubt now that Flossie loved him. He was
led to this certainty by the maternal quality in her present dealings with him, when perhaps
it should have warned him rather that these cares were not for him.

Flossie had somewhat elaborated her dream. Bearing the fascinating name of Muriel Maud, it
had grown softer and rosier than ever. She could not any longer deny its mysterious association
with Keith Rickman, though she would have died rather than that Keith should have suspected
it. And now as she sat mending Keith's socks her fancy all the time was busy fashioning delicious
garments for her dream. Flossie never pursued her vision of Muriel Maud beyond the period of
enchanting infancy; when it outgrew the tender folly of those garments, it was dismissed from
Flossie's fancy with unmaternal harshness. Therefore it appeared eternally innocent and young,
mortal in a delicate immortality. In fact, viewing her life too in the light of the bedroom
firelight, Flossie was herself deceived.

They were both blissfully unaware that Nature cares nothing about love, but was bent upon using
them for the only end she does care about, the end that gives to love the illusion of its own
eternity.

But Maddox saw through it in a minute. It was in the earlier stages of the poet's illness,
and Maddox had happened to put his head into Rickman's room at the moment when Flossie, compelled
by Mrs. Downey, was helping to put a stinging mustard plaster on his chest. They shrieked,
and Maddox instantly withdrew.

He painted the scene afterwards for Rankin in the lurid and symbolic colours of his Celtic
fancy. "Talk of Samson among the Philistines, it's nothing to Ricky-ticky in that d----d boarding-house.
There was a woman on each side of his bed. They'd got him down on it; they were pinning the
poor little chap in his blankets. I could just see Ricky-ticky's face between their shoulders;
it was very red; and I shall never forget the expression on it, never. The agony, Rankin, the
hopeless, unutterable agony."

"What were they doing to him?"

"I couldn't see properly. But I think they were cutting his hair off."

He declared later that he had distinctly heard the squeaking of that young Delilah's scissors.
"We're not told whether Delilah was Samson's wife," said he. "But the Scriptures were never
wrong on a point of human nature."

At which Rankin looked depressed; for he too was thinking of getting married; though, as Maddox
reminded him for his comfort, not to Miss Flossie Walker.

"Is our Ricky-ticky," urged Rankin, "the man to show wisdom in choosing a wife?"

"He isn't the man to marry at all."

"Did you expect him to live like an anchorite, then?"

"I didn't expect anything. He might have lived as he liked, provided he didn't ruin himself
as he's doing now."

And though Maddox now saw that young Delilah frequently, and always at her prettiest and her
best, he did not change his opinion.

CHAPTER LIII

It was now the third week in September, and the wedding was fixed for the twenty-fifth of October.
Everything was fixed, even Flossie's ideas on the subject of her trousseau. There never was
a little woman so unwavering in her choice of such things as clothes and furniture. To be married
in ivory white, and to go away in powder blue; to have a drawing-room furnished in imitation
rosewood and tapestry, and a dining-room in stamped velvet and black oak (imitation, too),
had been Flossie's firm determination from the first. It saves endless time and contention
when a young woman so absolutely knows her own mind.

Not but what she required approval and support in her decisions; otherwise she would have been
hardly recognizable as a young woman. And for Rickman to go shopping with the Beaver in Tottenham
Court Road, to follow her undeviating course through the furniture galleries, to note the infallible
instinct by which she made for and seized upon the objects of her choice, to see the austerity
with which she resisted the seductions of the salesman who sought to entangle her with a more
expensive article, the calmness of her mind in dealing with the most intricate problems of
measurement and price, was to be led a helpless captive in a triumph of practical ability.
Ability, good Lord! was there ever anything like Flossie's grasp of all facts that can be expressed
in figures? His brain reeled before the terrifying velocity of her mental arithmetic. What
a little woman it was to do sums in the top of its head!

Not that she dragged him on the chain for ever. There were idyllic resting-places, delicious,
thrilling pauses in her progress; when she tried every chair in succession in the drawing-room
suite; when she settled herself in the tapestry one, before the little rosewood tea-table (spread,
for the heightening of the illusion, with a tea-service all complete); when she pretended to
pour out tea, smiling over the tea-pot in the prettiest delight. With such a smile she would
welcome him, with such a smile she would pour out his tea when he came back from Fleet Street
to the home that was to be. (It did not occur to him that at the moment Flossie was only smiling
at the tea-pot.) Though he stood aloof from the anticipatory scene, as he looked at her he
grew positively weak with tenderness. In everything Flossie had her way. When they climbed
(as they inevitably did) to the upper galleries he indeed offered some show of resistance when
she insisted on choosing a terrible bedstead of brass with mother-o'-pearl ornaments. But to
do him justice, it was sheer nervous terror which prompted the brutal remark that, "Really,
mother-o'-pearl ornaments were more than he could stand"; for he melted and gave in at once
at the sight of Flossie feeling the rosy down coverlet with her little hands. When their eyes
met, Flossie's face was as rosy as the coverlet; so that the attendant spirit of commerce himself
turned from them abashed. That there would, that there must be, such a moment Keith had had
a horrible foreboding as he followed up the stairs.

Nobody could have been more happy than Flossie following the dream in Tottenham Court Road;
and Rickman was happy because she was. Happy for a whole fortnight; and then for the first
time they quarrelled.

And this was how it happened. They were going to live at Ealing; not because they liked it,
but because the neighbourhood was cheap. Flossie had said, "When we're rich, we'll go to Kensington";
and he had answered with an odious flippancy, "Yes, and when we die we'll go to heaven"; but
for the present, Flossie (wise Flossie who loved economy even more than Kensington) was content
with Ealing. That she was obliged to be content with it made her feel, naturally, that she
was entitled to gratification on every other point. It was not over Ealing, then, that they
quarrelled, but over the choosing of the house. Flossie was all for a gay little brand-new,
red-brick villa, with nice clean white paint about it, only two minutes from the tram; he for
a little old-fashioned brown-brick house with jasmine all over it, and a garden all grass and
lilac bushes at the back. He said the garden would be nice to sit in. She said, what was the
good of sitting in a garden when you had to walk ever so far to the tram? He retorted that
walking was a reason for sitting; and she that if it came to that they could sit in the house.
She wouldn't hear of the old brown house, nor he of the brand-new villa. He was peculiarly
sensitive to his surroundings.

"The villa," said he, "is a detestable little den."

"It isn't," said she, "it's got a lovely bay window in the drawing room, and a dear little
balcony on the top."

"But there isn't a quiet place in it, dear, where I could write."

"Oh, that's all you're thinking of--"

"Well, there isn't, really. Whereas here" (they were going now through the little brown house),
"there's a jolly big room at the back, where you can see miles away over the fields towards
Harrow."

"Oh, you've got time to look out of the window, have you, though you are so busy?"

"Never mind the window, let's look at the house. What's wrong with it?"

"What's wrong with the house? It won't suit the furniture, that's what's wrong with it."

"You mean the furniture won't suit it?"

"The furniture's chosen and the house isn't. There's no good going back on that."

"Look here, this is the room I meant." They had climbed to the top of the little brown house,
and Flossie had hardly condescended to glance through the doors he had opened on their way.
He opened one now at the head of the stairs, and this time she looked in.

"It would make all the difference to me, Floss," he said humbly, "if I had a place like this
when I want to get away to write."

"When you want to get away from me, you mean." Her lips shook; she looked round her with angry
eyes, as if jealous of the place, and all that he meant to do in it.

It was a large room, with a wide window looking on to the garden and away across meadows and
cornfields to Harrow Hill with its thin church spire. The window was guarded with iron bars.
So many hundreds of little figures, and so absurd and gay, that to sit in that room surrounded
by them, to look at them and endeavour to count them, was to go mad. But those figures fascinated
Flossie.

"Oh, Lord, what a beastly wall-paper," said he.

"I think it's sweet," said she. And though she wasn't going to let him have the house, she
was ready to quarrel with him again about the wall-paper. And then, in the corner by the window
they came upon a child's toy, a little wooden horse, broken. He pointed it out to her, half-smiling.
"Some kiddy must have left that there."

"Of course," said she, "it's been a nursery. And, I say, Keith, I think it must have died."

"How do you make that out?"

"It couldn't have been long here. Don't you see, the wall-paper's all new." (He thought that
was rather sharp of her, the practical Beaver!) "And yet," she said continuing her train of
induction; "it couldn't. If it had, they'd never have left that here."

Ah, that was not sharp; it was something better. There was, after all, about his Beaver a certain
poetry and tenderness.

She picked up the little wooden horse, and held it in her hands, and adjusted its loosened
mane, and mended its broken legs, fitting the edges delicately with her clever fingers. And
it seemed to him that as she bent over the toy her face grew soft again. When she lifted her
head her eyes rested on him, but without seeing him. Never had Flossie had so poignant a vision
of Muriel Maud.

He looked at her with a new wonder in his heart. For the first time he was made aware of the
change that two years had worked in her. She had grown, he thought, finer in growing firmer;
her body in its maturity was acquiring a strength and richness that had been wanting in its
youth; as if through that time of waiting it were being fashioned for the end it waited for.
But that was not all. She had clothed herself unconsciously with poetry. She stood for a moment
transfigured before him; a woman with sweet eyes beholding her desired destiny from far. Her
soul (for a moment) rose in her face like a star--a dim prophetic star that trembled between
darkness and dawn. He knew that she saw herself now as the possible mother of his children.

The anger and the jealousy were over; and all of a sudden she gave in.

"You can have the house, if you like, Keith."

"All right; I do like it. That's a dear little Beaver."

As he approached her her glance fled. "I didn't say you could have the room. I want to keep
it empty."

He put his arm round her and led her to the window. "What do you want to keep it empty for,
Flossie?"

Her poor little thoughts, surprised and dismayed, went scurrying hither and thither, trying
to hide their trail.

"Oh," she said, still looking away from him. "To store things in." He drew her closer to him
and kissed her tenderly.

It seemed to him that a serene and happy light rested on the garden, on the empty house, and
on the empty room that she had peopled already with her innocent dream. It seemed to him that
in that remote gaze of her woman's eyes, abstracted from her lover, unconsciously desirous
of the end beyond desire, he saw revealed the mystery, the sanctity, the purity of wedded love.
And seeing it he forgave her that momentary abstraction.

But the Beaver never dreamed; she was far too practical. She was building, that was all.

CHAPTER LIV

That evening as they sat down to dinner, it might have been noticed that Mrs Downey's face
was more flushed and festal than it had been since the day was fixed for Mr. Rickman's wedding
and departure. She seated herself expansively, with a gay rustling of many frills, and smiled
well pleased upon the arrangements of her table. From these signs it was evident that Mrs.
Downey was expecting another boarder, a boarder of whom she had reason to be proud. Rickman
noticed with dismay that the stranger's place was laid beside his own. He knew them so well,
these eternal, restless birds of passage, draggled with their flight from one boarding-house
to another. The only tolerable thing about them was that, being here to-day, they were gone
to-morrow.

The new boarder was late, culpably late. But Mrs. Downey was proud of that too, as arguing
that the poor bird of passage had stayed to smooth her ruffled plumage. Mrs. Downey approved
of all persons who thus voluntarily acknowledged the high ceremonial character of the Dinner.
She was glad that Mr. Rickman would appear to-night in full evening dress, to rush away in
the middle of the meal, a splendour the more glorious, being brief. She was waiting for the
delightful moment when she would explain to the visitor that the gentleman who had just left
the room was Mr. Rickman, "the reviewer and dramatic critic." She would say it, as she had
said it many times before, with the easy accomplished smile of the hostess familiar with celebrity.

But that moment never came. The very anticipation of it was lost in the thrill of the visitor's
belated entrance. Yet nothing could have been quieter than the manner of it. She (for it was
a lady) came into the room as if she had lived at Mrs. Downey's all her life, and knew her
way already from the doorway to her chair. When she said, "I'm so sorry, I'm afraid I'm rather
late," she seemed to be taking for granted their recognition of a familiar personal characteristic.
Perhaps it was because she was so tall that her voice sounded like music dropped downward from
a height.

There was a stir, a movement down each side of the table; it was subtle, like the flutter of
light and wind, and sympathetic, answering to her footfall and the flowing rhythm of her gown.
As it passed, Mrs. Downey's face became if possible more luminous, Miss Bramble's figure if
possible more erect. A feeble flame flickered in Mr. Partridge's cheeks; Mr. Soper began feeling
nervously in his pocket for the box of bon-bons, his talisman of success; while Mr. Spinks
appeared as if endeavouring to assume a mental attitude not properly his own. Miss Bishop searched,
double-chinned, for any crumbs that might have lodged in the bosom of her blouse; and Flossie,
oh, Flossie became more demure, more correct, more absolutely the model of all propriety. Each
was so occupied with his or herself that no one noticed the very remarkable behaviour of Mr.
Rickman. He rose to his feet. He turned his back on Flossie. There was a look on his face as
of a man seized with sudden terror, and about to fly.

In turning he found himself face to face with Lucia Harden.

He had the presence of mind to stand back and draw her chair from the table for her; so that
his action appeared the natural movement of politeness.

Though she held out her hand by an instinct of recognition, there was a perceptible pause before
she spoke. He had known that it was she before he saw her. She had to look at him twice to
make quite sure.

And then, being sure, she smiled; not the slow, cold smile of politeness that dies downwards
on the lips, but the swift smile of pleasure that leaps to the eyes and forehead.

"Mr. Rickman--? I think I should have known you anywhere else; but I didn't expect to meet
you here."

He looked at her courageously.

And as he looked there fell from him the past five years, the long estranging years of bitterness
and misery and vain desire, and the years, still more estranging, of his madness and his folly;
and not the thinnest phantom shadow of time divided him from the days of Harmouth, That moment
of recognition annihilated all between; a lustre of his life swept away in one sweep of her
eyelids, dropped fathom deep and forgotten in the gaze of her pure and tender eyes. It was
not the Lucia of their last meeting; the tragic and terrible Lucia who had been so divided
from him by her suffering and her grief. As she had appeared to him on that evening, the last
of his brief, incredible happiness, when he sat with her alone in the drawing-room at Court
House, and she had declared her belief in him, so she appeared to him now. The unforgettable
movements of her face, the sweet curve of her mouth (the upper lip so soft and fine that it
seemed to quiver delicately with the rhythm of her pulses and her breath), the turn of her
head, the lifting of her eyebrows, told him that she had kept no memory of his part in the
things that had happened after that.

And he too forgot. With Lucia sitting at his right hand, he forgot the woman sitting at his
left; he forgot the house of bondage, and he forgot that other house where the wedding chamber
yet waited for the bride.

"I should have known you anywhere." His eyes dropped and he said no more.

That act of recognition had only lasted a second; but it had made its mark. Over the dim, fluttering
table was the hush of a profound astonishment. He neither saw nor felt it; nor did he hear
Mrs. Downey scattering the silence with agitated apologies.

"You'll excuse us beginning, Miss Harden; but it's Mr. Rickman's night at the theatre."

Miss Harden looked at him again, lifting her eyebrows with that air of interested inquiry that
he knew so well. And yet, beyond those first half dozen words he said nothing.

"Silly boy," said Mrs. Downey to herself, "why can't he say he's sorry he has to go. I'm sure
I gave him his opportunity." She was annoyed at his rudeness.

Whether he were sorry or not, he went at his appointed time. He never knew how he got out of
the room, nor how he had behaved before going. He had simply looked at her, held her hand and
left her. And he had not said a word; or none at least that he could remember.

Miss Harden was, it seemed, the guest, or the ostensible guest, of Miss Roots. And Miss Roots
enjoyed herself, delighting openly in the recovery of the friend she had lost sight of for
so many years. But from Mrs. Downey's point of view the Dinner that night was not exactly a
success. Mr. Rickman had behaved in an extraordinary manner. Mr. Soper and Miss Bishop had
never looked so--well, so out of place and common. And she could see that Mr. Spinks had taken
advantage of the general consternation to help himself outrageously to ginger.

Lucia took her friend aside when it was over. "You might have told me he was here," said she.

"My dear, I didn't know you knew him."

"Then, did he never--" Whatever Lucia was going to say she thought better of it.

She did not see him till the next night, after dinner, when he came to her as she was sitting
in a corner of the back drawing-room alone. And as he came, she looked at him with a curiously
intent yet baffled gaze, as if trying to fit a present impression to one past. And yet she
could hardly have had any difficulty in recognizing him; for his face was unforgettable, unique;
but she missed something in it which used to be familiar. And now she saw that what she had
missed was the restless look of youth; the sensuous eagerness that had helped to make it so
irregular. It had settled into the other look that she had found there more rarely; the look
that strengthened and refined the mobile features, and brought them into harmony with the clean
prominent lines of the chin and of the serious level brows. Of all his looks it was the one
that she used to like best.

"So you've come back again?" he said.

"But I never was away."

"I thought you were abroad?"

"Who told you that?"

"I don't know. I suppose I must have dreamt it."

"I think you must. I've been in town for the last six weeks."

"In town?"

"Yes, if Hampstead's town. I've been staying with the Jewdwines. Didn't he tell you?"

"No, he never told me anything."

She was silent for a moment. "So that's why you never came to see me."

"To see you? I didn't know--and if I had I shouldn't have thought--" He hesitated.

"Of what? Of coming to see me?"

"No, that you would have cared for me to come."

"I think that's not a thing you ought to say. Of course I cared."

"Well, but I couldn't take that for granted, could I?"

"Couldn't you? Not after the messages I sent you?"

"But I never got any messages."

"Didn't you?" Her upper lip quivered; it was as if she winced at some thought that struck her
like a blow. "Then my cousin must have forgotten to give them to you. Just like him; he is
shockingly careless."

Now Rickman knew it was not just like him; Jewdwine was not careless, he was in all things
painfully meticulous; and he never forgot.

"I don't think I can forgive him for that."

"You must forgive him. He is overwhelmed with work. And he isn't really as thoughtless as you
might suppose. He has given me news of you regularly. You can't think how glad I was to hear
you were getting on so well. As for the latest news of all--" She lifted her face and looked
at him with her sweet kind eyes. "It is true that you are going to be married?"

"Quite true."

"I was so glad to hear that, too."

"Thanks." There was a slight spasm in his throat. That thick difficult word stuck in it and
choked him for the moment.

"I hope I shall meet your wife some day."

"You have met her." Lucia looked puzzled and he smiled, a little sadly for a bridegroom. "You
sat next her at dinner. She's here somewhere."

Lucia turned her head to where Flossie was sitting by a table, sitting very upright, with her
little air of strained propriety.

"Is it--is it that pretty lady? Do you think I might go up and speak to her? I would so like
to know her."

"I'll bring her to you. There's rather a crowd just now in the other room."

He went to her, hardly knowing how he went.

"Flossie," he said, "I want to introduce you to Miss Harden."

Flossie's eyes brightened with surprise and pleasure; for she had learnt from Mrs. Downey that
the visitor was the daughter of Sir Frederick Harden; and Lucia's distinction subdued her from
afar. Keith, being aware of nothing but Lucia, failed to perceive, as he otherwise might have
done, that he had risen in Flossie's opinion by his evident intimacy with Miss Harden. She
came blushing and smiling and a little awkward, steered by Keith. But for all her awkwardness
she had never looked prettier than at that moment of her approach.

If Keith had wanted to know precisely where he stood in the order of Lucia's intimacies, he
might have learnt it from her reception of Miss Walker. By it he might have measured, too,
the height of her belief in him, the depth of her ignorance. She who had divined him was ready
to take his unknown betrothed on trust; to credit her, not with vast intellect, perhaps (what
did that matter?), but certainly with some rare and lovely quality of soul. He loved her; that
was enough. Lucia deduced the quality from the love, not the love from the quality. His pretty
lady must be lovable since he loved her. He had noticed long ago that Lucia's face had a way
of growing more beautiful in the act of admiration; as if it actually absorbed the loveliness
it loved to look upon. And now, as she made a place for Flossie at her side, it wore that look
of wonder, ardent yet restrained, that look of shy and tentative delight with which five years
ago she had approached his Helen. It was as if she had said to herself, "He always brought
his best to show me. Five years ago he brought me his dream, to read and care for. Now he brings
me the real thing, to read and care for too." She was evidently preparing to read Flossie as
if she had been a new and beautiful poem.

He was unaware of all this; unaware of everything except the mingled beatitude and torture
of the moment. He sat leaning forward, staring over his clasped hands at Lucia's feet, where
he longed to fall down and worship. He heard her telling Flossie how glad she was to meet her;
how unexpected was her finding of him here, after fire years; how five years ago she had known
him in Devonshire; and so on. But in his ears the music of her voice detached itself wholly
from the meaning of her words. Thus he missed the assurance which, if he had only listened
intelligently, they might have had for him; the assurance of an indestructible friendship that
welcomed and enfolded his pretty lady for his sake.

But whatever her almost joyous acceptance of the pretty lady promised for the future, it could
not be said that, conversationally, Lucia was getting on very fast with Flossie in the present;
and Rickman's abstraction did not make things easier. Therefore she was a little relieved when
Miss Roots joined them, and Rickman, startled into consciousness, got up and left the room.
He feared that lady's sympathy and shrewdness. Nothing could be hidden from her clever eyes.

And now, perceiving that the conversation flagged, Miss Roots endeavoured to support it.

"Have you seen Metropolis?" she asked in her tired voice.

Lucia shook her head. "I don't know that I want to see it."

"You'd better not say so before Miss Walker."

"Oh, never mind me," said Miss Walker. "I haven't been yet. Is it good?"

"Some people seem to think so. It depends."

"Yes; there's such a difference in the way they put them on the stage, too."

Miss Roots' face relaxed, and her fatigued intelligence awoke.

"Who's on in it?" asked Flossie, happy and unconscious; and the spirit of mischief seized upon
Miss Roots.

"I can't tell you. I'm not well posted in these things. But I think you'd better not ask Mr.
Rickman to take you to see Metropolis."

Flossie was mystified, and a little indignant. If the play was so improper, why had Miss Roots
taken for granted that she had seen it?

"That wasn't at all nice of her, was it?" said Lucia, smiling as Miss Roots went away. Her
look was a healing touch laid on Flossie's wounded vanity. "That's the sort of little trap
she used to lay for me."

"I suppose you mean she was rotting me. I always know when other people are rotting. But that's
the worst of her; you never can tell, and she makes you look so ignorant, doesn't she?"

"She makes me feel ignorant, but that's another thing."

"But whatever did she mean just now?"

"Just now she meant that you knew all about Metropolis."

"Why should I? Do you know anything about it?"

"Not much; though it is my cousin's paper. But as Mr. Rickman writes for it, you see--"

"Well, how was I to know that? He's always writing for something; and he'd never think of coming
to me every time. I never talk shop to him, and he never talks shop to me. Of course he told
me that he'd got on to some better paying thing," she added, anxious to show that she was not
shut out from the secrets of his heart; "but when you said Metropolis I didn't take it in."

Lucia made no further attempt to converse. She said good-night and followed Sophie Roots to
her tiny room.

"That was rather dreadful," she said to herself. "I wonder--" But if she did not linger long
over her wondering neither did she stop to find out why she was so passionately anxious to
think well of the woman who was to be Keith Rickman's wife, and why it was such a relief to
her to be angry with Sophie for teasing the poor child.

CHAPTER LV

He asked himself how it was that he had had no premonition of the thing that was about to happen
to him; that the supreme moment should have come upon him so casually and with so light a step;
that he went to meet it in a mood so commonplace and unprepared? (Good Heavens! He remembered
that he had been eating pea soup at the time, and wishing it were artichoke.)

Had he not known that she would come back again, and in just that way? Had he not looked for
her coming five years ago? And what were five years, after all? How was it that he had heard
no summons of the golden and reverberant hour?

And what was he going to do with it, or it with him, now that it had come? That was a question
that he preferred to leave unanswered for the present.

It seemed that Lucia was going to stay for a week as Miss Roots' guest; and it was Mrs. Downey's
hope that she would be with them for a much longer period on her own account. This hope Rickman
judged to be altogether baseless; she would never be able to bear the place for more than a
week. He inquired of Miss Roots early the next morning on this subject; and at the same time
he found out from her what Lucia had been doing in the last five years. She had not been (as
Jewdwine had allowed him to suppose) abroad all the time with Kitty Palliser. She had only
lived with Miss Palliser in the holidays. The rest of the year, of the five years, she had
been working for her living as music mistress in a Women's College somewhere in the south of
England. To his gesture of horror Miss Roots replied that this was by no means the hideous
destiny he conceived it to be.

"But--for her--" he exclaimed.

"And why not for her?" Miss Roots, B.A., retorted, stung by his undisguised repugnance. If
Lucia had got her post merely by interest (which Miss Roots seemed to consider as something
of a blot on her career) at the end of her first year she had the pick of the students waiting
for her. Unfortunately Lucia had never been strong; and this summer her health had completely
broken down.

At that he shuddered, and turned abruptly away. Miss Roots looked at him and wondered why.
When he approached her again it was to offer her, with every delicacy and hesitation, the loan
of his study for the time of Miss Harden's visit. This was not an easy thing to do; but he
was helped by several inspirations. The room, he said, was simply standing empty all day. He
had hardly any use for it now. He would be kept busy at the office up to the time of his marriage.
And he thought it would be a little more comfortable for Miss Harden than the public drawing-room.

"I want," he said (lying with a certain splendour), "to pay some attention to her. You see,
she's my editor's cousin--"

Miss Roots turned on him a large look that took him in, his monstrous mendacity and all. But
she nodded as much as to say that the explanation passed.

"One hardly likes to think of her, you know, sitting in the same room with Soper."

"We all have to put up with Mr. Soper."

"Yes; but if she isn't strong, she ought to have some place where she can be alone and rest.
Besides, it'll be nicer for you. You'll see a great deal more of her, you know, that way."

In the end the offer was accepted. For, as Miss Roots pointed out to her friend, it would give
him far more pleasure to lend his room than to sit in it himself.

Certainly it gave him pleasure, a thrilling, subtle, and perfidious pleasure, every time that
he thought of Lucia occupying his room. But before she could be allowed to enter, he caused
it to be thoroughly cleansed, and purified as far as possible from the tobacco smoke that lingered
in the curtains and the armchairs. He tidied it up with his own hands, removing or concealing
the unlovelier signs of his presence and profession. He bought several cushions (silk and down)
for the sofa, and a curtain for the door to keep out the draught, and a soft rug for Lucia's
feet; also a tea-table, a brass kettle and a spirit lamp, and flowers in an expensive pot.
He did things to them to make them look as if they had been some little time in use. He caused
a wrinkle to appear in the smooth blue cheeks of the sofa cushions. He rubbed some of the youth
off the edges of the tea-table. He made the brass kettle dance lightly on the floor, until,
without injury to its essential beauty, it had acquired a look of experience. It was the deceit
involved in these proceedings that gave him the first clear consciousness of guilt. He persuaded
himself that all these articles would come in nicely for the little house at Ealing, then remembered
that he had provided most of them already.

In doubt as to the propriety of these preparations, he again approached Miss Roots. "I say,"
said he, "you needn't tell her all these things are mine. I'm going to leave them here in case
she wants to stay on afterwards. She won't have to pay so much then, you know." He hesitated.
"Do you think that's a thing that can be done?"

"Oh yes, it can be done," she replied with an unmistakable emphasis.

"But I mayn't do it? Mayn't I? It's all right if she doesn't know, you know."

Miss Roots said nothing; but he gathered that she would not betray him, that she understood.

He could not explain matters half so clearly to himself. He might have wanted to lend his study
to his friend's cousin; he certainly did want to lend it to Lucia for her own sake; but besides
these very proper and natural desires he had other motives which would not bear too strict
examination. Lucia sitting in the same room with Mr. Soper was not a spectacle that could be
calmly contemplated; but he hoped that by providing her with a refuge from Mr Soper he might
induce her to stay till the moment of his own departure. And there was another selfish consideration.
It was impossible to see her, to talk to her with any pleasure in the public drawing-room.
Lucia could not come into his study as long as it was his; but if he gave it up to her and
her friend, it was just possible that he might be permitted to call on her there. That she
accepted him as a friend he could not any longer doubt. There were so many things that he had
to say to her, such long arrears of explanation and understanding to make up. He could see
that, unlike the Lucia he used to know, she had misunderstood him; indeed she had owned as
much. And for this he had to thank Horace Jewdwine.

Jewdwine's behaviour gave him much matter for reflection, painful, but instructive. Jewdwine
had not lied to him about Lucia's movements; but he had allowed him to remain in error. He
had kept his cousin regularly posted in the news she had asked for, as concerning an unfortunate
young man in whom they were both interested; but he had contrived that no sign of her solicitude
should reach the object of it. It was as if he had been merely anxious to render an account
of his stewardship; to assure her that the unfortunate young man was now prospering under his
protection, was indeed doing so well that there was no occasion for Lucia to worry herself
about him any more. Apparently he had even gone so far as to admit that there was friendship
between Rickman and himself, while taking care that there should never be anything of the sort
between Rickman and Lucia. He had constituted himself a way by which news of Rickman might
reach Lucia; but he had sternly closed every path from Lucia to Rickman. That meant that Lucia
might be depended upon; but that Rickman must be allowed no footing lest he should advance
too far. In other words it meant that they acknowledged, and always would acknowledge, the
genius while they judged it expedient to ignore the man.

But she had not always ignored him. Did it not rather mean, then, that Jewdwine would not trust
her there; that, knowing her nature and how defenceless it lay before the impulses of its own
kindness, he feared for her any personal communication with his friend? It did not occur to
Rickman that what Jewdwine dreaded more than anything for Lucia was the influence of a unique
and irresistible personal charm. As far as he could see, Jewdwine was merely desperately anxious
to protect his kinswoman from what he considered an undesirable acquaintance. And five years
ago his fears and his behaviour would have been justifiable; for Rickman owned that at that
period he had not been fit to sit in the same room with Lucia Harden, far less, if it came
to that, than poor Soper. But his life since he had known her was judged even by Jewdwine to
be irreproachable. As Rickman understood the situation, he had been sacrificed to a prejudice,
a convention, an ineradicable class-feeling on the part of the distinguished and fastidious
don. It was not the class-feeling itself that he resented; he could have forgiven Jewdwine
a sentiment over which he had apparently no control; he could have forgiven him anything, even
his silence and his subterfuge, if he had only delivered Lucia's messages. That was an unpardonable
cruelty. It was like holding back a cup of water from a man dying of thirst. He had consumed
his heart with longing for some word or sign from her; he had tortured himself with his belief
in her utter repudiation of him; and Jewdwine, who had proof of the contrary, had abandoned
him to his belief. He could only think that, after taking him up so gently, Lucia had dropped
him and left him where he fell. He owned that Jewdwine was not bound to tell him that Lucia
had returned to England, or to provide against any false impression he might form as to her
whereabouts; and it was not there, of course, that the cruelty came in. He could have borne
the sense of physical separation if, instead of being forced to infer her indifference from
her silence, he had known that her kind thoughts had returned to him continually; if he had
known that whatever else had been taken from him, he had kept her friendship. Her friendship--it
was little enough compared with what he wanted--but it had already done so much for him that
he knew what he could have made of it, if he had only been certain that it was his. He could
have lived those five years on the memory of her, as other men live on hope; sustained by the
intangible but radiant presence, by inimitable, incommunicable ardours, by immaterial satisfactions
and delights. If they had not destroyed all bodily longing, they would at least have made impossible
its separation from her and transference to another woman. They would have saved him from this
base concession to the folly of the flesh, this marriage which, as its hour approached, seemed
to him more inevitable and more disastrous. Madness lay in the thought that his deliverance
had been near him on the very day when he fixed that hour; and that at no time had it been
very far away. No; not when two years ago he had stood hesitating on the edge of the inexpiable,
immeasurable folly; the folly that had received, engulfed him now beyond deliverance and return.
If only he had known; if he could have been sure of her friendship; if he could have seen her
for one moment in many months, one hour in many years, the thing would never have begun; or,
being begun, could never have been carried through.

Meanwhile the friendship remained. His being married could not make it less; and his being
unmarried would certainly not have made it more. As there could be neither more nor less of
it, he ought to have been able to regard it as a simple, definite, solidly satisfactory thing.
But he had no sooner realized that so much at least was his than he perceived that he had only
the very vaguest notion as to the nature and extent of it. Of all human relations, friendship
was the obscurest, the most uncertainly defined. At this point he remembered one fatal thing
about her; it had always been her nature to give pleasure and be kind. The passion, he imagined,
was indestructible; and with a temperament like that she might be ten times his friend without
his knowing from one day to another how he really stood with her. And hitherto one means of
judging had been altogether denied to him; he had never had an opportunity of observing her
ways with other men.

This third evening he watched her jealously, testing her dealings with him by her behaviour
to the boarders, and notably to Spinks and Soper. For Lucia, whether she was afraid of hurting
the feelings of these people, or whether she hesitated to establish herself altogether in Mr.
Rickman's study, had determined to spend the first hours after dinner in the drawing-room.
Miss Roots protested against these weak concessions to the social order. "You'll never be able
to stand them, dear," she said; "they're terrible."

But Lucia had her way. "You've stood them for five years," said she.

"Yes, but I've had my work, and I'm used to it; and in any case I'm not Miss Lucia Harden."

"Mr. Rickman stands them."

"Does he? You wouldn't say so if you'd known him for five years."

"I wonder why he stayed."

"Do you? Perhaps Miss Flossie could enlighten you."

"Of course. I was forgetting her."

"Don't forget her," said Miss Roots drily; "she's important."

Miss Roots went up to the study, and Lucia turned into the drawing-room. She owned to herself
that what took her there was not so much an impulse of politeness as an irresistible desire
to know what manner of people Keith Rickman had had to live among. In those evenings the scene
had grown familiar to her; the long room with the three tall windows looking on the street;
the Nottingham lace curtains tied with yellow sashes in the middle; the vivid blue-green painting
of the wood-work, a bad match for the wall paper; the oleographs and pier-glasses in their
gilded frames; the carpet, with its monstrous meaningless design in brown and amber; the table,
secretary, and cabinet of walnut wood whose markings simulated some horrible discoloration
of decay; the base company of chairs, and the villainous little maroon velvet ottoman, worn
by the backs of many boarders; and beyond the blue-green folding doors the dim little chamber
looking on a mews. And the boarders, growing familiar, too, to her sensitive impressionable
brain; Miss Bramble, upright in her morning gown and poor little lace cap and collar; Mrs.
Downey sitting, flushed and weary, in the most remote and most uncomfortable chair; Mr. Spinks
reading the paper with an air of a man engaged in profound literary research; the two girls
sitting together on the ottoman under the gaselier; Mr. Soper wandering uneasily among them,
with his insignificant smile and his offerings of bon-bons; and Keith Rickman sitting apart,
staring at his hands, or looking at Flossie with his blue, deep-set, profoundly pathetic eyes.
For that pretty lady's sake, how he must have suffered in those five years.

Rickman, from his retreat in the back drawing-room, watched her ways. She was kind to Miss
Bramble. She was kind to that old ruffian Partridge whose neck he would willingly have wrung.
She was kind, good Heavens! yes, she was kind to Soper. When the commercial gentleman approached
her with his infernal box of bon-bons, she took one. He could have murdered Soper. He was profoundly
depressed by the spectacle of Lucia's ways. If she behaved like that to every one, what had
he to go upon? Nothing, nothing; it was just her way. And yet, he did not exactly see her sending
messages to Soper.

He rose and opened the grand piano that stood in the back drawing-room. He went up to her (meeting
with a nervous smile Flossie's inquiring look as he passed). He stood a moment with one arm
on the chimney-piece, and waited, looking down at Lucia. Presently she raised her head and
smiled, as surely she could never have smiled at Soper.

"Do you want me to play for you?" she said.

"That is exactly what I wanted." He drew the flattering inference that, while apparently absorbed
in conversation with Miss Bramble, she had been aware of his presence in the background, and
of every movement he had made.

"Well, I must ask our hostess first, mustn't I?"

She went to that lady and bent over her with her request.

If Lucia's aim was to give pleasure she had certainly achieved it. Mrs. Downey may or may not
have loved music, but she was visibly excited at the prospect of hearing it. So were the boarders.
They settled themselves solemnly in their seats. Spinks crushed his noisy newspaper into a
ball and thrust it behind him; Miss Bramble put away her clicking needles; while Mr. Soper
let himself sink into a chair with elaborate silence; one and all (with the exception of Mr.
Partridge, who slept) they turned their faces, politely expectant, towards the inner room.
It struck Lucia that in this the poor things were better mannered than many a more aristocratic
audience.

Rickman lit the candles on the piano and seated himself beside her.

"I know what I have got to play." said she.

"What?"

"The Sonata Appassionata, isn't it?"

"Fancy your remembering."

"Of course I remember. It isn't every one who cares for Beethoven. I'm afraid the others won't
like it, though."

"They've got to like it," he said doggedly.

And Lucia, with her fatal passion for giving pleasure, played. And as the stream of music flowed
through the half-lit room, it swept away all sense of his surroundings, all memory of the love
and truth and honour pledged to his betrothed, and every little scruple of pity or of conscience.
It bore down upon the barriers that stood between him and Lucia, and swept them away too. And
the secret sources of his inspiration, sealed for so many months, were opened and flowed with
the flowing of the stream; and over them the deep flood of his longing and his misery rose
and broke and mingled with the tumult. And through it, and high above it all, it was as if
his soul made music with her; turning the Sonata Appassionata into a singing of many voices,
a symphony of many strings.

So lost was he that he failed to perceive the effect of her playing on the audience of the
outer room. Flossie sat there, very quiet in her awe; Miss Bishop kept her loose mouth open,
drinking in the sounds; Mr. Soper leaned forward breathing heavily in a stupid wonder; there,
over the tops of the chairs, one up-standing ribbon on Miss Bramble's cap seemed to be beating
time to the music all by itself; while Mrs. Downey flushed and swelled with pride at the astonishing
capabilities of her piano. He did not notice either that, as Lucia played the tender opening
bars of the Sonata, Mr. Partridge shook off the slumber that bound him at this hour; that,
as she struck the thundering chords that signal the presto Finale, he raised his head like
an old war-horse at the sound of the trumpet. He stared solemnly at Lucia as she came forward
followed by Rickman; then he rose from his own consecrated chair, heavily but with a certain
dignity suited to the moral grandeur of the act, and made a gesture of abdication.

"I was a professional myself once," said he. "My instrument was the flute."

There was no doubt about the spirit of Lucia's reception that night. Perhaps the finest appreciation
of connoisseurs had never touched her more than did the praise of that simple audience. Rickman
was the only one who did not thank her. For when her playing was over he had turned suddenly
very cold, seized with a fierce shivering, the reaction from the tense fever of his nerves;
and it was with difficulty that he controlled the chattering of his teeth. But before they
parted for the night he asked if he might "call" some afternoon; his tone pointing the allusion
to the arrangement that permitted this approach, "We can't talk very well here, can we?" he said.

She answered by inviting him and Miss Walker to tea the next day. He was conscious of a base
inward exultation when he heard poor Flossie say that she could only look in later for a little
while. In October, work was heavy at the Bank, and the Beaver seldom got home till after tea-time.
His conscience asked him sternly if he had reckoned on that too?

When to-morrow came, Miss Hoots was busy also, and disappeared after tea. He had certainly
reckoned on that disappearance.

There was a moment of embarrassment on his part when he found himself alone with Lucia in the
room (his room) that he had made ready for her. He had done his work so thoroughly well that
the place looked as if it had been ready for her since the beginning of time.

She was tired. He remembered how tired she used to be at Harmouth; and he noticed with a pang
how little it took to tire her now. She leaned back in his chair, propped by the cushions he
had chosen for her (chosen with a distinct prevision of the beauty of the white face and dark
hair against that particular shade of greenish blue). She had been reading one of his books;
it lay in her lap. Her feet rested on his fender, they stretched out towards the warmth of
his fire. If only it were permitted to him always to buy things for her; always to give her
the rest she needed; always to care for her and keep her warm and well. He wondered how things
had gone with her those five years. Had she been happy in that college in the south? Had they
been kind to her, those women; or had they tortured her, as only women can torture women, in
some devilish, subtle way? Or would overwork account for the failure of her strength? He thought
he saw signs in her tender face of some obscure, deep-seated suffering of the delicate nerves.
Well, anyhow she was resting now. And in looking at her he rested, too, from the labour of
conscience and the trouble of desire. Heart and senses were made quiet by her mere presence.
If his hands trembled as they waited on her it was not with passion but with some new feeling,
indescribable and profound. For brought so near to him as this, so near as to create the illusion
of possession, she became for him something too sacred for his hands to touch.

He could count on about half an hour of this illusion before Flossie appeared. Afraid of losing
one moment of it, he began instantly on the thing he had to say.

"All this time I've been waiting to thank you for your introduction to Fielding."

"Oh," she said eagerly, "what did he say? Tell me."

He told her. As she listened he could see how small a pleasure was enough to give life again
to her tired face.

"I am so glad," she said in the low voice of sincerity; "so very glad." She paused. "That justifies
my belief in you. Not that it needed any justification."

"I don't know. Your cousin, who is the best critic I know, would tell you that it did."

"My cousin--perhaps. But he does see that those poems are great. Only he's so made that I think
no greatness reconciles him to--well, to little faults, if they are faults of taste."

"Did you find many faults of taste?"

She smiled. "I found some; but only in the younger poems. There were none--none at all--in
the later ones. Which of course is what one might expect."

"It is, indeed. Did you look at the dates? Did you notice that all those later things were
written either at Harmouth, or after?"

"I did."

"And didn't that strike you as significant? Didn't you draw any conclusions?"

"I drew the conclusion that--that the poet I knew had worked out his own salvation."

"Exactly--the poet you knew. Didn't it occur to you that he might never have done it, if you
hadn't known him?"

He looked at her steadily. The colour on her face had deepened, but her eyes, as they met his,
were grave and meditative. She seemed to be considering the precise meaning of his words before
she answered.

"No, I didn't."

"What, never? Think. Don't you remember how you used to help me?"

She shook her head. "I only remember that I meant to have helped you. And I was very sorry
because I couldn't. But I see now how absurd it was of me; and how unnecessary."

He knew that she was thinking now of her private secretary.

"It was beautiful of you. But, you know, it couldn't have happened. It was one of those beautiful
things that never can happen."

"That's why I was so sorry. I thought it must look as if I hadn't meant it."

"But you did mean it. Nothing can alter that, can it?"

"No. You must take the will for the deed."

"I do. The will is the only thing that matters."

"Yes. But--it was absurd of me--but I thought you might have been counting on it?"

"Did I count on it? I suppose I did; though I knew it was impossible. You forget that I knew
all the time it was impossible. It was only a beautiful idea."

"I'm sorry, then, that it had to remain an idea."

"Don't be sorry. Perhaps that's the only way it could remain beautiful. It wouldn't have done,
you know. You only thought it could because you were so kind. It was all very well for me to
work for you for three weeks or so. It would have been very different when you had me on your
hands for a whole year at a stretch. And it's much better for me that it never came off than
if I'd had to see you sorry for it afterwards."

"If I had been sorry, I should not have let you see it."

"I should have seen it, though, whether you let me or not. I always see these things."

"But I think, you know, that I wouldn't have been sorry."

"You would! You would! You couldn't have stood me."

"I think I could."

"What, a person with a villainous cockney accent? Who was capable of murdering the Queen's
English any day in your drawing-room?"

"Oh, no; whatever you do you'll never do that."

"Well, I don't know. I'm not really to be trusted unless I've got a pen in my hand. I'm better
than I used to be. I've struggled against it. Still, a man who has once murdered the Queen's
English always feels, you know, as if he'd got the body under the sofa. It's like homicidal
mania; the poor wretch may be cured, but he lives in terror of an attack returning. He knows
it doesn't matter what he is or what he does; he may live like a saint or write like an archangel;
but one aitch omitted from his conversation will wreck him at the last."

"You needn't be afraid; you never omit them."

"You mean I never omit them now. But I did five years ago. I couldn't help it. Everybody about
me did it. The only difference between them and me was that I knew it, and they didn't."

"You were conscious of it, then?"

"Conscious? Do you know, that for every lapse of the sort in your presence I suffered the torments
of the damned? Do you suppose I didn't know how terrible I was?"

She shook her head, this time with disapproval. "You shouldn't say these things."

"Do you mean, I shouldn't say them, or shouldn't say them to you?"

"Well, I think you shouldn't say them to me. Don't you see that it sounds as if I had done
or said something to make you feel like that."

"You? Good Heavens! rather not! But whatever you said or did, I couldn't help knowing how you
thought of me."

"And how was that?"

"Well, as half a poet, you know, and half a hair-dresser."

"That's funny; but it's another of the things you shouldn't say. Because you know it isn't true."

"I only say them because I want you to see how impossible it was."

"For me to help you?"

"Yes."

"I do see it. It was impossible--but not for any of the reasons you suppose. If it had been
possible--"

"What then?"

"Then, perhaps, I needn't have felt so sorry and ashamed. You know I really am a little bit
ashamed of having asked a great poet to be my private secretary."

It was thus that she extricated herself from the embarrassing position in which his clumsiness
had placed her. For he saw what she meant when she told him that he should not say these things
to her. He had made her feel that she ought to defend him from the charges he had brought against
himself, when she knew them to be true, when her gentleness could only have spared him at the
expense of her sincerity. How beautifully she had turned it off. He refrained from the obvious
pretty speeches. His eyes had answered her.

"If you knew that you had done something for me; not a little thing but a great one--" He paused;
and in the silence they heard the sound of Flossie's feet coming up the stair. He had only
just time to finish his sentence--"Would it please you or annoy you?"

She answered hurriedly; for as she rose, Flossie was knocking at the door.

"It would please me more than I can say."

"Then," he said in a voice that was too low for Flossie to hear, "you shall know it."

CHAPTER LVI

It was impossible that Rickman's intimacy with Miss Harden should pass unnoticed by the other
boarders. But it was well understood by Miss Roots, by Flossie and by all of them, that any
attentions he paid to her were paid strictly to his editor's cousin. And if there was the least
little shade of duplicity in this explanation, his conscience held him so far guiltless, seeing
that he had adopted it more on Lucia's account than his own. Incidentally, however, he was
not displeased that it had apparently satisfied Flossie.

But if Flossie felt no uneasiness at the approaches of Mr. Rickman and Miss Harden, the news
that Lucia was staying under the same roof with the impossible young poet could hardly be received
with complacency by her relations. It threw Edith Jewdwine into an agony of alarm. Horace as
yet knew nothing about it; for he was abroad. Even Edith had heard nothing until her return
from her autumn holiday in Wales, when a letter from Lucia informed her that she would be staying
for the next week or two with Sophie Roots in Tavistock Place. Edith was utterly unprepared
for her cousin's change of plans. She had not asked Lucia to go with her to Wales; for Lucia's
last idea had been to spend September and October in Devonshire with Kitty Palliser. Edith,
eager for her holiday, had not stopped to see whether the arrangements with Kitty were completed;
and Lucia, aware of Edith's impatience, had omitted to mention that they were not. But what
made Lucia's move so particularly trying to Edith was the circumstance that relations between
them had latterly been a little strained; and when Edith searched her heart she found that
for this unhappy tension it was she and not Lucia who had been to blame.

And now (while Lucia was resting calmly on Mr. Rickman's sofa), in the grave and beautiful
drawing-room of the old brown house at Hampstead a refined and fastidious little lady walked
up and down in a state of high nervous excitement. That little lady bore in her slight way
a remarkable resemblance to her brother Horace. It was Horace in petticoats, diminutive and
dark. There was the same clearness, the same distinction of feature, the same supercilious
forehead, the same quivering of the high-bred nose, the same drooping of the unhappy mouth.
Bat the flame of Edith's small steel black eyes revealed a creature of more ardour and more energy.

At the moment Edith was visited with severe compunction; an intrusive uncomfortable feeling
that she had never before been thus compelled to entertain. For looking back upon the past
two years she perceived that her conduct as mistress of that drawing-room and house had not
always been as fastidious and refined as she could wish. The house and the drawing-room were
mainly the cause of it. Before Horace became editor of The Museion, Edith had been mistress
of a minute establishment kept up with difficulty on a narrow income. In a drawing-room seventeen
feet by twelve she received with difficulty a small circle of the cultured; ladies as refined
and fastidious as herself, and (after superhuman efforts on the part of these ladies) occasionally
a preoccupied and superlatively married man. From this position, compatible with her exclusiveness,
but not with her temperament or her ambition, Edith found herself raised suddenly to a perfect
eminence of culture and refinement as head of the great editor's house. She held a sort of
salon, to which her brother's reputation attracted many figures if possible more distinguished
than his own. She found herself the object of much flattering attention on the part of persons
anxious to stand well with Horace Jewdwine. With a dignity positively marvellous in so small
a woman, her head held high and made higher still by the raised roll of her black hair, Edith
reigned for three years in that long drawing-room. She laid down the law grandiloquently to
the young aspirants who thronged her court; she rewarded with superb compliments those who
had achieved. Happily for Edith those gentlemen were masters of social legerdemain; and they
conveyed their smiles up the sleeves of their dress-coats adroitly unperceived.

And then, in the very flower of her small dynasty, Lucia came. Lucia, with her music and her
youth and her indestructible charm. And the little court, fickle by its very nature, went over
bodily to Lucia! To Lucia who did not want it, who would much rather have been without it,
but must needs encourage it, play to it, sympathize with it, just to satisfy that instinct
of hers which was so fatal and so blind. And Horace, who to Edith's great relief had freed
himself from this most undesirable attachment, who for three years had presented every appearance
of judicious apathy, Horace, perceiving that men's eyes (and women's too) loved to follow and
to rest upon his cousin, discovering all over again on his own account the mysterious genius
of her fascination, had ended by bowing down and worshipping too. His adoration was the more
profound (and in Edith's shrewd opinion more dangerous), because he kept it to himself; because
it pledged him to nothing in the eyes of Lucia and the world.

But the eyes of the world, especially of the journalistic world, are exceedingly sharp; and
if Lucia had not been charming in herself those literary ladies and gentlemen would have found
her so, as the lady whom Horace Jewdwine was presumably about to marry. It was Hanson, Hanson
of the Courier, who sent the rumour round, "La reine est morte, vive la reine." The superb
despotic Edith saw herself not only deserted, but deposed; left with neither court nor kingdom;
declining from the palace of royalty to the cottage of the private gentlewoman, and maintaining
her imperious refinement on a revenue absurdly disproportioned to that end. Not that as yet
there had been any suggestion of Edith's abdication. As yet Lucia had only spent her winter
holidays at Hampstead. But when, at the end of the present summer, Lucia suddenly and unexpectedly
broke down and her salary ceased with her strength, it became a question of providing her with
a home for three months at the very least. Even then, the revolution was delayed; for Horace
had gone abroad in the autumn. But with every month that Edith remained in power she loved
power more; and in her heart she had been considering how, without scandal to the world, or
annoyance to Horace, or offence to Lucia, she could put her rival delicately aside. She had
long been on the look-out for easy posts for Lucia, for posts in rich and aristocratic families
in the provinces, or better still for ladies in want of charming travelling companions.

But now, better, a thousand times better, that Edith should have been forced to abdicate than
that Lucia should have taken herself out of the way in this fashion; a fashion so hideously
suggestive of social suicide; that she should be living within four miles of her fastidious
and refined relations in a fifth-rate boarding-house inhabitated by goodness knows whom. If
only that had been all! Of course it was intolerable to think of Lucia mixing with the sort
of people whom nobody but Goodness ever does know; but, after all, she wouldn't mix with them;
she hadn't had time to; and if instantly removed from the place of contamination she might
yet be presented to society again without spot or taint. But it was not all. Out of the many
hundred base abodes of Bloomsbury Lucia had picked out the one house she ought to have avoided,
the one address which for five years her cousin Horace had been endeavouring to conceal from
her; it being the address of the one disreputable, the one impossible person of his acquaintance.
Rickman had appeared, as strange people sometimes did, at Edith's court; an appearance easily
explained and justified by the fact that he was a genius of whom Horace Jewdwine hoped great
things. But he had never been suffered in that salon when Lucia had been there. Horace had
taken untold pains, he had even lied frequently and elaborately, to prevent Lucia's encountering,
were it only by accident, that one impossible person; and here she was living, actually living
in the same house with him. Even if Rickman could be trusted to efface himself (which wasn't
very likely; for if there is anything more irrepressible than a cockney vulgarian it is a poet;
and Rickman was both!), could they, could anybody trust Lucia and her idiotic impulse to be
kind? To be kind at any cost. She never calculated the cost of anything; which was another
irritating reflection for Miss Jewdwine. Poor as she was, she thought nothing of paying twenty-five
or thirty shillings for her board and a miserable lodging, when she might--she ought--to have
been living with her relations free of all expense. But there was the sting, the unspeakable
sting; for it meant that Lucia would do anything, pay anything, rather than stop another week
in Hampstead. And Edith knew that it was she who had made Lucia feel like that; she who had
driven her to this deplorable step. Not by anything done, or said, or even implied; but by
things not done, things not said, things darkly or passionately thought. For Lucia, with her
terrible gift of intuition, must somehow have known all the time what Edith hardly knew, what
at least she would never have recognized if she had not observed the effect on Lucia. Edith
had no patience with people who were so abominably sensitive. It was all nerves, nerves, nerves.
Lucia was and always had been hopelessly neurotic. And if people were to be shaken and upset
by every passing current of another person's thought, it was, Edith said to herself a little
pathetically, rather hard upon the other person. Nobody can help their thoughts; and there
was something positively indecent in the uncanny insight that divined them. All the same, Edith,
confronted with the consequences of these movements of the unfettered brain, was stung with
compunction and considerable shame. Horace would be furious when he knew; more furious with
Edith than Lucia. Therefore Edith was furious with Sophia Roots, the cause of this disaster,
who must have known that even if Lucia was too weak-minded to refuse her most improper invitation,
that invitation ought never to have been given. Edith had her pride, the pride of all the Jewdwines
and the Hardens; and her private grievances gave way before a family catastrophe. She did not
want Lucia at Hampstead; but at all cost to herself Lucia must be brought back to her cousin's
house before anybody knew that she had ever left it. It was even better that Horace should
marry her than that they should risk the scandal of a mesalliance, or even-a passing acquaintance
with a man like Rickman. She would go and fetch Lucia now, this very evening.

She went as fast as a hansom could take her, and was shown up into Rickman's room where she
had the good luck to find Lucia alone. Lucia was too tired to go out very much; and at that
moment of her cousin's entrance she was resting on Mr. Rickman's sofa. As the poor poet had
been so careful to remove the more telling tokens of his occupation, Edith did not see that
it was Mr. Rickman's room; and she was a little surprised to find Sophia Roots so comfortably,
not to say luxuriously lodged.

She lost no time in delivering her soul, lest Sophia should pop in upon them.

"Lu-chee-a," she said with emphasis, "I think you ought to have told me."

"Told you what?"

"Why, that you hadn't anywhere to go to, instead of coming here."

"But I didn't come here because I hadn't anywhere to go to. I came because I wanted to see
something of Sophie after all these years."

"You could have seen Sophie at Hampstead. I would have asked her to stay with you if I'd known
you wanted her."

"That would have been very nice of you. But I'm afraid she wouldn't have come. You see she
can't leave her work at the Museum--ever, poor thing."

"Oh. Then you don't see so much of Sophie after all?"

"Not as much as I should like. But I must be somewhere; and I'm perfectly happy here."

As she rose to make tea for Edith (at the poet's table, and with the poet's brass kettle),
she looked, to Edith's critical eyes, most suspiciously at home. Edith's eyes, alert for literature,
roamed over the bookcases before they settled on the tea-pot (the poet's tea-pot); but it was
the tea-pot that brought her to her point. Did Lucia mix with the other boarders after all?

"This isn't a bad room," she said. "I suppose you have all your meals up here?"

"Only tea and breakfast."

"But, my dear girl, where do you lunch and dine?"

"Downstairs, in the dining-room."

"With all the other boarders?"

Lucia smiled. "Yes, all of them. You see we can't very well turn any of them out."

"Really, Lucia, before you do things like this you might stop to consider how your friends
must feel about it."

"Why should they feel anything? It's all right, Edith, really it is."

"Right for you to take your meals with these dreadful people? You can't say they're not dreadful,
Lucia; for they are."

"They're not half so dreadful as you might suppose. In fact you've no idea how nice they can
be, some of them. Indeed I don't know one of them that isn't kind and considerate and polite
in some way. Yes, polite. They're all inconceivably polite. And do you know, they all want
me to stay on; and I've half a mind to stay."

"Oh, no, my dear, you're not going to stay. I've come to carry you off the very minute we've
finished tea. Sophia should have known better than to bring you here."

"Poor little Sophie. If she can stand it, I might."

"That doesn't follow at all. And if you can stand it, your relations can't. So make up your
mind that you're going back with me."

"It's extremely kind of you; but I should hurt Sophie's feelings terribly if I went. Why should
I go?"

"Because it isn't a fit place for you to be in. To begin with, I don't suppose they feed you
properly."

"You can't say I look the worse for it."

No, certainly she couldn't; for Lucia looked better than she had done for many months. In the
fine air of Hampstead she had been white and languid and depressed; here in Bloomsbury she
had a faint colour, and in spite of her fatigue, looked almost vigorous. What was more, her
face bore out her own account of herself. She had said she was perfectly happy, and she looked it.

A horrible idea occurred to Edith. But she did not mean to speak of Rickman till she had got
Lucia safe at Hampstead.

"Besides," said Lucia simply, "I'm staying for the best of all possible reasons; because I
want to."

"Well, if it's pleasant for you, you forget that it's anything but pleasant for Horace and
me. Horace--if you care what he thinks--would be exceedingly annoyed if he knew about it."

"Isn't he just a little unreasonable?"

"He is not. Is it nice for him to know that you prefer living with these people to staying
in his house?"

"What would he say if he knew that one of these people lent us this room?"

The words and the smile that accompanied them challenged Edith to speak; and speak she must.
But she could not bring herself to utter the abominable name. "And was that on Sophie's account
or yours?"

"On both our accounts; and it was beautifully done."

"Oh, if it was done beautifully there's no doubt on whose account it was done. I should have
thought you were the last person, Lucia, to put yourself under such an obligation."

"There was no obligation. It was kinder to Mr. Rickman to take his room than refuse it, that
was all."

Lucia had no difficulty whatever in bringing out the name. And that, if Edith's perceptions
had not been dulled by horror, would have struck her as a favourable sign.

"Young Rickman!" Edith's astonishment was a master stroke in all that it ignored and in all
that it implied of the impossibility of that person. "Your notions of kindness are more than
I can understand. Whatever possessed you to take his room? If he'd offered it fifty times!"

"But it wasn't wanted."

Edith relaxed the tension of her indignant body and sank back in her chair (or rather, Mr.
Rickman's chair) with an immense relief. "You mean he isn't in the house at present?"

"Oh yes, he's in the house, I'm glad to say. Neither Sophie nor I could stand very much of
the house without him."

That admission, instead of rousing Edith to renewed indignation, appeared to crush her. "Lucia,"
she murmured, "you are hopeless."

Another cup of tea, however, revived the spirit of remonstrance.

"I know you don't see it, Lucia, but you are laying yourself under an obligation of the worst
sort; the sort that puts a woman more than anything in a man's power."

Lucia ignored the baser implication (so like Lucia). "I'm under so many obligations to Mr.
Rickman already, that one more hardly counts." She hastened to appease the dumb distress now
visible on her cousin's face. "I don't mean money obligations; though there's that, too--Horace
knows all about it. I don't know if I can explain--" She laid her hands in her lap and looked
at Edith and beyond her, with liquid and untroubled eyes; not seeing her, but seeing things
very far off, invisible from Edith's point of view; which things she must endeavour, if possible,
to make her see. "The kind of obligations I mean are so difficult to describe, because there's
nothing to take hold of. Only, when you've once made a man believe in you and trust you, so
that he comes to you ever afterwards expecting nothing but wonderful discernment, and irreproachable
tact, and--and an almost impalpable delicacy of treatment, and you know that you failed in
all these things just when he needed them most, you do feel some obligations. There's the obligation
to make up for your blunders; the obligation to think about him in a certain way because no
other way does justice to his idea of you; the obligation to show him the same consideration
he showed to you; the obligation to take a simple kindness from him as he would have taken
it from you--"

"My dear Lucia, you forget that a man may accept many things from a woman that she cannot possibly
accept from him."

"Yes, but they are quite another set of things. They don't come into it at all. That's where
you make the mistake, Edith. I've got--for my own sake--to behave to that man as finely as
he behaved to me. I owe him a sort of spiritual redress. I always shall owe it him; but I'm
doing something towards it now." She said to herself, "I am a fool to try to explain it to
her. She'll never understand. I wish Kitty were here. She would have understood in a minute."

Edith did not understand. She thought that Lucia's perceptions in this matter were blunt, when
they were only superlatively fine.

"All this," said she, "implies an amount of intimacy that I was not aware of."

"Intimacy? Yes, I suppose it is intimacy, of a sort."

"And how it could have happened with a man like that--"

"A man like what?"

"Well, my dear girl, a man that Horace wouldn't dream of allowing you to meet, even in his
own house."

"Horace? You talk about my being under an obligation. It was he who helped to put me under it."

"And how?"

"By never delivering one of my messages to him; by letting him believe that I behaved horribly
to him; that I sent him away and never gave him a thought--when he had been so magnificent.
There were a thousand things I wanted to explain and set right; and I asked Horace for an opportunity
and he never gave it me. He can't blame me if I take it now."

"If Horace did all these things, he did them for the best possible reasons. He knows rather
more of this young man than you do, or could have any idea of. I don't know what he is now,
but he was, at one time, thoroughly disreputable."

"Whatever did he do?"

"Do? He did everything. He drank; he ran after the worst sort of women--he mixes now with the
lowest class of journalists in town; he lived for months, Horace says, with a horrid little
actress in the next house to this."

Lucia's face quivered like a pale flame.

"I don't believe it. I don't believe it for a moment."

"It's absurd to say you don't believe what everybody knows, and what anybody here can tell you."

"I never heard a word against him here. Ask Sophie She's known him for five years. Besides,
I know him. That's enough."

"Lucy, when you once get hold of an idea you're blind to everything outside it."

"I take after my family in that. But no, I'm not blind. He may have gone wrong once, at some
time--but never, no, I'm sure of it, since I knew him."

"Still, when a man has once lived that sort of life, the coarseness must remain."

"Coarseness? There isn't any refinement, any gentleness he isn't capable of. He's fine through
and through. Stay and meet him, Edith, and see for yourself."

"I have met him."

"And yet you can't see?"

"I've seen all I want to see."

"Don't, Edith--"

There was a sound of feet running swiftly up the stair; the door of the adjoining room opened
and shut, and a man's voice was heard singing. These sounds conveyed to Edith a frightful sense
of the nearness and intimacy of the young man, and of the horror of Lucia's position. As she
listened she held her cousin by her two hands in a dumb agony of entreaty.

"Horace is coming back," she whispered.

"No, Edith, it's no good. I'm going to stay till Kitty takes me."

Edith wondered whether, after all, Lucia was so very fastidious and refined; whether, indeed,
in taking after her family, she did not take after the least estimable of the Hardens. There
was a wild strain in them; their women had been known to do queer things, unaccountable, disagreeable,
disreputable things; and Lucia was Sir Frederick's daughter. Somehow that young voice singing
in the next room rubbed this impression into her. She stiffened and drew back.

"And am I to tell Horace, then, that you are happy here?"

"Yes. Tell him to come and see how happy I am."

"Very well."

As Edith opened the door to go, the voice in the next room stopped singing, and the young man
became suddenly very still.

CHAPTER LVII

