Anthony continued. "That may be a shock to you, but this will be a greater. Unless I am greatly
mistaken, we seven, we four men and three women, are the only living humans left on Earth."

The words dripped into Allan's consciousness. Beyond them, he could hear movements, exclamations.
But they meant nothing to him. Only the one thought tolled, knell-like, within him. "We seven
are the only living humans left on Earth."

       *       *       *       *       *

Dimly he knew that Anthony was talking. "There is a possibility, a bare possibility, that somewhere
near here there are two others. That chance is faint indeed. Otherwise humanity is dead, killed
by its own hand."

Through a dizzy vertigo that blurred sight and sound Allan heard the rounded voice go on and
on, telling the story of the doom that Man's own folly had brought. And intermingled with that
tale of a world gone mad there came back to the listener the clear-cut vision of the day of
horror that to him seemed but yesterday. He remembered the sudden ultimatum of the Easterner's,
the Western Coalition's stanch defiance. Again he saw a supposedly invincible fleet utterly
destroyed, saw comrades whiffed out of existence in infinitesimal seconds. Again he watched
a city of twenty millions inundated by a muddy yellow gas in which no human being, no animal,
might live. He waked once more to find himself helpless with weakness, among living corpses,
in a place that seemed a tomb.

"All this we saw in our long-distance televisoscope." Anthony gestured to a blank screen above
the apparatus ranged along the opposite wall. "Then, just as that last weird battle ended,
something happened to the eye-mast outside, and we were isolated." He fell silent, in a brooding
reverie, and Allan, recovered somewhat, saw that the other strange occupants of the place had
risen and were clustered about that cage where something fluttered.

He turned to his mentor. "But I still don't understand. How is it that we escaped the holocaust?"

"Four of us, members of the scientific faculty of the National University, having foreseen
the inevitable result of the course of world events, had joined forces and developed a substance--we
called it nullite--so dense and so inert that no gas could penetrate it or chemical break it
down. We offered it to the Western General Staff, and were laughed at for our pains. Then we
decided to use it to preserve our families from the danger we foresaw.

"At first we sheathed one room in each of our own dwellings with the nullite. Later we decided
that the deposited gas might last for many years, and blasted out this cave, a hundred feet
below the summit of Sugar Loaf Mountain, for a common refuge.

"When the red word flared from the newscast machines, 'War!', we fled here with our wives,
as we had planned. All, that is, save one couple, the youngest of us. They never arrived--I
waited for them in the clearing at the entrance to the shaft. At the last moment I saw you
dropping in your parachute, saw the death beam just miss you, saw you land at my feet, unconscious,
but still breathing. I carried you in with me. There were two vacant spaces: you could occupy
one of them. Then we sealed the last aperture with nullite, and settled to our vigil. We did
not know how long the gas would last, but we had sufficient concentrated food, and enough air-making
chemicals, to last two persons for a century."

"Two people," Allan interjected. "But there were seven here."

       *       *       *       *       *

Anthony nodded. "We had worked out every detail of our plan. When release came we needs must
be in the full vigor of our prime. From our loins must spring the new race that will repopulate
the Earth; that will found a new civilization, better, we hope, and wiser than the one that
had died. By injecting a certain compound we suspended animation in all but a single couple.
Those so treated were to all intents dead, though their bodies did not decay. The two who remained
awake kept watch, making daily tests of the outside atmosphere, drawn through tubes of nullite
that pierced the seal. At the end of six months they revived another couple by the use of a
second injection, and were themselves put to sleep. We exempted you from the watch, since you
could have no companion, so that while we have lived about seven years in the twenty, you have
not aged at all."

"Not aged at all!" Dane exclaimed. "Why, I have wasted away to a mere bagful of bones, and
you others also." 

Gradually the idea gained upon him, that it was not impossible to repair the past. His conduct had
been unpardonable, no doubt; yet, perhaps it might be forgiven. But even if Elinor could forget
his inexcusable fickleness, would her friends ever consent to risk her future peace with one
who had so recklessly trifled with her already? Mr. Wyllys had been deeply indignant at his
conduct; his whole manner had changed, there had been a cold civility in it when they had met,
which Harry had felt keenly--it amounted almost to contempt. Miss Wyllys, too, was no longer
the kind, indulgent Aunt Agnes of his boyhood; there was a very decided coldness and reserve
in her whole expression, which it seemed all but impossible to overcome. He wished, however,
that he had it in his power to make advances towards a reconciliation;
he was prepared for merited coldness at first, but he would willingly
submit to it as a just penance, if he could but hope eventually to
regain his position with Elinor.

Such a wife as Elinor would be, was worth a serious struggle to obtain. Then, at other moments,
this idea appeared preposterous to him; how could the Wyllyses ever forgive him after so keen
an insult, so cruel a blow?

No, it was a dream; he would not indulge in it any longer; he would not think of marrying; he
would turn out an old bachelor diplomatist, like Mr. Henley. It is not to be supposed that
Mrs. Creighton was entirely forgotten in these reveries of Harry's, which formed occasional interludes
to his diplomatic labours while at Rio.

 I cannot even father a family, since I have no wife. I am
the only one to go out as long as there is danger."

"The young man is right," some one said. "He is the logical choice."

"Very well," agreed Anthony, who appeared the leader. "He shall be the first."

       *       *       *       *       *

His instructions were few. One plane had been preserved, and was in the shaft. Allan was to
make a circuit of the neighborhood. If he deemed it safe he was to visit the building, described
to him, where the fourth couple had lived, and see if he could find trace of them. Then he
was to return and report his findings.

All stuffed their ears with cotton wool, and crowded against one end of the chamber. Anthony
had the end of a long double wire in his hand, and it curled across the floor to the farther
wall. He pressed the button of a pear-switch--and there was a concussion that hurled the watchers
against the wall behind them. A great gap appeared in the farther wall, beyond it a black chasm,
and a helicopter that was dimly illumined by the light from within the room. A quick inspection
of the flier revealed that its alumino-steeloid had been unaffected by the passage of time,
and Allan climbed into it. A wave of his hand simulated an insouciance he did not feel. Then
he was rising through darkness. The sun's light struck down and enveloped him, and he was in
the open air. He rose above the trees.

Desolation spread out beneath him. In all the vastness that unfolded as the lone 'copter climbed
into a clear sky, nothing moved. The air, that from babyhood Allan had seen crowded with bustling
traffic, was a ghastly emptiness. Not even a tiny, wheeling speck betrayed the presence of
a bird. And below--the gas that was fatal to animal life seemed to have stimulated vegetable
growth--an illimitable sea of green rolled untenanted to where the first ramparts of New York
rose against the sky. Roads, monorail lines, all the countless tracks of civilization had disappeared
beneath the green tide. Nature had taken back its own.

Heartsick, he turned south, and followed the silver stream of the Hudson. The river, lonely
as the sky, seemed to drift oily and sluggish down to plunge beneath the city at the lower
end of the Tappan Zee. Allan Dane came over New York, gazed down at the ruin of its soaring
towers, at the leaping arabesque of its street bridges. He peered into vast rifts of tumbled,
chaotic concrete and steel. "Far more," said Harry; "but you know there is less difference between
the climates of Brazil and Portugal, than between ours and that of
England."

"For my part," observed Mr. Ellsworth, "I do not think we look in the least like the English--neither
men nor women. We are getting very fast to have a decided physiognomy of our own. I think I
could pick out an American from among a crowd of Europeans, almost as soon as I could a Turk."

"You
always piqued yourself, Ellsworth, upon having a quick eye for national
characteristics.

We used to try him very often, when we were in Europe, Mrs. Creighton,
and I must do him the justice to say he seldom failed."

"Oh, yes;
I know all Frank's opinions on the subject," replied Mrs. Creighton:
"it is quite a hobby with him."

       *       *       *       *       *

Dane got heavily from his seat, oppressed by the vast soundlessness, and pushed through curling
plants that caught at his heels. The sound of his passage was like crackling thunder. A decaying
door was marked, in faded, almost undecipherable letters, "Emergency Stairs." It was half open,
and Allan squeezed around its edge. Spiral steps curved down into blackness. He hesitated a
moment. He could feel the awful silence, the emptiness below was a pit of death. Anthony's
words came back to him, echoed in his ears: "We seven are the only living humans left on Earth."

In that moment, out of the pitch-black well of soundlessness, a scream shrilled! No words,
only a red, thin thread of sound, rising, and falling, and rising again out of depths where
not even a living mouse should be! It came again, ripping the silence--a woman's scream, high-pitched,
quivering with fear!

Allan plunged down into the darkness, caroming from wall to wall as he half ran, half fell,
down the twisting stairs. Another sound reverberated from unseen walls, and Dane realized that
it was his own voice, shouting.

His feet struck level floor. A pale rectangle of light showed before him, and he dived through
it. He was in a corridor, dim-lit by phosphorescent fungi that cloaked the damp walls. He halted,
at fault. The long hall stretched away to either side, cluttered with grimed bones, slimy with
mold. "Certainly; we had better all be on the spot; though I am confident we shall unmask the
rogues very speedily. You were already pledged to return with us, Mrs. Stanley; and I shall be
glad to see you at Wyllys-Roof, again, Harry."

A muffled sound of scuffling came from his left. Allan whirled toward it and sped down the
corridor. He was breathing in great gasps, and the air he breathed was thick and musty. Too
late to stop, he saw a slick of green slime on the floor. His foot struck it, flew out from
under him, he fell and slid headlong.

