It was Friday morning and the Rev. Henry Maxwell was trying to finish his Sunday morning sermon.
He had been interrupted several times and was growing nervous as the morning wore away, and
the sermon grew very slowly toward a satisfactory finish.

"Mary," he called to his wife, as he went upstairs after the last interruption, "if any one
comes after this, I wish you would say I am very busy and cannot come down unless it is something
very important."

"Yes, Henry. But I am going over to visit the kindergarten and you will have the house all
to yourself."

The minister went up into his study and shut the door. In a few minutes he heard his wife go
out, and then everything was quiet. He settled himself at his desk with a sigh of relief and
began to write.

He had emphasized in the first part of the sermon the Atonement as a personal sacrifice, calling
attention to the fact of Jesus' suffering in various ways, in His life as well as in His death.
He had then gone on to emphasize the Atonement from the side of example, giving illustrations
from the life and teachings of Jesus to show how faith in the Christ helped to save men because
of the pattern or character He displayed for their imitation. He was now on the third and last
point, the necessity of following Jesus in His sacrifice and example.

He had put down "Three Steps. What are they?" and was about to enumerate them in logical order
when the bell rang sharply. ...

A day has come when partisanship with its personalities and bitterness does not satisfy the
public. We have seen things on too large a scale now to believe in the importance of trifles,
or in the adequacy of trifling men. We must have men who are large enough to be international
and national at the same time, to be politicians and yet American
statesmen, to subordinate always the individual ambition and the party
advantage to the national good.

THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS

I feel that we have not tried to interpret the League of Nations to our people in terms of America's
advantage.

We Democrats are looked upon as International visionaries because we have not been willing to deal practically
with a practical situation.

The League is not anti-national, it is anti-war; its aim is to defer war and reduce the chances
of war between nations. This is to be effected, not by creating a super-nation, or by binding
us to abide by the decisions of a super-national tribunal, but by
establishing the method and machinery by which the opinion of the
world may become effective as against those inclined toward war.

By adopting the League, we do not pledge ourselves to any war under any circumstances, without
the consent of Congress. And because we have not been willing to say this, we are now in danger
of losing the one chance the world has had to get the nations together.

Loyalty

to the President's principles does not mean loyalty to his methods. They have been wrong as to the
League, in my opinion. You could deal with Congress, even a Republican Congress, on this matter,
I believe, and come out with the essentials.

...

Don't let Bryan get away from you, if you can help it, because he really represents a great body of
moral force and opinion. But don't pay the price to Bryan or Wilson or Hearst or Murphy or
any one else, of being untrue to your own belief as to the wise and practicable national policy,
that you may gain their support.

There couldn't be a better year in which to lose, for something real.

You can not win as a Wilson man, nor as a Murphy man, nor as a Hearst man. The nation is crying
out for leadership, not pussy- footing nor pandering. Be wrong strongly
if you must be wrong, rather than be right weakly. You can only win
as a Cox man, one who owns himself, has his own policies, is willing
to go along, not with a bunch of bosses, but with any reasonable man,
asks for counsel from all classes of men and women, does not fear
defeat, and expects a victory that will be more a party victory than
a personal one, and more a people's victory than a partisan one.

YOUR
ENEMIES

Pick a few enemies and pick them with discretion. Chiefly
be FOR things.

"The same man," said the Rev. Henry Maxwell thoughtfully.

"Did you finish your sermon, Henry?" his wife asked after a pause.

"Yes, all done. It has been a very busy week with me. The two sermons have cost me a good deal
of labor."

"They will be appreciated by a large audience, Sunday, I hope," replied his wife smiling. "What
are you going to preach about in the morning?"

"Following Christ. I take up the Atonement under the head of sacrifice and example, and then
show the steps needed to follow His sacrifice and example."

"I am sure it is a good sermon. I hope it won't rain Sunday. We have had so many stormy Sundays
lately."

"Yes, the audiences have been quite small for some time. People will not come out to church
in a storm." The Rev. Henry Maxwell sighed as he said it. He was thinking of the careful, laborious
effort he had made in preparing sermons for large audiences that failed to appear.

But Sunday morning dawned on the town of Raymond one of the perfect days that sometimes come
after long periods of wind and mud and rain. The air was clear and bracing, the sky was free
from all threatening signs, and every one in Mr. Maxwell's parish prepared to go to church.
When the service opened at eleven o'clock the large building was filled with an audience of
the best-dressed, most comfortable looking people of Raymond.

The First Church of Raymond believed in having the best music that money could buy, and its
quartet choir this morning was a source of great pleasure to the congregation. The anthem was
inspiring. All the music was in keeping with the subject of the sermon. And the anthem was
an elaborate adaptation to the most modern music of the hymn,

    "Jesus, I my cross have taken,
     All to leave and follow Thee."

Just before the sermon, the soprano sang a solo, the well-known hymn,

    "Where He leads me I will follow,
     I'll go with Him, with Him, all the way."

Rachel Winslow looked very beautiful that morning as she stood up behind the screen of carved
oak which was significantly marked with the emblems of the cross and the crown. Her voice was
even more beautiful than her face, and that meant a great deal. There was a general rustle
of expectation over the audience as she rose. Mr. Maxwell settled himself contentedly behind
the pulpit. Rachel Winslow's singing always helped him. He generally arranged for a song before
the sermon. It made possible a certain inspiration of feeling that made his delivery more impressive.

People said to themselves they had never heard such singing even in the First Church. It is
certain that if it had not been a church service, her solo would have been vigorously applauded.
It even seemed to the minister when she sat down that something like an attempted clapping
of hands or a striking of feet on the floor swept through the church. He was startled by it.
As he rose, however, and laid his sermon on the Bible, he said to himself he had been deceived.
Of course it could not occur. In a few moments he was absorbed in his sermon and everything
else was forgotten in the pleasure of his delivery.

No one had ever accused Henry Maxwell of being a dull preacher. On the contrary, he had often
been charged with being sensational; not in what he had said so much as in his way of saying
it. But the First Church people liked that. It gave their preacher and their parish a pleasant
distinction that was agreeable.

It was also true that the pastor of the First Church loved to preach. He seldom exchanged.
He was eager to be in his own pulpit when Sunday came. There was an exhilarating half hour
for him as he faced a church full of people and know that he had a hearing. He was peculiarly
sensitive to variations in the attendance. He never preached well before a small audience.
The weather also affected him decidedly. He was at his best before just such an audience as
faced him now, on just such a morning. He felt a glow of satisfaction as he went on. The church
was the first in the city. It had the best choir. It had a membership composed of the leading
people, representatives of the wealth, society and intelligence of Raymond. He was going abroad
on a three months vacation in the summer, and the circumstances of his pastorate, his influence
and his position as pastor of the First Church in the city--

It is not certain that the Rev. Henry Maxwell knew just how he could carry on that thought
in connection with his sermon, but as he drew near the end of it he knew that he had at some
point in his delivery had all those feelings. They had entered into the very substance of his
thought; it might have been all in a few seconds of time, but he had been conscious of defining
his position and his emotions as well as if he had held a soliloquy, and his delivery partook
of the thrill of deep personal satisfaction.

The sermon was interesting. It was full of striking sentences. They would have commanded attention
printed. Spoken with the passion of a dramatic utterance that had the good taste never to offend
with a suspicion of ranting or declamation, they were very effective. If the Rev. Henry Maxwell
that morning felt satisfied with the conditions of his pastorate, the First Church also had
a similar feeling as it congratulated itself on the presence in the pulpit of this scholarly,
refined, somewhat striking face and figure, preaching with such animation and freedom from
all vulgar, noisy or disagreeable mannerism.

Suddenly, into the midst of this perfect accord and concord between preacher and audience,
there came a very remarkable interruption. It would be difficult to indicate the extent of
the shock which this interruption measured. It was so unexpected, so entirely contrary to any
thought of any person present that it offered no room for argument or, for the time being,
of resistance.

The sermon had come to a close. Mr. Maxwell had just turned the half of the big Bible over
upon his manuscript and was about to sit down as the quartet prepared to arise to sing the
closing selection,

    "All for Jesus, all for Jesus,
     All my being's ransomed powers..."

when the entire congregation was startled by the sound of a man's voice. It came from the rear
of the church, from one of the seats under the gallery. The next moment the figure of a man
came out of the shadow there and walked down the middle aisle.

Before the startled congregation fairly realized what was going on the man had reached the
open space in front of the pulpit and had turned about facing the people.

"I've been wondering since I came in here"--they were the words he used under the gallery,
and he repeated them--"if it would be just the thing to say a word at the close of the service.
I'm not drunk and I'm not crazy, and I am perfectly harmless, but if I die, as there is every
likelihood I shall in a few days, I want the satisfaction of thinking that I said my say in
a place like this, and before this sort of a crowd."

Henry Maxwell had not taken his seat, and he now remained standing, leaning on his pulpit,
looking down at the stranger. It was the man who had come to his house the Friday before, the
same dusty, worn, shabby-looking young man. He held his faded hat in his two hands. It seemed
to be a favorite gesture. He had not been shaved and his hair was rough and tangled. It is
doubtful if any one like this had ever confronted the First Church within the sanctuary. It
was tolerably familiar with this sort of humanity out on the street, around the railroad shops,
wandering up and down the avenue, but it had never dreamed of such an incident as this so near.

There was nothing offensive in the man's manner or tone. He was not excited and he spoke in
a low but distinct voice. Mr. Maxwell was conscious, even as he stood there smitten into dumb
astonishment at the event, that somehow the man's action reminded him of a person he had once
seen walking and talking in his sleep.

No one in the house made any motion to stop the stranger or in any way interrupt him. Perhaps
the first shock of his sudden appearance deepened into a genuine perplexity concerning what
was best to do. However that may be, he went on as if he had no thought of interruption and
no thought of the unusual element which he had introduced into the decorum of the First Church
service. And all the while he was speaking, the minister leaded over the pulpit, his face growing
more white and sad every moment. But he made no movement to stop him, and the people sat smitten
into breathless silence. One other face, that of Rachel Winslow from the choir, stared white
and intent down at the shabby figure with the faded hat. Her face was striking at any time.
Under the pressure of the present unheard-of incident it was as personally distinct as if it
had been framed in fire.

"I'm not an ordinary tramp, though I don't know of any teaching of Jesus that makes one kind
of a tramp less worth saving than another. Do you?" He put the question as naturally as if
the whole congregation had been a small Bible class. He paused just a moment and coughed painfully.
Then he went on.

"I lost my job ten months ago. I am a printer by trade. The new linotype machines are beautiful
specimens of invention, but I know six men who have killed themselves inside of the year just
on account of those machines. Of course I don't blame the newspapers for getting the machines.
Meanwhile, what can a man do? I know I never learned but the one trade, and that's all I can
do. I've tramped all over the country trying to find something. There are a good many others
like me. I'm not complaining, am I? Just stating facts. But I was wondering as I sat there
under the gallery, if what you call following Jesus is the same thing as what He taught. What
did He mean when He said: 'Follow Me!'? The minister said,"--here he turned about and looked
up at the pulpit--"that it is necessary for the disciple of Jesus to follow His steps, and
he said the steps are 'obedience, faith, love and imitation.' But I did not hear him tell you
just what he meant that to mean, especially the last step. What do you Christians mean by following
the steps of Jesus?

"I've tramped through this city for three days trying to find a job; and in all that time I've
not had a word of sympathy or comfort except from your minister here, who said he was sorry
for me and hoped I would find a job somewhere. I suppose it is because you get so imposed on
by the professional tramp that you have lost your interest in any other sort. I'm not blaming
anybody, am I? Just stating facts. Of course, I understand you can't all go out of your way
to hunt up jobs for other people like me. I'm not asking you to; but what I feel puzzled about
is, what is meant by following Jesus. What do you mean when you sing 'I'll go with Him, with
Him, all the way?' Do you mean that you are suffering and denying yourselves and trying to
save lost, suffering humanity just as I understand Jesus did? What do you mean by it? I see
the ragged edge of things a good deal. I understand there are more than five hundred men in
this city in my case. Most of them have families. My wife died four months ago. I'm glad she
is out of trouble. My little girl is staying with a printer's family until I find a job. Somehow
I get puzzled when I see so many Christians living in luxury and singing 'Jesus, I my cross
have taken, all to leave and follow Thee,' and remember how my wife died in a tenement in New
York City, gasping for air and asking God to take the little girl too. Of course I don't expect
you people can prevent every one from dying of starvation, lack of proper nourishment and tenement
air, but what does following Jesus mean? I understand that Christian people own a good many
of the tenements. A member of a church was the owner of the one where my wife died, and I have
wondered if following Jesus all the way was true in his case. I heard some people singing at
a church prayer meeting the other night,

    'All for Jesus, all for Jesus,
     All my being's ransomed powers,
     All my thoughts, and all my doings,
     All my days, and all my hours.'

and I kept wondering as I sat on the steps outside just what they meant by it. It seems to
me there's an awful lot of trouble in the world that somehow wouldn't exist if all the people
who sing such songs went and lived them out. I suppose I don't understand. But what would Jesus
do? Is that what you mean by following His steps? It seems to me sometimes as if the people
in the big churches had good clothes and nice houses to live in, and money to spend for luxuries,
and could go away on summer vacations and all that, while the people outside the churches,
thousands of them, I mean, die in tenements, and walk the streets for jobs, and never have
a piano or a picture in the house, and grow up in misery and drunkenness and sin."

The man suddenly gave a queer lurch over in the direction of the communion table and laid one
grimy hand on it. His hat fell upon the carpet at his feet. A stir went through the congregation.
Dr. West half rose from his pew, but as yet the silence was unbroken by any voice or movement
worth mentioning in the audience. The man passed his other hand across his eyes, and then,
without any warning, fell heavily forward on his face, full length up the aisle. Henry Maxwell
spoke:

"We will consider the service closed."

Chapter Two

Henry Maxwell and a group of his church members remained some time in the study. 'That I can never
give my hand to a man whom I love too well to dishonour.'

'Madeleine, you are right, and you are a noble girl!' replied her
brother.

'Children,' said the old man, with a groan, 'I see my crime now in
its full hideousness; but I can at least repair part of the evil done.
Now, listen to me. Let me see you follow the bent of your hearts,
and be happy, and I will go where you will, for you will have forgiven
your father. Refuse to do so, and I remain here--once a wrecker, always
a wrecker. But the minister insisted
on taking charge of the man, and when a carriage came the unconscious but living form was carried
to his house; and with the entrance of that humanity into the minister's spare room a new chapter
in Henry Maxwell's life began, and yet no one, himself least of all, dreamed of the remarkable
change it was destined to make in all his after definition of the Christian discipleship.

The event created a great sensation in the First Church parish. People talked of nothing else
for a week. It was the general impression that the man had wandered into the church in a condition
of mental disturbance caused by his troubles, and that all the time he was talking he was in
a strange delirium of fever and really ignorant of his surroundings. That was the most charitable
construction to put upon his action. It was the general agreement also that there was a singular
absence of anything bitter or complaining in what the man had said. He had, throughout, spoken
in a mild, apologetic tone, almost as if he were one of the congregation seeking for light
on a very difficult subject.

The third day after his removal to the minister's house there was a marked change in his condition.
The doctor spoke of it but offered no hope. Saturday morning he still lingered, although he
had rapidly failed as the week drew near its close. Sunday morning, just before the clock struck
one, he rallied and asked if his child had come. The minister had sent for her at once as soon
as he had been able to secure her address from some letters found in the man's pocket. He had
been conscious and able to talk coherently only a few moments since his attack.

"The child is coming. She will be here," Mr. Maxwell said as he sat there, his face showing
marks of the strain of the week's vigil; for he had insisted on sitting up nearly every night.

"I shall never see her in this world," the man whispered. Then he uttered with great difficulty
the words, "You have been good to me. Somehow I feel as if it was what Jesus would do."

After a few minutes he turned his head slightly, and before Mr. Maxwell could realize the fact,
the doctor said quietly, "He is gone."

The Sunday morning that dawned on the city of Raymond was exactly like the Sunday of a week
before. Mr. Maxwell entered his pulpit to face one of the largest congregations that had ever
crowded the First Church. He was haggard and looked as if he had just risen from a long illness.
His wife was at home with the little girl, who had come on the morning train an hour after
her father had died. He lay in that spare room, his troubles over, and the minister could see
the face as he opened the Bible and arranged his different notices on the side of the desk
as he had been in the habit of doing for ten years.

The service that morning contained a new element. No one could remember when Henry Maxwell
had preached in the morning without notes. As a matter of fact he had done so occasionally
when he first entered the ministry, but for a long time he had carefully written every word
of his morning sermon, and nearly always his evening discourses as well. It cannot be said
that his sermon this morning was striking or impressive. He talked with considerable hesitation.
It was evident that some great idea struggled in his thought for utterance, but it was not
expressed in the theme he had chosen for his preaching. It was near the close of his sermon
that he began to gather a certain strength that had been painfully lacking at the beginning.

He closed the Bible and, stepping out at the side of the desk, faced his people and began to
talk to them about the remarkable scene of the week before.

"Our brother," somehow the words sounded a little strange coming from his lips, "passed away
this morning. I have not yet had time to learn all his history. He had one sister living in
Chicago. I have written her and have not yet received an answer. His little girl is with us
and will remain for the time."

He paused and looked over the house. He thought he had never seen so many earnest faces during
his entire pastorate. He was not able yet to tell his people his experiences, the crisis through
which he was even now moving. But something of his feeling passed from him to them, and it
did not seem to him that he was acting under a careless impulse at all to go on and break to
them this morning something of the message he bore in his heart.

So he went on: "The appearance and words of this stranger in the church last Sunday made a
very powerful impression on me. I am not able to conceal from you or myself the fact that what
he said, followed as it has been by his death in my house, has compelled me to ask as I never
asked before 'What does following Jesus mean?' I am not in a position yet to utter any condemnation
of this people or, to a certain extent, of myself, either in our Christ-like relations to this
man or the numbers that he represents in the world. But all that does not prevent me from feeling
that much that the man said was so vitally true that we must face it in an attempt to answer
it or else stand condemned as Christian disciples. A good deal that was said here last Sunday
was in the nature of a challenge to Christianity as it is seen and felt in our churches. I
have felt this with increasing emphasis every day since.

"And I do not know that any time is more appropriate than the present for me to propose a plan,
or a purpose, which has been forming in my mind as a satisfactory reply to much that was said
here last Sunday."

Again Henry Maxwell paused and looked into the faces of his people. There were some strong,
earnest men and women in the First Church.

He could see Edward Norman, editor of the Raymond DAILY NEWS. He had been a member of the First
Church for ten years.

No man was more honored in the community. There was Alexander Powers, superintendent of the
great railroad shops in Raymond, a typical railroad man, one who had been born into the business. Indeed,
it is more than thirty years now since we first joined with boyish enthusiasm in the activities
of the Young Men's Democratic League, and always I have wondered at his willingness to make
himself the target of so much criticism because of his loyalty to convictions that have not pleased
those in political or social power. He thinks; he does not take orders. And you can rely on
his being superior to the partisan phase of any real issue. This self-respecting, or self- owned individual
is the sort of man we need to promote in our political life, or else we will soon find ourselves
back in the pre-Roosevelt days of political invertebrates. I found in Washington the secret of
the exceeding great authority which the older states carry in Congress, they return their
Senators and Congressmen, term after term, and give them opportunity
to rise to positions of eminence in the national legislature.

The usefulness of a Senator is not to be measured by the roundness of his periods, nor even by the
soundness of his ideas. He must pass through a period of impatient waiting before his status is
such that he can really have the opportunity to have his ideas considered seriously. By returning
men who have been faithful, the State strengthens itself in Washington and eventually gains greatly
in prestige, as in the case of Julius Kahn. Senator Phelan has now passed through this initial
period of gaining status, and his future will be one of an assured and much strengthened position
among his colleagues.

Not to return Phelan will mean a loss at Washington that California can ill afford at this critical
time, for in the national mind he is identified with her prime concerns.

... These are to be most momentous times ... Just where we are going no one knows, but clearly
the people here, as elsewhere, are bent upon testing the value of Democracy as a cooperative
organization of men and women, and are determined to make of it a fuller expression of human capacities
and hopes. We must feel our way carefully at such a time, but we must act constructively,
else there will surely come a dangerous radical reaction. Sympathy must be checked by wisdom, a wise
knowledge of man's limitations and tendencies, that we do not take on burdens we cannot safely
carry. Yet we must dare, and dare purposefully. What can this Democracy do for men and women--that
is the super-question which rises like Shasta and follows one throughout the day, dominating every
prospect. Our motto will be,
'What would Jesus do?' Our aim will be to act just as He would if He was in our places, regardless
of immediate results. In other words, we propose to follow Jesus' steps as closely and as literally
as we believe He taught His disciples to do. And those who volunteer to do this will pledge
themselves for an entire year, beginning with today, so to act."

Henry Maxwell paused again and looked out over his people. It is not easy to describe the sensation
that such a simple proposition apparently made. Men glanced at one another in astonishment.
It was not like Henry Maxwell to define Christian discipleship in this way. There was evident
confusion of thought over his proposition. It was understood well enough, but there was, apparently,
a great difference of opinion as to the application of Jesus' teaching and example.

He calmly closed the service with a brief prayer. The organist began his postlude immediately
after the benediction and the people began to go out. There was a great deal of conversation.
Animated groups stood all over the church discussing the minister's proposition. It was evidently
provoking great discussion. After several minutes he asked all who expected to remain to pass
into the lecture-room which joined the large room on the side. He was himself detained at the
front of the church talking with several persons there, and when he finally turned around,
the church was empty. He walked over to the lecture-room entrance and went in. He was almost
startled to see the people who were there. He had not made up his mind about any of his members,
but he had hardly expected that so many were ready to enter into such a literal testing of
their Christian discipleship as now awaited him. There were perhaps fifty present, among them
Rachel Winslow and Virginia Page, Mr. Norman, President Marsh, Alexander Powers the railroad
superintendent, Milton Wright, Dr. West and Jasper Chase.

He closed the door of the lecture-room and went and stood before the little group. His face
was pale and his lips trembled with genuine emotion. It was to him a genuine crisis in his
own life and that of his parish. No man can tell until he is moved by the Divine Spirit what
he may do, or how he may change the current of a lifetime of fixed habits of thought and speech
and action. Henry Maxwell did not, as we have said, yet know himself all that he was passing
through, but he was conscious of a great upheaval in his definition of Christian discipleship,
and he was moved with a depth of feeling he could not measure as he looked into the faces of
those men and women on this occasion.

It seemed to him that the most fitting word to be spoken first was that of prayer. He asked
them all to pray with him. And almost with the first syllable he uttered there was a distinct
presence of the Spirit felt by them all. As the prayer went on, this presence grew in power.
They all felt it. The room was filled with it as plainly as if it had been visible. When the
prayer closed there was a silence that lasted several moments. All the heads were bowed. Henry
Maxwell's face was wet with tears. If an audible voice from heaven had sanctioned their pledge
to follow the Master's steps, not one person present could have felt more certain of the divine
blessing. And so the most serious movement ever started in the First Church of Raymond was begun.

"We all understand," said he, speaking very quietly, "what we have undertaken to do. We pledge
ourselves to do everything in our daily lives after asking the question, 'What would Jesus
do?' regardless of what may be the result to us. Some time I shall be able to tell you what
a marvelous change has come over my life within a week's time. I cannot now. But the experience
I have been through since last Sunday has left me so dissatisfied with my previous definition
of Christian discipleship that I have been compelled to take this action. I did not dare begin
it alone. I know that I am being led by the hand of divine love in all this. The same divine
impulse must have led you also.

"Do we understand fully what we have undertaken?"

"I want to ask a question," said Rachel Winslow. Every one turned towards her. Her face glowed
with a beauty that no physical loveliness could ever create.

"I am a little in doubt as to the source of our knowledge concerning what Jesus would do. Who
is to decide for me just what He would do in my case? It is a different age. There are many
perplexing questions in our civilization that are not mentioned in the teachings of Jesus.
How am I going to tell what He would do?"

"There is no way that I know of," replied the pastor, "except as we study Jesus through the
medium of the Holy Spirit. He shall glorify me; for he shall take of mine, and shall declare
it unto you. All things whatsoever the Father hath are mine: therefore said I, that he taketh
of mine, and shall declare it unto you.' There is no other test that I know of. We shall all
have to decide what Jesus would do after going to that source of knowledge."

"What if others say of us, when we do certain things, that Jesus would not do so?" asked the
superintendent of railroads.

"We cannot prevent that. But we must be absolutely honest with ourselves. The standard of Christian
action cannot vary in most of our acts."

"And yet what one church member thinks Jesus would do, another refuses to accept as His probable
course of action. What is to render our conduct uniformly Christ-like? Will it be possible
to reach the same conclusions always in all cases?" asked President Marsh.

Mr. Maxwell was silent some time. Then he answered, "No; I don't know that we can expect that.
But when it comes to a genuine, honest, enlightened following of Jesus' steps, I cannot believe
there will be any confusion either in our own minds or in the judgment of others. We must be
free from fanaticism on one hand and too much caution on the other. If Jesus' example is the
example for the world to follow, it certainly must be feasible to follow it. But we need to
remember this great fact. After we have asked the Spirit to tell us what Jesus would do and
have received an answer to it, we are to act regardless of the results to ourselves. Is that
understood?"

All the faces in the room were raised towards the minister in solemn assent. There was no misunderstanding
that proposition. Henry Maxwell's face quivered again as he noted the president of the Endeavor
Society with several members seated back of the older men and women.

Chapter Three

"He that saith he abideth in Him ought himself also to walk even as He walked."

EDWARD NORMAN, editor of the Raymond DAILY NEWS, sat in his office room Monday morning and
faced a new world of action. He had made his pledge in good faith to do everything after asking
"What would Jesus do?" and, as he supposed, with his eyes open to all the possible results.
But as the regular life of the paper started on another week's rush and whirl of activity,
he confronted it with a degree of hesitation and a feeling nearly akin to fear.

He had come down to the office very early, and for a few minutes was by himself. He sat at
his desk in a growing thoughtfulness that finally became a desire which he knew was as great
as it was unusual. Answer me that and you will know why the people sit indifferent while papers
are suppressed, speakers harried, and espionage is king.
Mind you, I am not saying that you are alone to blame. Congress is.
The States are. The cities are. The people are. He
kneeled down by his desk and prayed for the Divine Presence and wisdom to direct him.

He rose with the day before him, and his promise distinct and clear in his mind. "Now for action,"
he seemed to say. But he would be led by events as fast as they came on.

He opened his door and began the routine of the office work. The managing editor had just come
in and was at his desk in the adjoining room. One of the reporters there was pounding out something
on a typewriter. Edward Norman began to write an editorial. The DAILY NEWS was an evening paper,
and Norman usually completed his leading editorial before nine o'clock.

He had been writing for fifteen minutes when the managing editor called out: "Here's this press
report of yesterday's prize fight at the Resort. It will make up three columns and a half.
I suppose it all goes in?"

Norman was one of those newspaper men who keep an eye on every detail of the paper. The managing
editor always consulted his chief in matters of both small and large importance. Sometimes,
as in this case, it was merely a nominal inquiry.

"Yes--No. Let me see it."

He took the type-written matter just as it came from the telegraph editor and ran over it carefully.
Then he laid the sheets down on his desk and did some very hard thinking.

"We won't run this today," he said finally.

The managing editor was standing in the doorway between the two rooms. He was astounded at
his chief's remark, and thought he had perhaps misunderstood him.

"What did you say?"

"Leave it out. We won't use it."

"But--" The managing editor was simply dumbfounded. He stared at Norman as if the man was out
of his mind.

"I don't think, Clark, that it ought to be printed, and that's the end of it," said Norman,
looking up from his desk.

Clark seldom had any words with the chief. His word had always been law in the office and he
had seldom been known to change his mind. The circumstances now, however, seemed to be so extraordinary
that Clark could not help expressing himself.

"Do you mean that the paper is to go to press without a word of the prize fight in it?"

"Yes. That's what I mean."

"But it's unheard of. All the other papers will print it. What will our subscribers say? Why,
it is simply--" Clark paused, unable to find words to say what he thought.

Norman looked at Clark thoughtfully. The managing editor was a member of a church of a different
denomination from that of Norman's. The two men had never talked together on religious matters
although they had been associated on the paper for several years. 

You could not have beaten that yourself.

And your dear friend T. Roosevelt, did certainly write himself down as one large and glorious
ass in his criticism of the message. He hates Wilson so, that he has just lost his mind. I wish
I didn't have to say this about Roosevelt, because I am extremely
fond of him (which you are not), but a poorer interview on the message
could not have been written.

... As always yours,

F. K. L.
The following letter was written to Mrs. Adolph Miller when she was
in a hospital in New York.

Clark could not have looked more amazed if the chief had suddenly gone crazy. In fact, he did
think something was wrong, though Mr. Norman was one of the last men in the world, in his judgment,
to lose his mind.

"What effect will that have on the paper?" he finally managed to ask in a faint voice.

"What do you think?" asked Norman with a keen glance.

"I think it will simply ruin the paper," replied Clark promptly. He was gathering up his bewildered
senses, and began to remonstrate, "Why, it isn't feasible to run a paper nowadays on any such
basis. It's too ideal. The world isn't ready for it. You can't make it pay. Just as sure as
you live, if you shut out this prize fight report you will lose hundreds of subscribers. It
doesn't take a prophet to see that. The very best people in town are eager to read it. They
know it has taken place, and when they get the paper this evening they will expect half a page
at least. Surely, you can't afford to disregard the wishes of the public to such an extent.
It will be a great mistake if you do, in my opinion."

Norman sat silent a minute. Then he spoke gently but firmly.

