That night, Molly had a dream straight from Fairyland which reminded her that, although she
had a whole palace of her own and quantities of little subjects to do her bidding, she was
really the daughter of the shoemaker on the other side of the sun.  So, when Skilful and Wilful
and Captious and Queer came to play with her in the morning, she told them she could not be
their Queen any longer, as it was time for her to go back to the front of the sun.  The four
little fellows looked more dismal than a wymp had ever been known to look before, and so did
all the wymps in Wympland as soon as they heard that their bewymping Queen was going away from
them.

"Can we do nothing to make you stop with us?" they asked her.  "Have we been too rough with
you, after all?  You must forgive us if we have, for we are not accustomed to Queens, at the
back of the sun.  If we try to be less noisy, will you not stay with us a little longer?"

"Dear little wymps," cried Molly; "you never tread on my toes now, nor crumple my pinafore,
nor pull my hair.  I do not want to go away from you, but it is time for me to go back to the
other side of the sun. Will you please show me how to get there, dear little wymps?"

When they saw that she was quite determined to go, they led her very sadly to the back of the
sun; and nobody made a single joke on the way, and there was not a smile to be seen in the
whole of that sad little procession.  There had never been so little laughter and so much dolefulness
in the Land of the Wymps.

"How am I to get through that?" asked Molly, rubbing the tears out of her eyes and looking
up at the back of the big round sun; "and shall I tumble all the way down when I get to the
other side?"

"It is quite easy," explained Skilful.  "You have only to shut your eyes and jump through it,
and the sunbeams will catch you on the other side; and you can slide down the one that shines
into the shoemaker's garden, where your mother sits watching for you." 

Presently the red line wavered, and finally broke up, as the regiments wheeled into open column,
when the whole fifteen hundred men crawled past three little scarlet spots, denoting the general
and his staff. When they began to manoeuvre, each company looked like a single piece in a game
at chess; and as they fired by companies, the little tiny puffs of smoke floated up like wreaths
of wool, suddenly surmounting and overlaying the red lines, while the light companies breaking
away into skirmishers, seemed, for all the world, like two red bricks suddenly cast down, and
shattered on the ground, whereby the fragments were scattered all over the green fields, and
under the noble trees, the biggest of which looked like small cabbages.

  
  And now that you 've gone and your wymping is done,
  The world has grown sad at the back of the sun."

Molly never knew what happened when they finished singing; but the fairies knew, because they
were hiding all round the edge of the sun at the time.  And it was the most remarkable thing
that had ever happened in Wympland.

The wymps say that Queer began it; and this is extremely likely, for Queer was always a little
different from the other wymps.  Anyhow, they very soon followed his example; and so it was
that all the wymps at the back of the sun sat down on the ground and cried, because their bewymping
little Queen was no longer with them.  And all the fairies who were hiding popped up their
heads and peered over the edge of the sun and stared in amazement at what was going on in Wympland.

So the Fairy Queen was right, as she always is, and the wymps were made to cry for once in
their lives; and the fairies have as good a joke against the wymps as the wymps ever had against
the fairies.  Perhaps that is why the wymps play so few tricks on the fairies, now; but the
Fairy Queen only smiles when people say that, so she probably knows better.

The Story of Honey and Sunny

There was once a wonderful country in which everything was beautiful. All the trees, and the
flowers, and the birds, and the animals were just as beautiful as could be imagined; and the
shops, and the houses, and the palaces were the same.  Of course all the little girls and boys
were beautiful, too; but that is the same everywhere.  Now, whether it was because of the beauty
of his kingdom, or whether it was merely on account of his royal birth, it is impossible to
say, but the King was so extremely nervous that his life was no pleasure to him.

"I cannot bear anything noisy," he said.  "Noise is so very alarming." So when the baby Princess
cried, he sent her away to another King's country, to be brought up in a village nobody had
ever heard of, so that her royal father should not be disturbed.  And when he heard that the
Queen, his wife, had gone after her, he hardly raised his royal eyebrows.  "She laughed too
much," he observed, thoughtfully.

The palace grew quieter day by day.  The ladies in waiting were forbidden to wear high heels
because they made such a clatter on the marble floors; so everybody knew for the first time
how short everybody else was.  Every courtier whose boots creaked was instantly banished, and
if he had a cough into the bargain he was beheaded as well; but the climate was so delightful
that this very rarely happened.  In time, everybody at court took to speaking in a whisper,
in order to spare the King's nerves; and it even became the fashion to talk as little as possible.
The King was immensely pleased at this.  "Anybody can talk," he said; "but it is a sign of
great refinement to be silent."  After that, even the ladies in waiting were sometimes silent
for quite half an hour.  It is true that the King talked whenever he felt inclined, but that,
of course, was necessary.

The silence of the court soon spread over the country.  Laws were made to forbid the people
to keep chickens, or pigs, or cows, or anything that was noisy; and the children were ordered,
by royal proclamation, never to laugh, and never to cry, and never to quarrel, so that when
the King rode out from his palace not a sound should meet his ears. But this was not all; for
the birds were so frightened by the stillness of everything that they stopped singing altogether,
and the leaves on the trees ceased to rustle when the wind blew; and even the frogs and the
toads were startled at the hoarseness of their own voices and did not croak any more, which
was the most remarkable thing that ever happened, for it takes a very great deal to persuade
a frog or a toad that his voice is not charming.  The only sound that broke the silence was
the occasional humming of bees, for the King still allowed the people to keep bees if they
liked.  "Bees are not noisy," he said. "They do not grunt, or bark, or croak.  I can bear to
listen to the humming of bees."  Even the bees did not hum so much as bees generally do; for
the sun soon found that nobody laughed when he was shining his very best, so he went behind
a cloud in a temper and stayed there for years and years and years; and the bees could not
do without sunshine, even if the King could.  So the country grew less beautiful and more gloomy
every year.

But the village without a name in the other King's country, where the little Princess was being
brought up, was a very different kind of place.  It was full of happy people, who made as much
noise as they pleased, and laughed when they were glad, and cried when they were sad, and never
bothered about anything at all.  And the chickens ran in and out of the cottages with the children,
and the birds sang all the year round, and the sun had never been known to stop shining for
a single minute.  It was the jolliest country imaginable, for nobody interfered with anybody
else, and the King never made any laws at all, and the only punishment that existed was for
grumbling.  It is true that there was hardly any conversation, for everybody talked at once
and nobody heard what anybody else said; but as it was not often worth hearing, that did not
matter in the least.  Everybody was happy and jolly, and that was the great thing.

Little Sunny the Princess grew up without knowing that she was a Princess at all; and nobody
else knew that she was a Princess either; and even the Queen had almost forgotten that she
was a King's wife. That was nobody's concern though; and they lived in the tiniest cottage
of all, and Sunny romped with every girl and boy in the place and was loved by them all.  They
had called her Sunny because she could look straight at the sun without blinking, which was
more than the boldest of them could do; and it was such a good name for her that she was never
called anything else.  Besides, nobody knew her real name, and as it is much too long to be
mentioned here, and as the Queen had forgotten it long ago, it really is of no consequence at all.

One fine day, Sunny sat up in the chocolate tree, listening to one of the stories that Honey
the gardener's son was so fond of telling her; and Honey the gardener's son lay on the grass
below, and tried to catch the chocolate drops with which she was pelting him.

"Why are all your stories so much alike, Honey?" asked Sunny the Princess.  "Why does the Prince
always go out into the world to find a Princess?  Why should n't the Princess go and find the
Prince, for a change?  I wish I was a Princess; I would start to-morrow.  What fun!"

She laughed her very happiest laugh and found an extra large chocolate drop and threw it into
his mouth.  Honey laughed as well as any one could laugh with a chocolate drop in his mouth,
and tried to think of an answer to her question.  Honey was not his real name either, but it
was the one they had given him because he knew the language of the bees, as, indeed, every
true son of a gardener should.

"Perhaps the stories are wrong," he said.  "I only tell them to you as I have them from the
bees.  Or perhaps none of those particular Princesses ever wanted to go out into the world
to find anybody."

"Or perhaps," added Sunny, "they were just found before they had time to look for a Prince
themselves.  Do you think that was it?  Anyhow, I don't want to wait for a Prince, for Princes
never come this way at all; so I am going out into the world to seek my own fortune, and I
shall start this very moment!"

She jumped down from the chocolate tree as she spoke, and danced round Honey, clapping her
hands with excitement.  Honey was not surprised, for nobody was ever surprised at anything
in that country, but he was just a little bit sad.

"And I shall ask the first Prince I meet if he will come back with me," continued Sunny; "just
as the Princes always ask the Princesses in the stories.  He won't know I am not a Princess,
will he?  And you won't tell him, will you, Honey dear?"

"I shall not be there," said Honey the gardener's son.  "I don't think I want to look for a
Princess; and I certainly cannot leave my garden."

"Oh," said Sunny, and she was almost grave for an instant.  "But I will come back some day,
when I have found my Prince, and then you shall be my gardener," she went on consolingly. 
"And you don't mind my going without you, do you, Honey dear?"

"The Princes in the stories always went alone," answered Honey.

So that was how Sunny the Princess went out into the world, without knowing that she was a
Princess.  And of course everybody in the village missed her; but the Queen, her mother, and
Honey, the gardener's son, missed her most of all.  Before she went, however, Honey taught
her a song which she was to sing if she ever found herself in trouble; and this was the song:--

  "Friends of Honey,
  Come to Sunny;
    Whizzing, whirring,
    Stillness stirring,
    Sunlight blurring;
  Friends of Honey,
  Fly to Sunny!"

and this she learned by heart before she started.

Now, she travelled a great many days without meeting with any adventures at all.  It was such
a delightful country that everybody was pleased to see her, and she never had any difficulty
in getting enough to eat, for she had only to smile and that was all the payment that anybody
wanted.  But one day, as she was walking through a wood, a great change suddenly came over
everything.  Every sound was hushed, and the birds stopped singing, and the wind stopped playing
with the leaves; there was not a rustle or a movement anywhere, and the sun had gone behind
a cloud.  In the whole of her short life the little Princess had never seen the sun go behind
a cloud, and she felt extremely inclined to cry.  The further she went, the darker and gloomier
it grew, and at last she could not bear it another minute; so down she sat by the side of the
road and wept heartily.

"Hullo! you must stop that noise or else you will be banished," said a voice, not very far
on.  Sunny was so astonished that she stopped crying at once and looked up to see a little
old man with a white beard staring at her.  He was a very sad-looking little man, and his mouth
was drawn down at the corners as though he had been on the point of crying all his life and
had never quite broken down.

"Why must I stop?" asked Sunny.  "If you feel unhappy you must cry, must n't you?"

"Dear me, no," said the sad little man, in a tone of deep gloom.  "I am always unhappy, but
I never cry.  The whole country is unhappy, but nobody is allowed to cry.  If you cry, you
must go away."

"What a funny country!" cried Sunny, and she at once began to laugh at the absurdity of it.

"Don't do that," said the little man, in a tone of still greater alarm. "If you go on making
any fresh noises, you will get beheaded.  Why can't you be quiet?  You can do anything you
like, as long as you do it quietly."

"May n't I laugh?" exclaimed Sunny.  "What is the use of feeling happy if you may n't laugh?"

"It is n't any use," said the sad little man.  "Nobody ever is happy in this country.  Nobody
ever has been happy since the King was bewitched and the sun went away in a temper, and that
was sixteen years ago. Nobody ever will be happy again, unless the spell is broken; and the
spell cannot be broken until a Princess of the royal blood comes this way, without knowing
that she is a Princess."

"How absurd!" said Sunny.  "As if a Princess could be a Princess without knowing she is a Princess!"

"Why not?" asked the sad little man, crossly.  He had lived alone in the dark, silent wood
for such a long time that he began to find the conversation tiring.

"Oh, because there are bands and flags and balls and banquets and cheers and Princes and lots
of fun, wherever there is a Princess," replied Sunny.

The sad little man looked more sad than before.

"Then the spell will never be broken," he said, miserably; "because all that noise would be
stopped at once.  If you have done talking you had better go, or else we shall both be banished;
and I advise you to take off those wooden shoes of yours, unless you want to be clapped into
prison.  But, first of all, tell me if you can look straight at the sun without blinking."

He always asked that of every little girl who came his way, in case she should happen to be
a Princess; for he was really a very wise little man in spite of his sadness, and he knew that
only eagles, and Princesses who did not know they were Princesses, could look straight at the
sun without blinking. In the offing the sea appeared like ice, for the waves were not seen at
all, and the swell could only be marked by the difference in the reflection of the sun's rays
as it rose and fell, while a hot haze hung over the whole, making
every thing indistinct, so that the water blended into sky, without
the line of demarcation being visible.

But even as we looked forth on this most glorious scene, a small black cloud rose to windward.
At this time we were both sitting on the grass on a most beautiful bank, beneath an orange--tree--the
ominous appearance increased in size--the sea breeze was suddenly
stifled--the swelling sails of the frigate that had first saluted,
fell, and, as she rolled, flattened in against the masts the rustling
of the green leaves overhead ceased.

The cloud rolled onward from the east, and spread out, and out, as
it sailed in from seaward, and on, and on, until it gradually covered
the whole scene from our view, (shipping, and harbour, and town, and
camp, and sugar estates,) boiling and rolling in black eddies under
our feet.

Anon the thunder began to grumble, and the zigzag lightning to fork out from one dark mass into
another, while all, where we sat, was bright and smiling under the unclouded noon--day sun.
This continued for half an hour, when at length the sombre appearance of the clouds below us
brightened into a sea of white fleecy vapour like wool, which gradually
broke away into detached masses, discovering another layer of still
thinner vapour underneath, which again parted, disclosing through
the interstices a fresh gauze--like veil of transparent mist, through
which the lower ranges of hills, and the sugar estates, and the town
and shipping, were once more dimly visible; but this in turn vanished,
and the clouds, attracted by the hills, floated away, and hung around
them in festoons, and gradually rose and rose until presently we were
enveloped in mist, and Mary spoke.

"Tom, there will be thunder here what shall we do?"

"Poo, never mind. Mary, you have a conductor on the house."

"True," said she; "but the servants, when the post that supported it was blown down t'other day,
very judiciously unlinked the rods, and now, since I remember me, they are, to use your phrase,
'stowed away' below the house;" and so they were, sure enough. However, we had no more thunder,
and soon the only indications of the spent storm were the red discoloured appearance of the margin
of the harbour, from the rush of muddy water off the land, and the chocolate colour of the previously
snow--white sandy roads, that now twisted through the plain like black snakes, and a fleecy dolphin--shaped
cloud here and there stretching out, and floating horizontally in the blue sky, as if it had
been hooked to the precipitous mountain tops above us.
  And Sunny went clattering along the great hall, past the page boys who
were playing marbles with india-rubber marbles, and past the kitchen where the fires burned
without crackling and the kettles never boiled over, and up the wide marble staircase, and
along all the passages, until the sound of her coming even reached the King's ears.

Now the King sat on his throne with cotton wool stuffed in his ears, in case there should by
accident be the least sound in the palace.  But, in spite of that, he heard the clatter of
Sunny's shoes coming closer and closer, and he began to feel terribly nervous lest there really
was going to be a noise at last.

"What is that noise?  Take it away and behead it at once!" he said to the Prime Minister, in
his most distinct whisper.  But the noise outside was now so great that the Prime Minister
could not hear a word; and the next moment the door was flung open, and Sunny the Princess
ran into the room.  And the King looked so funny as he tried to make the Prime Minister hear
his whispers, and the Prime Minister looked so funny as he tried to hear the King's whispers,
that Sunny was obliged to laugh; and when she had once begun she found she could not stop,
so she laughed and laughed and laughed; and when the poor, nervous old King turned again to
the Prime Minister to tell him to behead some one at once, he found that the Prime Minister
was laughing too; and immediately all the pages in the hall, and the courtiers in the courtyard,
and the cooks in the kitchen, and the townspeople in the streets, and the children in the nurseries,
were all laughing as heartily as they could.  And when the sun heard all this laughter, he
finished making up his mind immediately, and came out from behind the cloud and shone his very
best once more.  So there was the sunshine again, and there was everybody laughing, except
the King.

Now, when the King found that no one was paying any attention to his royal whispers, he began
to grow angry, and without thinking any more about it he shouted at the very top of his royal
voice.  And this was so remarkable, after sixteen years of whispering, that the laughter was
instantly hushed; and even Sunny the Princess became grave, because she wanted to see what
was going to happen next.

"Who are you?" demanded the King, pointing at her with his sceptre.

"I am Sunny, of course," she said, stepping up to the throne in quite a friendly manner.  All
the courtiers looked at one another and nodded.

"She is Sunny, of course," they said, just as though there could be no doubt about it whatever.

"She is the little Princess your daughter," said a fresh voice from the doorway.  And there
stood the Queen, who had not been able to stay by herself any longer and had just come after
Sunny as fast as she could. When the King saw her, he quite forgot that she used to laugh too
much, and he came down from his throne in a terrific hurry and he kissed her several times
before the whole court; and Sunny kissed them both there and then; and all the ladies in waiting
in the room kissed all the pages that were to be seen; and the courtiers stood in rows along
the wall and never got kissed at all.  For that evening the King gave a magnificent ball, to
celebrate the return of his daughter Sunny; and all the Princes in the kingdom were invited to it.

"Now," said the Queen, as she carefully put on Sunny's beautiful new crown, "you will be able
to find your Prince, as you said you would."

But Sunny shook her head and wondered why she felt so sad when everything seemed to be going
so well; and when the Queen had gone downstairs to look after the supper, she went to the open
window and looked out into the garden.  As she did so, there came a faint buzzing and humming
close at hand, and three beautiful brown bees flew down and settled on her round white arm.

She had not nearly finished singing it before there came a distant murmur in the still, warm
air, and the murmur grew louder and louder until it would almost have deafened any one if there
had been any one there to deafen.  But the people in the palace were so occupied in dressing
for the ball that a thunderstorm would not have made any difference to them; and as for Sunny,
the sound only reminded her of the village without a name, where she had been so happy with
Honey.  So she leaned out of the window as far as she could, and waited until she saw a dense
cloud coming gradually towards her, so large that it covered the whole of the setting sun.
When it reached the palace it hung just above it, and she could see quite plainly that it was
made of millions and millions of bees.  Then the three bees which had dropped on her round
white arm floated up into the air and flew round her head three times and went away to join
the cloud of bees overhead.  Sunny knew then that they were going to do what she wanted; and
she clapped her hands and laughed, as the humming and buzzing began all over again, and the
cloud moved away as quickly as it had come.  "Hurry, hurry, dear little bees!" she cried from
the palace window; and the next moment there was not a bee left in the whole kingdom, for they
had all gone to the village without a name, in the other King's country.

Everybody wondered why the Princess was so disdainful to all the Princes who danced with her,
that night.  But nobody wondered any more when Honey the gardener's son arrived; and this really
happened, only three days later.  And he came, all in his gardener's clothes; and he walked
straight into the palace, just as Sunny had done; and she met him in the great hall, where
the King and the Queen and the whole court were having a reception to receive one another.
And they both shouted with happiness and ran straight into each other's arms; and they kissed
and kissed and kissed, and then they fell to talking as fast as they could; and they both talked
at once for three quarters of an hour, before either of them heard a word.  Then they sat down
on the steps of the King's throne, just because it happened to be there, and Sunny told him
everything that had happened to her.  Nobody interfered, not even the Prime Minister, for Sunny
had done so many curious things since her arrival that one more or less made very little difference.

"It is very dull being a Princess," said Sunny.  "And I don't like palaces much, after all;
they are such stuffy places!  The people who live in them are rather stuffy, too.  And there
is n't a chocolate tree in the whole of the garden; did you ever know such a stupid garden?
Oh, I am so glad you have come, Honey dear!"

"Have you found your Prince?" was all that Honey said.

"Princes are not a bit amusing," said Sunny.  "There were fifty-two Princes at the ball, the
other night, but I did n't like any of them. I am dreadfully tired of being a Princess.  It
is ever so much nicer in the village, under the chocolate tree."

"Of course it is," said Honey.  "We 'll go back, shall we?"  And nothing the King could say
would make them see any other side to the question.  Indeed, as the Queen pointed out to him,
if he had not allowed the people to keep so many bees it might never have happened at all.
So the end of it was, that the Queen stayed with the King; and Honey and Sunny were married
that very same day and went back to live in the village without a name.  And there they built
a very small house in a very big garden, and they planted it with rows of chocolate trees,
and rows of acid-drop bushes, and lots of almond rockeries; and the fairies came and filled
it with flowers from Fairyland that had no names at all, but were the most beautiful flowers
that any one has ever seen, for they never faded or died but just changed into something else
when they were tired of being the same flower.

So no wonder that Honey and Sunny were happy for ever and ever!

The Little Princess and the Poet

There was once a Poet whom nobody wanted.  Wherever he went, he was always in the way; and
the reason for this was his inability to do anything useful.  All the people in all the countries
through which he passed seemed to be occupied in making something,--either war, or noise, or
money, or confusion; but the Poet could make nothing except love, and that, of course, was
of no use at all.  Even the women, who might otherwise have welcomed him, could not endure
the ugliness of his features; and, indeed, it would have been difficult to find a face with
less beauty in it, for he looked as if all the cares and the annoyances of the world had been
imprinted on his countenance and left it seared with lines.  So the poor, ugly Poet went from
place to place, singing poems to which nobody listened, and offering sympathy to people who
could not even understand his language.

One day he came to a city he had never visited before; and, as he always did, he went straight
to the part where the poorer people lived, for it was all about them that he wrote the poetry
to which nobody listened.  But, as usual, the poor people were so full of their troubles that
they could not even understand him.

"What is the use of telling us we are unhappy?" they grumbled.  "We know that already, and
it does not interest us a bit.  Can you not do something for us?"

The Poet only shook his head.

"If I did," he replied, "I should probably do it very badly. My window had been left open the evening
before, when it was hot and sultry enough, but it was now cold and damp, and a wetting mist
boiled in through the open sash, like rolling wreaths of white smoke.

"What is that--where are we in the North Sea, or on the top of Mont Blanc? Why, clouds may be all
in your way, Massa Jupiter, but."

"Cloud!" rejoined the Deity--"him no more den marning fag, massa;
always hab him over de Vale in de morning, until de sun melt him.

And where is you?--why, you is in Massa Aaron house, here in St Thomas in de Vale--and Miss."

"Miss"--said
I--"what Miss?"

"Oh, for you Miss," rejoined Jupiter with a grin,
"Miss Mary up and dress already, and de horses are at de door; him
wait for you to ride wid him before breakfast, massa, and to see de
clearing of de fag."

"Who are you, and what do you want?" demanded the royal sentinels, when he presented himself
at the palace gates.

"I am a Poet," he replied.  "And I have come to see the Princess, because she is fond of poets."

"We have never seen a poet like you," said the sentinels, doubtfully. "All the poets in the
palace have smooth, smiling faces, and fine clothes, and white hands.  Her Royal Highness is
not accustomed to receiving any one so untidy as yourself."

The Poet looked down at his weather-beaten clothes and his toil-worn hands; and he stared at
the reflection of his wrinkled, furrowed face in the moat that surrounded the palace; and he
sighed in a disappointed manner.

"I am a Poet," he repeated.  "How can a man be a poet if his face is smooth and his hands are
white?  No man can be a poet if he has not toiled and suffered and wandered over the earth,
for the sake of the people who are in it."

Just then he heard a woman's voice speaking from the other side of the gates; and looking through
them, he saw a beautiful, pale Princess, standing there all by herself, with a look of interest
on her face.

"It is the little blind Princess," thought the Poet, and he bowed straight to the ground though
he knew quite well that she could not see him.  The sentinels saluted, too, for they were so
accustomed to saluting people who never saw them at all that the blindness of the little Princess
made no difference to them.

"Tell me," said the Princess, eagerly, "the name of the man with the wonderful voice, who is
saying all those beautiful, true things."

"Please your Highness," said the sentinels, "he says he is a Poet."

"Ah," cried the little Princess, joyfully, "at last you have come; I have been waiting for
you all my life!  At last I have found a real Poet, and the Queen-mother will see now that
all those people in there, who say the same things over and over again in their small, thin
voices, are not poets at all.  Come in, Poet; why do you stay so long outside?"

So the drawbridge was let down, and the sentinels saw what a mistake they had made and did
their best to pretend that they had not made it at all; and for the first time in his life
the Poet felt that he was not in anybody's way.

"Come with me, Poet," said the little Princess, holding out her small white hand to him.  "If
you will take my hand, I shall feel quite sure you are there."

So the little blind Princess and the Poet went into the palace, hand in hand.

"I have found a Poet," she announced to the whole court, just as it was sitting down to luncheon.

"What!  Another?" groaned the King from the top of the table.  "I should have thought five-and-forty
were quite enough, considering the demand."

"This is a real Poet," continued the little Princess, still holding the Poet's hand.  "I knew
him by his wonderful voice.  I am so glad he has come; and now, we can send away all the others,
who are not poets at all."

Now, this was a little awkward, for the five-and-forty poets were all present; and being mostly
the younger sons of kings, who had only taken up poetry as an accomplishment, they were also
suitors for the Princess's hand, which made it more awkward still.  So the Queen coughed uncomfortably,
and all the ladies in waiting blushed uncomfortably, and the five-and-forty poets naturally
looked uncomfortable into the bargain.  But the little Princess, who could see nothing and
never had been able to see anything, neither blushed nor felt uncomfortable.

"Will some one give place to the Poet?" she asked with a smile.

The Queen, who was generally full of resources, felt that it was time to interfere.

"Do not listen to Her Royal Highness," she said, soothingly, to the five-and-forty poets. 
"She is so terribly truthful that she does not know what she is saying.  I have tried in vain
to break her of it."

"Don't know where she gets it from," growled the old King, who had a great dislike to scenes
at meal times. 

The youngest is now, I believe, the prime ornament of the Scottish Peerage; and I never can forget
the pleasure I so frequently experienced in those days in the society
of this delightful family.

The same evening I returned to the Pen.  "My daughter did not know who you were
because, unfortunately, she cannot see.  She actually mistook you for a poet!"

"It is the first time," said the Poet, "that any one has made the mistake.  However, you are
quite right and I had better go.  You will not like my poetry; I see five-and-forty gentlemen
who can write the poetry that will give you pleasure; mine is written for the people, who have
to work that you may be happy.  Little lady," he added, turning to the Princess, "I pray you,
think no more of me.  As for me, I shall love you to the end of my days."

Then he tried to go, but the small, white fingers of the little blind Princess were round his
own rough, tanned ones, and he could not move.

"I loved you before you came," she said, smiling.  "I have been waiting for you all the time.
Why are you in such a hurry to go, if you love me?"

The listeners grew more scandalised every moment.  No one had seen such love-making before.
To be sure, the five-and-forty poets had written love songs innumerable, but that was not at
all the same thing.  Every one felt that something ought to be done and nobody quite knew how
to do it.  Fortunately, the King was hungry.

"I think you had better say the rest in private, when we have had lunch," he said grimly, and
the courtiers looked immensely relieved, and a place was found next to the Princess for the
Poet; and the Queen and her ladies in waiting proceeded to make conversation, and lunch went
on as usual.

"Now," said the King, with a sigh, for meals were of far greater importance to him than poetry,
"you shall tell us one of your poems, so that we may know whether you are a poet or not." 

Presently we crossed a wooden bridge, supported by a stone pier in the centre, when Jupiter pricked
a--head to give notice of the approach of waggons, that our cavalcade might haul up, out of
danger, into some nook in the rock, to allow the lumbersome teams to pass.
  There was a great silence when he sat down again,
and the Poet did not know what to make of it.  But the small, white fingers of the little Princess
had again stolen round his, and that was at least consoling.

The Queen was the first to break the silence.

"Charming," she said with an effort, "and so new."

"We have heard nothing like it before," said the ladies in waiting. "Are there really such
people as that in the world?  It might be amusing to meet them, or, at least, to study them."

