He sought out Andreas Döderlein at once. He was told that the professor was not in town. Two
weeks later he stood once more before the old house. He was told that the professor could not
be seen to-day. He was discouraged. But out of loyalty to his cause he returned at the end
of three days and was received.

He entered an overheated room. The professor was sitting in an arm chair. On his knees was
his little, eight-year-old daughter; in his right arm he held a large doll. The white tiles
of the stove were adorned with pictured scenes from the Nibelungen legend; table and chairs
were littered with music scores; the windows had leaded panes; in one corner there was a mass
of artfully grouped objects—peacocks’ feathers, gay-coloured silks, Chinese fans. This combination
was known as a Makart bouquet, and represented the taste of the period.

Döderlein put the little girl down and gave her her doll. Then he drew himself up to the fulness
of his gigantic stature, a process that gave him obvious pleasure. His neck was so fat that
his chin seemed to rest on a gelatinous mass.

He seemed not to recall Daniel. Cues had to be given him to distinguish this among his crowded
memories. He snapped his fingers. It was a sign that his mind had reached the desired place.
“Ah, yes, yes, yes! To be sure, to be sure, my dear young man! But what do you suppose? Just
now when all available space is as crowded as a street strewn with crumbs is crowded with sparrows.
We might take the matter up again in autumn. Yes, in autumn something might be done.”

A pause, during which the great man gave inarticulate sounds of profound regret. And was the
young man, after all, so sure of a genuine talent? Had he considered that art was becoming
more and more an idling place for the immature and the shipwrecked? It was so difficult to
tell the sheep from the goats. And finally, granting talent, how was the young man equipped
in the matter of moral energy? There, indisputably, the core of the problem was to be sought.
Or didn’t he, perhaps, think so?

As through a fog Daniel observed that the little girl had approached him and looked him over
with a curiously cold and testing glance. Almost he was impelled to stretch out his hand and
cover the eyes of the child, whose manner was uncanny to him through some ghostly presentiment.

“I’m truly sorry that I can’t give you a more encouraging outlook.” Andreas Döderlein’s voice
was oily, and showed a conscious delight in its own sound. “But as I said, there’s nothing
to be done until autumn. Suppose you leave me your address. Put it down on this slip. No? Well,
quite as you wish. Good-bye, young man, good-bye.”

Döderlein accompanied him to the door. Then he returned to his daughter, took her on his knee,
picked up the doll, and said: “Human beings, my dear Dorothea, are a wretched set. If I were
to compare them to sparrows on the road, I should be doing the sparrows but little honour.
Heavens and earth! Wouldn’t even write his name on a slip of paper. Felt hurt! Well, well,
well. What funny creatures men are. Wouldn’t leave his name. Well, well.”

He hummed the Walhalla motif, and Dorothea, bending over her doll, coquettishly kissed the
waxen face.

Daniel, standing in front of the house, bit his lips like a man in a fever who does not want
his teeth to rattle. Why, the depth of his soul asked him, why did you sit in their counting-houses
and waste their time? Why did you crucify your body and bind my wings? Why were you deaf to
me and desirous of gathering fruits where there are only stones? Why did you, like a coward,
flee from your fate to their offices and ware-houses and iron safes and all their doleful business?
For the sake of this hour? Poor fool!

And he answered: “Never again, my soul, never again.”

                                  XI

In the beginning Marian had received a letter from Daniel every now and then. These letters
became rarer. During the second year he wrote only once—a few lines at Christmas.

At the time when he was leaving his last place of employment he wrote her on a postcard that
he was changing his residence again. But he did not tell her that he was going to Nuremberg.
So spring passed and summer. Then her soul, which was wavering between fear and hope, was rudely
jolted out of its dim state by a letter from Jason Philip.

He wrote that Daniel was loafing about in Nuremberg. Quite by accident he had met him a few
days before near the fair booths on Schütt Island. His appearance was indescribable. He had
tried to question him, but Daniel had disappeared. What had brought him to the city he, Jason
Philip, could not see. But he was willing to wager that at the bottom of it was some shady
trick, for the fellow had not looked like one who earns an honest living. So he proposed to
Marian that she should come to Nuremberg and help in a raid on the vagabond, in order to prevent
the unblemished name he bore from being permanently disgraced before it was too late. As a
contribution to her travelling expenses he enclosed five marks in stamps.

Marian had received the letter at noon. She had at once locked up her house and shop. At two
o’clock she had reached the station at Ansbach; at four she arrived in Nuremberg. Carrying
her hand-bag, she asked her way to Plobenhof Street at every corner.

Theresa sat at the cashier’s desk. Her brown hair on her square peasant’s skull was smoothly
combed. Zwanziger, the freckled shop-assistant, was busy unpacking books. Theresa greeted her
sister with apparent friendliness, but she did not leave her place. She stretched out her hand
across the ink-stand, and observed Marian’s shabby appearance—the worn shawl, the old-fashioned
little cloth bonnet with its black velvet ribbands meeting in a bow under the chin.

“Go upstairs for a bit,” she said, “and let the children entertain you. Rieke will bring up
your bag.”

“Where is your husband?” asked Marian.

“At an electors’ meeting,” Theresa answered morosely. “They couldn’t meet properly, according
to him, if he isn’t there.”

At that moment a man in a workingman’s blouse entered the shop and began to talk to Theresa
urgently in a soft but excited voice. “I bought the set of books and they’re my property,”
said the man. “Suppose I did skip a payment. That’s no reason to lose my property. I call that
sharp practice, Frau Schimmelweis, that’s what I call it.”

“What did Herr Wachsmuth buy of us?” Theresa turned to the shop-assistant.

“Schlosser’s ‘History of the World,’” was the prompt answer.

“Then you’d better read your contract,” Theresa said to the workingman. “The terms are all
fixed there.”

“That’s sharp practice, Frau Schimmelweis, sharp practice,” the man repeated, as though this
phrase summed up all he could express in the way of withering condemnation. “A fellow like
me wants to get on and wants to learn something. All right. So I think I’ll buy me a book and
get a step ahead in knowledge. So where do I go? To a party member, to Comrade Schimmelweis,
thinking natural-like I’m safe in his hands. I pay sixty marks—hard earned money—for a history
of the world, and manage to squeeze the payments out o’ my wages, and then, all of a sudden,
when half the price is paid, I’m to have my property taken from me without so much as a by
your leave just because I’m two payments in arrears.”

“Read your contract,” said Theresa. “Every point is stipulated.”

“No wonder people get rich,” the man went on. His voice grew louder and louder, and he glanced
angrily at Jason Philip, who at that moment rushed into the shop with his hat crushed and his
trousers sprinkled with mud. “No wonder that people can buy houses and speculate in real estate.
Yes, Schimmelweis, I call such things sharp practice, and I don’t give a damn for your contract.
Everybody knows by this time what kind of business is done here—more like a man-trap—and that
these here instalments are just a scheme to squeeze the workingman dry. First you talk to him
about education, and then you suck his blood. It’s hell!”

“Pull yourself together, Wachsmuth!” Jason Philip cried sternly.

Wachsmuth picked up his cap, and slammed the shopdoor behind him.

Marian Nothafft’s eyes passed mechanically over the titles of a row of fiercely red pamphlets
spread out on a table. She read: “The Battle that Decides,” “Modern Slaveholders,” “The Rights
of the Poor,” “Christianity and Capitalism,” “The Crimes of the Bourgeoisie.” Although these
catch-words meant nothing to her, she felt in her heart once more her old, long forgotten hatred
against machines.

                                  XII

“Fetch me a sandwich, Theresa,” Jason Philip commanded, “I’m hungry as a wolf.”

“Didn’t you eat anything at the inn?” Theresa asked suspiciously.

“I was at no such place.” Jason Philip’s eyes gleamed, and he shook his head like a lion.

So Theresa went to fetch his sandwich. It was queer to observe how much distrust and contradiction
she was able to express through the sloth of her movements. But her daughter Philippina was
already hurrying down the stairs with the sandwich.

At this moment Jason Philip became aware of his sister-in-law. “Ah, there you are, you shrinking
flower,” he said lightly, and held out his pudgy hand. “Theresa will put you up in the little
room under the store-room. You have a pleasant view of the river there.”

Theresa handed him the bread. He sniffed at it, and frowned because it wasn’t thickly enough
buttered. But he had not the courage to complain. He bit into it, and, with full cheeks, turned
once more to Marian.

“Well, that son of yours has disappeared again. A nice situation. Shouldn’t wonder if he ended
in the penitentiary. The best thing would be to ship him off to America; but it isn’t clear
to me how we’re to get hold of him at all. It was really premature to ask you to come.”

“If only I knew what he’s living on,” Marian whispered, with repressed anguish.

Jason Philip indulged with broad psychical comfort in an anecdote: “I was reading the other
day how a giraffe escaped from the Zoo. You’ve heard of giraffes. They are long-necked quadrupeds,
very stupid and stubborn. The silly beast had run off into the woods, and the people didn’t
know how to capture it. Then the keeper hung the stable-lantern over his chest and a bundle
of hay on his back, and at nightfall went into the woods. Scarcely had the giraffe noticed
the gleam of the lantern when it came up in its curiosity. At once the man swung around. It
smelled the hay, nibbled, and began to feed. Slowly the man went on, and the beast went on
nibbling and feeding. First thing you know it was back in its cage. Now don’t you think that
when hunger begins to torment him, your Daniel could be tamed with a bit of hay too? It’s worth
your thinking about.”

Jason Philip laughed merrily, and Zwanziger grinned. His boss was a source of humour. At night,
when he sat in his favourite tap-rooms over his beer, he would entertain his boon companions
with the witticisms of Schimmelweis, and always won their applause.

A lean old man with kid gloves and a top-hat entered the shop. It was growing dark, and he
had peered carefully about before entering. He hurried up to Jason Philip, and said in a cracked
falsetto: “How about the new publications? Anything very fine?” He rubbed his hands, and stared
stupidly from under his thin, reddish lids. It was Count Schlemm-Nottheim, a cousin of the
Baron von Auffenberg, the leader of the liberal party.

“I’m entirely at your service, sir,” said Jason Philip, holding himself as rigidly as a sergeant
who is being addressed by a captain.

He led the count to a corner of the shop, and opened a heavy oaken chest. This chest contained
the pornographic publications forbidden by the state. They were sold quite secretly and only
to very reliable persons.

Jason Philip whispered, and the old count turned over the heap of books with avid fingers.

                                 XIII

Marian climbed up the steep, dark stairs, and rang the upstairs bell. She had to tell the maid
who she was and even mention her name to the children. The latter laughed at her stiff, rural
courtesy. Philippina, who was twelve, acted arrogantly and swung her hips when she walked.
All three had their mother’s square head and a cheesy complexion.

The maid brought up the bag. Then Theresa came too and helped her sister unpack. With her acrid,
unfeeling voice she asked many questions, but without waiting for an answer told the tale of
marriage and births and deaths that had taken place in the city. She avoided Marian’s eyes,
because she was silently considering how long her sister’s visit would last and to what expense
it would put her.

She did not mention Daniel, and her silence condemned him more completely than her husband’s
acrimonious speeches. She held firmly an almost religious doctrine of the complete obedience
which children owe their parents, and doubted Marian’s power to punish properly a breach of
this sacred law.

When Marian was left alone, she sat down by the window of the little room, and gazed sadly
down at the river. Without any curl of waves the yellow water glided by and washed the walls
of the houses on the other bank. She had a view of the Museum Bridge and another bridge, and
the crowding of people on the bridges disquieted her.

She walked through the streets, and stopped at the head of the Museum Bridge. She thought that
every human being who lived in the town must pass by here sooner or later. Her attentive glance
searched all faces, and where one escaped, she followed the figure as it melted into the dark.
But as it grew later the people were fewer and fewer.

At night she would lie awake, and listen to the dull echo of the feet of the last passerby.
Next day from morning to twilight she would wander up and down the streets. What she saw weighed
on her heart. The city people seemed to her like dumb animals, tormented and angry. The narrow
streets stopped her breath; the hubbub deadened her senses.

But she was never tired of seeking.

On the fifth day she did not come home until ten o’clock. Theresa, who had gone to bed, sent
her a plate of lentil soup. While she was avidly eating the soup she heard steps in the hall
and a knock at the door. Jason Philip entered. “Come along at once,” was all he said. But she
understood. With trembling fingers she threw a shawl across her shoulders, since the October
nights were growing cool, and followed him in silence.

They went up hill to Adler Street, turned into it and then into a narrow, dark little alley
at the right. A lantern hung above a door and on a green glass pane were inscribed the words:
“The Vale of Tears.” A greenish light suffused the stone stairs that led to the cellar, the
kegs and the desolate room filled with chairs and benches. A sourish smell of wine arose from
the place.

Beside the entrance there was a barred window. Beside it Jason Philip stopped, and beckoned
Marian to join him.

At the long tables below them sat a queer crowd. They were young men, but such as one never
finds in ordinary houses and only very rarely in the streets. Want seemed to have driven them
to huddle here, and the night to have lured them from their hiding places—shipwrecked creatures
they seemed who had fled to a cavern on some deserted shore. They had absurdly gay cravats
and sad, pallid faces, and the greenish light made them look altogether like corpses. It was
long since a barber had touched their hair or a tailor their garb.

A little aside from these sat two old fellows, habitual topers, not in the best circumstances
themselves, yet rather astonished at this dreary Stygian crew. For they themselves at least
received their weekly wage of a Saturday night, while those others had obviously for years
not worked at all.

But in a dusky corner sat one at a piano and struck the keys with a strange might. He had no
score before him, but played from memory. The instrument moaned; the strings hummed pitifully;
the pedals creaked; but the man who played was so bewitched by his music that he cared little
for the inadequacy of its communication. Wild as the tumult of the playing sounded, the shrill
and raging chords, the wild clamour of the treble, the driven triplets and seething tremolos
of the bass, yet the deep emotion of the player, the ecstasy and world-estranged madness in
which he was, lent the scene a melancholy and a solemnity which would have had its effect even
without the greenish cellar and the cavernous pallor of the listeners.

Marian had at once recognised the pianist as Daniel. She had to hold fast to the bars of the
window and lean her knees against the wainscoting. It was not for nothing that Jason Philip
was known as a thorough wag. The comparison to Daniel in the lion’s den was too much for him.
He whispered the words to Marian. But since the window was open and the music had first risen
and then, at this moment, paused, his words penetrated to the people below, and several heads
turned toward him. Marian was thoughtless. She believed that the piece had ended. Faintly and
fearfully she cried: “Daniel!”

Daniel leaped up, stared at her, saw Jason Philip’s mocking face, hastened to the door, the
steps, and was beside them.

He stood in the doorway, and his lips began to form words. The unhappy boy, she thought, and
it seemed to her as though power would be given her to press back to his heart the words she
trembled to hear.

It was in vain. The words were uttered. He did not wish to see his mother any more; he was
content to live alone and for himself and to be free. He needed no one. He needed only to be free.

Jason Philip hurled a glance of contempt at the blasphemous wretch, and drew Marian away with
him. To the very corner of the alley they were accompanied by the excited voices of the people
in the Vale of Tears.

Next morning Marian returned to Eschenbach.

                  FOES, BROTHERS, A FRIEND AND A MASK

                                   I

Daniel had rented a room of the brush-maker Hadebusch and his wife, who lived on Jacob’s Square
behind the church.

It was March, and a sudden cold had set in; and Frau Hadebusch had a superstitious fear of
coal, which she characterised as Devil’s dung. At the back of the yard was the wood pile, and
logs were brought in with which to feed the oven fires. But wood was dear, and had Daniel fed
his little iron stove in the garret with such costly food, his monthly bill would have reached
a fabulous height. He paid seven marks a month for his room and counted every penny so as not
to shorten the period of his liberty by any needless expenditure.

So he sat freezing over his books and scores until the first warmth of spring stole in through
the windows. The books he borrowed from the library at the King’s Gate, and paid six pfennigs
a volume. Achim von Arnim and Jean Paul were his guides in those days: the one adorned the
world of the senses for him, the other that of the soul.

On the police department’s identification blank Daniel had called himself a musician. Frau
Hadebusch brought the paper into her living room, which, like all the rooms of the house, seemed
built for dwarfs and reeked of limewater and lye. It was at the day’s end, and in the room
were assembled Herr Francke and Herr Benjamin Dorn, who lodged on the second floor, and Frau
Hadebusch’s son, who was weak-minded and crouched grinning beside the stove.

Herr Francke was a town traveller for a cigar house, and was regarded as a good deal of a Don
Juan by the female servants of the neighbourhood. Benjamin Dorn was a clerk in the Prudentia
Life Insurance Company, belonged to a Methodist congregation, and was respected by all the
respectable on account of his Christian walk and conversation.

These gentlemen examined the document thoroughly and with frowns. Herr Francke gave it as his
opinion that a musician who never made music could scarcely be regarded as one.

“He’s probably pawned his bass violin or bugle or whatever he was taught,” he said contemptuously;
“perhaps he can only beat a drum. Well, I can do that too if I have one.”

“Yes, you’ve got to have a drum to be a drummer,” Benjamin Dorn remarked. “The question, however,
is whether such a calling is in harmony with the principles of Christian modesty.” He laid
his finger on his nose, and added: “It is a question which, with all proper humility, all proper
humility, you understand, I would answer in the negative.”

“He hasn’t any relatives and no acquaintances at all,” Frau Hadebusch wailed, and her voice
sounded like the scraping of carrots on a grater; “and no employment and no prospects and no
boots or clothes but what he’s got on. In all my life I haven’t had no such lodger.”

The blank fluttered to the floor, whence the weak-minded Hadebusch Jr. picked it up, rolled
it in the shape of a bag, and applied that bag, trumpet-like, to his lips, a procedure which
caused the document in question to be gradually soaked through and thus withdrawn from its
official uses. Frau Hadebusch was too little concerned over the police regulations to take
further thought of her duties as the keeper of a lodging house.

Herr Francke drew from his pocket a pack of greasy cards and began to shuffle them. Frau Hadebusch
giggled and it sounded like a witch rustling in the fire. The Methodist conquered his pious
scruples, and placed his pfennigs on the table; the town-traveller turned up his sleeves as
though he were about to wring a hen’s neck.

Before very long there arose a dissonant controversy, since Herr Francke’s relations with the
goddess of fortune were strained and violent. The old brush-maker poked his head in at the
door and cursed; the weak-minded boy blew dreamily on his paper trumpet; and the company that
had been so peacefully at one separated in violence and rage.

                                  II

Daniel wandered up to the castle, along the walls, over the bridges and planks.

It was his youth that caused him so to love the night that he forgot all men and seemed to
himself to be alone on earth. It was his youth that delivered him up to things with such passion
that he was able to weave the ghostly flowers of melodies about all that is visible—melodies
that were so delicate, so eloquent, and so winged that no pen could ever record them. They
vanished and died whenever he sought to capture them.

But it was also his youth that fired his eyes with hatred when he saw the comfort of lit windows,
and filled his heart with bitterness against the satisfied, the indifferent, the strangers,
the eternal strangers who had no consciousness of him.

He was so small and so great: small in the eyes of the world, great in his own estimation.
When the tones burst from him like sparks from an anvil, he was a god. When he stood in the
dark court behind the City Theatre waiting for the final chorus of “Fidelio” to penetrate the
wall and reach his grateful ears, he was an outcast. Fountains of music rustled all about him.
He looked into the eyes of the children and there was melody; he gazed up at the stars and
there was harmony. He finally came to the point where there was no limit. His day was a waste
place, his brain a parched field in the rain, his thoughts were birds of passage, his dreams
a super-life.

He lived on bread and fruit, treating himself only every third day to a warm meal in the inn
at the sign of the White Tower. There he would sit and listen at times, unobserved, to the
quite remarkable conversation of some young fellows. This awakened in him a longing for intercourse
with congenial companions. But when the brethren of the Vale of Tears finally took him into
their circle, he was like a Robinson Crusoe or a Selkirk who had been abducted from his island.

                                  III

Benjamin Dorn was a compassionate individual. The desire to save a lost soul filled him with
the courage to pay Daniel Nothafft a visit. He hobbled up the creaky steps with his club-foot,
and knocked timidly at the door.

“Can I be of service to you, Sir, in a Christian way?” he asked, after he had blown his nose.

Daniel looked at him in amazement.

“You know, I could help you in an unselfish, Christian way, to get a position. There is a great
deal of work to be done down at the Prudentia. If I were to recommend you to Herr Zittel it
certainly would not be in vain. Herr Zittel is head of the clerical department. I also stand
in with Herr Diruf, and he is general agent. I come in contact nearly every day with Inspector
Jordan, and Herr Jordan is a man of exceptional culture. His daughter Gertrude attended my
Sunday-school class. She has received and still enjoys divine favour. If you were to entrust
your case to me, you would be entering upon a righteous, wholesome career. I am always looking
out for some one. To tell the truth, and not wishing to appear immodest, I was born that way.”

The man looked like a patchwork of qualmishness, tribulation, and unctuous piety, and his coat
collar was badly frayed.

“That’s all right,” replied Daniel; “don’t you see that I am getting along quite well?”

The pious life-insurance agent sighed and brushed a drop from the tip of his nose with the
back of his hand. “My dear Sir,” said he, “take to heart the words of Solomon: Pride goeth
before a fall, but the humble in spirit obtain honour.”

“Yes, I’ll take that to heart,” said Daniel drily, and bent still lower over the score on which
he was working.

Benjamin Dorn sighed again, and limped out of the room. With his thumbs pointing straight to
high heaven above, he said to Frau Hadebusch: “You know, Frau Hadebusch, I simply can’t help
it. I must lighten my heart in a Christian way. What do you think?”

“Good heavens, what’s he doing? What’s he up to now?” sighed the old lady, as she shoved her
broom under her arm.

“As true as I stand here, the table is all covered with papers, and the papers are all covered
with some kind of mysterious signs.”

Alarmed at the very thought of having a lodger up in the attic who was practising black magic,
Frau Hadebusch sent her husband down to the district policeman. This enlightened official declared
that the brush-maker was a gossip. Vexed at this unanticipated description of himself, the
brush-maker went straightway to the inn at the sign of the Horse and got drunk, so drunk that
Benjamin Dorn had to take him home. It was a beautiful moonlit night.

                                  IV

Not far from Hadebusch’s was a little café known as The Paradise. Everything in it was diminutive,
the proprietor, the waitress, the tables, the chairs and the portions. There the brethren from
the Vale of Tears assembled to drag the gods down into the dust and destroy the universe in
general.

Daniel wended his way thither. He knew the liliputian room and the starved faces. He was personally
acquainted with the painter who never painted, the writer who never wrote, the student who
never studied, and the inventor who never invented anything. He knew all about the sculptor
who squandered such talents as he may have had in tinkering with plaster casts, the actor who
had been on a leave of absence for years, and the half dozen mendicant Philistines who came
here day after day to have a good time in their own repelling fashion. He knew the young Baron
von Auffenberg who had broken with his family for reasons that were clear to no one but himself.
He knew Herr Carovius, who invariably played the rôle of the observer, and who sat there in
a sort of mysterious fashion, smiling to himself a smile of languishing irony, and stroking
his hand over his long hair, which was cut straight across at the back of his neck.

He knew, ah, he knew by heart, the grease spots on the walls that had been rubbed in by the
heads of the habitués, the indelible splotches on the tables, the hartshorn buttons on the
proprietor’s vest, and the smoke-coloured curtains draped about the tiny windows. The loud,
boisterous talking, the daily repetition of the same hackneyed remarks, the anarchistic swashbuckling
of the painter whom his comrades had dubbed Kropotkin—all of these were familiar stories to
him. He knew the philosophic cynicism of the student who felt that he was the Socrates of the
nineteenth century, and who looked back on twenty-five wasted semesters as on so many battles
fought and won.

The most interesting personage was Herr Carovius. He was a well-read man. That he knew a great
deal about music was plain from many of his chance remarks. He was a brother-in-law of Andreas
Döderlein, though he seemed to take anything but pride in the relationship. If any one mentioned
Döderlein’s name in his presence, he screwed up his face, and began to shuffle about uneasily
on his chair. He was an unfathomable, impenetrable personality. Even if his years—he was forty-five—had
not won for him a measure of esteem, the malicious and mordant scorn he heaped on his fellow-men
would have done so. People said he had a good deal of money. If this was brought to his attention,
he employed the most ghastly oaths in asserting his poverty. But since he had neither calling
nor profession and spent his days in unqualified idleness, it was apparent that his assertions
on this point were wholly unfounded, and this despite the virility of his unconventional language.

“Say, tell me, who is that lanky quack there?” asked Herr Carovius, pointing to Daniel and
looking at Schwalbe the sculptor. He had known Daniel for a long while, but every now and then
it gave him a peculiar kind of pleasure to play the rôle of the newcomer.

The sculptor looked at him indignantly.

“That is a man who still has faith in himself,” he remarked rather morosely. “He is a man who
has bathed in the dragon blood of illusions, and has become as invulnerable as Young Siegfried.
He is convinced that the people who sleep in the houses around this part of town dream of his
future greatness, and have already placed an order with the green-grocer for his laurel wreath.
He has not the faintest idea that the only thing that is sacred to them is their midday meal,
that they are ready to drink their beer at the first stroke of the gong, and to yawn when the
light appears on Mount Sinai. He is completely taken up with himself; he is sufficient unto
himself; and he gathers honey. The bee will have its honey, and if it is unable to get it from
the flowers, it buzzes about the dung heap. As is evidently the case here. Prosit Nothafft,”
he said in conclusion, and lifted his glass to Daniel.

Herr Carovius smiled in his usual languishing fashion. “Nothafft,” he bleated, “Nothafft, Nothafft,
that is a fine name, but not exactly one that is predestined to a niche in Walhalla. It strikes
me as being rather more appropriate for the sign of a tailor. Good Lord! The bones the young
people gnaw at to-day were covered with meat in my time.”

And then, clasping his glasses a bit firmer onto his nose, he riveted his blinking, squinting
eyes on the door. Eberhard von Auffenberg, elegant, slender, and disgruntled, entered to find
life where others were throwing it away.

It was far into the night when the brethren went home. As they passed along through the streets
they bellowed their nocturnal serenades at the windows of the otherwise peaceful houses.

As the hilarious laughter and vocal rowdyism reached Daniel’s ear, he detected from out of
the hubbub a gentle voice in E-flat minor, accompanied by the inexorable eighth-notes sung
with impressive vigour. Then the voice died away in a solemn E-flat major chord, and everything
was as if sunk in the bottom of the sea.

                                   V

Toward the end of the summer, Philippina, Jason Philip’s daughter, shot out the eye of her
seven-year-old brother with a so-called bean-shooter.

The children were playing in the yard. Willibald, the older boy, wanted the shooter. Philippina,
who had not the slightest sense of humour, snatched it from his hands, placed the stone on
the elastic band and let it fly with all her might. Little Marcus ran in front of it. It was
all over in a jiffy. A heart-rending scream caused the frightened mother to leave the shop
and run out into the yard. She found the child lying on the ground convulsed with pain. While
Theresa carried the boy into the house, Jason Philip ran for the doctor. But it was too late;
the eye was lost.

Philippina hid. After considerable search her father found her under the cellar steps. He beat
her so mercilessly that the neighbours had to come up and take him away.

Little Marcus was Theresa’s favourite child. She could not get over the accident. The obsession
that had slumbered in her soul for years now became more persistent than ever: she began to
brood over guilt in general and this case in particular.

At times she would get up in the night, light a candle, and walk about the house in her stocking
feet. She would look behind the stove and under the table, and then crouch down with her ear
against the maid’s door. She would examine the mouse-trap and if a mouse had been caught in
it, she could not, try as she might, completely detach her own unrest from the mental disturbance
of the little beast.

One day Jason Philip was stopped on the street by a well-known cabinet-maker and asked whether
he had any old furniture for sale. Jason Philip replied that he was not at all familiar with
the contents of the attic and sent him to Theresa. Theresa recalled that there was an old desk
up in the attic that had been standing there for years. She suggested that they might be willing
to dispose of this for a few taler, and accompanied the man to the room where the worn-out
furniture was stored.

She opened the little wooden door. The cabinet-maker caught sight at once of the desk. It had
only three legs and was just about ready to fall to pieces. “I can’t make you an offer for
that,” said the cabinet-maker, and began to rap on it here and there, somewhat as a physician
might sound a corpse. “The most I can offer you is twelve groschen.”

They haggled for a while, and finally agreed on sixteen. The man left at once, having promised
to send one of his men up in the afternoon to get the desk. Theresa was already standing on
the steps, when it occurred to her that it might be well to go through the drawers before letting
the thing get out of the house: there might be some old documents in them. She went back up
in the attic.

In the dust of one of the drawers she found, sure enough, a bundle of papers, and among them
the receipt which Gottfried Nothafft had sent back to Jason Philip ten years before. She read
in the indistinct light the confidential words of the deceased. She saw that Jason Philip had
received three thousand taler.

After she had read this, she crumpled up the paper. Then she put it into her apron pocket and
screamed out: “Be gone, Gottfried, be gone!”

She went down stairs into the kitchen. There she took her place by the table and stirred a
mixture of flour and eggs, as completely absent-minded as it is possible for one to become
who spends her time in that part of the house. Rieke, the maid, became so alarmed at her behaviour
that she made the sign of the cross.

                                  VI

When the midday meal was over, the children left the table and prepared to go to school. Jason
Philip lighted a cigar, and took the newspaper from his pocket.

“Did you find anything for the second-hand furniture man?” he asked, as he puffed away.

“I found something for him and something for myself,” she said.

“What do you mean? You found something for yourself?”

“What do I mean? I mean just what I said. I have always known that there was something crooked
about that money.”

“What money are you talking about? Listen, don’t speak to me in riddles! When you have anything
to say to me, say it. Do you understand?”

“I mean Gottfried Nothafft’s money, Jason Philip,” said Theresa, almost in a whisper.

Jason Philip bent over the table. “Then you have at last found the old receipt, have you?”
he asked with wide-opened eyes. “Ahem! You have found the receipt that I’ve been looking for
for years ...?”

Theresa nodded. She took out a hairpin, and stuck it in a crust of bread. Jason Philip got
up, clasped his hands behind his back, and began to walk back and forth. Just then Rieke came
in and began to clear off the table. She went about her business in a slow but noisy fashion.
She made things rattle, even if she could not make them hum. When she was through, Jason Philip,
his hands pressed to his hips, his elbows protruding, planted himself before Theresa.

“I suppose you think I am going to let you browbeat me,” he began. “Well, my dear woman, you’re
mistaken. Listen! Are you angry at me because I have created for you and your children a dignified
existence? Do you take it amiss of me for having kept your sister from going to the poor-house?
You act as though I had won that much money at the county fair, or had squandered an equal
amount at the same place. The truth is, Gottfried Nothafft entrusted me with three thousand
taler. That’s what he did; that’s the truth. It was his intention to keep the whole affair
from the chatter of women. And he willed that I should use this hard-earned capital in a productive
way, and not give it to the culprit who would waste it in debauchery and worse if possible.”

“Ill-gotten goods seldom prosper,” said Theresa, without looking up. “Things may go along all
right for ten years, and that seems like a long time, but the vengeance of Heaven comes in
the eleventh, as it has already come in the case of little Marcus.”

“Theresa—you’re talking like a mad woman,” said Jason Philip at the top of his voice. With
that he picked up a chair, and threw it on the floor so violently that every cup, spoon, and
plate in the room shook.

Theresa turned her peasant face toward him without the shadow of a trace of fear. He was a
trifle alarmed: “You’ll have to be responsible, if you can, for any misfortune that visits
us in the future.” She spoke these words with a deep voice.

“Do you think I am a bandit?” said Jason Philip. “Do you think I want to pocket the money?
Don’t you think that I am capable of anything better or higher than that? Or is ambition of
any sort quite beyond your powers of comprehension?”

“Well, what ambitions do you have?” asked Theresa in a tone of sullenness, her eyes in the
meantime blinking.

“Listen,” Jason Philip continued, as he sat down on the chair he had so violently abused a
minute before, and assumed the air of a teacher: “The culprit has got to submit, and that with
good grace. He has got to fall on his knees before me. And he’ll come to it. I have made some
inquiries; I am on his tracks; and I know that he has just about reached the end of his rope.
He’ll come, depend upon it he’ll come around, and when he does he will whine. Then I am going
to take him into the business. In this way we will see whether it is humanly possible to make
a useful man out of him. If I can, and if he sticks, I’ll call him into the office, tell him
the whole story, make everything as clear as day to him, and then offer to take him in as a
partner in the firm. You have got to admit that he will be a made man if he becomes my partner.
He will have sense enough himself to see this, and as sure as you are living, he will first
kiss my hand and then eat out of it for the kindness I have shown him. And once this has all
been put through, I will bind him to us more firmly than ever by having him marry Philippina.”

A wry smile disfigured Theresa’s face. “I see, so, so,” she said in a sing-song tone. “You
will have him marry Philippina. I take it that you feel that she will be hard to marry, and
that the man who does marry her will have his hands full. Well, that’s not a bad idea.”

“In this way,” continued Jason Philip, without detecting the scorn in Theresa’s words, “the
account between the culprit and myself will be settled. He will become a decent member of society,
the money will remain in the family, and Philippina will be cared for.”

“And suppose he does not come; suppose he does not fall on his knees; suppose you have made
a miscalculation. What then?” Whether Jason Philip himself believed what he had said Theresa
could not determine. Nor had she the slightest desire to enlighten herself on this point. She
did not look him in the face, but contented herself with letting her eyes rest on his hands.

“Well—there will be time then to change my plans,” said Jason Philip, in a tone of peeved vexation.
“Leave it to me. I have turned the whole situation over in my mind; I have omitted not the
slightest detail. I know men, and I have never made a mistake in judging them. Mahlzeit!”

With that he went out.

Theresa remained seated for a while, her arms folded across her breast. Then she got up, and
walked over to the door that opened on to the court. Suddenly she stopped as if rooted to the
sill: she caught sight of Philippina, who was then sitting by the window mending a pair of
socks. On her face there was an expression of naïveté that may be harmless in itself, but it
was enough to arouse suspicion.

“What’s the matter with you, why didn’t you go to school?” asked Theresa uneasily.

“I couldn’t; I had a headache,” said Philippina curtly, and broke the thread as she gave a
hasty jerk at the needle. Her dishevelled hair hung down over her forehead and quite concealed
her face.

Theresa was silent. Her gloom-laden eyes rested on the diligent fingers of Philippina. It was
easy to suspect that the girl had heard everything Jason Philip had said, for he had such a
loud voice. She could have done this without going to the trouble of listening at the door.
Theresa was minded to give the girl a talking-to; but she controlled herself, and quietly withdrew.

Philippina looked straight through her as she left. But she did not interrupt her work, and
in a short while she could be heard humming a tune to herself. There was a challenge in her voice.

                                  VII

Daniel’s money was about at an end. The new sources on which he had hoped to be able to draw
were nowhere to be discovered. He defiantly closed the doors against care; and when fear showed
its gloomy face, he shut up shop, and went out to drown his sorrows with the brethren of the
Vale of Tears.

Schwalbe, the sculptor, had made the acquaintance of Zingarella, then engaged in singing lascivious
couplets at the Academy, and invited the fellows to join him.

The Academy was a theatre of the lowest description. Smoking was, of course, permitted. When
they arrived the performance was over. People were still sitting at many of the tables. Reeking
as the auditorium was with the stench of stale beer, it left the impression of a dark, dank cavern.

With an indifference that seemed to argue that Zingarella made no distinction between chairs
and people, she took her seat between the sculptor and the writer. She laughed, and yet it
was not laughter; she spoke, and her words were empty; she stretched out her hands, and the
gesture was lifeless. She fixed her eyes on no one; she merely gazed about. She had a habit
of shaking her bracelet in a way that aroused sympathy. And after making a lewd remark she
would turn her head to one side, and thereby stagger even the most hardened frequenter of this
sort of places. Her complexion had been ruined by rouge, but underneath the skin there was
something that glimmered like water under thin ice.

The former winsomeness of her lips was still traceable in the sorrowed curves of her now ravaged
mouth.

At times her restless eyes, seeking whom they might entangle, were fixed on Daniel, then sitting
quite alone at the lower end of the table. In order to avoid the unpleasant sensation associated
with the thought of going up to such a distinguished-looking person and making herself known
to him, she would have been grateful had some one picked her up and thrown her bodily at his
feet. There was an element of strangeness about him. Zingarella saw that he had had nothing
to do with women of her kind. This tortured her; she gnashed her teeth.

Daniel did not sense her hatred. As he looked into her face, marked with a life of transgression
and already claimed by fate, he built up in his own soul a picture of inimitable chastity.
He tried to see the playmate of a god. The curtain decorated with the distorted face of a harlequin,
the acrobat and the dog trainer at the adjacent table, who were quarrelling over their money,
the four half-grown gamblers directly behind him, the big fat woman who was lying stretched
out on a bench with a red handkerchief over her face and trying to sleep, the writer who slandered
other writers, the inventor who discoursed so volubly and incessantly on perpetual motion—to
all of this he paid not the slightest bit of attention. For him it could just as well have
been in the bottom of the sea. He got up and left.

But as he saw the snow-covered streets before him and was unable to decide whether he should
go home or not, Zingarella stepped up to him. “Come, be quick, before they see that we are
together,” she whispered. And thus they walked along like two fugitives, whose information
concerning each other stops short with the certainty that both are poor and wretched and are
making their way through a snow storm.

“What is your name?” asked Daniel.

“My name is Anna Siebert.”

The clock in the St. Lorenz Church struck three. The one up in the tower of St. Sebaldus corroborated
this reckoning by also striking three and in much deeper tones.

They came to an old house, and after floundering through a long, dark, ill-smelling passage
way, entered a room in the basement. Anna Siebert lighted a lamp that had a red chimney. Gaudy
garments of the soubrette hung on the wall. A big, grey cat lay on the table cover and purred.
Anna Siebert took the cat in her arms and caressed it. Its name was Zephyr. It accompanied
her wherever she went.

Daniel threw himself on a chair and looked at the lamp. Zingarella, standing before the mirror,
stroked the cat. Gazing distractedly into space, she remarked that the manager had discharged
her because the public was no longer satisfied with her work.

“Is this what you call the public?” asked Daniel, who never once took his eyes from the lamp,
just as Anna Siebert kept hers rigidly fixed on the desolate distances of the mirror. “These
fathers of families who side-step every now and then, these counter-jumpers, the mere looks
of whom is enough to snatch your clothing from your body, this human filth at the sight of
which God must conceal His face in shame—this is what you call the public?”

“Well, however that may be,” Anna Siebert continued in a colourless voice, “the manager rushed
into my dressing room, threw the contract at my feet, and said I had swindled him. How on earth
could I have swindled him? I am no prima donna and my agent had told him so. You can’t expect
a Patti on twenty marks a week. In Elberfeld I got twenty-five, and a year ago in Zürich I
even drew sixty. Now he comes to me and says he doesn’t need to pay me anything. What am I
to live off of? And you’ve got to live, haven’t you, Zephyr,” said Anna as she picked up the
cat, pressed its warm fur to her cheek, and repeated, “You’ve got to live.”

She let her arms fall to her sides, the cat sprang on the floor, hunched up its back, wagged
its tail, and purred. She then went up to Daniel, fell on her knees, and laid her head on his
side. “I have reached the end,” she murmured in a scarcely audible voice, “I am at the end
of all things.”

The snow beat against the window panes. With an expression on his face as though his own thoughts
were murdering each other, Daniel looked into the corner from which Zephyr’s yellowish eyes
were shining. The muscles of his face twitched like a fish on being taken from the hook.

And as he cowered in this fashion, the poor girl pressed against his body, his shoulders lowered,
past visions again arose from the depths of the sea. First he heard a ravishing arpeggio in
A-flat major and above it, a majestic theme, commanding quiet, as it were, in sixteenth triads.
The two blended, in forte, with a powerful chord of sevens. There was a struggling, a separating,
a wandering on, and out of the subdued pianissimo there arose and floated in space a gentle
voice in E-flat minor. O voice from the sea, O humanity on earth! The eighth note, unpitiable
as ever in its elemental power, cut into the bass with the strength that moves and burrows
as it advances, until it was caught up by the redeemed voice in E-flat major. And now everything
suddenly became real. What had formerly been clouds and dreams, longing and wishing, at last
took shape and form and stood before him. Indeed he himself became true, real, and conscious
of his existence in a world of actualities.

On his way home he covered his face with his hands, for the windows of the houses gaped at
him like the hollow eyes of a demi-monde.

                                 VIII

Zingarella could not imagine why the strange man had left. He seemed to be quite indifferent.
Her heart beat with numerical accuracy, but there was no strength in the beats. The sole creature
through which she was bound to the world was Zephyr.

Night followed night, day followed day. Each was like the preceding. She spoke when people
took enough trouble to speak to her. She laughed when they had the incomprehensible desire
to hear laughter. To-day she wrapped this dress around her shivering body, to-morrow another.
She waited for the time to come when she was to do something definite. She lay in bed and dreaded
the darkness; she pondered on the injustice of the world; she thought of her own disgrace,
and reflected on the need that surrounded her. It was too much for her to bear.

A man would come, and at daylight he would leave and mingle with the rest of the people on
the street. When she awoke she could no longer recall what he looked like. The landlady would
bring in soup and meat. Then some one knocked at the door; but she did not open it. She had
no desire to find out who it was. Perhaps it was the man who had been with her the night before;
perhaps it was another.

She had neither curiosity nor hope. Her soul had dissolved like a piece of salt in water. When
she returned home on the third day she found Zephyr lying by the coal-scuttle dead. She knelt
down, touched the cold fur, wrinkled her brow, shook her bracelet, and went out.

It was getting along toward night, and the air was heavy with mist. She went first through
lighted streets, and then turned into others that were not lighted. She passed through avenues
of leafless trees, and walked across silent squares. The snow made walking difficult. When
it was too deep, she was obliged to stop every now and then and take a deep breath.

She reached the river at a point where the shore was quite flat and the water shallow. Without
thinking for a moment, without a moment’s hesitation, just as if she were blind, or as if she
saw a bridge where there was none, she walked in.

First she felt the water trickling into her shoes. Then she could feel her legs getting wet,
as her clothes, soft, slippery, and ice-cold, clung to her body. Now her breast was under the
water, and now her neck. She sank down, glided away, took one deep breath, smiled, and as she
smiled she lost consciousness.

The next day her body was washed up on the shore some distance beyond the city. It was taken
to the morgue of the Rochus Cemetery.

                                  IX

Schwalbe, the sculptor, was attending a funeral. His nephew had died, and was being buried
in the same cemetery.

As he passed by the morgue he caught sight of the body of a girl. After the child had been
buried he went back to the morgue. A few people were standing near the body, one of whom said,
“She was a singer down at the Academy.”

Schwalbe was struck by the pure and beautiful expression on the girl’s face. He studied it
long and with no little emotion. Then he went to the superintendent, and asked if he might
take a death mask. The permission was given him, and in a few hours he returned with the necessary
implements.

When he removed the mask from the face, he held something truly wonderful in his hands. It
showed the features of a sixteen-year-old girl, a face full at once of sweetness and melancholy,
and, most charming of all, an angelic smile on the curved lips of this mouth of sorrow. It
resembled the work of a renowned artist, so much so that the sculptor was suddenly seized with
a burning desire to regain his lost art.

He was nevertheless obliged within a week to sell the mask to the caster by whom he was employed
in Pfannenschmied Street. Schwalbe needed ready money. The caster hung the mask by the door
at the entrance to his shop.

                                   X

At the end of December Daniel found himself with not a cent of cash, so that he was obliged
to sell his sole remaining treasure, the score of the Bach mass in B-minor. Spindler had presented
it to him when he left, and now he had to take it to the second-hand dealer and part with it
for a mere pittance.

Unless he cared to lie in bed the whole day, he was obliged to walk the streets in order to
keep warm. His poverty made it out of the question for him to go to any of the cafés, and so
he was excluded from association with the brethren of the Vale of Tears. He had moreover taken
a violent dislike to them.

One evening he was standing out in front of the Church of Ægydius, listening to the organ that
some one was playing. The icy wind blew through his thin clothing. When the concert was over
he went down to the square, and leaned up against the wall of one of the houses. He was tremendously
lonesome; he was lonely beyond words.

Just then two men came along who wished to enter the very house against the wall of which he
leaned. He was cold. One of these men was Benjamin Dorn, the other was Jordan. Benjamin Dorn
spoke to him; Jordan stood by in silence, apparently quite appreciative of the condition in
which the young man found himself, as he stood there in the cold and made unfriendly replies
to the questions that were put to him. Jordan invited Daniel up to his room. Daniel, chilled
to the very marrow of his bones, and able to visualise nothing but a warm stove, accepted the
invitation.

Thus Daniel came in contact with Jordan’s family. He had three children: Gertrude, aged nineteen,
Eleanore, aged sixteen, and Benno, fifteen years old and still a student at the gymnasium.
His wife was dead.

Gertrude was said to be a pietist. She went to church every day, and had an inclination toward
the Catholic religion, a fact which gave Jordan, as an inveterate Protestant, no little worry.
During the day she looked after the house; but as soon as she had everything in order, she
would take her place by the quilting frame and work on crowns of thorns, hearts run through
with swords, and languishing angels for a mission. There she would sit, hour after hour, with
bowed head and knit.

The first time Daniel saw her she had on a Nile green dress, fastened about her hips with a
girdle of scales, while her wavy brown hair hung loose over her shoulders. It was in this make-up
that he always saw her when he thought of her years after: Nile green dress, bowed head, sitting
at the quilting frame, and quite unaware of his presence, a picture of unamiability, conscious
or affected.

Eleanore was entirely different. She was like a lamp carried through a dark room.

For some time she had been employed in the offices of the Prudentia, for she wished to make
her own living. So far as it was humanly possible to determine from her casual remarks, she
thoroughly enjoyed her work. She liked to make out receipts for premiums, lick stamps, copy
letters, and see so many people come in and go out. Stout old Diruf and lanky Zittel did everything
they could to keep her interested, and if, despite their efforts, it was seen that a morose
mood was invading her otherwise cheerful disposition, they took her out to the merry-go-round,
and in a short time her wonted buoyancy had returned.

She seemed like a child, and yet she was every inch a woman. She insisted on wearing her little
felt cap at a jaunty angle on her blond hair. When she entered the room, the atmosphere in
it underwent a change; it was easier to breathe; it was fresher. People somehow disapproved
of the fact that her eyes were so radiantly blue, and that her two rows of perfect white teeth
were constantly shining from out between her soft, peach-like lips. They said she was light-hearted;
they said she was a butterfly. Benjamin Dorn was of the opinion that she was a creature possessed
of the devil of sensuality and finding her completest satisfaction in earthly finery and frippery.
For some time there had been an affair of an intimate nature between her and Baron von Auffenberg.
Just what it was no one knew precisely; the facts were not obtainable. But Benjamin Dorn, experienced
ferreter that he was, could not see two people of different sexes together without imagining
that he was an accomplice in the hereditary sin of human kind. And one day he caught Eleanore
alone in the company of Baron von Auffenberg. From that day on she was, in his estimation,
a lost soul.

The fact concerning Eleanore was this: life never came very close to her. It comes right up
to other people, strangles them, or drags them along with it. It kept its distance from Eleanore,
for she lived in a glass case. If she had sorrow of any kind, if some painfully indeterminable
sensation was gnawing at her soul, if the vulgarity and banality of a base and disjointed world
came her way, the glass case in which she lived simply became more spacious than ever, and
the things or thoughts that swarmed around it more and more incomprehensible.

One can always laugh if one lives in a glass case. Even bad dreams remain on the outside. Even
longing becomes nothing more than a purple breath which clouds the crystal from without, not
from within.

The people were quite right in saying that Jordan was bringing up his daughters like princesses.
Both were far removed from the customary things of life: the one was translated to the realm
of darkness, the other to that of light.

Daniel saw both of them. They were just as strange to him as he to them. He saw the brother,
too, a tall, glib, dapper youth. He saw the old house with its dilapidated stairs, its rooms
filled with cumbersome, provincial furniture. He saw the alternating currents of life in this
family: there was now rest, now unrest, now quiet, now storm. Life flowed out from the house,
and then life, the same or of a different origin, flowed back in again. When he came, he talked
with Jordan himself rather than with any one else; for he always knew when Jordan would be
at home. They spoke in a free and easy fashion and about things in general. If their conversation
could be characterised more fully, it might be said that Daniel was reserved and Jordan tactful.
Gertrude sat by the table and attended to her needlework.

Daniel came and warmed himself by the stove. If he was offered a sandwich or a cup of coffee
he declined. If the offer was made with noticeable insistency, he shook his head and distorted
the features of his face until he resembled an irritated ape. It was the peasant spirit of
defiance in him that made him act this way. He nourished a measure of small-minded anxiety
lest he be indebted to somebody for something. To temptations, yielding to which would have
been spiritually mortifying, he was impervious. When, consequently, his need became overpowering,
he simply stayed away.

                                  XI

His want grew into a purple sheen. To him there was an element of the ridiculous in the whole
situation: it was 1882 and he had nothing to eat; he was twenty-three years old and quite without
food.

Frau Hadebusch, virago that she could be when a dubious debtor failed to fulfil his obligations,
stormed her way up the steps. The rent was long overdue, and uncanny councils were being held
in the living room, in which an invalid from the Wasp’s Nest and a soap-maker from Kamerarius
Street were taking part.

In his despair, Daniel thought of entering the army. He reported at the barracks, was examined—and
rejected because of a hollow chest.

At first there was the purple sheen. He saw it as he stood on the hangman’s bridge and looked
down into the water where pieces of ice were drifting about. But when he raised his distressed
face a gigantic countenance became visible. The great vaulted arch of heaven was a countenance
fearfully distorted by vengeance and scorn. Of escape from it there could be no thought. Within
his soul everything became wrapped in darkness. Tones and pictures ran together, giving the
disagreeably inarticulate impression that would be made by drawing a wet rag across a fresh,
well-ordered creation.

As he walked on, it seemed to him that the horror of the vision was diminishing. The countenance
became smaller and more amiable. It was now not much larger than the façade of a church and
what wrath remained seemed to be concentrated in the forehead. An old woman passed by, carrying
apples in her apron. He trembled at the smell of them; but he did not reach out; he did not
try to take a single one of them from her; he still held himself in control. By this time the
entire vision was not much larger than the top of a tree, and in it were the traces of mercy.

The sun was high in the heavens, the snow was melting, birds were chirping everywhere. As he
sauntered along with uncertain steps through Pfannenschmied Street he suddenly stopped as if
rooted to the pavement. There was the vision: he caught sight of it in bodily form on the door
jamb of the shop. He could not see that it was the mask of Zingarella. Of course not, for it
was a transfigured face, and how could he have grasped a reality in his present state of mind?
He looked from within out. The thing before him was a vision; it joined high heaven with the
earth below; it was a promise. He could have thrown himself down on the street and wept, for
it seemed to him that he was saved.

The incomparable resignation and friendly grief in the expression of the mask, the sanctity
under the long eyelashes, the half extinguished smile playing around the mouth of sorrow, the
element of ghostliness, a being far removed from death and equally far removed from life—all
this caused his feeling to swell into one of credulous devotion. His entire future seemed to
depend upon coming into possession of the mask. Without a moment’s hesitation or consideration
he rushed into the shop.

Within he found a young man whom the caster addressed most respectfully as Dr. Benda, and who
was about thirty years old. Dr. Benda was being shown a number of successful casts of a figure
entitled “The Fountain of Virtue.” It was quite a little while before the caster turned to
Daniel and asked him what he wanted. In a somewhat rude voice and with an unsteady gesture,
Daniel made it clear to him that he wished to buy the mask. The caster removed it from the
door, laid it on the counter, and named his price. He looked at the shabby clothing of the
newly arrived customer, concluded at once that the price, ten marks, would be more than he
could afford, and turned again to Dr. Benda, so that Daniel might have time to make up his mind.

The two conversed for quite a while. When the caster finally turned around, he was not a little
surprised to see that Daniel was still standing at the counter. He stood there in fact with
half closed eyes, his left hand lying on the face of the mask. The caster exchanged a somewhat
dazed glance with Dr. Benda, who, in a moment of forewarning sympathy, grasped the situation
perfectly in which the stranger found himself. Dr. Benda somehow understood, owing to his instinct
for appreciation of unusual predicaments, the man’s poverty, his isolation, and even the ardour
of his wish. Subduing as well as he might the feeling of ordinary reserve, he stepped up to
Daniel, and said to him calmly, quietly, seriously, and without the slightest trace of condescension:
“If you will permit me to advance you the money for the mask, you will do me a substantial favor.”

Daniel gritted his teeth—just a little. His face turned to a greenish hue. But the face of
his would-be friend, schooled in affairs of the spirit, showed a winning trace of human kindness.
It conquered Daniel; it made him gentle. He submitted. Dr. Benda laid the money for the mask
on the counter, and Daniel was as silent as the tomb.

When they left the shop, Daniel held the mask under his arm so tightly that the paper wrapping
was crushed, if the mask itself was not. The sad state of his clothing and his haggard appearance
in general struck Dr. Benda at once and forcibly. He needed to ask but a few well chosen questions
to get at the underlying cause of this misery, physical and spiritual, in human form. He pretended
that he had not lunched and invited Daniel to be his guest at the inn at the sign of the Grape.

Daniel felt that his soul had suddenly been unlocked by a magic key. At last—he had ears and
could hear, eyes and could see. It seemed to him that he had come up to earth from out of some
lightless, subterranean cavern. And when they separated he had a friend.

                          THE NERO OF TO-DAY

                                   I

The spectacle of wellnigh complete degeneracy offered by the roister-doistering slough brethren
of the Vale of Tears gave Herr Carovius a new lease on life. He had a really affable tendency
to associate with men who were standing just on the brink of human existence. He always drank
a great deal of liqueur. The brand he preferred above all others was what is known as Knickebein.
Once he had enjoyed his liberal potion, he became jovial, friendly, companionable. In these
moods he would venture the hardiest of assertions, not merely in the field of eroticism, but
against the government and divine providence as well.

And yet, when he trippled home with mincing steps, there was in his face an expression of cowardly,
petty smirking. It was the sign of his inner return to virtuous living; for his night was not
as his day. The one belied the other.

He had a quite respectable income; the house in which he lived was his own private property.
It was pointed out to strangers as one of the sights of the town; it was certainly one of the
oldest and gloomiest buildings in that part of the country. An especially attractive feature
of it was the smart and graceful bay-window. Above the beautifully arched outer door there
was a patrician coat-of-arms, consisting of two crossed spears with a helmet above. This was
chiselled into the stone. In the narrow court was a draw-well literally set in a frame of moss.
Each floor of the house had its own gallery, richly supplied with the most artistic of carvings.
The stairway was spacious; the tread of the steps was broad, the elevation slight; there were
four landings. It symbolised in truth the leisurely, comfortable tarrying of centuries gone
before and now a matter of easy memory only.

Often in the nighttime, Herr Carovius recognised in the distance the massive figure of his
brother-in-law, Andreas Döderlein, the professor of music. Not wishing to meet him, Herr Carovius
would stand at the street corner, until the light from Döderlein’s study assured him that the
professor was at home. On other occasions he would come in contact with the occupant of the
second floor, Dr. Friedrich Benda. When these two came together, there was invariably a competitive
tipping of hats and passing of compliments. Each wished to outdo the other in matters of courtesy.
Neither was willing to take precedence over the other. The polished civility of the young man
made an even greater degree of pretty behaviour on the part of Herr Carovius imperative, with
the result that his excessive refinement of manners made him appear awkward, while his embarrassment
made coherent speech difficult and at times impossible.

When however he came alone, he would take the huge key from his pocket, unlock the door, light
a candle, hold it high above his head, and spy into every nook and cranny of the barn-like
hall before entering his apartment on the ground floor.

                                  II

Herr Carovius was a regular customer at the Crocodile Inn; a table was always reserved for
him. Around it there assembled every noon the following companions: Solicitor of the Treasury
Korn, assistant magistrate Hesselberger, assistant postmaster Kitzler, apothecary Pflaum, jeweller
Gründlich, and baker Degen. Judge Kleinlein also joined them occasionally as a guest of honour.

They gossiped about their neighbours, their acquaintances, their friends, and their colleagues.
What they said ran the whole gamut of human emotions from an innocent anecdote up to venomous
calumny. Not a single event was immune from malicious backstairs comment. Reputations were
sullied without discrimination; objections were taken to the conduct of every living soul;
every family was shown to have its skeleton in the closet.

When the luncheon was finished, the men all withdrew and went about their business, with the
exception of Herr Carovius. He remained to read the papers. For him it was one of the most
important hours of the day. Having feasted his ears with friends in private, he now turned
to a study of the follies, transgressions, and tragedies that make up everyday life.

He read three papers every day: one was a local sheet, one a great Berlin daily, and the third
a paper published in Hamburg. He never deviated; it was these three, week in and week out.
And he read them from beginning to end; politics, special articles, and advertisements were
of equal concern to him. In this way he familiarised himself with the advance of civilisation,
the changes civic life was undergoing, and the general status of the aristocracy, bourgeoisie,
and proletariat.

Nothing escaped him. He was as much interested in the murder of a peasant in a Pommeranian
village as he was in the loss of a pearl necklace on the Boulevard des Italiens in Paris. He
read with equal concentration of the sinking of a steamer in the South Sea and the wedding
of a member of the Royal Family in Westminster Abbey. He could work up just as much enthusiasm
over the latest fashions as he could over the massacring of enslaved Armenians by the Turks.
If he read with care and reflection of the death of a leading citizen, he pursued the same
course with regard to the reprehending of a relatively harmless vagabond.

It is only fair to remark, however, that his real sympathy was with those events that have
to be entered on the calamitous side of life’s ledger. This was due to a bizarre kink in his
philosophy: he studied the world primarily from the point of view of its wars, earthquakes,
floods, hailstorms, cyclones, and public and private tragedies in the lives of men. Happy and
reassuring events, such as the birth of a healthy child, the conferring of an order of distinction,
heroic deeds, the winning of a prize in the lottery, the publication of a good book, or the
announcement of a legitimate and successful speculation made no impression on him. At times
they even annoyed him. He kept his mind, in other words, riveted on the evils, sorrows, woes,
and tribulations that come to pass either on this earth or in the starry firmament above, and
that were somehow brought to his attention.

His brain was a storehouse of fearful and ferocious happenings; it was a catalogue, an inventory
of disease, seduction, theft, robbery, larceny, assassination, murder, catastrophe, pest, incest,
suicide, duel, bankruptcy, and the never failing family quarrel.

If he chanced to enrich his collection by the addition of some especially curious or unheard-of
incident, he took out his pocket diary, noted the date, and then wrote: “In Amberg a preacher
had a hemorrhage while delivering his morning sermon.” Or: “In Cochin China a tiger killed
and ate fourteen children, and then, forcing its way into the bungalow of a settler, bit off
the head of a woman as she was sleeping peacefully by the side of her husband.” Or: “In Copenhagen
a former actress, now ninety years old, mounted a huge vegetable basket on the market place,
and recited Lady Macbeth’s monologue. Her unconventional behaviour attracted such a large crowd
of passersby that several people were crushed to death in the excitement.”

This done, he would go home, happy as a man can be. To idlers standing in the doorways or servants
looking out the windows he would extend the greetings of the day, and that with really conspicuous
cordiality.

If a fire broke out in the city, he was present. As his eyes peered into the flames, they seemed
intoxicated, obsessed, seized with uncanniness. He would hum a tune of some sort, look into
the anxious faces of those immediately concerned, busy himself with whatever had been salvaged,
and attempt to force his gratuitous advice on the fire chief.

If a prominent citizen died, he never failed to attend the funeral, and, where possible, to
join the procession on the way to the cemetery. He would stand by the grave with bowed head,
and take in every word of the funeral discourse. But his lips twitched in a peculiar fashion,
as if he felt that he were understood, and flattered.

And in truth all this did flatter him. The defeat, distress, and death of other people, the
betrayals that take place in any community, the highhanded injustice of those in power, the
oppression of the poor, the violence that was done to right and righteousness, and the sufferings
which had to be borne by thousands day after day, all this flattered him; it interested him;
it lulled him into a comfortable feeling of personal security.

But then he sat down at his piano at home, and played an adagio of Beethoven or an impromptu
by Schubert, his eyes with fine frenzy rolling in the meantime. And when the mighty chorus
in a Bach oratorio resounded, he became pale with ecstasy. At the hearing of a good song well
sung he could shed copious tears.

He idolised music.

He was a provincial with unfettered instincts. He was an agitator with a tendency to conservatism.
He was a Nero without servants, without power, and without land. He was a musician from despair
and out of vanity. He was a Nero in our own day.

He was the Nero of our day living in three rooms. He was a lonely bachelor and a bookworm.
He exchanged his views with the corner grocer; he discussed city ordinances with the night
watchman; he was a tyrant through and through and a hangman at heart; he indulged in eavesdropping
at the shrine of fate, and in this way concocted the most improbable of combinations and wanton
deeds of violence; he was constantly on the lookout for misfortune, litigation, and shame;
he rejoiced at every failure, and was delighted with oppression, whether at home or abroad.
He hung with unqualified joy on the imagined ruins of imaginary disaster, and took equal pleasure
in the actual debacles of life as it was lived about him. And alongside of this innate and
at times unexpressed gruesomeness and bloodthirstiness, he was filled with a torturing passion
for music. This was Herr Carovius. Such was his life.

                                  III

For nine long years, that is, from the time she was fifteen until she was twenty-four, his
sister Marguerite kept house for him. She got his breakfast, made his bed, darned his socks,
and brushed his clothes; and all he knew about her was that she had yellowish hair, a skin
full of freckles, and a timid, child-like voice. His astonishment was consequently unbounded
when Andreas Döderlein called one day and proposed to her. He had moved into the house the
year before. Herr Carovius was amazed for the very simple reason that he had never known Marguerite
except as a fourteen-year-old girl.

He took her to task. With unusual effort she summoned the courage to tell him that she was
going to marry Döderlein. “You are a shameless prostitute,” he said, though he did not dare
to show Andreas Döderlein the door. The wedding took place.

One evening he was sitting in the company of the young couple. Andreas Döderlein, being in
an unusually happy mood, went to the piano, and began playing the shepherd’s motif from Wagner’s
“Tristan and Isolde.”

Herr Carovius sprang to his feet as if stung by a viper, and exclaimed: “Stop playing that
foul magic! You know as well as you are living that I don’t believe in it.”

“What do you mean, brother?” asked Andreas Döderlein, his head bowed in grief.

“What are you trying to do? Are you trying to teach me something about this poisoner of wells?”
shouted Herr Carovius, and his face took on the enraged expression of a hunchback who has just
been taunted about his deformity. “Does the professor imagine that he knows better than I do
who this Richard Wagner is, this comedian, this Jew who goes about masked as the Germanic Messiah,
this cacaphonist, this bungler, botcher, and bully, this court sycophant, this Pulchinello
who pokes fun at the whole German Empire and the rest of Europe led about by the nose, this
Richard Wagner? Very well, if you have anything to teach me about him, go on! Proceed! I am
listening. Go on! Pluck up your courage.” With this he leaned back in his chair, and laughed
a laughter punctuated with asthmatic sighs, his hands in the meantime resting folded across
his stomach.

Andreas Döderlein rose to his full stature, see-sawed a bit on the tips of his toes, and looked
down on Herr Carovius as one might look down upon a flea that one had caught and was just in
the act of crushing between two finger nails. “Oh, ho,” he said, “how interesting! Upon my
word, brother Carovius, you are an interesting individual. But if some one were to offer me
all the money in the world, I should not like to be so ... interesting. Not I. And you, Marguerite,
would you like to be so interesting?”

There was something distinctly annihilating in this air of superiority. It had its full effect
on Herr Carovius: his unleashed laughter was immediately converted into a gurgling titter.
He opened his eyes wide and rolled them behind his nose-glasses, thus making himself look like
a water-spitting figure on a civic fountain. Marguerite, however, timid as she was, never saying
a word without making herself smaller by hiding her hands, glanced in helpless fashion from
her brother to her husband, and dropped her head before them.

Was the feeling of Herr Carovius for Andreas Döderlein one of hatred? It was hatred and more.
It was a feeling of venomous embitterment with which he thought of him, his name, his wife,
his child, the thick, bulky wedding ring on his finger, and the gelatinous mass of flesh on
his neck. From that evening on he never again visited his sister. If Marguerite got up enough
courage to visit him, he treated her with crabbed contempt. She finally came to the point where
she would pass his door with not a thought of entering it.

When the first child was born and the maid brought him the glad tidings, he squinted into the
corner, tittered, and made bold to say: “Well, my congratulations. It is good that the Döderleins
are not to become extinct, for so long as one of them is living, plaisir will not have vanished
from the earth.”

Little Dorothea formed in time the habit of playing on the steps or around the old windlass
well in the backyard. Herr Carovius procured forthwith a mean dog and named him Cæsar. Cæsar
was tied to a chain, to be sure, but his snarls, his growls, his vicious teeth were hardly
calculated to inspire the child with a love for the place near him. She soon stopped playing
at home.

Four years had elapsed since the Carovius-Döderlein wedding. Herr Carovius was celebrating
his birthday. Marguerite called with Dorothea. The child recited a poem which she had learned
by heart for her uncle’s benefit. Carovius shook with laughter when he saw the girl dressed
up like a doll and realised that the recital was imminent. Dorothea had of course the enunciation
of one of her age. When through, Herr Carovius said: “Honestly, it would never have occurred
to me that such a little toad could croak so beautifully.”

Though the man knew so little about women that it would be perilous to attempt to measure his
ignorance of them, he nevertheless felt, as he looked into Marguerite’s radiant face, a certain
disappointment in life—a disappointment which he would try at once to benumb but which delighted
him.

                                  IV

About this time Herr Becker died. He was the senior city official, and had been living in the
second story of the apartment for twenty-eight years. Dr. Benda moved in at once with his mother.

Carovius told all about this at the reserved table in the Crocodile. His companions were in
a position to tell him a great deal more about the ancestry and past life of the Bendas. They
were said to have been very rich once, to have lost their money in the great panic, and to
be living at present in quite moderate circumstances. Benda’s father was said to have shot
himself, and his mother was reported to have taken the boy to school every morning. Solicitor
Korn had been told that, despite his youth, Dr. Benda had written a number of scientific books
on biology, but that this had not enabled him to reach his desired goal.

“What goal?” the table companions asked in unison.

“Why, he wanted to be made a professor, but people had objected.” Why had they objected? came
the question from more than one throat. “Well, you see it was this way: the man is a Jew, and
the authorities are not going to appoint a Jew to an official position in a university without
raising objections. That is to be taken as a matter of course.” That this was in very truth
to be taken as a matter of course was also the opinion of Herr Carovius, who, however, insisted
that Benda didn’t exactly look like a Jew; he looked more like a tolerably fat Dutchman. He
was in truth not quite blond, but he was not dark either, and his nose was as straight as a rule.

“That is just the point: that’s the Jewish trick,” remarked the Judge, and took a mighty draught
from his beer glass. “In olden times,” he said, “the Jews all had the yellow spots, aquiline
noses, and hair like bushmen. But to-day no Christian can be certain who is Jew and who is
Gentile.” To this the whole table agreed.

Herr Carovius at once began a system of espionage. He studied the faces of the new tenants,
and was particularly careful to note when they went out and when they came in and with whom
they associated. He knew precisely when they turned the lights out at night and when they opened
the windows in the morning. He could tell exactly how many rugs they had, how much coal they
burned, how much meat they ate, how many letters they received, what walks they preferred,
what people they spoke to, and who recognised them. As if this were not enough, he went down
to the bookstore, bought the complete works of Dr. Benda, and read these heavy scientific treatises
in the sweat of his brow. He was annoyed at the thought that they had not been critically reviewed.
He would have embraced any one who would have told him that they were all perfectly worthless
compilations.

One evening, along towards spring, he chanced to go into the backyard to feed Cæsar. He looked
up, and saw Marguerite standing on the balcony. She did not see him, for she was also looking
up. On the balcony of the second floor, across the court from her, stood Friedrich Benda, responding
to some mute signals Marguerite was giving him. Finally they both stopped and merely looked
at each other, until Marguerite caught sight of her brother, when she quickly disappeared behind
the glass door draped with green curtains.

“Aha,” thought Carovius, “there’s something up.” The scene warmed his very blood.

From that day on he avoided the court. He sat instead for hours at a time in a room from which
he could look out through a crack and see everything that was taking place at the windows and
on the balconies. He discovered that signals were being sent from the first floor up to the
second by changing the position of a flower pot on the railing of the balcony, and that these
signals were answered by having a yellow cloth flutter on now a vertical, now a horizontal pole.

At times Marguerite would come out quite timidly, and look up; at times Benda appeared, and
stood for a while at the window completely absorbed, as it seemed, in melancholy thoughts.
Herr Carovius caught them together but on one single occasion. He opened the window as quickly
as he could, and placed his ear so that he could hear what was being said, but it so happened
that over in the adjoining yard some one was just then nailing a box together. As a result
of the noise it was impossible for him to understand their remarks.

Since that day they exchanged no more signals, and never again appeared on the balcony.

Carovius rubbed his hands at the thought that the majestic Andreas Döderlein had after all
grown horns. But his joy waned when he reflected that two other people were deriving profit
from the situation. That should not be; that had to be corrected.

And so he stood at times in the evening out in the narrow passage at the entrance to his apartment.
His bathrobe fell down over his bony body in many folds. In his right hand he carried a candle.
Thus equipped, he listened in, or rather into, the stillness of the house.

At times he would take a dark lantern, walk up the stairs slowly, step by step, and listen,
listen with the greedy ears of a man who was determined to hear something. There was something
in the air that told him of secret, and of course illicit, transactions.

Was it the same medium through which he learned of the weakening of Marguerite’s mind and the
beclouding of her soul? Was it this that told him of her mental anxiety and the ever growing
delusion of her terrified and broken heart?

Later he learned of her mad outbursts of anxiety concerning the life of her child. He heard
that she would never allow the child out of her sight; that she regarded the natural warmth
of her body as a high fever; that every morning she would stand by Dorothea’s bed, weep, take
her in her arms, feel her pulse, and wrap her body in warm clothing. He heard, too, that night
after night she sat by the child’s bedside watching over her and praying for her, while the
child herself slept like an old shoe. All this he learned from the maid.

One day Herr Carovius came home, and found an ambulance and a crowd of gaping people before
the house. As he went up the stairway he heard a hushed whimpering. Marguerite was being dragged
from the house by two men. The rear of this procession was brought up by Andreas Döderlein,
on whose face there was an expression of accusation. The room door was open. He looked in,
and saw bits of broken glasses and dishes, and in the midst of the debris sat Dorothea. Her
mouth was puckered as if just on the point of weeping, and a cloth was bound about her forehead.
The maid stood in the door wringing her hands. And on a step above was Friedrich Benda, white
as a sheet, and evidently suffering from great mental anxiety.

Marguerite offered but little resistance. She looked behind her, and tried to see what the
child was doing. Herr Carovius buried his hands in his overcoat pockets, and followed the mournful
caravan out on to the street. The poor woman was taken to the insane asylum at Erlangen.

Herr Carovius said to himself: somebody is responsible for all this. He determined at once
to bring the guilty party to account. He took this stand neither out of grief nor from a feeling
of love for his fellow men. His action was motivated by his hatred of a world in which something
is constantly going on, and in the midst of which he was condemned to an inactive and deedless
life.

                                   V

Not much could be learned from Döderlein’s maid. The efforts to draw something out of little
Dorothea were also fruitless. She was wrapped up in her own affairs. She arranged her ribbons,
played with her toys, recounted the small incidents of her uneventful life, and could hardly
be persuaded even to listen to the ingenious questions Carovius put to her when he stopped
her out in the hall and asked her about this and that.

One day he went over to Erlangen to visit his sister in the insane asylum. He thought that
he might be able to get some clue to this mystery from her.

He found her sitting in the corner of a room, stroking her long, yellowish hair. Her head was
bowed; her eyes were fixed on the floor. Through no cunning that he could devise was it possible
to entice a single statement from her.

The physician said: “She is a harmless patient, but most secretive and passionate. She must
have suffered for years from some heavy burden on her soul.”

Herr Carovius left her, and went back to the station. The sun was shining bright. He soon saw
to his infinite discomfort that it was impossible to eliminate the picture of the melancholy
woman from his inner eye. He went into a café and drank some whiskey. On the return journey
an old woman sat opposite him who seemed to understand him. There was a trace of compassion
in her eyes. This made him so uneasy that he found it necessary to change his seat.

He had met with unanticipated difficulties in his investigation. He recognised these fully,
but consoled himself with the thought that there was still time. It occurred to him that he
might somehow get hold of Dr. Benda and cross-question him. He recalled having seen Friedrich
Benda meet little Dorothea on the stairway once, and no sooner had he seen her coming than
he made every effort to avoid her. That set Carovius to thinking.

Some gas pipes had to be installed in the apartment about that time, and this gave him, as
superintendent, a splendid opportunity to go up and see Benda. The doctor was just then making
his final attempt to claim his rights—the rights of a man and a scholar—against the conspiracy
of enemies who were really immune before the law.

He was all alone when Carovius called. He took him straight to his study. The walls of his
hall as well as those of his room were covered with books from floor to ceiling. Benda said
he was just getting ready to go on an extended journey. The finished politeness with which
he removed the books from a chair and the tense way in which he eyed Herr Carovius made it
clear to the latter that this was neither the time nor the place to engage in mock conversation.
Carovius talked gas pipes. Benda finished all he had to say on this subject in two short, crisp
sentences and got up to go.

Herr Carovius got up too, removed his nose glasses, and rubbed them with his bright blue handkerchief.
“Where are you going, if I may ask?” There was an expression of apparent sympathy in his question.

Benda made it a habit never to treat any man impolitely, however little regard he might have
for him personally. He said that he was going to Kiel to deliver his trial lecture at the university.

“Bravo!” cried Carovius, falling at once into the tone of awkward familiarity. “You have simply
got to show those fellows that you are not a coward. Bravo!”

“I don’t quite understand you,” said Benda in amazement. His antipathy for the man was growing.
And no one recognised this better than Carovius himself.

He cast a sideglance that reeked with hypocrisy at the young scholar. “My dear doctor, you
must not look upon me as a poor uncultured yokel,” he said, “anch’ io sono pittore. I have
read, among other things, your monograph on the morphogenetic achievements of the original
sulcate cell. Listen, man! I take off my hat to that book. Of course, it is not exactly original,
but then it is one of your earlier works. The idea developed in it follows pretty closely that
of the evolutionary and mechanical theories of the much slandered Wilhelm Roux. And yet I am
bound to say you display considerable independence in your method. Indeed you do. And more
than that, you throw much needed light on the mysteries of God himself. There is a good deal
of incoherent drivel these days about the freedom of science. Well, you’ll have to show me
where it is. Scientists? They are a lot of conceited pin-heads, each working for himself, and
incurably jealous of what his colleagues are doing. Up and at ’em, Doctor, that’s my advice,
and luck to you!”

Benda was amazed to hear Carovius mention a work that was otherwise known only to specialists.
This however merely tended to increase his distrust. He knew too much about the man to stand
before him without a feeling of hostility. He merely needed to call to mind the story of the
woman whose youth he had made into a waste place and a prison to be made aware of the fact
that it was quite impossible to stand in his presence and breathe easily. The air of the room
in which Carovius chanced to be was heavy, stuffy, depressing.

Benda’s bearing, however, remained unchanged. He replied in a serious tone: “It is not after
all easy to get along with people. Each has his own place and wants to keep it. I thank you
very much for your visit and your kind words, but my time is limited. I have a great deal to do—”

“Oh, certainly,” said Carovius hastily, while a rancorous grin flitted across his face, “but
you don’t need to drive me away. I am going on my own accord. I have an engagement at the district
court at five o’clock, I am to sign some sort of a document concerning the detention of my
sister in the insane asylum. It probably has to do with the settling of her estate or something
like that. Who knows? By the way, what have you to say about the affair? You knew her rather
intimately. No hedging, doctor. There she sits in the cell and combs her hair. Can you imagine
who is responsible? You know a woman doesn’t lose her mind from a mere love affair. And this
music swindler down stairs—it is impossible to get him to show his true colours. Yes, we all
have our troubles.”

In order to take the sting out of his impudent insinuations, for he regretted having made a
premature move with his trump card, Carovius smiled in a scurrilous fashion, ducked his head,
coward that he was, and riveted his greedy, banal eyes on Benda.

But Benda was looking down. His eyes had been attracted by the fancy buckle shoes of Herr Carovius.
He was repelled by the man’s foppish socks with the yellow stripes which were made more conspicuous
by the fact that his trousers were too high. He had a feeling of unmitigated mental nausea,
too, when he noticed how Carovius lifted first one foot and then the other from the floor,
and then set it down, heel first. It was a detestable habit; and indulging in it made an ugly
noise.

                                  VI

Benda’s absence lasted for hardly a year. His mother had not accompanied him this time. She
was not feeling well, and there was some danger that she was losing her eyesight.

After his return he took to silent brooding. Though he never said a word to his mother about
the disappointment he had experienced, she knew precisely what he had gone through, and spared
him the humiliation that would have followed any questions she might have asked.

He was oppressed by the memories the house awakened in him. Forgotten pictures became living
ones. The figure of the murdered woman appeared in the nighttime on the balcony. Her shadow
fell upon him, nestled up to him in fact, as he sat at his writing-desk.

There were a great many things that still bound him to her whose spirit had vanished from the
earth, though her body remained.

It was impossible for him to forget her gentle look or the coyness of her hands. He knew her
fate; he knew her soul. But he was condemned to silence. To withdraw from contact with the
world and into the deepest of loneliness had been her lot; it had also been his. At present
it was possible to get only one picture of her, the one her brother had given: she sat in her
cell and combed her yellow hair.

He held no one responsible; he blamed no one. He merely regretted that men are as they are.

A former university friend of his came in, and tried to get him interested in collaborating
on a great scientific work. He declined. As soon as his colleague of other days had gone, he
visualised to himself the entire conversation: The man was affable and insistent; and yet there
was in his very being an underground, enigmatic hostility. It was the hostility he invariably
felt whenever he had anything to do, either of a purely external, business nature or in a social
way, with men of other faith. The least he had to fear was a prejudiced inimicality, as if
the individual in question were on the point of calling out to him: You stay on that side,
I’ll stay on this. Keep off the bridge.

He was fully aware of this, but his pride forbade his fighting against it. He renounced his
natural right to life and a living. He declined the university conceded privilege of co-existence.
To go out and actually win for himself the right to participate in the inevitable contest of
forces, or to secure even this poor privilege by supplication, or to defend it by argument,
or to cajole it into his possession by political wiles, seemed to him contrary to reason and
at odds with common sense. He would not do it.

He refused to knock at the door which he himself had bolted and barricaded.

From this self-imposed embarrassment he suffered to an almost intolerable degree. It was the
irrational and fraudulent phase of matters that made him suffer. Did men act as they did because
they were so strong in their faith? Not at all. Did he believe in those racial differences
which made them believe? Not at all. He felt at home on the soil that nourished him; he felt
under obligations to the weal and woe of his people; he was bound heart and soul to the best
of them, and realised that he had been spiritually developed by their language, ideas, and ideals.

Everything else was a lie. They knew that it was a lie too, but out of his pride they forged
a weapon and turned it against him. To deny his relationship to them, a relationship that had
been proved by his achievements and enthusiasm, was a part of their plan; it was also a part
of their evil designs.

To strike up acquaintances, seek out congenial companions, or take an active part in social
organisations was repulsive to him. He did not care to be dragged into fruitless and empty
community of effort or social co-operation. Defiant and alone, he explained his case to himself.
Since it merely intensified his agony to compare his lot with that of others who seemed to
be similarly situated, he did not do it. He avoided in truth all reflections that might have
made the world appear to him as having at least a semblance of justice.

He was consequently filled with a longing which took more definite shape day by day, and finally
developed into a positive and irrevocable decision.

About this time he made the acquaintance of Daniel, and through him he came to know other people.
He saw at once that there was something unusual about Daniel; that there was something in him
which he had never before noticed in any one. Even his outer distress was a challenge to greater
activity, while his inner agitation never permitted his associates to rest in idle peace.

It was not easy to be of assistance to him; he rejected all gifts which he could not repay.
He had to be convinced first of his duty and indebtedness to the friend whom fate had made
cross his path. And even then he stood out for the privilege of being theoretically ungrateful.

Benda and his mother succeeded in getting him a position as a tutor in some private families.
He had to give piano lessons to young boys and girls. The compensation was not great, but it
at least helped him out for the time being.

After the day’s work was done, the evenings and nights bound the two more and more firmly together.

                                  VII

One evening Daniel entered the house and met Herr Carovius. But he was so absorbed in thought
that he passed by without noticing him. Carovius looked at him angrily, and walked back to
the hall to see where the young man was going. When he heard him ring the bell on the second
floor, an uneasy expression came over his face. He rubbed his chin with his left hand.

“The idea of passing by me as though I were a block of wood,” murmured Carovius spitefully.
“Just wait, young man, I’ll make you pay for that.”

Instead of leaving the house as he had wished, Carovius went into his apartment, lighted a
candle, and tripped hastily through three rooms, in which there were old cabinets and trunks
filled with books and music scores. There was also a piano in one. He then took a key from
his pocket, and unlocked a fourth room, which had closed shades and was in fact otherwise quite
oddly arranged.

He went to a table which reached almost the full length of the room, picked up a piece of white
paper, sat down, and wrote with red ink: “Daniel Nothafft. Musician. Two months in jail.”

He then covered the paper with mucilage, pasted it on a wooden box which looked like a miniature
sentry-house, and nailed a lid on the box, using tacks that were lying ready for this purpose.

There were at least five dozen such boxes on the long table, the majority of which had names
attached to them and had been nailed up.

The closed room Herr Carovius called his court chamber. What he did in it he termed the regulation
of his affairs with humanity, and the collection of little wooden cells he called his jail.
Every individual who had offended, hurt, humiliated, or defrauded him was assigned such a keep
in which he was obliged to languish, figuratively, until his time, determined by a formal sentence,
was up.

Nor was this all. In the middle section of the table there were a number of diminutive sand
heaps, about thirty in all, and on each one was a small wooden cross and on each cross was
a name. That was Herr Carovius’s cemetery, and those who were figuratively buried there were,
so far as he was concerned, dead, even though they were still going about their earthly affairs
as lively and cheerful as ever. They were people whose mundane careers were finished, as he
saw it, and under each of their accounts, reckoned exclusively in sins, he had drawn a heavy
line. They were such people as Richard Wagner and his champions, the local stationer to whom
he had advanced some money years ago and who entered a plea of bankruptcy a few months later,
the authors of bad books that were widely read, or of books which he loathed without having
read them, as, for instance, those of Zola.

There were still a third noteworthy section of the table, and that was the so-called Academy.
This consisted of a plot of ground, surrounded by an iron fence, and divided up into twelve
or fifteen square fields, each of which was painted in fresh green. In the middle of each field
there was a wooden peg about two inches high, and to the middle of each peg there was attached
a name-plate. From the tops of some of these pegs little banners of green cloth fluttered in
the breeze.

The fact is, Herr Carovius had a weakness for association with aristocrats. In his heart of
hearts he admired the manners of the aristocracy, their indifference and self-complacency,
their irrefragable traditions and their noiseless and harmonious behaviour. To the pegs of
the Academy he had affixed the names of some of the best families he had known; among others,
those of the Tuchers, the Hallers, the Humbsers, the Kramer-Kleets, and the Auffenbergs. Whenever
he had succeeded in making the personal acquaintance of the members of any of these families,
he went straightway to the Academy and hoisted the appropriate flag.

But, despite all his effort, he had never in the course of time been able to run up more than
three flags, and these only for a brief period and without any marked success. Some one had
recognised him on the street or spoken to him at the concert, and that was all. The Academy
looked, in contradistinction to the jail and the cemetery, quite deserted. Finally he was able
to hoist the Auffenberg banner. Herr Carovius felt that the Academy had a great future.

                                 VIII

Kropotkin the painter had once upon a time received an order to make a copy of a Holbein for
Baron Siegmund von Auffenberg. He never finished the picture, owing to lack of ability; but
he had become acquainted with Baron Eberhard, and years later, having met him quite accidentally,
took him to the Paradise, where the infamous brethren were then in the habit of gathering.

Eberhard’s appearance at the Paradise was short-lived; he disappeared in fact as quickly as
he had appeared. But this brief space was sufficient for Herr Carovius to become intimately
acquainted with him.

The first time he sat at the same table with him he was noticeably excited. His face shone
with a mild spiritual glow. His voice was sweet and gentle, his remarks of an unusually agreeable
moderation.

He turned the conversation to a discussion of the superiorities of birth, and lauded the distinction
of the hereditary classes. He said it was from them only that the people could acquire civic
virtue. The brethren scorned his point of view. Herr Carovius came back at them with an annihilating
jest.

During the rendition of this hallelujah-solo in praise of the nobility, Eberhard von Auffenberg
intrenched himself behind a sullen silence. And though Carovius used every available opportunity
from then on to flatter the young nobleman in his cunning, crafty way, he failed. The most
he could do was to inspire Eberhard to lift his thrush-bearded chin in the air and make some
sarcastic remark. Fawn as he might, Carovius was stumped at every turn.

One night, however, the two enjoyed each other’s company on the way home. That is, Carovius
never left Eberhard’s side. Annoyed at the failure of his former tactics, he thought he would
try his luck in another way: he ridiculed the arrogance of a certain caste which affected to
attach less importance to a man like himself than to some jackanapes whose handkerchief was
adorned with an embroidered crown.

“What are you, any way, what is your vocation?” asked Eberhard von Auffenberg.

“I don’t do anything,” replied Carovius.

“Nothing at all? That is quite agreeable.”

“Oh, I do work a little at music,” added Herr Carovius, entirely pleased at the curiosity of
the Baron.

“Now, you see, that is after all something,” said the Baron. “I for my part am as unmusical
as a shot-gun. And if you do not do anything but interest yourself in music, you must have
a great deal of money.”

Herr Carovius turned away. The positive dread of being taken for a rich man wrestled with the
vain desire to make the young Baron feel that he really was somebody. “I have a little,” he
remarked with a titter, “a little.”

“Very well; if you will loan me ten thousand marks, it will give me great pleasure to make
you a present of the crown on my handkerchief,” said Eberhard von Auffenberg.

Herr Carovius stopped stock still, and opened his mouth and his eyes: “Baron, you are taking
the liberty of jesting with me.” But when Eberhard indicated that he was quite serious, Carovius
continued, blank amazement forcing his voice to its highest pitch: “But my dear Sir, your father
has an income of half a million. A mere income! The tax receipts show it.”

“Well, I am not talking about my father,” said Eberhard coldly, and once more threw his chin
in the air. “It is evidently a part of your heraldic prejudices to feel that you can coax the
income of my father into my own pockets.”

They were standing under a gas lamp at the Haller Gate. It was dripping rain, and they had
raised their umbrellas. It was perfectly still; it was also late. Not a human being was to
be seen anywhere. Carovius looked at the seriously offended young man, the young man looked
at Carovius, then grinning a grin of embarrassment, and neither knew how to take the other.

“You are surprised,” said Eberhard, resuming the conversation. “You are surprised, and I don’t
blame you. I am a discontented guest in my own skin; that much I can assure you. I am as abortive
a creature as ever was born. I inherited far too much that is superfluous, and not nearly enough
of the necessities. There are all manner of mysteries about me; but they are on the outside.
Within there is nothing but stale, dead air.”

He stared at the ground as though he were talking to himself, and as though he had forgotten
that any one was listening, and continued: “Have you ever seen old knights carved in stone
in old churches? If you have, you have seen me. I feel as if I were the father of my father,
and as if he had had me buried alive, and an evil spirit had turned me to stone, and my hands
were lying crossed over my breast and could not move. I grew up with a sister, and I see her
as though it were yesterday”—at this point his face took on an expression of fantastic senility—“walking
through the hall, proud, dainty, innocent, with roses in her hand. She is married to a captain
of cavalry, a fellow who treats his men like Negro slaves, and who never returns the greeting
of a civilian unless he is drunk. She had to marry him. I could not prevent it. Somebody forced
her into it. And if she is carrying roses now, it is as if a corpse were singing songs.”

Herr Carovius felt most uneasy. He was not accustomed to hearing things like this. Where he
lived people called a spade a spade. He pricked up his ears and made a wry face. “It is the
way he has been trained that makes him talk like that,” he thought; “it is the result of constantly
sitting on gold-embroidered chairs and seeing nothing about him but paintings.”

“I am going to sit on such chairs too,” he was happy to think, “and I shall see the paintings,
too.” He pictured himself between the Baron and the Baroness, marching up to the portals of
the castle, flanked on either side by a row of liveried servants, the nervous masses catching
sight of the splendour as well as they might. The rear of this procession was being brought
up by the young Baron, who had returned home as the penitent Prodigal Son.

“One must have a feeling of personal security,” remarked Carovius. He wondered whether the
Baron had reached his majority. Eberhard replied that he had just completed his twenty-first
year, and that certain things had made him feel that it would be wise to live independent of
his family and to renounce his claims to all family rights for the time being. What he really
had in mind was the desire to avoid, so far as humanly possible, association with all professional
money-lenders.

Herr Carovius felt that this was an extremely serious case. He claimed moreover to understand
it perfectly and to be ready for anything, but insisted that nothing must be withheld, that
he must be given undiluted wine. He made this remark just as if he were holding a glass of
old Johannisberger out in the rain, sniffing as he did with appreciative nostrils.

“I am very discreet,” he said, “very taciturn.” He looked at the Baron tenderly.

The young Baron nodded.

“The wearer of purple is recognised wherever he goes,” continued Herr Carovius, “and if he
lays the purple aside he stands at once in need of reticent friends. I am reserved.”

The Baron nodded again. “If you will permit me, I shall visit you in a few days.” With that
he ended the conversation.

He started off toward the Avenue, walking stiffly. It was not hard to see that he was ill at
ease. Herr Carovius walked away with mincing, merry steps down toward the small end of the
alley, singing an aria from the “Barber of Seville” as he went.

At the end of the first week he was taken down with a disconcerting suspicion that the Baron
had made a fool of him. He was filled with a wrath that had to be cooled. One morning, just
as he was leaving his apartment, he saw two milk cans filled with milk standing in the outer
hall. One was for the first floor, the other for the second. The milkmaid had placed them there
for the time being, and had gone over to have a little morning chat with her neighbour. Herr
Carovius went to his lumber-room, which also served as the kitchen, took down a jug of vinegar,
came back, looked around with all the caution he could summon, and then poured half of the
contents of the jug into one can and the other half into the other.

Two days later he decided not to give Cæsar anything to eat, so that he would terrify the neighbours
by his howling. This worked. The dog howled and whined and barked night after night. It was
enough to melt the heart of a stone. Nobody could sleep. Andreas Döderlein went to the police,
but they told him that the case was beyond their jurisdiction.

Herr Carovius lay in bed rejoicing with exceeding great joy over the fact that the people could
not sleep. He became enamoured of the idea that it might be possible, through some ingenious
invention, to rob a whole city or a whole nation of its sleep. The inventor could then move
about conscious of the fact that he was at once the distributor and the destroyer of the world’s
supply of sleep. If he so elected to exploit his invention, he could revel in the sight of
an entire people pining, drying up, and eventually dying from the want of sleep.

After Cæsar had become quite savage, Herr Carovius decided to unleash him. It was just after
sunset. He slipped up to the beast from the rear, and opened the chain lock. The dog ran like
mad through the court and the hall, and out on to the street.

Just at this moment young Baron von Auffenberg was entering to pay Herr Carovius that promised
visit. He jumped back from the beast, but it sprang at his body, and in a jiffy the Baron was
lying full length on the pavement. Cæsar left him, made a straight line for the open door of
a butcher shop across the street, sprang in, and snatched a fancy cut from one of the hooks.

In order to see just how much damage the dog would really do, Herr Carovius ran after him,
hypocritically feigning as he ran an expression of horror, and acting as though the beast had
somehow broken his chain and got loose. The first sight that caught his eyes was that of the
young Baron as he rose to his feet and limped over toward his host to-be.

The horror of Herr Carovius at once became real. With the diligence of a seasoned flunkey,
he stooped over, picked up the Baron’s hat, dusted it, stammered all sorts of apologies, gazed
at high heaven like a martyred saint, and brushed the dirt from Eberhard’s trousers. Then the
dog came back, a huge piece of meat in his mouth. The butcher came to the door and shook his
fists. The butcher’s boy stuck two fingers in his mouth, and whistled for the police. They
came, too, and Herr Carovius had to pay for the meat.

He then took the Baron into his living-room, plying him in the meantime with innumerable questions
as to how he felt. Having been stunned by the fall, the Baron asked to lie down for a few minutes
on the couch. Herr Carovius granted his wish, smothering him with sighs of affection and exclamations
of regret.

As the Baron lay on the couch, trying to regain his vital spirits, Herr Carovius went to the
piano and played the rondo from Weber’s sonata in A flat major. His technique was superb; his
emotion was touching.

After the concert the transactions began.

                   INSPECTOR JORDAN AND HIS CHILDREN

                                   I

Benno Jordan was now a senior in the gymnasium and had begun to play mischievous pranks. He
also declared that he was no longer minded to tolerate the tyranny of the school, and that
he had not the slightest desire to enter the university. He was a wilful, obstinate boy with
a marked tendency to sociability. He paid a great deal of attention to his clothes, and was
proud of his handsome face.

After repeated conversations with the seventeen-year-old boy, Jordan decided to get him a job
as a clerk in the offices of the Prudentia. He discussed the situation with the general agent,
and Alfons Diruf gave his consent. Benno began his work at fifty marks a month.

When Jordan would come home of an evening, the first thing he would hear from Eleanore was
that Benno had an engagement with some of his friends, and that they were in the Alfas Garden,
or in the Wolf’s Glen, or in Café Merkur, where the orchestrion, then a new invention, was
being played for the first time.

“Lord, what is to become of the next generation?” said Jordan, quite worried. “All they think
about is having a good time. Why, I never in my whole life thought of merely amusing myself.”

Anxious about Benno’s behaviour, Jordan called on the chief of the clerical department. The
little man with the waxened, weazened, face expressed himself as quite satisfied with the new
employé. Jordan took him by the hand; it was his way of displaying gratitude. And he was grateful,
though it was hard for him to subdue a feeling of solicitude. He recognised the boy’s external
amiability, but felt convinced that this merely covered and concealed a decayed soul.

Alfons Diruf was obese and gloomy. His clothes were made in Paris, and on the ring finger of
his left hand was a brilliant diamond.

Since the Prudentia had introduced the so-called workmen’s insurance, the number of clerks
on its payroll had been increased by about twenty-five thousand. Of these eighty-four were
under Diruf’s direct supervision. They were located in three rooms of a house in Fürther Street.
They were pale and they were silent. Diruf himself had a private office which resembled the
boudoirs of a woman of the world. The curtains were of blue silk, a bathing nymph by Thumann
hung on the wall, and the whole place smelled of musk.

Three times a day he would leave his fair retreat, and, with the mien of disgust, make the
rounds of the clerks’ quarters. When they saw him coming, heads ducked, hands scurried across
the books, feet stopped scraping, and all whispering died out.

He gave the impression of a man who hated his job, but in reality he loved it. He liked the
clerks because of their servile docility and their famished faces. He liked them because they
came promptly every morning and went away every evening tired as tired could be, and because
day after day, year in and year out, they sat there and wrote, wrote, wrote.

He liked the inspectors because day after day, year in and year out, they did a great deal
of work for a very little money. He liked the agents and sub-agents who made it possible for
the company to issue hundreds of new policies every day. He liked their dirty clothes and tattered
boots, their hungry looks, their misleading but effective line of talk, and their sad faces.

The special bait of the workmen’s insurance was the small premium, carrying with it a small
policy. In this way the man of small means was to be educated in thrift. As a rule, however,
the small man realised, when it was too late, that the agent had promised more than the company
could do. He became distrustful; his weekly savings were so scant that it was impossible for
him to pay his premiums regularly; with the expiration of each week it became increasingly
difficult to make up the back payments, and, before he knew precisely what had happened, his
policy had been declared void, and the money he had paid in on it confiscated.

In this way the company made millions. It was the pfennigs of the poorest classes that constituted
these millions, made the dividends rise higher and higher, increased the army of clerks, and
filled the pockets of the agents.

These agents were recruited from the scum of human society. They were made up of bankrupts,
decadent students, gamblers, topers, and beggars. They came from the ranks of those who had
been pursued by misfortune and who bore the marks of crime. No one was too small or too bad.

Alfons Diruf, however, saw that it would vastly improve the credit of the company if to this
list of outcasts he would add a few eminently respectable citizens. He consequently went out
on his own responsibility, and looked for help. His quest brought him to Jason Philip Schimmelweis.

“It’s a gold mine,” he said; “you work for an ideal, and you get something out of it for yourself.
Ideals, incidentally, that are not profitable are idiotic.” With that he blew the smoke of
his Havana cigar through his nose.

Jason Philip understood. It was not necessary to flatter the leader and politician that was
admittedly in him. He nearly ran his legs off working for the company. Alfons Diruf loved this
socialist bookkeeper, after a fashion.

Inspector Jordan saw however that the countless brokers were encroaching on his territory and
stirring up distrust on the part of his better clients. He lost his interest. The directors
felt obliged to send Alfons Diruf a critical memorandum explaining Jordan’s case, and showing
that he was no longer as efficient as he used to be.

                                  II

Daniel had grown tired of his room in the attic and the society of brush-maker Hadebusch. He
announced that he was going to move. Surrounded by a cloud of smells from boiled cabbage, Frau
Hadebusch raged about the ingratitude of man. Her shrieks called Herr Francke and the Methodist
from out their warm holes; the brush-maker and his imbecile son also appeared in the dimly
lighted vestibule; and before these five Hogarth figures stood the defenceless sinner, Daniel
Nothafft.

He looked about in the suburbs of St. Mary, but found everything too dear. He went out to New
Gate, but everything was taken. He tried the St. John district, and that pleased him best of
all. Late in the afternoon he came to a house in the Long Row, at the entrance to which hung
a “To Let” sign.

He pulled the bell cord, and a beautiful servant girl took him into a room. Through the window
he could look out on a garden filled with old trees. A spinster came in, and smiled at the
pleasure he took in the room and the view.

“I must see my sister,” she said, as he asked her about the price.

She called out into the hall, and her sister, likewise an elderly and kindly spinster, came
in. They held a council, the deliberations of which were conducted in muffled tones, and then
agreed that they would have to consult Albertina. She was the third sister. The first tip-toed
to the door and, with pointed lips, called the name, Albertina, out into the long hall with
as much coyness as had been employed in summoning the second sister.

Albertina was the youngest of the three; she was about forty. But she had forgotten, like Jasmina
and Saloma, to erase twenty years from the calendar: all three had preserved the youthful charm
of their girlhood.

Albertina blushed as she looked at the young man, and her modesty was contagious; the two sisters
also blushed. She told Daniel that they were the Rüdiger sisters. With that she remained silent,
and looked down as though she had divulged her entire fate. She informed Daniel that they had
decided to rent the room to some dependable young man, because there had been considerable
petty thieving in the neighbourhood of late and they would like to enjoy the protection of
a man, for they were entirely alone, except for the boy who tended the garden. They told him
also that they had had several offers, but that they had declined them because they did not
like the appearance of the applicants. In affairs of this kind, indeed in everything, the three
sisters were always of like mind.

Fräulein Saloma asked Daniel what he did. He replied that he was a musician. A chorus of surprise
greeted his ears, rendered in perfect time by the three female voices. Fräulein Jasmina asked
him whether he was a singer or a violinist. He replied that he was neither, that he was a composer,
or that he at least hoped to become one. With that an expression of intense spirituality spread
over the faces of the sisters, so that they looked like triplets. Aha, a creative artist! “Y-e-s,”
said Daniel, “if you wish to put it that way: a creative artist.”

They hopped into the corner like so many sparrows, and went into serious conference. Fräulein
Saloma, as chairman, wanted to know whether a monthly rent of twelve marks would be too much.
No, replied Daniel, that would not be excessive. He said it without giving the matter the slightest
consideration, and then shook hands with the sisters. Fräulein Jasmina added that he could
use the piano on the first floor whenever he wished to, and that it merely needed tuning. Daniel
shook her hand again, this time with special warmth. His joy had awakened in him a measure
of clumsy familiarity.

Before he left the house he went out into the garden, and stood for a while under one of the
trees. A tree to myself at last, he thought. Up in the top a blackbird was singing. Meta the
servant looked out from the door where she was standing, astonished at it all.

Fräulein Albertina said to her sisters: “He seems like an interesting young man, but he has
bad manners.”

“Artists attach no importance to externalities,” replied Fräulein Jasmina with knitted brow.

“A great mistake. He always looked as if he had just come out of a bandbox. You remember, don’t
you?”

The other two nodded. The three then walked down the garden path, arm in arm.

                                  III

Daniel was standing in the vegetable market before the Goose Man Fountain, eating apples.

The sun was shining, and he noticed that the shadow of the fountain was moving slowly toward
the church. It made him sad to see that time was passing and how it was passing. When he turned
around, however, and saw that the bronze figure of the man with the two geese under his arms
was not merely indifferent to the passing of time but confident that all is well, he could
not help but laugh.

What made him laugh was partly the calm of the man: he was always waiting for something, and
he was always there. He was likewise amused at the thought that two geese could make a man
look so contented.

                                  IV

As Daniel was going home one afternoon from a piano lesson, he met Eleanore Jordan. He told
her about his new room and the three bizarre creatures in the house in the Long Row.

Eleanore had heard all about them. She said they were the daughters of the geometrician Rüdiger,
and that he had left the town some time ago because of a quarrel with the citizens, or rather
with one of the gilds. The origin of the trouble was the picture of a certain painter. More
she did not know, other than that Rüdiger had gone to Switzerland and lost his life by falling
down one of the mountains. The sisters, she said, were the laughing stock of the town. They
never left the house except on certain days, when they went out to the nearby cemetery at the
Church of St. John to place flowers on the grave of that painter.

Daniel hardly listened to what she said. They were standing at the St. Sebaldus Church, and
the chimes began to play. “Magnificent,” he murmured, “an ascending triad in A.”

Eleanore asked him how he was getting along, and looked with regret at his sunken cheeks. Her
virile expression was rather displeasing to him. He was surprised to see how rarely she lowered
her eye lids. He said he was getting along quite well. She smiled.

“It’s terrible that a man has to have a monster in his body that must be fed,” he remarked.
“Otherwise one could storm the heavens and steal the songs of the angels. But this was not
to be. You have first to flutter your wings until they are wounded and break your chains, and
by that time such ethereal power as you may have had is dissipated.”

He wrinkled his face until he again looked like the wily ape. “But I am going to see it through,”
he said. “I want to find out whether God drew me from the urn as a blank or a prize.” He could
be very eloquent when he talked about himself.

Eleanore smiled. It seemed to her that it was merely necessary to bring a little order into
his life. She consequently assumed the responsibility of looking after his room.

In Tetzel Street they met the inspector. As Jordan walked along at the side of his beloved
daughter, it seemed to him that the grey walls and weather-beaten stones of the houses were
no longer so earthy or weighed down with time. Eleanore looked toward the West into the purple
glow of the setting sun. She was not quite herself. There came moments when she suffered from
homesickness for a fairer land.

She thought of Italy. She conjured up lovely visions of sunny bays, blooming groves, and white
statues.

Daniel however went on toward the Füll. The workmen were coming from the suburbs, and in their
tired faces he felt that he recognised his own world. “Oh,” he sighed, “I should like to get
nearer the stars, to make the acquaintance of more dependable hearts, of hearts that are truer
even than my own.”

Just then he looked up at Benda’s window, and saw his light. He was ashamed of himself.

                                   V

The first time Eleanore visited Daniel it was along toward evening. She heard from a distance
the piano and the shrill crowing of Daniel’s voice. Down in the hall she saw three white figures
cuddled up close to each other like hens on a roost.

It was the Rüdiger sisters trying to drink in the creative efforts of the artist. That they
were eavesdropping at the fount of art they understood both in the good and the bad sense:
their enthusiasm was praiseworthy, their courtesy was deficient. When they caught sight of
Eleanore on the stairway, they were terrified, and rustled into the adjoining room.

The three elderly hearts beat impetuously. It was Jasmina’s turn to read from Rückert’s poems.
Jasmina had not the shadow of a desire to perform; her sisters were equally disinclined to listen.

“It is not right,” the three kept saying, when they heard of Eleanore’s visits. “It is not
right.” Even Meta the maid was of the opinion that her calls were highly unconventional.

As Daniel played on and merely nodded to her, Eleanore’s eyes fell on the mask of Zingarella.
She stepped up, took it down from the nail on the wall, and examined it in perfect silence.

Daniel had in the meantime left the piano. A loud cry from him startled her: “What the devil
are you doing?” he exclaimed in a tone of immoderate anger. He took the mask, which she was
handling so lightly and tremulously, out of her hands, and replaced it on the nail with affectionate
care.

The sensitive girl at once began to cry. She turned to one side in order to conceal her tears.
Daniel was irritated, but the first thought that occurred to him was how he could make amends
for his rudeness. He fetched a worn book, and offered to lend it to her. It was a translation
of that beautiful old novel, “Manon Lescaut.”

Eleanore came frequently after office hours, but never remained long; she did not wish to make
the people at home uneasy. During the short time she stayed she always found a number of things
to do, such as straightening up the papers on his table or arranging his scores.

She became acquainted with Benda; he took a liking to her. It did him good merely to be in
her presence, and he could not understand why she did not have the same wholesome effect on
Daniel. Daniel seemed thoroughly unappreciative of the girl. He was like a man who goes along
the street carrying a basket full of eggs: his sole ambition for the time being is to see that
not a single egg is lost or broken.

The two would frequently accompany the girl home. Daniel always talked about himself, and Benda
listened with a smile. Or Benda talked about Daniel, and Daniel was all ears.

What did people say? That Eleanore was now trotting around with three men, whereas she formerly
had only one on her string, the Baron, and that you are going to hear from this affair.

Every now and then a snip of ugly gossip reached Eleanore’s ears. She paid not the slightest
attention to it. She looked out from her glass case on to the world with cool and cheerful
indifference, quite incapable of placing the established interpretation on the glances of calumniators.

                                  VI

Benda could have sketched Daniel’s face in the darkness: the round forehead, the little nose,
pointed and mulish, the rigidly pinched lips, the angular musician’s chin, and the deep dimples
in his cheeks.

His ignorance of the musician was complete. Like all scholars, he nurtured an ingrained distrust
when it came to the supernatural influence of art. For the great musical compositions which,
in the course of time and as a result of the homage of succeeding generations, had come to
be regarded as exemplary and incontestable, he had a feeling of reverence. For the creations
of his contemporaries he had no ear.

That it was hard to understand and appreciate, he knew. That it was bitter not to be understood
or appreciated, he had experienced. That the discipline associated with all intellectual work
demands its tribute in the form of sacrificial renunciation needed no proof in his case.

The musician was something new to him. How did he regard him? As a blind man whose soul was
on fire. As a drunken man who made the impression of repulsive sobriety on other men. As an
obsessed individual who was living an excruciatingly lonely life and was unaware of it. As
an unpolished peasant with the nerves of a degenerate.

The scientist wished to find the established and formulated law in the musician—a task that
could lead only to despair. The friend surveyed the life of his friend; he allowed the personalities
of many young men whom he had met in life to pass before his mind’s eye. He looked for the
criteria of common interests; he sought a law, even here. He sat in the dusk, and read from
the works of the philosopher Mainländer. Then he laid the book to one side, and said to himself:
“The youth of to-day are lacerating, devastating themselves.... It is a fearful age. Measure,
proportion, and balance are gone. Every model becomes a caricature. The individual is absolutely
dependent upon himself. The flame is without container, and threatens to burn the hand that
would check it.”

In Daniel he had found his brother in fate. Music became his brother in torture. On seeing
his friend lacerated and devastated, he saw twitch from the eye of Gorgo herself the profoundest
of wisdom. But he did not lay bare his own heart.

One night, after unending conversation had brought them both to silence—like ships which, tossed
about by the winds, at last drift into the harbour—Benda, taking up with an angry, exasperated
remark by Daniel as it echoed back from the other shore of this silence, said: “We must not
be vain. We dare not usurp a privilege which has no other basis than our inner task. We must
never stand before our own picture. It seems to me that an artist should be of exalted modesty,
and that without this modesty he is nothing but a more or less remarkable lout.”

Daniel looked up at once. Benda’s big teeth were visible under his bushy moustache. He had
a habit of pulling his lips apart whenever he was searching for a really incisive word.

Benda continued: “The great majority of what you call talent is ignominious. Talent is a feather
duster. All that comes from the finger tips is evil. The man who has a distinct goal and is
willing to suffer in order to reach it, that man we can use. And otherwise—how beautiful it
all is after all! Heaven is above us, the earth is beneath us, and in between stands immortal man.”

Daniel got up, and seized Benda’s hand. There was nothing more vanquishing than Benda’s handshake.
His good strong right became a vise in which he shook a man’s hand until it became limp, a
perfectly delightful benevolence radiating from his eyes in the meanwhile.

The two men exchanged the fraternal “thou.”

                                  VII

Eleanore returned the copy of “Manon Lescaut.” When Daniel asked her how she liked it, she
never said a word. Since he thought that it was an excellent book, he began to scold.

She said: “I cannot read books in which there is so much talk about love.”

He gazed into space in order to allow her voice time to die away. There was a violin tone in
her speech, the charm of which he could not escape. When he fully realised what she had said,
he laughed a short laugh, and remarked that her attitude was one of affected coyness. She shook
her head. Then he teased her about going with young Auffenberg, and asked her whether real
love affairs were just as disagreeable to her as those related in novels.

The flaming blue of her eyes compelled him to look down. It was not pleasant for him to admit,
by action, that the expression in her face was stronger than his own. She left, and did not
allow herself to be seen for a few days.

When she returned, he was naïve enough to renew his banter. She took her seat on the corner
sofa, and looked straight into his face: “Do we really intend to remain friends, Daniel?” she
asked.

He cast a side glance of amazement at her, not because he was particularly struck by her charming
suavity and marked winsomeness, but rather because the violin tone in her throat resounded
more strongly and clearly than ever. But it was quite impossible for him to give an affirmative
reply to her question without puckering up his lips and putting his hands in his trouser pockets.

She said she had no desire to seem important in his estimation, that she merely wanted him
to regard her as different from other girls. She insisted that he concede her one privilege
if they were to remain friends: he was not to talk to her about love, either seriously or in
jest. She remarked that for months the very word love had called up ghost-like recollections.
Why this was so, she said she could not tell him, not now, perhaps years from now when both
had grown old. She could not do it, for if she endeavoured to refresh old memories or revive
what she had half forgotten, her whole past arose before her, flat, languid, and insipid, easily
misinterpreted by the person who heard the story, however clear it might be to her. She repeated
that this was the way it was, and she could not help it. Once again she asked that he spare
her feelings on this point.

Her face took on a serious expression; it resembled an old picture. There was something dream-like
in her words.

“Well, if that is all you have on your mind, Eleanore, I am sure that it will be easy for me
to respect your wish,” said Daniel. There was a manifest lack of feeling in the kindness he
displayed. It seemed indeed that the secret to which she was attaching so much importance was
far removed from his egotistically encircled world. The little fountain in the garden was rustling.
He listened to see if he could not catch the dominating tone in the continual splashing.

Eleanore turned to him now with renewed if not novel candour. She was closer to him in every
way—her eyes, her hands, and her words.

                                 VIII

Daniel had just completed an orchestral work which he had entitled “Vineta.” He wished to have
Benda hear it. One evening about six Benda came in. Everything was ready. Daniel sat down at
the piano. His face was pale, his smooth upper lip was trembling.

“Now think of the sea; think of a storm; think of a boat with people in it. Picture to yourself
a wonderful aurora borealis and a sunken city rising from the sea. Imagine a sea that had suddenly
become calm, and in the light a strange phenomenon. Conjure up such a scene before your mind’s
eye, or conjure up something totally different, for this is a false way of getting at the meaning
of music. It is plain prostitution to think anything of the kind. Ice-flat.”

He was just about to begin, when some one knocked at the door. Eleanore entered. She whisked
across the room, and took her seat on the sofa.

The piece opened with a quiet rhythmical, mournful movement, which suddenly changed to a raging
presto. The melodic figure was shattered like a bouquet of flowers in a waterfall almost before
it had had time to take shape and display real composure. The dissipated elements, scattered
to the four corners of the earth, then returned, hesitatingly and with evident contrition,
to be reunited in a single chain. It seemed that the mad whirlwind had left them richer, purer
and more spiritual. They pealed forth now, one after the other, in a slow-moving decrescendo,
until they constituted a solemn chorus played in moderato, melting at last into the lovely
and serious main theme, which in the finale streamed away and beyond into infinity, dying out
on an arpeggiated chord.

Where the piano failed to produce the full effect, Daniel helped out with his crow-like voice.
It was the uncanny energy of expression that prevented his singing from having a comic effect.

Benda’s eyes were so strained in the effort to listen intelligently and appreciatively that
they became dazed, glazed. Had he been asked he could not have said whether the work was a
success or a failure. The feature of the performance that convinced him was the man and the
magnetism that radiated from the man. The work itself he could neither fathom nor evaluate.
It took hold of him nevertheless because of its inseparable association with the human phenomenon.

Daniel got up, stumbled over to the sofa, buried his face in his hands, and sighed: “Do you
feel it? Do you really feel it?” He then rose, lunged at the piano, seized the score, and hurled
it to the floor: “Ah, it’s no account; it is nothing; it is an abominable botch.”

He threw himself on the sofa a second time. Eleanore, sitting perfectly motionless in the other
corner, looked at him with the eyes of an astonished child.

Benda had gone to the window, and was looking out into the trees and the grey clouds of the
sky. Then he turned around. “That something must be done for you and your cause is clear,” he said.

Eleanore stretched out her arms toward Benda as though she wished to thank him. Her lips began
to move. But when she saw Daniel she did not dare to say a word, until she suddenly exclaimed:
“Heavens, there are two buttons on his vest which are hanging by a thread.” She ran out of
the room. In a few moments she returned with needle and thread, which she had had Meta give
her, sat down at Daniel’s side, and sewed the buttons on.

Benda had to laugh. But what she did had a tranquilising effect; she seemed to enable life
to win the victory over the insidious pranks of apparitions.

                                  IX

In years gone by, Benda had known the theatrical manager and impresario Dörmaul. He went to
Dörmaul now, and took Daniel’s new work along with him; for the versatile parvenu, who always
had a number of irons in the fire, also published music.

A few weeks elapsed before Benda heard from Dörmaul: “Incomprehensible stuff! Crazy attempt
to be original! You couldn’t coax a dog away from the stove with it.” Such was Dörmaul’s opinion.

A young man with fiery red hair followed Benda to the door and spoke to him. He said his name
was Wurzelmann and that he was a musician himself; that he had attended the Vienna Conservatory,
where his teacher had given him a letter of recommendation to Alexander Dörmaul. He also told
Benda that Dörmaul was planning to form an opera company that would visit the smaller cities
of the provinces, and that he was to be the Kapellmeister.

He spoke in the detestable idiom of the Oriental Jew. Benda was politely cold.

The main point was still to come: “Vineta” had aroused Wurzelmann’s profound admiration; he
had read the score on the side: “A great talent, Doctor, a talent such as we have not had for
a long, long while,” said Wurzelmann.

“Yes, but what am I to say about Herr Dörmaul’s opinion?” asked Benda. He found it difficult
to trust the man before him, and was using the judgment of the man behind him as a foil.

“Don’t you know Dörmaul? I thought you did. Whenever he has no authority to fear he becomes
very bold. Lay the Ninth Symphony before him without Beethoven’s name to it, and he will tell
you at once that it is rubbish. Do you want to bet?”

“Honestly?” asked Benda, somewhat concerned.

“Give me the score, and I’ll promise you to arouse the least sensitive from their lethargy
with it. With a work of that kind you have got to blow the trumpet.”

Benda thought it over. He had no use for trumpet-blowing, and no confidence in those who did
the blowing. And yet he consented, for he did not feel justified in arbitrarily depriving Daniel
of a chance.

It turned out that Wurzelmann had told the truth. A fortnight later Daniel was informed that
the Orchestral Union had decided to perform his work in February. In order to provide its hearers
with a more elaborate picture of his creative ability, the Union asked him for a second work.
His compositions were perfect; others needed revision.

Wurzelmann boasted of having won his way to the seats of the mighty. He had the cordial approval
of such professors of music as Wackerbarth and Herold. His masterpiece of diplomacy lay in
the fact that he had secured Andreas Döderlein as director of the orchestra.

His store of suggestions was inexhaustible, his plans without number. He mentioned the fact
that when the company was on the road they would have to have a second Kapellmeister, since
he himself would have to function at times as substitute director: “Leave it all to me, dear
Nothafft,” he said, “Alexander Dörmaul has got to dance to my tune, and my tune is this: It
is Nothafft or nobody for Kapellmeister.”

If he began with humility, he concluded with familiarity. Daniel hated red-headed people, particularly
when they had inflamed eyes and slobbered when they spoke.

“He is an unappetising fellow, your Wurzelmann,” he said to Benda, “and it is embarrassing
to me to be indebted to him. He imagines he flatters me when he speaks contemptibly of himself.
What he deserves is a kick or two.”

Benda was silent. Touched by Wurzelmann’s devoted efforts, he had called him servule, or the
“little slave.” It was pleasant to think that there was some one to remove the stumbling blocks
from the road, so that the feet of him who had risen from obscurity might find a place to walk.
But the little slave was filled with the admiration of the Jew, born in poverty and oppression,
for the genius of the other race.

Benda knew this. He was uneasy at the thought of it; for other and no less disingenuous fanatics
regarded Wurzelmann’s behaviour merely as a racial peculiarity.

                                   X

Summer with its hot August days had come. The two friends took frequent walks out to the suburbs,
strolling through the forests of Feucht and Fischbach, or climbing the high hills about the city.

Eleanore joined them on one of these excursions. It was a joy to see her drink in the fragrance
of the flowers and the fir trees or study the various cloud formations and the alternating
scenes of the landscape. When she did this she was like a bird gliding along on noiseless wing
in the upper regions, far removed from the grime of the earth, bathing in the undefiled air
of the clouds.

She listened to the conversation of the friends with intelligent attention. A piercing glance
or a wrinkle of the brow showed that she was taking sides, and accepting or rejecting in her
own mind the views that were being set forth. If she was moved to express an opinion of her
own, she generally hit the nail on the head.

As they were returning home, night set in. The sky was clear; the stars were shining. There
were a great number of falling stars. Eleanore remarked that she really did not have as many
wishes as she could express under these circumstances. The erudite Benda replied with a smile
that in these August nights there were frequently so many groups of asteroids that the whole
firmament seemed to be in motion, and that one could easily grow tired of so many wishes.

Eleanore wanted to know what an asteroid was. Benda explained it to her as well as he could.
Then he told her all about constellations and the milky way, and explained to her that the
latter consists of millions of individual stars. He also spoke of the size of the stars; and
since he referred to them occasionally as suns and worlds, she became somewhat sceptical, and
asked him whether there were any earths among the stars. “Earths? What do you mean by earths?”
he asked. “Why, earths, just like the one we live on,” she replied. Having been told that there
were earths among the stars, Eleanore raised a number of rather cleverly framed questions about
the trees and animals and people that might be found on these other earths. She was told that
it was highly probable that they were all inhabited about as our own: “Why should this globe
enjoy special privileges?” he asked. He added, however, that even if the inhabitants of the
other earths did not have the same mental faculties that we have, they were at least beings
endowed with reason and instinct.

“Do you mean to tell me that such people as you and Daniel and I may be living up there in
those starry regions?”

“Certainly.”

“And that there are countless peoples and humanities up among the stars of whom we know nothing
at all?”

“Certainly.”

Eleanore sat down on a milestone by the roadside, gazed out into space with trembling lips,
and broke out crying. Benda took her hand, and caressed it.

“I am awfully sorry for all those peoples up there,” Eleanore sobbed, looked up, smiled, and
let the tears take their course. Benda would have liked to take Daniel by the arm, and shout
into his ear: “Look at her now!” Daniel was looking at her, but he did not see her.

                                  XI

One evening in October, Inspector Jordan left his house in Broad Street, buttoned his top coat
more closely about him, and walked hastily through a connecting alley that was so narrow that
it seemed as if some one had taken a big knife and cut the houses in two. His goal was Carolina
Street. It was late, and he was hungry. Doubting whether Gertrude would have a warm supper
ready for him, he went to an inn.

He had spent two full hours there trying to get a rich hops dealer to take out some insurance.
The man had him explain over and over again the advantages of insurance, studied the tables
backwards and forwards, and yet he was unable to come to a decision. Then the waiter brought
him his dinner. There he sat, smacking his lips with the noise of human contentment, his great
white napkin tied under his chin in such a fashion that the two corners of it stuck out on
either side of his massive head, giving the appearance of two white ears. He had offended Jordan’s
social instincts: he had not thought it worth while to wait for an invitation.

Among other guests in the inn was Bonengel, the barber. He recognised Jordan and spoke to him.
He took a seat in the background, picked out the ugliest and greasiest of the waitresses, and
ordered a bulky portion of sausage and sauerkraut.

He told lascivious anecdotes. When the waitress brought him his food, she tittered, and said:
“He is a jolly good fellow, Bonengel is.”

Jordan began to eat rapidly, but soon lost his appetite, pushed his plate to one side, propped
his chin on his hands, and stared at the immobile clouds of tobacco smoke before him.

He had a feeling that it was no longer possible to keep at this work day after day, year in
and year out. Running from one end of the city to the other, up and down the same stairs, through
the same old streets—he could not do it. Answering the same questions, making the same assertions,
refuting the same objections, praising the same plan in the same words, feigning the same interest
and quieting the same distrust day after day—no, he could not do it. Disturbing the same people
in their domestic peace, prodding himself on to new effort every morning, listening to the
same curtain lectures of that monster of monsters, the insatiate stock market, and standing
up under the commands of his chief, Alfons Diruf—no, he was no longer equal to it. It was all
contrary to the dignity of a man of his years.

He was ashamed of himself; and he was fearfully tired.

He thought of his past life. He recalled how he had risen from poverty, and worked up to the
position of a highly respected merchant. That was when he was in Ulm. There he had married
Agnes, the blond daughter of the railroad engineer.

But why had he never become rich? Other men who were distinctly inferior to him in shrewdness,
diligence, and polish were now wealthy; he was poor. Three times he had been threatened with
bankruptcy, and three times friends had come to his rescue. Then a partner joined him, invested
some capital in the firm, and the business was once more on its feet.

But it turned out that this partner was a stranger to loyalty and quite without conscience.
“Jordan is a drag on the business,” he would say to his customers, “Jordan is stupid, Jordan
cannot make a calculation.” And the partner never rested until Jordan was paid a set sum and
eased out of the firm.

He then tried his fortune here and there for eight or nine years. “Don’t worry, Jordan,” said
Agnes, “everything will come out well.” But it did not. Whatever Jordan took hold of, he took
hold of at the wrong end at the wrong time with the wrong people.

He could not get on. Not only because his hand was heavy and his head too honest, but because
he had allowed himself to be befooled by a chimera.

Early in life he had had a dream, and all his enterprise and industry were directed toward
the fulfilment of this dream. It had been impossible: he had never been able to save up enough
money. Every time he discussed his favourite wish with Agnes, and told her about the happy
days when he would be able to live his own life and be his own boss, she encouraged him and
tried to help him. But it seemed now that she had known all along that he had merely been dreaming,
and that her magnanimity had prompted her not to jolt him out of his delusion.

It had always seemed to him that the world of dolls was a world in itself. He had taken an
enchanted delight in picturing the types of faces, clothes, and hair he would design for his
various dolls, big and little. Dolls of the most variegated charm peopled his fancy: there
were princesses of different degrees of proximity to the throne, fisher maids and mermaids;
there were shepherds and shepherdesses, Casperls and lusty imps, dolls with heads of porcelain
and dolls with heads of wax, all so faithfully imitated that it would require anthropomorphic
skill to detect that they were not human beings. Their hair was, of course, to be human hair.
Some of them were to wear the costumes of foreign races, while others were to be dressed up
like fairy figures, sprites, and gnomes. There was to be a Haroun al Raschid and an Oriental
Dervish.

The last time he moved his choice fell on Nuremberg. He was attracted to Nuremberg because
it was the centre of the doll industry.

About this time Agnes died, and he was left alone with the three children for whom he had to
make a living. He no longer had the courage to hope for success or prosperity; even the doll
factory had become a chimera. He had but one ambition: he wished to lay aside ten thousand
marks for each of his three daughters, so that they would be provided for in any event after
his death. The boy, he thought, could take care of himself.

Up to the present, however, he had not been able to place the half of this sum in the bank.
And now, suppose he lost his position; suppose the frailties of old age prevented him from
making his own living; suppose he was obliged to draw on the savings of years for his own support.
How could he look his daughters in the face in the evening of his earthly life?

“The slag hid behind something in the cellar, and when his wife tried to bring him his pants,
she let them fall in the flour bin.” This elegant remark emanated from Bonengel the barber.

His auditors gurgled, the waitress roared.

As Jordan walked home he could hear above the wind the voice of Bonengel the barber. It sounded
like the rattling of a pair of hair-clippers.

He disliked walking up the steps to his front door; they were so narrow; they creaked as though
they were ready to fall down; and he was always afraid he would meet some blind people. An
oculist lived on the first floor, and he had often seen sightless persons feeling their way around.

A letter was lying on his table. The cover bore the address of the General Agency of the Prudentia
Insurance Co. He walked up and down a while before opening it. It was his discharge papers.

                                  XII

Friedrich Benda became more and more dejected. He saw that as a private individual he would
have to waste energy that should be going into his profession. It seemed to him that he was
condemned to bury his talent in eternal obscurity.

He broke off from the most of his acquaintances; with others he quit corresponding. If friends
spoke to him on the street, he turned his head. His sense of honour had been wounded; he was
on the point of losing his self-respect.

Daniel was the only one who failed to notice the change that was coming over him. Probably
he had accustomed himself to the belief that Benda’s life was orderly and agreeable. The plebeian
prosperity of the family in which he himself lived probably made him feel that that was the
way his friend was living. At all events he never asked any questions, and was never once struck
by the fact that Benda would sit before him for hours with his face wrapped in bitter, melancholy
gloom.

Benda smiled at Daniel’s naïveté; for he felt that his attitude was due to naïveté and nothing
more. He harboured no resentment. He decided not to say a word about his condition to Daniel,
then all taken up with himself and his music. It was, however, at times impossible for him
to prevent his smarting and his desire to put an end to his ineffectual existence from breaking
through the coating of reserve in which he had encased himself.

Late in the afternoon of a dismal day, Benda called for Daniel just as he was finishing one
of his piano lessons. The two friends decided to take a walk and then dine together at Benda’s.

In the hallway they met the Rüdiger sisters as they were returning from their daily stroll
through the garden. Benda greeted them with an antiquated politeness; Daniel just barely touched
the rim of his hat. The sisters lined up as if ready for a cotillion, and returned the greetings
with infinite grace. Fräulein Jasmina let a rose fall, and when Benda picked it up for her,
she pressed her hand against her scarcely noticeable breast and gave voice to her gratitude,
again with infinite grace.

When they reached the street, Benda said in a tone of compassion: “They are three delicate
creatures; they live their lonely lives like vestal virgins guarding a sacred fire.”

Daniel smiled. “Yes, a sacred fire? Do you refer to the incident with the painter?”

“Yes, I do; and he was no ordinary painter, either, let me tell you. I heard the whole story
the other day. The painter was Anselm Feuerbach.”

Daniel knew nothing whatever about Anselm Feuerbach. He was impressed, however, by the name,
which, by virtue of a mysterious magic, struck his ear like the chime of a noble bell. “Tell
me about him,” he said.

The story was as follows: Four years before his death, that is, six years ago, Anselm Feuerbach
came to Nuremberg for the last time to visit his mother. He was already sick in body and soul,
and was much disappointed in his alleged friends. The incessant torture resulting from lack
of appreciation had told on his health. A few of the more enlightened citizens, however, recalled
his fame, as it floated about in the heavy air of Germany, somewhat befogged and quite expatriated,
and the Chamber of Commerce placed an order with Feuerbach for a painting to be hung in the
Palace of Justice. Feuerbach accepted the order, choosing as his theme Emperor Ludwig in the
act of conferring on the citizens of Nuremberg the right to free trade. When the picture was
completed, there was a great deal of dissatisfaction with it. The merchants had expected something
totally different: they had looked for a cheap but striking canvas after the style of Kreling,
and not this dignified, classical work by Feuerbach.

Nor was this all. The hanging space was so small that several inches of the canvas had to be
run into the wall, and the light was wretched. The Chamber of Commerce proceeded at once to
make trouble with regard to the paying of Feuerbach’s bill. An ugly quarrel arose in which
Rüdiger, the geometrician, who had always been an ardent champion of Feuerbach, took the artist’s
part. It finally reached the point where Rüdiger left the city, swearing he would never return.
His daughters had all three loved Feuerbach from the time he lived in their father’s house.

“As a matter of fact, if there ever was an amiable artist,” Benda said in conclusion, “it was
Anselm Feuerbach. Would you like to see him? Come, then.”

They were near the Cemetery of St. John. The gate was open, and Daniel followed Benda. They
walked along a narrow path, until Benda pointed to a flat stone bearing the name of Albrecht
Dürer. After this they came to Feuerbach’s grave. A bronze tablet, already quite darkened with
age and weather, bore Feuerbach’s face in profile. Beneath it lay a laurel wreath, the withered
leaves of which were fluttering in the wind.

“What a life he lived!” said Benda in a low tone. “And what a death he died! The death of a
hunted dog!”

As they walked back to the city, night came on. Daniel had removed his hat, and was walking
along at Benda’s side looking straight ahead. Benda was as nervous as he had ever been in his life.

“A German life, and a German death,” he exclaimed. “He stretched out his hand to give, and
the people spat in it. He gives and gives and gives, and they take and take and take, without
gratitude, yea, rather with, scorn. The only thing they study is their consanguinity table.
They make the microscope and the catechism copulate; their philosophy and their police systems
live in mésalliance. Good demeanour they know not; of human agreements they have never heard.
They decide to do something, and they do it. That is all. There is no longer a place for me
in Germany. I am leaving.”

“You are going to leave? Where are you going?” asked Daniel, in faithful amazement. Benda bit
his lips, and was silent.

“Do you see these big white spots here? They have neither mountains nor rivers on them. Those
are places that have never been trod upon by European feet. There is where I am going.” He
smiled a gentle smile.

“Really? When?” asked Daniel, filled with dismay at the thought of losing his friend.

“I have not decided when, but it will be soon. I have work to do over there. I need air, room,
sky, the free animal and the free plant.”

Benda’s mother came in. She was rather tall, walked with the difficulties of age, had sharp
features and deep-set eyes.

She looked first at her son and then at Daniel. Then her eyes fell on the atlas and remained
fixed upon it, filled with an expression of horror and anxiety.

Daniel did not know what to say. Benda, still smiling to himself, began to talk about other things.

                                 XIII

At the death of her mother, Gertrude Jordan was nine years old. She had crept into the death
chamber and sat by the bier for three hours. Perhaps her seclusion from the world and association
with people dated from that hour. As she was leaving the death room, the clock on the wall
struck, and a cock crowed in the distance.

“Why do you tick, clock?” she asked in a loud voice, “why do you crow, cock?” And again: “Who
makes you tick, clock, who makes you crow, cock?”

She had grown up, and no one knew anything about her. It was even difficult for her own father
to approach her; how she was constituted, mentally and spiritually, he did not know. She never
associated with girls of her own age. Her dark eyes glowed with wrath when she heard the senseless,
sensuous laughter of other girls.

The first time she partook of the holy communion she swooned and had to be carried out. Jordan
then took her to Pommersfelden to his sister, the widow of the district physician Kupferschmied.
At the end of one week she returned alone, completely broken in spirit. She had seen a calf
slaughtered; the sight had made her almost insane.

From the time she was fifteen years old she had insisted on having her own bed room. When she
was sixteen she demanded that the maid be discharged; she herself did all the cooking and kept
house. As soon as she had finished her work, she would take her seat by the quilting frame.

Through her father, Benjamin Dorn had come into the family. Gertrude liked him because Eleanore
made fun of him. He did not seem to her like a man; he reminded her rather of the languishing
angels she embroidered. He brought her all his religious tracts and edifying pamphlets, but
she could not grasp the language. He took her to the Methodist revivals, but the noisy gnashing
of teeth at these meetings terrified her, and after a few times it was impossible to persuade
her to go back. He also recommended that she read the Bible, but she could find nothing in
it that brought her peace of mind. It seemed that she had a wound in her soul that would not
heal. Long after she had abandoned Benjamin Dorn and his cheap sanctimoniousness, he imagined
that she still loved him and looked up to him. She managed, however, to come into his presence
only on the rarest occasions, and then she never spoke to him.

Divine worship in the Protestant church seemed to her like a sort of bargain day on which the
people assembled to do business with Heaven instead of on work days. She missed the dignity;
the sermons left her cold; the ritual made not the slightest appeal to her.

She never heard from any one at any time a single sentence that really enlightened her or remained
fixed in her memory. It was the jejune insipidity of an entire age, the stale flatness of the
world that she felt to the very depths of her soul. If she wished to make her heart glow, if
she became unusually fearful of the empty air and the empty day, she stole secretly into the
Church of Our Lady or into St. Sebaldus, where the house of God was more solemnly decorated,
where there were more lights burning, where the prayers had a more mysterious sound, the priests
seemed to be more affected by what they were doing, and where the worshipper could sense the
awful meaning of life and death.

All external beauty, however, was repulsive to her. She hated even beautiful scenery and fair
weather, regarding them as temptations to mortal man intended to lead him into some sort of
folly. She loved nothing about herself, neither her face nor her voice. She was indeed frightened
at the sound of her own deep voice. She did not like her hair, nor had she any use for her hands.

One winter evening she took from her hand the gold ring, an heirloom from her mother, presented
to her by her father, and threw it into the creek. Then she bowed down over the ledge, and
seemed to feel as if she had relieved her soul of a great burden.

Eleanore tried time and time again to come near her sister, but each time she was thrust back.
Though Gertrude never conversed with people, every word that was said about Eleanore reached
her ears; she felt ashamed of her sister. She could not bear the looks of Eleanore, took an
intense dislike to her, and in the end was obliged to summon all her courage in order to return
her greeting. It was impossible for her, however, to reproach Eleanore; for that she did not
have sufficient command of language. In truth, her control of words was exceedingly limited.
Everything, grief as well as injustice, she was forced to stifle within her own soul. She grieved
about Eleanore, and became at the same time more and more nervous and excited. It seemed that
something about her sister was tantalising her, drawing her on, worrying her, making her lose
sleep.

Her restlessness became so great that she could no longer sit at the quilting frame; in fact,
it was no longer possible for her to do any kind of exacting work. Something drew her out of
the house, and once she was away, something forthwith drew her back home. Her heart beat violently
when she was alone, and yet, if her father or brother or Eleanore came in, she could not stand
their presence, and took refuge in her own room. If it was hot, she closed the windows; if
it was cold, she opened them and leaned out. If it was quiet, she was filled with fear; if
it was not quiet, she longed for peace. She could not say her prayers; she had none to say;
her mind and soul were muted, muffled, dumb. She felt the hours following each other in regular
order as something terrible; she wanted to skip over years, just as one might skip over pages
of a tiresome book. And when the worst came to the worst, and she did not know what on earth
to do, she ran to the Church of Our Lady, threw herself prostrate before the high altar, buried
her face, and remained perfectly motionless until her soul had found greater peace.

Something made her go to Eleanore; she did not want to do it, but she could not help it. She
was naturally vigilant, and she wished to ward off misfortune if possible. She was obsessed
with an uncanny feeling, a gruesome curiosity. She dogged her sister’s steps in secret. One
time she saw from a distance that Eleanore had started off with a man who had been waiting
for her. She could not move from the spot; Eleanore caught sight of her.

The next day Eleanore came to her voluntarily, and told her quite candidly of her relation
to Eberhard von Auffenberg. Concerning what she knew of Eberhard’s fate she said nothing; she
merely indicated that he was extremely unhappy. She told her how she had met him the previous
winter on the Dutzendteich at the ice carnival, how he ran after her, how glad she was to show
him a little friendship, and how much he needed friendship.

Gertrude was silent for a long while. Finally she said, with a voice so deep that it seemed
to have burst from being too full: “You two either must get married, or you must not see each
other any more. What you are doing is a crime.”

“A crime?” said Eleanore astonished, “how so?”

“Ask your conscience,” was the answer, spoken with eyes riveted on the ground.

“My conscience is quite clear.”

“Then you have none,” said Gertrude harshly. “You lie, and you are being lied to. You are sunk
in sin; there is no hope for you. That man’s evil looks! His ugly thoughts! And the thoughts
of the other men! They are all beyond redemption. You are spotted through and through. You
don’t know it, but I do.”

She got up, kicked the chair from her with her heels, and stared at Eleanore with her mysterious
black eyes: “Never mention this to me again,” she whispered with trembling lips, “never, never!”
With that she went out.

Eleanore felt something like actual loathing for her own sister. Filled with an indescribable
foreboding, she detected in Gertrude the adversary that fate had marked out for her.

                                  XIV

When the autumn days came on and it began to get cold, Daniel was a frequent visitor at Jordan’s.
Although he had a warm stove now of his own, he took pleasure in remembering the comfortable
corner of a year ago. He had a greater affection for things and rooms than he had for human beings.

It was rare that he came in contact with Jordan, for now that he was no longer with the Prudentia,
it was hard to locate him: he was doing odd jobs for a number of concerns, and this kept him
more or less on the go. Benno came home after office hours, only to betake himself to his room,
where he shaved and made himself as elegant-looking as possible for the social engagements
of the evening. He did not like to be alone with Gertrude, so he never came until after six
o’clock, when he knew that Eleanore would be at home. Realising that Eleanore was diligently
pursuing the study of French and English, and that her evenings were therefore of great value
to her, he begged her not to be disturbed by his visits. He said that he found nothing so agreeable
as sitting still and saying nothing. After an hour or two, however, he left, murmuring an indistinct
farewell as he did so.

At times he would bring a book with him and read. If he chanced to look up, he saw Eleanore
bending over the writing table, her hair, bathed in a flood of golden light from the lamp,
falling in fine silken threads over her temples, while her mouth was firmly closed, her lips
inclined to droop at the corners, but in a lovely fashion. Then he saw Gertrude. She did not
wear her hair loose; she put it up in a tight knot above her neck. Her dress was no longer
the Nile green; it was made of brown cloth, and on the front was a row of glistening black buttons.

At times Eleanore would make some remark to him, and he would reply. At times the remarks between
the two spun out into a verbal skirmish. Eleanore teased, and he was gruff; or he mocked, and
Eleanore delivered a curtain lecture. Gertrude would sit with an expression of helpless amazement
on her face, and look at the window. She purposely remained unoccupied; she purposely postponed
her household duties. The thought of leaving the two alone in the room was unbearable.

What Daniel did and said, how he walked or sat or stood, how he put his hands in his pockets
and smacked his lips, all this and more aroused a sense of fear and shame in her. She regarded
his candour as impudent presumption; she looked upon his capriciousness as malevolent irrationality;
his indifferent manners and his disposition to slander she felt certain were of a piece with
the scorn of the devil.

On one occasion he dropped a caustic remark about the bigots who contend that God is a moralising
censor. Having this phase of ethics under discussion, he also paid his respects to those people
who look upon every worm-eaten pastor as an archangel. Gertrude got up with a jerk, and stared
at him. He stood his ground; he merely shrugged his shoulders. Gertrude whispered: “Men without
faith are worse than contagious diseases.”

Daniel laughed. Then he became serious, and asked her what she understood by faith. He wanted
to know whether she felt that faith was a matter of lip service. She replied, with bowed head,
that she could not discuss sacred matters with a man who had renounced all religion. Daniel
told her that her remark was slanderous. He wanted to know whether she had ever taken the pains
to find out precisely how he stood in matters of religion, and if not, was this the reason
she passed such final judgment on him with such suddenness and conviction. He asked her point
blank whether she was quite certain that her so-called faith was better than his so-called
unfaith. Not content with this, he asked where she got her authority, her courage, her feeling
of security; whether she felt she had evidence to prove that she had carefully examined his
soul; and whether she had at any time interviewed God.

He laughed again, whistled, and left.

Gertrude remained motionless for a while, her eyes fixed on the floor. Eleanore supported her
chin on her hand, and looked at her compassionately. Gertrude began to tremble in her whole
body, and, without raising her head, she stretched out her arms to Eleanore. Though quite unable
to interpret this accusing gesture, Eleanore was terrified.

The next time Daniel came, he resumed his seat by the stove, and remained silent for a while.
Then, without the slightest warning or apparent motivation, he began to discuss religion. And
how? With the old spirit of defiance, as if from an ambuscade from which he could send out
his poisoned arrows, with calculating maliciousness and cold rebellion, with the air of a man
who has been defeated, who is now being pursued, and who is willing to concede more to the
earthly order of things than to the divine. Thus he sat, the incarnation of blasphemy, and
once more shuffled the features of his face until he looked like the sedulous ape.

Eleanore felt that he was denying both himself and God, and that with violence. She went over
to him, and laid her hand on his shoulder. Gertrude, a death-like pallor playing over her face,
got up, passed by her and Daniel, and did not appear again that evening. Nor did she appear
the following evening. From that time on she avoided his presence.

For one remarkable second and no longer, Daniel fixed his eyes on the shape of Gertrude’s legs.
He became suddenly conscious of the fact that she was a woman and he was a man. During this
second, one of the rarest of his life, he perceived the outer surface of her body, but without
the enveloping clothes. He thought of her as a nude figure. It lasted only a second, but he
pictured her to himself as a nude. Everything she had said and done fell from her like so much
clothing.

He had a feeling that his eyes had been opened; that he had really seen for the first time
in his life; and that what he now saw was the body of the world.

The nude picture followed him. He fought against his disquietude. Nothing like this had ever
happened to him before. He conjured up the picture in order to destroy it with coolness and
composure; but it would not be destroyed, nor would it vanish. One day he chanced to meet Gertrude
by the beautiful fountain. He stopped, stood as if petrified, and forgot to speak to her.

                                  XV

It was a cold, clear day in the middle of December. Eleanore wanted to go skating after dinner.
She was known in the entire city for her skill on the ice. An irrepressible vivacity and sense
of freedom pulsed through her body. It seemed to her lamentable that she should have to sit
down in the overheated, sticky air of the office among all those clerks, and write.

She went, nevertheless, to the office, took her place among the clerks, and wrote as usual.
Herr Zittel’s eyes shone through the lenses of his spectacles like two poison flasks. But she
did not make much progress; time dragged; it dragged even more heavily and slowly than Herr
Diruf’s feet, as he made his rounds through the room. Eleanore looked up. She felt as if his
gloomy eyes were resting on her. Conscious of having failed to perform her duty as she might
have done, she blushed.

Finally the clock struck six. The other clerks left, making much noise as they did so. Eleanore
waited as usual until they had all gone, for she did not like to mix with them. Just then Benjamin
Dorn came wabbling in: “The Chief would like to speak to Fräulein Jordan,” he said, and bent
his long neck like a swan. Eleanore was surprised: what on earth could Herr Diruf want with
her? Possibly it had to do with Benno.

Alfons Diruf was sitting at his desk as she entered. He wrote one more line, and then stared
at her. There was something in his expression that drove the blood from her cheeks. Involuntarily
she looked down at herself and felt her flesh creep.

“You wanted to see me,” she said.

“Yes, I wanted to see you,” he replied, and made a weary attempt to smile.

There was another pause. In her anxiety Eleanore looked first at one object in the room and
then at another; first at the bathing nymph, then at the silk curtains, then at the Chinese
lampshade.

“Well, sweetheart,” said Herr Diruf, his smile gradually changing into a sort of convulsion,
“we are not bad, are we? By the beard of the prophet, we are all right, aren’t we? Hunh?”

Eleanore lowered her head. She thought she had misunderstood him: “You wanted to see me,” she
said in a loud voice.

Diruf laid his hand, palm down, on the edge of his desk. His solitaire threw off actual sparks
of brilliancy. “I can crush every one of you,” he said, as he shoved his hand along the edge
of the desk toward Eleanore. “That boy out there, your brother, is an underhanded sharper.
If I want to I can make him turn a somersault, believe me.” He shoved his fat hand a little
farther along, as if it were some dangerous engine and his solitaire a signal lamp. “I can
make the whole pack of you dance whenever I want to. Can’t I, sweetheart? Capito? Comprenez-vous?”

Eleanore looked into Alfons Diruf’s smeary eyes with unspeakable amazement.

Diruf got up, walked over to her, and put his arms around her shoulders. “Well, if the boy
is a sweet-toothed tom-cat who can easily be led astray, you are a purring pussy-cat,” he said
with a tone of terrible tenderness, and held the girl so tight in his arms that she could not
possibly move. “Now be quiet, sweetheart; be calm, my little bosom; don’t worry, you little devil!”

Horror, hot and cold, came over her, and filled her with unnamable dismay. Contact with the
man had a more gruesome effect on her than anything she had ever even dreamed of. One jerk
as though it were a matter of life and death, and she was free. White as a sheet, she nevertheless
stood there before him, and smiled. It was a rare smile, something quite beyond the bounds
of what is ordinarily called a smile. Alfons Diruf was no longer fat and fierce; he was like
a pricked bubble; he was done for. And finding himself alone, he stood there for a while and
gaped at the floor. He looked and felt hopelessly stupid.

Eleanore hastened through the streets, and suddenly discovered that she was in the Long Row.
She turned around. Benda, then on the way over to call on Daniel, caught sight of her, recognised
her by the light of the gas lamp, stopped as she passed by him, and looked after her not a
little concerned.

When she reached home, she sank down on the sofa exhausted. To rid her mind of the memory of
the past hour, she took refuge in her longing, longing for a southern country. Her longing
was so intense, her desire to go south so fervent, that her face shone as if in fever. But
the glass case had at last been broken.

The bell rang shortly before eight; she said to Gertrude: “If it is Daniel, send him away.
I cannot see any one this evening.”

“Are you ill?” asked Gertrude with characteristic sternness.

“I don’t know; I simply do not want to see anybody,” said Eleanore, and smiled again as she
had smiled in Diruf’s office.

It was Daniel, to be sure. Benda had told him that he had seen Eleanore out in front of the
house; and when he learned that she had not been to call on Daniel, his anxiety increased.
“There is something wrong here,” he said, “you had better go see her.” After they had talked
the situation over for a while Benda accompanied Daniel as far as Ægydius Place, in order to
make sure that he inquired after Eleanore.

Gertrude opened the iron door. “Eleanore does not want you to come in,” she said, with a trace
of joy in her eyes.

“Why not? What has happened?”

“She does not wish to see you,” said the monosyllabic Gertrude, and gazed into the light of
the hall lamp.

“Is she ill?”

“No!”

“Then she has got to tell me herself that she does not wish to see me.”

“Go!” commanded Gertrude and tossed her head back.

Her gloomy eyes hung on his, and the two stood there for a moment opposite each other, like
two racers who have come in at the same goal at the same time but from opposite directions.
Daniel then turned around, and went down the steps in silence. Gertrude remained standing for
a time, her head sinking deeper and deeper all the while on her breast. Suddenly she covered
her face with her hands; a cold shudder ran through her body.

                                  XVI

Before going to bed, Eleanore wrote a letter to Herr Zittel informing him that she was leaving
the Prudentia at once.

Lying in bed, she could not sleep. She saw herself on the ice cutting bold and novel figures.
The spectators, grouped about her in a wide circle, admired her skill. She saw the sea with
fishing smacks and coloured sails. She saw gardens full of roses.

Her father and Benno had come home long ago. She heard the bell up in the nearby church tower
strike twelve—and then one—and then two.

She heard some one walking back and forth in the house; she heard some one opening and closing
a door. Then the steps died away, and all was quiet. She got up, went to the door, and listened.
A deep sigh reached her ear from the next room. She opened the door just a little, without
making the slightest noise, and peeped out through the crack.

Gertrude was standing by the open window; she was in her night-gown and bare feet. The moon
was shining on the square in front of the house; the glitter of the snow on the roofs made
it seem quite cold. The spooky illumination made the girl’s face look spooky. Her loose flowing
hair looked as black as ebony.

Eleanore ran into the room, and closed the window. “What on earth are you doing, Gertrude?”
she exclaimed; “are you getting ready to take your life?”

Gertrude’s slender body shivered in the cold; her toes were all bent in as if she were having
a convulsion. “Yes,” she said with marked moroseness, “that is what I would like to do.”

“That’s what you would like to do?” replied Eleanore, also trembling with cold. “And your father?
Haven’t you the slightest consideration for him? Do you want to give him more worry than he
already has? What is the matter with you, you crazy girl?”

“I am a sinner, Eleanore,” cried Gertrude, fell on her knees, and clasped Eleanore about the
hips. “I am a sinner.”

“Yes? A sinner? What sin, pray, have you committed?” asked Eleanore, and bent down over her.

“Why am I in that house there, in that prison?” cried Gertrude, and clasped her hands to her
breast. “Evil has come over me, evil has taken possession of me. I have evil thoughts. Look
at me, Eleanore, look at me!”

Her voice had now mounted to the pitch of a piercing shriek. Eleanore stepped back from her,
terror-stricken. Gertrude fell head first on the floor. Her hair covered her bent and twitching
back.

The door leading to Jordan’s room opened, and he himself came in carrying a lighted candle.
In default of pajamas, he had thrown a chequered shawl around his shoulders, the fringes of
which were dangling about his knees. He had a white-peaked night-cap on his head.

Quite beside himself, he looked at the two girls and wanted to say something; but he was speechless.
When much worried he would always smirk. It was a disagreeable habit. In Eleanore it always
aroused a feeling of intense compassion. “There is nothing wrong, father,” she stammered, and
made an awkward gesture which indicated to him that it would be most agreeable to her if he
would go away. “Gertrude has pains in her stomach; she tried to go to the medicine chest to
get a few drops. Please go, father; I’ll put her to bed.”

“I will go to the doctor, or I will call Benno and have him go,” said Jordan.

“No, father, it is not necessary. Please go away!”

He appreciated Eleanore’s impatience and obediently withdrew, shielding the light of the candle
with his hand; his gigantic shadow followed along behind him like some unclassified animal.

“Get up, Gertrude, get up and come with me!” said Eleanore.

Gertrude was taken back to her room. After she had been in bed for a few minutes, there was
a knock at the door. It was Jordan; he asked how she felt. Eleanore told him everything was
all right.

Until the moon had disappeared below the church roof, Eleanore sat on Gertrude’s bed, and held
her mute hand in her own. Though she had thrown a cloak about her shoulders, she was cold.
Gertrude lay with open, lifeless eyes. Every movement of Eleanore’s face revealed the changing
moods of her soul: she was thinking over an unending series of grave thoughts. When it became
quite dark, Gertrude turned her face to Eleanore, and said softly: “Please get in bed with
me, Eleanore. If I see you sleeping, possibly I can sleep too.”

Eleanore laid the cloak to one side, and slipped in under the covers. The two girls cuddled
up to each other, and in a few minutes both were sound asleep.

              VOICES FROM WITHOUT AND VOICES FROM WITHIN

                                   I

Daniel gradually gained followers. Those whom the “little slave” won over to his cause were
hardly to be called patrons: they were patriots. They were delighted at the thought that a
maestro should have been born and risen to fame in soulful old Franconia. In the actual life
of their protégé they took but little interest.

Daniel’s followers were young people.

Professor Herold was a strange man. His reputation reached far beyond the boundaries of his
native province, and yet, owing to his whimsical peculiarities, he had not the slightest desire
to leave home. On such sons and daughters of the natives as were diligent in their pursuit
of musical studies, he poured out the whole of his sarcasm. His chief, his darling ambition
was to wean them away from their fondness for worthless music and clap-trap performances of
it. He did not succeed: you were not considered educated unless you could play the piano, and
in the homes of these merchants education was highly regarded.

Enticed by his name, all kinds of people came from a distance to take lessons from Professor
Herold. Having read the score of “Vineta,” he said to two of these: “Fetch me that fellow dead
or alive.” And they fetched him.

The two came more frequently to Daniel, and then others, pupils of Professors Wackerbarth and
Döderlein. At times he would take luncheon with them in the students’ restaurant. We will call
them the long-haired, or the pale-faced. Many of them looked like snake-charmers. They were
almost without exception hopelessly stupid, but they all had some kind of a bee in their bonnet.

There were some young girls among them; we will call them the dreamy-eyed, or the lost-in-dreams.
Daniel had no use for them whatsoever. His patience with the long-haired was equally lacking.

He told “the old man,” as Professor Herold was called, of his antipathy to these students.
Professor Herold snapped like a vicious dog, brushed the white bristles back over his enormous
head, and said: “Well, my young original, you have made a discovery. Don’t you know that music
cajoles into its magic circle the very riff-raff of any community? Don’t you know that music
is a subterfuge for the neglect of human duty? Don’t you know that the voluptuous fumes it
spreads over the cities results in the general corrosion and consumption of men’s hearts? Don’t
you know that of every five hundred so-called artists, four hundred and ninety-nine are nothing
but the cripple guard of God above? Therefore he who does not come to music with the holiest
fire burning in the depths of his soul has his blood in time transformed by it into glue, his
mind into a heap of rubbish.”

Whereat he pushed Daniel out of the door, so that he might work undisturbed on his little pictures.
Of these the walls of his room were full. He painted them in his leisure hours. They were small
in size, and smaller still in merit; but he was proud of them. They represented scenes from
country life.

                                  II

On New Year’s Eve, Dörmaul, the impresario, gave a dinner in the Little Swan, to which he invited
Daniel. Dörmaul was quite well disposed toward Daniel. He said he had recognised the young
man’s talents at the sight of his very first note. He promised to publish “Vineta” and also
the work Daniel had finished in the meantime, entitled “Nuremberg Serenade.” He also seemed
inclined to consider favourably Daniel’s appointment in his newly founded opera company.

Among those present at the dinner were Professors Herold and Wackerbarth, Wurzelmann, a few
of the long-haired and a few of the lost-in-dreams. Andreas Döderlein had promised to come
in later. He appeared, as a matter of fact, five minutes before midnight, and stood in the
wide-opened door as ceremonious as the New Year itself.

He went up to Daniel, and extended him his right hand.

“Look who’s here! Our Benjamin and our John, not to mention our Daniel,” he said, glancing
at the last of the trio. “Congratulations, my young star! What do the annals from Andreas Döderlein’s
nose for news have to report? Back in Bayreuth, when we used to draw our wine by the flask,
he merely had to sniffle around a bit to know just how things were. Isn’t that true, Benjamin?”

Nobody denied it. Benjamin let right yield to mercy. The mighty man removed his storm-cape
from his shoulders as though it were ermine he were doffing before condescending to associate
with ordinary mortals.

Professor Wackerbarth had a wife who beat him and gave him nothing to eat: he regarded this
as a rare opportunity to eat his fill and have a good time generally. But it was a poor sort
of a good time.

One of the long-haired sang the champagne song, and Wurzelmann made a witty speech. Döderlein
suggested that now was the time to let the mice dance and the fleas hop. When one of the lost-in-dreams
sang David’s March, which according to the rules of Bayreuth could not be classed as real music,
Döderlein exclaimed: “Give me Lethe, my fair one.” By “Lethe” he meant punch.

Daniel drank Lethe too. He embraced old Herold, shook hands with Andreas Döderlein, and tried
to waltz with Wurzelmann. He was not drunk; he was merely happy.

Then it became too close for him in the room. He took his hat, put on his overcoat, and hurried
out.

The air was warm, mild. A south wind was blowing. Heaven above, heaven below, the houses were
standing on clouds. One breath made him thirsty for the next one. There was a bay-window; it
was so beautiful that he felt like kneeling before it. There was a fountain; it was so snug
and exotic that it seemed like a poem. There were the arches of the bridge; in them was the
dim reflection of the water. There were two towers; they were as delicate as a spider’s web.

He rejoiced and exclaimed: “Oh world, art thou real? Art thou my world, and am I living in
thee? My world, my year, my time, and I in it all, I myself!”

                                  III

He stood on Ægydius Place, and looked up at the windows in Jordan’s house. They were all dark.

He wanted to call out, but the name that was on his lips filled him with anxiety. The passionate
flutter of his heart almost tore his breast asunder.

He had to do something; he had to speak; he had to ask questions and hear a human voice. Consequently,
he hurried out to the Füll, stood under Benda’s window, and called Benda’s name. The clocks
struck three.

The blinds were soon drawn to one side, and Benda’s stoutish figure appeared at the open window.
“Daniel? Is it you? What’s up?”

“Nothing. I merely wanted to bring you New Year’s greetings.”

“Do you think you are bringing me something good? Go home and go to bed.”

“Ah, let me come in a little while, Friedrich. Let’s chat for a moment or two about happiness!”

“Be reasonable! We might frighten happiness away by our talk.”

“Philistine! Well, give me your blessing at least.”

“You have it. Now go, night owl, and let the people sleep.”

Another window opened on the ground floor. Herr Carovius’s desolate nocturnal physiognomy appeared
at the window, looked up, looked down on the disturber of the peace on the street, and with
one mighty grim, grinning sound on his lips, his revengeful fist swinging in the meanwhile,
the indignant man closed the window with a bang.

Something impelled Daniel to return to Ægydius Place. Again he looked up at the windows, this
time beseechingly. The storm within his heart became more violent. For a long time he ran through
the streets, and reached home at last along toward five o’clock.

As he passed through the dark hall, he saw a light up on the landing. Meta was carrying it.
She was already stirring about, ready to begin her morning’s work. He hesitated; he looked
at her; with three steps he was by her side.

“So late?” she whispered with premonitory embarrassment, and began to finger her dress, which
she had not yet buttoned up.

“Oh, what a joy to take hold of a living human being on this glorious day!” he exclaimed.

She offered some resistance, but when he tried to take her into her room, she bent her body
backward, and thus pressed about his wrist. She was still carrying the light.

“Oh, if you only knew how I feel, Meta. I need you. Hold me tight in your arms.”

She made no more resistance. Perhaps she too was not without her fervent desire. Perhaps it
was the time of day that made nature more insistent than usual. Perhaps she was suffering from
loneliness in the company of the three sisters. It was still night and dark; but for her it
was already day; it was the first day in the year, and she greeted it in festive mood. She
yielded to him.

She was a virgin; she had no idea of the responsibility she was taking upon herself. Man had
never been exactly a mystery to her, but now she felt for the first time the congenerous creature—and
she gave in to him.

Daniel returned to earth after having knocked at the portals of the gods with tremendous wishes.
The gods smiled their profoundest smile; for they had decided to have an especial fate arise
from this hour.

                                  IV

A meeting of the Social Democrats was being held in Gosten Court. They had met to discuss the
Chancellor’s speech on accident insurance.

The first speaker was Deputy Störbecker. But his voice had no carrying power, and what he said
died away almost unheard.

Jason Philip Schimmelweis followed him. He presented a fearful indictment of the government.
The official representative of the government advised him to be more reserved, whereupon he
reinvigorated himself with a draught of beer. Then he hurled the full beaker of that wrathful
scorn for which his heart, beating for the people, was noted, at the head of the individual
who was first and foremost responsible for the affairs of the Empire. He did not mention Bismarck
by name; he spoke instead of a certain bogey. He snatched the halo from his head, swore that
he would some day unmask him and show the people that he was a traitor, branded his fame as
a tissue of lies, his deeds as the disgrace of the century.

The venomous and eloquent hatred of the pudgy little man inflamed the minds that drank in his
oratory. Jason Philip was greeted with a tumult of applause as he took his seat. His face was
a bright scarlet red.

The leaders of the party, however, were noticeably quiet. In a moment or two, Deputy Störbecker
returned with two comrades eager to enter into a debate with Jason Philip. He followed them
into a side room. Exalted at the thought that they had been delegated to express to him the
gratitude of the party for his speech, he smiled the smile of vanity and caressed his beard
with his fingers.

“What is the matter, gentlemen? Why are you so serious? Did I go too far? I assume complete
responsibility for everything I said. But be calm! They are getting afraid of us. The air has
a dubious odour. The French are becoming cantankerous again.”

“No, Comrade Schimmelweis, that is not it. You have got to vindicate yourself. You are a Proteus,
Comrade Schimmelweis. Your right hand does not know what your left hand is doing. You are treating
us disgracefully. You are ploughing in the widow’s garden. You preach water and guzzle wine.
You have entered into a conspiracy with the grafters of the town. You are in collusion with
the people down at the Prudentia, and you are filling your own coffers in this gigantic swindle.
From morning to night you enrich yourself with the hard-earned pennies of the poor. That is
sharp practice, Jason Philip Schimmelweis, sharp practice, we say. Now you have got to sever
all connection with the Prudentia, or the Party is going to kick you out.”

Then it was that Jason Philip Schimmelweis rose to his true heights of eloquence. He insisted
that his hands were clean, his left one and also his right one; that he was working in the
interest of a good cause; and that threats could not intimidate him. He made it plain that
he would bow to no dictatorship operating under the mask of equality and fraternity. He cried
out that if the people wanted a scandal they could have it, but they would find him armed to
the teeth. And he assured them that wherever he went in this wide, wide world, he would find
the doors open to welcome him.

He then made a sudden about-face, and left his comrades standing. On the way home he continued
to murmur murmurs of embitterment to himself.

Like a seasoned sailor eager to escape the storms of a raging sea, he steered his good ship
toward other and more hospitable shores. Three days later he went to Baron Siegmund von Auffenberg,
the leader of the Liberals, and offered him his services. He told him that he was willing to
make any sacrifice for the great Liberal Party.

                                   V

For thirty-five minutes, by his own watch, he cooled his heels in the ante-chamber. He made
one caustic remark after another touching on the arrested development of the feeling of equality
among the rich. Genuine rebel that he was, he did not repudiate himself even when he was practising
high treason.

When he was finally taken into the office, he was not blinded in the slightest by the luxuriousness
of the furniture, the rugs, or the oil paintings. He displayed not the remotest shimmer of
servility on meeting the illustrious Baron. He sat down on one of the chairs with complete
equanimity, took no notice of the French-speaking parrot, and never cast a single glance at
the breakfast table covered with appetising tid-bits. But he did present his case with all
due straightforwardness and simplicity.

“Fine,” said the Baron, “fine! I hardly believe that you will find it necessary to make a radical
change in your battlefront. A conscienceless agitator you have never been. You have a family,
a home of your own; your affairs are in good condition; and in the bottom of your heart you
love order and discipline. I have in truth been expecting you for a long while. Nor am I exaggerating
when I confess to you that you had to bolt, sooner or later.”

Jason Philip blushed with satisfaction. With the bearing of a cabman who has just pocketed
his tip, he replied: “I thank you very much, Baron.”

“On one point we are wholly agreed,” said the Baron, “and it seems to me to be the most important—”

“Quite right,” interrupted Jason Philip, “you allude to the fight against Bismarck. Yes, on
this point we are, I hope, of precisely the same opinion. I will do my part. Hand and heart
on it, Baron. I could look with perfectly cold blood on this knight of obscurantism writhing
on the rack.”

Herr von Auffenberg heard this temperamental statement with noticeably tenuous reassurance.
He smiled just a little, and then said: “Wait a minute, my friend, don’t be quite so savage.”
He reached for his smelling salts, held them to his nose, and closed his eyes. Then he got
up, folded his hands across his back, and walked up and down the room a few times.

What he said after this was as familiar to him as the letters of the alphabet. While Jason
Philip gaped at his lips in dumb inspiration, the Baron himself thought of things that had
not the remotest connection with what he said.

“The very same man who tried to make the new Empire inhabitable, with the aid of a liberal
code of laws, and who brought the long-drawn-out quarrel between the Emperor and the Pope to
a happy conclusion, is now trying, by word, thought, and deed, gradually to destroy all liberal
traditions and to proclaim the Roman High Priest as the real creator of peace. All that the
German Chancellor could do to give the final blow to liberalism he has done. The reaction has
not hesitated to abandon the idea of the Kulturkampf and to work instead in the interests of
class hatred and racial prejudice, nurturing them even with deeds of violence. Faced with the
crimes they themselves have committed, they will see their own children despised and rejected.”

“Dépêche-toi, mon bon garçon,” screeched the parrot.

“I am happy at the thought of having snatched a precious booty from the claws of anarchy, and
of having won a new citizen for the State, my dear Herr Schimmelweis. But for the time being
it will be advisable for you to keep somewhat in the background. They will be inclined to make
your change of political conviction the subject of vociferous attacks, and that might injure
the cause.”

                                  VI

What was the old Baron really thinking about while he delivered this political speech?

There was just one thought in his mind; the same sullen, concealed anger gnawed incessantly
at his heart.

He thought incessantly of his son, of the contempt which he had experienced because of him,
and was still experiencing daily, even hourly, because of the fact that Eberhard had withdrawn
from his power, had repudiated him.

He could not get over the fact that he had heaped up millions, and that Eberhard, so far as
it was humanly possible to calculate—and in accordance with the law—would some day fall heir
to a part of these millions. He knew very little about poverty; but his poisoned mind could
think of nothing else than the satisfaction he would derive from being able, somehow, to deliver
this abortive scion of his own name and blood over to poverty. Thus did he wish to take vengeance;
thus would he punish.

But it was impossible for him to wreak vengeance on his son as he would have liked to: between
the execution of the punishment and himself stood the law. The very thought that his riches
were increasing daily, hourly, that the millions he had were creating new millions without
his moving a finger, that he could not even stop the flood if he wished to, and that consequently
the share of this disloyal, rebellious, and hateful son was becoming larger daily, even hourly—this
thought he could not endure. It poisoned his peace of mind, paralysed his powers, robbed him
of all natural and legitimate joy, and enveloped his days in a cloud of despair.

A modern Midas, he transformed everything he touched into gold; and the more gold he had the
sadder his life became, the more revengeful his soul.

The tones of a piano reached his ear; it was his wife who was playing. She played Mendelssohn’s
“Song Without Words.” He shook with disgust; for of all things repulsive, music was to him
the most repulsive.

“Dépêche-toi, mon bon garçon,” screeched the parrot.

                                  VII

During Jason Philip’s absence, poorly dressed people frequently came to the shop and demanded
that Theresa give them back the money they had paid in on their insurance.

Some of them became very much excited when Theresa told them that she would do nothing of the
kind, that the insurance was the affair of her husband, and that she had nothing whatever to
do with it. A locksmith’s apprentice had given a sound thrashing to Zwanziger, the clerk, who
had hastened up to protect the wife of his employer. A gold-beater from Fürth had created so
much excitement that the police had to be called in. A cooper’s widow, who had managed to pay
her premiums for one year, but had been unable to continue the payment for the quite sufficient
reason that she had been in the hospital, fell headlong to the floor in epileptic convulsions
when she heard how matters stood.

It finally reached the point where Theresa was frightened every time she saw a strange face.
She breathed more easily when a day had passed without some disagreeable scene, but trembled
at the thought of what might happen on the day to come.

What disturbed her more than anything else was the inexplicable disappearance of small sums
of money; this had been going on for some time. A man came into the office once and laid his
monthly premium, one taler in all, on the counter. When he left, Theresa closed the door behind
him in order that she might be able to watch the snow storm from the window. When she returned
to the desk the taler had disappeared. She asked where it was. Jason Philip, who was just then
handing some books up the ladder to Zwanziger, became so gruff that one might have thought
she had accused him of the theft. She counted the money over in the till, but in vain; the
taler had vanished.

She had forgotten, or had not noticed, that Philippina had been in the office. She had brought
her father his evening sandwiches, and then gone out again without making the slightest noise;
she wore felt shoes.

On another occasion she missed a number of groschen from her purse. On still another, a spice
merchant came in and demanded that she pay a bill of three marks. She was certain she had already
paid it; she was certain she had given Philippina the money to pay it. Philippina was called
in. She, however, denied having anything to do with it, and acted with such self-assurance
that Theresa, completely puzzled, reached down in her pocket and handed over the three marks
in perfect silence.

She had suspected the maid, she had suspected the clerk. She even suspected Jason Philip himself;
she thought that he was appropriating money to pay his drinking expenses. And she suspected
Philippina. But in no case could she produce the evidence; her spying and investigating were
in vain. Then the thieving stopped again.

For Philippina, who had been doing all the stealing, feared she might be discovered, and adopted
a less hazardous method of making herself a rich woman: she stole books, and sold them to the
second-hand dealer. She was sly enough to take books that had been on the shelves for a long
while, and not to do all her business with one dealer: she would go first to one and then to
another.

The money which she scraped together in this way, as secretly and greedily as a jack-daw, she
hid in the attic. There was a loose brick in the wall near the chimney. This she removed; and
in time she removed other bricks. And once her treasures were safely stored in the hole, she
would replace the bricks and set a board up against them.

When everything had become perfectly quiet and she felt wholly at ease, she would sit down,
fold her hands, and give herself up to speechless meditation, an evil and fanatic dream playing
over her features as she did.

                                 VIII

One evening in February, Theresa and Philippina chanced to be sitting by the lamp mending the
week’s wash. Jason Philip entered the room; there was a sheepish expression on his face; he
rubbed his hands.

Since Theresa did not consider it worth her trouble to ask him why he was in such a good humour,
he suddenly laughed out loud and said: “Now we can pack up, my dear. I see it in writing: The
wonder of the age, or the humiliated relatives. A touching tableau presented by Herr Daniel
Nothafft of the Schimmelweis family.”

“I do not understand you; you are talking like a harlequin again,” said Theresa.

“Compositions by Daniel are going to be played in a public concert,” Philippina informed her
mother with that old, harsh voice of hers.

“How do you know?” asked Theresa, in a tone of evident distrust.

“I read it in the paper.”

“The miracle is to take place in the Harmony Society,” said Jason Philip, by way of confirming
Philippina’s remark, with an expression of enigmatic malevolence. “There is to be a public
rehearsal on Thursday, and there is nothing on earth that can keep me away. The music dealer,
Zierfuss, has given me two tickets, and if you want to, why, you can come along and see how
they make a local hero out of a plain loafer.”

“I?” responded Theresa, in a tone of contemptuous amazement, “not one step will I take. What
have I got to do with your imbecile concerts?”

“But these gentlemen are going to be disillusioned, terribly so,” continued Jason Philip in
a threatening tone. “There is still a certain amount of common sense left, just as there are
means of proceeding against a common, ordinary swindler.”

Philippina raised her head in the mood of a person who has come to a sudden decision: “C’n
I go ’long, Pop?” she asked, her ears as red as fire.

It was more than a request. Jason Philip was startled at the intractable expression on the
girl’s face. “Sure,” he said, avoiding as well as he could the mute opposition on the part
of Theresa, “but take a whistle along so that you can make cat calls.”

He sank back with a comfortable sigh on his chair, and stretched out his legs. Philippina knelt
down and took off his boots. He then put on his slippers. Each of them bore a motto embroidered
in red. On the left one were the words “For tired father”; on the right one, “Consolation.”

                                  IX

Eleanore had not told her father why she had left her position with Alfons Diruf. Nor did Jordan
ask her why when he learned that she did not wish to speak about it. He suspected that there
was some disagreeable incident back of it, and if he maintained a strict silence it was because
he feared his own wrath and grief.

She soon found another position. A schoolmate and good friend of hers, Martha Degen, the daughter
of the pastry-baker, had married Herr Rübsam, a notary public and an old man to boot. Eleanore
visited the Rübsams occasionally, as did also her father; and in the course of conversation
it came out that Herr Rübsam needed an assistant copyist. Since it was then impossible to give
Eleanore a desk in the office, she was allowed to do all her work at home.

Friedrich Benda had also given her a cordial letter of recommendation to Herr Bock, Counsellor
of Archives, who was just then engaged in writing a voluminous work on the history of Nuremberg.
It would be her task to arrange Herr Bock’s muddled manuscript.

It was a laborious undertaking, but she learned a great deal from it. Her thirsty mind would
draw nourishment even from dry and lifeless subjects.

She was seized with a desire to fill up the gaps in her education. She begged Benda first for
this book and then for that one. And after having written the whole day long, she would often
sit down and read until late at night.

Everything she came in contact with she either assimilated or shook off: she dragged nothing
along in the form of surface impedimenta; it became a part of her being, or she threw it to
one side.

Daniel had not called for a long while. He was busy with the rehearsals which Wurzelmann was
conducting. Professor Döderlein was not to take charge of the orchestra until it had been thoroughly
drilled. The programme was to consist of Daniel’s works and the “Leonore Overture.” Wurzelmann
referred to the Beethoven number as “a good third horse in the team.”

Daniel also had a lot of business to transact with the impresario Dörmaul: the company was
to go on the road in March, and many things had to be attended to. The contract he signed was
for three years at a salary of six hundred marks a year.

A few days before the public rehearsal he came to Jordan’s with three tickets: one for Jordan
himself and the other two for the sisters. The public rehearsal was quite like a regular concert;
over a hundred persons had been invited.

Jordan was just getting ready to go out. “That is fine, that is great: I can hear some more
music now. I am looking forward to the concert with extreme pleasure. When I was a young fellow
I rarely missed a concert. But that was long ago; indeed, when I think it over I see how old
I am. The years pass by like milestones on the highway of life. Well, Daniel, I thank you,
thank you very much!”

Eleanore’s joy was also great. As soon as her father had gone, she remarked that Daniel had
looked for Gertrude; but she had left the room as soon as she saw him coming. Eleanore opened
the door, and cried: “Gertrude, come in, right away! I have a surprise for you.”

After a while Gertrude came in.

“A ticket for you to Daniel’s concert,” said Eleanore, radiant with joy, and handed her the
green card of admission.

Gertrude looked at Eleanore; and she wanted to look at Daniel. But her heavy glance, slowly
rising from the floor, barely reached his face before it returned to its downward position,
aggrieved and pained. Then she shook her head, and said: “A ticket for the concert? For me?
Are you serious, Eleanore?” Again she shook her head, amazed and indignant. Whereupon she went
to the window, leaned her arm against the cross bars, and pressed her head against her arm.

Daniel followed her with looks of glowing anger. “You can take sheep to the slaughter,” he
said, “you can throw thieves in a dungeon, you can transport lepers to a hospital for incurables,
but you cannot force an emotional girl to listen to music.”

He became silent; a pause ensued. Tortured at the thought that Daniel’s eyes were riveted on
her back, Gertrude turned around, went to the stove, sat down, and pressed her cheek against
the Dutch tiles.

Daniel took two steps, stood by her side, and exclaimed: “But suppose I request that you go?
Suppose my peace of mind or something else of importance to the world, consolation, liberation,
or improvement, depends on your going? Suppose I request that you go for one of these reasons?
What then?”

Gertrude had become as pale as death. She looked at him for a moment, then turned her face
to one side, drew up her shoulders as if she were shivering with cold, and said: “Well—then—then—I’ll
go. But I will be sorry for it ... sorry for it.”

Eleanore was a witness to this scene. Her eyes, wide open when it began, grew larger and larger
as it advanced through its successive stages. As she looked at Daniel a kindly, languishing
moisture came to them, and she smiled.

Daniel, however, had become vexed. He mumbled a good-bye and left. Eleanore went to the window
and watched him as he ran across the square, holding his hat with both hands as a shield against
the driving wind.

“He is an amusing fellow,” she said, “an amusing fellow.”

She then lifted her eyes to the clouds, whose swift flight above the church roof pleased her.

                                   X

It was the original intention to begin the regular evening concert with the third “Fidelio
Overture.” Döderlein was of the opinion that it offered no special difficulties: the general
rehearsal was to be devoted primarily to the works of the novice. He raised his baton, and
silence filled the auditorium.

The “Nuremberg Serenade” opened with ensemble playing of the wind instruments. It was a jovial,
virile theme which the violins took up after the wind instruments, plucked it to pieces in
their capricious way, and gradually led it over into the realm of dreams. The night became
living: a gentle summer wind blew, glow worms flitted about, Gothic towers stood out in the
sultry darkness, plebeian figures crept into the narrow, angular alleys; it was night in Nuremberg.
The acclamation a glorious past with an admonition to the future fell upon the smug complacency
of the present, the heroic mingled with the jocose, the fantastic with the burlesque, romanticism
found its counterpart, and all this was achieved through a flood of genuine melody in which
stodginess played no part, while charm was abundant in every turn and tune.

The professional musicians were astonished; and their astonishment was vigorously expressed
in their criticisms. The general admiration, to be sure, was somewhat deafened by the unpleasant
end that the rehearsal was destined to come to; but one critic, who enjoyed complete independence
of soul, though an unfortunate incident in his life had compelled him to relinquish his influential
circle in the city and retire to a limited sphere of activity in the province, wrote: “This
artist has the unquestioned ability to become the light and leader of his generation. Nature
created him, his star developed him. May Heaven give him the power and patience indispensable
to the artist, if he would be born again and become a man above the gifts of men. If he only
does not reach out too soon for the ripe fruits, and, intoxicated by the allurements of the
lower passions, fail to hear the voice of his heart! He has taken a lofty flight; the azure
gates of renown have swung wide open to him. Let him only be cautious about his second descent
into the night.”

The same connoisseur found the composition of “Vineta” less ingenious, and its instrumentation
suffering from the lean experience of a beginner. Yet even this work was strongly applauded.
The impresario Dörmaul clapped his hands until the perspiration poured from his face. Wurzelmann
was beside himself with enthusiasm. Old Herold smiled all over his face. The long-haired found
it of course quite difficult to subdue their jealousy, but even they were not stingy with their
recognition.

But how did Herr Carovius feel? His spittle had a bitter taste, his body pained him. When Andreas
Döderlein turned to the audience and bowed, Carovius laughed a laugh of tremendous contempt.
And Jason Philip Schimmelweis? He would have felt much more comfortable if the hand-clapping
had been so much ear-boxing, and Daniel Nothafft, the culprit, had been the objective. The
boy who had been cast out had become the leader of men! Jason Philip put his hand to his forehead,
shook his head, and was on the point of exclaiming, “Oh, ye deceivers and deceived! Listen,
listen! I know the boy; I know the man who has made fools of you here this evening!” He waited
to see whether the misunderstanding, the colossal swindle, would not be cleared up automatically.
He did not wait in vain.

At the close of the “Serenade,” Jordan was struck by Gertrude’s feverish paleness. He asked
her whether she felt ill, but received no reply. During the performance of the second piece
she kept putting her hands to her bosom, as if she were suffering from repressed convulsions.
Her eyes were now lifeless, now glowing with an uncanny fire. As soon as the piece was finished,
she turned to her father and asked him to take her home. Jordan was frightened. Those sitting
next to him looked at the girl’s pale face, sympathised with her, and made conventional remarks.
Eleanore wanted to go home too, but Gertrude whispered to her in her imperious way and told
her to stay. Familiar as she was with Gertrude’s disposition, she thought that it was simply
a passing attack of some kind, and regained her composure.

Daniel was standing at the door, talking to Benda and Wurzelmann. He was very much excited;
his two companions were trying to appease his embitterment against Andreas Döderlein. “Ah,
the man doesn’t know a thing about his profession,” he exclaimed, and scorned all attempts
to effect a reconciliation between him and the leader of the orchestra. “What is left of my
compositions is debris only. He drags the time, never even tries to make a legatura, scorns
a piano every time he comes to one, pays no attention to crescendos, never retards—it is terrible!
My works cannot be played in public like that!”

Gertrude and her father passed by quickly and without greeting. Daniel was stupefied. The lifeless
expression in Gertrude’s face unnerved him. He felt as if he had been struck by a hammer, as
if his own fate were inseparably connected with that of the girl. Her step, her eyes, her mouth
were, he felt, a part of his own being. And the fact that she passed by without even speaking
to him, cold, reserved, hostile, filled him with such intense anger that from then on he was
not accountable for what he did.

The flood of melody in Beethoven’s great work was on the point of pouring forth from the orchestra
in all its exalted ruggedness. What happened? There came forth instead a confused, noisy clash
and clatter. Daniel was seized with violent restlessness. It was hard enough to see his own
works bungled; to see this creation with its delicate soul and titanic power, a work which
he knew as he knew few things on this earth, torn to tatters and bungled all around was more
than he could stand. The trumpet solo did not sound as though it came from some distant land
of fairy spirits: it was manifestly at the people’s feet and it was flat. He began to tremble.
When the calm melancholy andante, completely robbed of all measure and proportion by the unskilled
hand of the leader and made to dissipate in senseless sounds, reached his ear, he was beside
himself. He rushed on to the platform, seized the arm of the conductor with his icy fingers,
and shouted: “That is enough! That is no way to treat a divine creation!”

The people rose in their seats. The instruments suddenly became silent, with the exception
of a cello which still whimpered from the corner. Andreas Döderlein bounded back, looked at
the mad man, his mouth as wide as he could open it, laid the baton on the desk, and stammered:
“By Jupiter, this is unheard of!” The musicians left their places and grouped themselves around
the strange man; the tumult in the public grew worse and worse. They asked questions, threatened,
tried to set each other at ease, scolded and raged. In the meantime Daniel Nothafft, his head
bowed, his back bent, stood there on the platform, glowing with anger and determined to have
his revenge.

A few minutes later, Andreas Döderlein was sitting at the table in the musicians’ waiting room.
He looked like Emperor Barbarossa in Kyffhäuser. He had well founded reason to express his
contempt for the decadence and impiety of the youth of to-day. It was superfluous for him to
remark that a man who would conduct himself as Daniel had done should be eliminated from the
ranks of those who lay claim to the help and consideration of sane people. The dignified gentlemen
of the Orchestral Union were of the same opinion; you could search the annals of history from
the beginning of time, and you would never find a case like this. Mild eyes flashed, grey beards
wagged. The deliberation was brief, the sentence just. A committee waited on Daniel to inform
him that his compositions had been struck from the programme. The news spread like wild-fire.

Who was happier than Jason Philip Schimmelweis?

He was like a man who gets up from the table with a full stomach, after having sat down at
it fearing lest he starve to death. On his way home he whistled and laughed alternately and
with well balanced proportion.

“There you see it again,” he said to his daughter, as she walked along at his side, “you see
it again: you cannot get blood from a turnip any more than you can get happiness from misery.
A jackass remains a jackass, a culprit a culprit, and loafing never fails to bring the loafer
to a disgraceful end. The Devil has a short but nimble tail; and it makes no difference how
slovenly he may conduct his business, his recruits have got to pay the piper in the end. This
will be a windfall for mother. Let’s hurry so that we can serve it to her while it’s still hot!”

And Philippina—she had never taken her eyes off the floor the entire evening—seemed to be utterly
unconscious of the fact at present that she was surrounded by houses and people. She was a
defeated woman; she wanted to be. She had much to conceal; her young breast was a hell of emotions,
but her ugly, gloomy old face was as inanimate and empty as a stone.

Herr Carovius waited at the gate. After all the other people had gone, Daniel, Benda, Wurzelmann,
and Eleanore came along. Daniel’s storm cape fluttered in the wind; his hat was drawn down
over his eyes. Herr Carovius stepped up before him.

“A heroic deed, my dear Nothafft,” he miauled. “I could embrace you. From this time on you
can count me among your friends. Now stand still, you human being transformed into a hurricane.
I must say of course that so far as your music is concerned, I am not with you. There is too
much hullaballoo in it, and not enough plain hellishness to suit me. But rid this country of
the whole tribe of Döderleins, and you will find that I am your man. Not that I would invite
you to take dinner with me, so that you could have me make you a loan, not on your life. I
am only a poor musician myself. But otherwise I am at your service. I hope you sleep well to-night—and
get the hullaballoo out of your music just as soon as you can.”

He tittered, and then scampered away. Daniel looked at him with a feeling of astonishment.
Wurzelmann laughed, and said he had never seen such a queer codger in all his life. All four
stood there for a while, not knowing exactly what to think, and in the meantime it was snowing
and raining. Asked by Benda where he wished to go, Daniel said he was going home. But what
could he do at home? Why couldn’t he go home with Benda? “No,” said Daniel, “I can’t do that:
I am a burden to every one to-day, including myself. Say, little servant, how are you feeling?”
he said, turning to Wurzelmann, “how about a drink or two?”

Wurzelmann, somewhat embarrassed, said that he had an engagement. There was something repulsive
in the way he declined the invitation.

“Ah, you, with your old engagement,” said Daniel, “I don’t give a hang where you are going;
I am going along.”

“No, you’re not, Daniel,” cried Eleanore. And when Daniel looked at her in astonishment, she
blushed and continued: “You are not going with him; he is going to see some women!”

The three young men laughed, and in her confusion Eleanore laughed too.

“How tragic you are, little Eleanore,” said Daniel in a tone of unusual flippancy, “what do
you want me to do? Do you think that Wurzelmann and I are just alike when it comes to an evening’s
amusement? Do you think the earth claims me as soon as I see a tear?”

“Let him go,” whispered Benda to the girl, “he is right. Don’t bring an artificial light into
this darkness; it serves his purpose; let him do with it as he pleases.”

Eleanore looked at Benda with wide-opened eyes. “Darkness? What do you mean? The fire then
was merely a will-o’-the-wisp,” she said, her eyes shining with pride, “I see him full of light.”
Daniel had heard what she said. “Really, Eleanore?” he asked with greedy curiosity.

She nodded: “Really, Daniel.”

“For that you can have anything you want from me.”

“Well then I beg you and Benda to come over to our house. Father will be delighted to see you,
and we will have something to eat.”

“Fine. That sounds good to me. Addio, Wurzelmann, and remember me to the girls. You are coming
along, aren’t you, Friedrich?”

Benda first made a few polite remarks, and then said he would accept.

“You liked it then, did you, Eleanore?” asked Daniel, as they walked along the street.

Eleanore was silent. To Daniel her silence was moving. But he soon forgot the impression it
made on him; and it was a long, long while, indeed even years, before he recalled this scene.

                                  XI

Jordan had taken Gertrude home. He was very careful not to ask her any questions that would
cause her pain. On reaching the house he lighted a lamp and helped her take off her cloak.

“How do you feel?” he asked in a kindly tone, “are you better?”

Gertrude turned to one side, and sat down on a chair.

“Well, we’ll drink a cup of hot tea,” continued the old man; “then my child will go to bed,
and to-morrow morning she will be all right again. Yes?”

Gertrude got up. “Father,” she sighed, and felt around for the tea table as a means of support.

“Gertrude, what is the matter?” cried Jordan in dismay.

She moved the upper part of her body in her characteristic way—as though it were limp and she
were trying to drag it along with her—and a faint smile came over her face. All of a sudden
she burst out crying and ran to her room. Jordan heard her bolt the door, looked anxiously
before him, waited a moment or two, and then crept up to her door on his tiptoes.

He placed his hands under his chin and listened. Gertrude was crying. It was an even and touching
cry, not so much filled with grief as her sobs generally were, and seemed to be expiratory
rather than the reverse.

As Jordan let the lonely, unhappy, and impenetrable life of his daughter pass by him in mental
review, he became painfully aware of the fact that this was the first time in her life that
she had ever heard real music. “Is it possible?” he asked. He tried to think of another time
that would make him disbelieve the accuracy of his unpleasant observation.

He said to himself: Her case is simple; the hitherto unknown sweetness and power concealed
in the ensemble playing of the violins, the euphony of the orchestra, and the beauty of the
melody with all its fateful directness has made the same impression on her that the sunlight
makes on a person from whose eyes a cataract has just been removed. Her soul has suffered from
hunger; that is where the trouble lies. She has struggled too fiercely with the incomprehensible
and the intangible.

His instinct of love told him that the best thing to do was to let her cry. It will do her
good; it will relieve her soul. He pulled a chair up to her door, sat down, and listened. When
he could no longer hear her crying, his heart grew easier.

                                  XII

Eleanore was right. Her father was quite pleased to see Daniel and Benda. “I am proud of you,”
he said to Daniel, “and for your visit to me I thank you. I feel flattered.”

“If you had stayed a half hour longer, you might feel differently about it,” replied Daniel.

Eleanore gave her father a brief account of what had taken place at the concert. Jordan listened
attentively, looked at Daniel, and, with a wrinkle on his forehead, said, “Is it possible?”

“Yes, it is possible; it had to happen,” said Daniel.

“Well, if it had to happen, it is a good thing that it is over,” was the dispassionate response.

Eleanore took her father’s hand; the back of it was covered with big yellow spots; she kissed
it. Then she set the table, got everything ready for the meal, went in and out of the room
in a most cheerful way, and did not forget to put the water on the stove to boil. She had asked
about Gertrude as soon as she came home, but for some reason or other her father seemed disinclined
to say anything on the subject, from which Eleanore inferred that there was nothing seriously
wrong.

Finally they sat down at the table. Eleanore was quite pleased to see the three men whom she
liked so much gathered together in this way. There was a feeling of gratitude in her heart
toward each one of them. But she was also hungry: she ate four sandwiches, one right after
the other. When she saw that Daniel was not eating, she stepped up behind his chair, bent over
him so far that the loose flowing hair from her temples tickled his face, and said: “Are you
embarrassed? Or don’t you like the way the sausages have been prepared? Would you like something
else?”

Daniel evaded the questions; he was out of sorts. And yet in the bottom of his heart the contact
with the girl made a pleasing impression on him; it was in truth almost a saving impression.
For his thoughts continually and obstinately returned to the girl who had fled, and whose presence
he missed without exactly wishing that she were at the table with the others.

Benda spoke of the political changes that might, he feared, take place because of the death
of Gambetta. Jordan, who always took a warm interest in the affairs of the Fatherland, made
a number of true and humane remarks about the tense feeling then existing between France and
Germany, whereupon the door to Gertrude’s room opened and Gertrude herself stood on the threshold.

Deep silence filled the room; they all looked at her.

Strangely enough, she was not wearing the dress she had on at the concert. She had put on the
Nile green dress, the one in which Daniel saw her for the first time. Jordan and Eleanore hardly
noticed the change; they were too much absorbed in the expression on the girl’s face. Daniel
was also astonished; he could not look away.

Her expression had become softer, freer, brighter. The unrest in which her face had heretofore
been clouded had disappeared. Even the outlines of her face seemed to have changed: the arch
of her eyebrows was higher, the oval of her cheeks more delicate.

She leaned against the door; she even leaned her head against the door. Her left hand, hanging
at her side, seemed indolent, limp, indifferent. Her right hand was pressed against her bosom.
Standing in this position, she studied the faces of those who were sitting at the table, while
a timid and gentle smile played about her lips.

Jordan’s first suspicion was that she had lost her mind. He sprang up, and hastened over to
her. But she gave him her hand, and offered no resistance at all to being led over to the table.

Suddenly she fixed her silent gaze on Daniel. He got up involuntarily, and seized the back
of his chair. His colour changed; he distorted the corners of his mouth; he was nervous. But
when Gertrude withdrew her hand from her father’s and extended it to him, and when he took
it and his eye met hers—he could not help but look at her—his solicitude vanished. For what
he read in her eyes was an unreserved and irrevocable capitulation of her whole self, and Daniel
was the victor. His face grew gentle, grateful, dreamy, and resplendent.

It was not merely the sensuous charm revealed in the feeling which Gertrude betrayed that moved
him: it was the fact that she came as she had come, a penitent and a convert. The sublime conviction
that he had been able to transform a soul and awaken it to new life touched him deeply.

This it was that drew him to Gertrude more than her countenance, her expression, and her body
combined. And now he saw all three—her countenance, her expression, and her body.

Jordan had a foreboding of something. He felt that he would have to take the girl in his arms
and flee with her. Pictures of future misfortune crowded upon his imagination; the hope he
had cherished for Gertrude was crushed to the earth.

Benda stared at his plate in silence. Nevertheless, just as if he had other eyes than those
with which he saw earthly things, he noticed that Eleanore’s hands and lips were trembling,
that with each succeeding second she grew paler, that she cast a distrustful glance first at
her father, then at her sister, and then at Daniel, and that she finally, as if overcome with
a feeling of exhaustion, slipped away from her place by the table lamp, stole into a corner,
and sat down on the hassock.

But after they had all resumed their seats at the table, Gertrude sitting between Benda and
her father, Eleanore came up and sat down next to Daniel. She never took her eyes off Gertrude;
she looked at her in breathless surprise, Gertrude smiled as she had smiled when leaning against
the door, timidly and passionately.

From that moment on, the conversation lagged, Benda suggested to his friend that it was time
for them to leave. They thanked Jordan for his hospitality and departed. Jordan accompanied
them down the stairs and unlocked the front door. When he returned, Eleanore was just going
to her room: “Well, Eleanore, are you not going to say good-night?” he called after her.

She turned around, nodded conventionally, and closed the door.

Gertrude was still sitting at the table. Jordan was walking up and down the room. Suddenly
she sprang up, stepped in his way, forced him to stop, threw her arms about his neck, and kissed
him on the forehead. She had never done that before.

She too had gone to sleep. Jordan felt terribly alone. He heard the street door open and close;
he heard some one enter. It was Benno. Jordan thought that his son would come in, for he must
have seen the light through the crack of the door. But Benno evidently had no desire to see
his father. He went to his room at the other end of the hall, and closed the door behind him
just as if he were a servant.

“They are all three in bed,” thought Jordan to himself, “and what do I know about them?”

He shook his head, removed the hanging lamp from its frame, and locked the room, holding the
lamp very carefully as he did so.

                                 XIII

Eleanore had not seen Eberhard von Auffenberg for a number of weeks. He wrote her a card, asking
for the privilege of meeting her somewhere. The place in fact was always the same—the bridge
at the gate to the Zoölogical Garden. Immediately after sunset she betook herself to that point.
It was a warm March evening; there was not a breath of wind; the sky was covered with clouds.

They strolled up the castle hill, and when they had reached the parapet, Eleanore said, gently
laughing: “Now listen, I have talked enough; you say something.”

“It is so pleasant to be silent with you,” replied Eberhard in a downcast mood.

Filled with a disagreeable premonition, Eleanore sought out one of the many hundreds of lights
dimly flickering down in the city, fixed her eyes on it, and stubbornly refused to look at
any other earthly object.

“If I appeal to you at this hour,” the young Baron finally began, “it is to a certain extent
exactly as if I were appealing to the Supreme Court. My expectations in life have, with one
single exception, been utterly and irrevocably crushed. It depends quite upon you, Eleanore,
whether I am to become and remain a useless parasite of human society, or a man who has firmly
decided to pay for his share of happiness by an equal amount of honest work. I offer you everything
I have. It is not much, but I offer it to you without haggling and forever. You and you alone
can save me. That is what I wanted to say to you.”

He looked up at the clouds, leaning on his cane, which he had placed behind his back.

“I have forbidden you to speak of this,” whispered Eleanore in profound dismay, “and you promised
me that you would not say anything about it.”

“I gave you my promise because I loved you; I break it for the same reason,” replied Eberhard.
“I feel that such a promise is the act of a foolish child, when the building up or the tearing
down of a human life depends upon it. If you are of a different opinion, I can only beg your
pardon. Probably I have been mistaken.”

Eleanore shook her head; she was grieved.

“It was my plan to go to England with you, and there we would be married,” continued Eberhard.
“It is quite impossible for me to get married here: I loathe this city. It is impossible, because
if I did my people would in all probability set up some claims to which they are no longer
entitled and for which I would fight. The mere thought of doing this repels me. And it is also
impossible because ...” at this he stopped and bit his lips.

Eleanore looked at him; she was filled with curiosity. His pedantic enumeration of the various
hindrances as well as the romanticism of his plans amused her. When she detected the expression
of downright grief in his face, she felt sorry for him. She came one step nearer to him; he
took her hand, bowed, and pressed his lips to her fingers. She jerked her hand back.

“Fatal circumstances have placed me in a most humiliating situation; if I am not to succumb
to them, I must shake them off at once,” said Eberhard anxiously. “I was inexperienced; I have
been deceived. There is a person connected with my case who hardly deserves the name of a human
being; he is a monster in the garb of an honest citizen. I have not the faintest idea what
I am to do next, Eleanore. I must leave at once. In a strange country I may regain my strength
and mental clearness. With you I could defy the universe. Believe in me, have confidence in me!”

Eleanore let her head sink. The despair of this usually reserved man touched her heart. Her
mouth twitched as she sought for words.

“I cannot get married, Eberhard,” she said, “really, I cannot. I did not entice you to me;
you dare not reproach me. I have tried to make my attitude toward you perfectly clear from
the very first time I met you. I cannot get married; I cannot.”

For five or six minutes there was a silence that was interrupted only by human voices in the
distance and the sound of carriages from the streets down in the city. In the compassion that
Eleanore after all felt for Eberhard she sensed the harshness of her unqualified refusal. She
looked at him courageously, firmly, and said: “It is not obstinacy on my part, Eberhard; nor
is it stupid anxiety, nor imagination, nor lack of respect. Truth to tell I have a very high
opinion of you. But there must be something quite unnatural about me, for you see that I loathe
the very idea of getting married. I detest the thought of living with a man. I like you, but
when you touch me as you did a little while ago when you kissed my hand, a shudder runs through
my whole body.”

Eberhard looked at her in astonishment; he was morose, too.

She continued: “It has been in me since my childhood; perhaps I was born with it, just as other
people are born with a physical defect. It may be that I have been this way ever since a certain
day in my life. It was an autumn evening in Pappenheim, where my aunt then lived. My sister
Gertrude and I were walking in a great fruit garden; we came to a thorn hedge, and sitting
by the hedge was an old woman. My father and mother were far away, and the old woman said to
my sister, then about seven: Be on your guard against everything that sings and rings. To me
she said: Be careful never to have a child. The next day the woman was found dead under the
hedge. She was over ninety years old, and for more than fifty years she had peddled herbs in
Altmühltal. I naturally had not the vaguest idea what she meant at the time by ‘having a child,’
but her remark stuck in my heart like an arrow. It grew up with me; it became a part of me.
And when I learned what it meant, it was a picture by the side of the picture of death. Now
you must not think that I have gone through life thus far filled with a feeling of despicable
fear. Not at all. I simply have no desires. The idea does not attract me. If it ever does,
many questions will I ask about life and death! I will laugh at the old woman under the hedge
and do what I must.”

As she spoke these last words, her face took on a strangely chaste and fanciful expression.
Eberhard could not take his eyes from her. “Ah, there are after all fairy creatures on this
flat, stale, and unprofitable earth,” he thought, “enchanted princesses, mysterious Melusinas.”
He smiled somewhat distrustfully—as a matter of habit. But from this moment his frank, open,
wooing attachment to the girl was transformed into a consuming passion.

He was proud, and man enough to subdue his feelings. But he yearned more than ever, and was
tortured by his yearnings to know something more than the vague knowledge he had at present
about that glass case, that spirit-chest in which, so near and yet so far, this lovely creature
lived, impervious to the touch of mortal hands and immune to the flames of love.

“You are rejecting me, then?” he asked.

“Well, it is at least advisable that for the time being we avoid each other’s presence.”

“Advisable for me, you think. And for the time being? How am I to interpret that?”

“Well, let us say for five years.”

“Why exactly five years? Why not twenty? Why not fifty? It would be all the same.”

“It seems to me that five years is just the right amount of time, Eberhard.”

“Five years! Each year has twelve times thirty, fifty-two times seven days. Why, the arithmetic
of it is enough to make a man lose his mind.”

“But it must be five years,” said Eleanore gently though firmly. “In five years I will not
have changed. And if I am just the same in five years from now, why, we’ll talk it over again.
I must not exclude myself from the world forever. My father often says: What looks like fate
at Easter is a mere whim by Pentecost. I prefer to wait until Pentecost and not to forget my
friend in the meantime.”

She gave him her hand with a smile.

He shook his head: “No, I can’t take your hand; another one of those shudders will run through
you if I do. Farewell, Eleanore.”

“And you too, Eberhard, farewell!”

Eberhard started down the hill. Suddenly he stopped, turned around, and said: “Just one thing
more. That musician—Nothafft is his name, isn’t it?—is engaged to your sister, isn’t he?”

“Yes, Gertrude and Daniel will get married some day. But who told you about it?”

“The musician himself was in a restaurant. The fellows were drinking, and he was so incautious
as to raise his glass, and, somewhat after the fashion of an intoxicated drum-major, he himself
drank to Gertrude’s health. For some time there was talk of his marrying you. It is much better
as it is. I can’t stand artists. I can’t even have due respect for them, these indiscreet hotspurs.
Good night, Eleanore.”

And with that he vanished in the darkness.

                      IN MEMORY OF A DREAM FIGURE

                                   I

One evening Daniel called on Benda to take leave of him for a long while.

Just as he was about to enter the front gate, he saw Herr Carovius’s dog standing there showing
his teeth. The beast’s bloodshot eyes were fixed on a ten-year old girl who was likewise on
the point of entering the house, but, afraid of the dog, she did not dare take another step.
The animal had dragged his chain along behind him, and stood there now, snarling in a most
vicious way.

Daniel took the child by the hand and led it back a few steps, after he had frightened the
dog into silence by some rough commands. “Who are you?” he asked the girl.

“Dorothea Döderlein,” was the reply.

“Ah,” said Daniel. He could not help but laugh, for there was a comic tone of precociousness
in the girl’s manner of speaking. But she was a very pretty child. A sly, smiling little face
peeped out from under her hood, and her velvet mantle with great pearl buttons enshrouded a
dainty figure.

“You should have been in bed long ago, Dorothea,” said Daniel. “What will the night watchman
think when he comes along and finds you up? He will take you by the collar, and lead you off
to jail.”

Dorothea told him why she was still up and why she was alone. She had been visiting a school
friend, and the maid who called for her wanted to get a loaf of bread from the bakery before
going up stairs. She related the story of her meeting with the dog with so much coquetry and
detail that Daniel was delighted at the contrast between this rodomontade and the quaking anxiety
in which he first found her.

“You are a fraud, Dorothea,” said Daniel, and called to mind the unpleasant sensation she aroused
in him when he saw her for the first time years ago.

In the meanwhile the maid had come up with the loaf of bread; she looked with astonishment
at the two as they stood there gossiping, and immediately took the child into her charge, conscious
as she was of her own dilatoriness. With a few piercing shrieks she drove Cæsar back from the
gate, and as he ran across the street Dorothea cast one triumphant glance back at Daniel, feeling
that she had proved to him that she was not the least afraid of the dog.

                                  II

Frau Benda opened the door, closed it without saying a word, and went into her room. She had
had a violent quarrel with her son, who had just informed her that he had accepted the invitation
of a learned society to come to England and settle down. He was to start at the end of spring.
Frau Benda was tired of travelling; she shuddered at the thought of moving. The separation
from Friedrich seemed intolerable to her; and in his flight from the Fatherland she saw a final
and premature renunciation of all the opportunities that might in the end present themselves
to him at home.

She was convinced that the men who had done him injustice would in time come to see the error
of their ways and make amends for their miscalculations. She was particularly anxious that
he be patient until satisfaction had been done him. Moreover, she knew his plans, and trembled
at the risks to which he was voluntarily exposing himself: she felt that he was undertaking
a task for which he had not had the practical experience.

But his decision was irrevocable. That he had never said a word about it to Daniel, had not
even insinuated that he was thinking of making a change, was due to the peculiar onesideness
of their present relation to each other.

Laughing heartily, Daniel told of his meeting with little Dorothea. “She looks to me as though
she will give old Döderlein a good deal to think about in the days to come,” said Daniel.

“You played him a pretty scurvy trick, the old Döderlein,” replied Benda. “The night after
the public rehearsal I heard him walking up and down for hours right under my bedroom.”

“You feel sorry for him, do you?”

“If I were you, I would go to him and beg his pardon.”

“Do you really mean it?” exclaimed Daniel. Benda said nothing. Daniel continued: “To tell the
truth, I should be grateful to him. It is due to his efforts that I have come to see, more
quickly than I otherwise would have done, that those were two impossible imitations to which
I wanted to assure a place in the sun. They may throw me down if they wish; I’ll get up again,
depend upon it, if, and even if, I have in the meantime gulped down the whole earth.”

Benda smiled a gracious smile. “Yes, you die at each fall, and at each come-back you appear
a new-made man,” he said. “That is fine. But a Döderlein cannot come back, once his contemporaries
have thrown him over. The very thing that means a new idea to you spells his ruin; what gives
you pleasure, voluptuous pleasure, is death to him.”

“Y-e-s,” mumbled Daniel, “and yet, what good is he?”

“The spirit of nature, the spirit of God, is a total stranger to such conceptions as harmfulness
and usefulness,” replied Benda in a tone of serious reflection. “He lives, and that is about
all you can say. So far as I am concerned, I have not the slightest reason to defend a Döderlein
in your presence.” He was silent for a moment and took a deep breath. “I cannot speak more
distinctly; somehow or other I cannot quite find the right words,” he continued in a disconcerted
way, “but the point is, the man has committed a crime against a woman, a crime so malicious,
subtle, and naïve, that he deserves every stigma with which it is possible to brand him, and
even then he would not be adequately punished.”

“You see,” exclaimed Daniel, “he is not only a miserable musician. And that is the way it always
is. They are all like that. Oh, these bitter-sweet, grinning, pajama-bred, match-making, ninnying,
super-smart manikins—it makes your blood curdle to look at one of them. And yet a real man
has got to run the gauntlet before them his whole life long, and down through their narrow
little alleys at that!”

“Rather,” said Benda with bowed head. “It is a tough, clammy poison pap. If you stir it with
your finger, you will stick fast, and it will suck the very marrow out of your bones. But you
are speaking for the time being without precise knowledge of all the pertinent material, as
we say in science. During my study of the cells of plants and animals, I came to see that a
so-called fundamental procreation was out of the question. I gave expression to this view in
a circle of professional colleagues. They laughed at me. To-day it is no longer possible to
oppose the theory I then advanced. One of my former friends succeeded in making certain combinations
of acetic acid, crystallised by artificial means. When he made his great discovery known, one
of the assembled gentlemen cried out: ‘Be careful, doctorette, or your amido atoms will get
out of their cage.’ That is a sample of the base and treacherous fashion in which we are treated
by the very people who we might think were our warmest friends, for they are apparently trying
to reach the same goal that we are. But you! The world may reject you, and you still have what
no one can take from you. I have to wait in patience until a judge hands down a decision either
condemning me or redeeming me. You? Between you and me there is the same difference that exists
between the seed which, sunk into the earth, shoots up whether it rains or shines, and some
kind of a utensil which rusts in the store because no one buys it.”

He got up and said: “You are the more fortunate of us two, it behooves me therefore to be the
more merciful.”

Daniel could make no reply that would console him.

As he went home, he thought of the fidelity and the constant but unassuming help he had received
from Benda. He thought of the refined and delicate consideration of his friend. He thought
especially of that extraordinary courtesy which was so marked in him, that, for example, while
laughing at a good joke, Benda would stop with open mouth if some one resumed the conversation:
he did not wish to lose anything another might wish to say to him.

He stopped. It seemed to him that he had neglected the opportunity to put an especially reassuring,
cordial, and unforgettable force into his final handshake. He would have liked to turn back.
But it is not the custom to turn back; no one in truth can do it.

                                  III

Daniel did not wish to take the mask of Zingarella with him on his tours. To expose the fragile
material to all the risks associated with a fortuitous life on the road seemed to him an act
of impiety. He had consequently promised Eleanore to leave the mask with her in Jordan’s house
during his absence.

Eleanore opened the door; Daniel entered. Gertrude arose from her seat at the table, and came
up to meet him. Her face showed, as it always did when she saw him, unmistakable traces of
resignation, willingness, submissiveness.

Daniel walked over to the table, took the newspaper wrapping from the mask, and held it up
in the light of the lamp.

“How beautiful!” exclaimed Gertrude, whose senses were now delighted at the sight of any object
that appealed to one’s feelings.

“Well, take it, then, Gertrude,” said Eleanore, as she leaned both elbows on the top of the
table. “Keep it with you,” she continued somewhat tensely, when she noticed that Gertrude was
looking at Daniel as if to say, “May I?”

“But won’t he give it to both of us?” replied Gertrude with a covetous smile.

“No, no, he simply mentioned me for courtesy’s sake,” said Eleanore, quite positively.

“Eleanore, I can scarcely tell you how I feel toward you,” said Daniel, half confused, half
angry, and then stopped with conspicuous suddenness when the fiery blue of her eyes fell upon him.

“You?” she whispered in astonishment, “you?”

“Yes, you,” he replied emphatically. “Later I can tell everybody; to-day it is true in a double
sense: you seem to me just like a sister.”

He had laid the mask to one side and extended his left hand to Eleanore, and then, hesitating
at first, he gave Gertrude his right hand with a most decisive gesture.

Eleanore straightened up, took the mask of Zingarella, and held it up before her face. “Little
Brother,” she cried out in a teasing tone. The pale, sweet stone face was wonderful to behold,
as it was raised above the body that was pulsing with life.

And Gertrude—for one second she hung on Daniel’s gaze, a sigh as deep as the murmuring of the
sea sounded in her bosom, and then she lay in his arms. He kissed her without saying a word.
His face was gloomy, his brow wrinkled.

“Little Brother” sounded out from behind the mask. But there was no banter in the expression;
it was much more like a complaint, a revelation of anguish: “Little Brother!”

                                  IV

Daniel had left the city long ago. Eleanore chanced to meet Herr Carovius. He forced her to
stop, conducted himself in such a familiar way, and talked in such a loud voice that the passersby
simpered. He asked all about the young master, meaning Daniel.

He told her that “the good Eberhard”—it was his way of referring to Baron von Auffenberg—had
gone to Munich for a few months, and was taking up with spiritists and theosophists.

“It is his way of having a fling,” said Herr Carovius, grinning from ear to ear. “In former
times, when young noblemen wished to complete their education and have a little lark at the
same time, they made the grand tour over Europe. Now-a-days they become penny-a-liners, or
they go in for table-tipping. Humanity is on the decline, my charming little girl. To study
the flower of the nation at close range is no longer an edifying occupation. It is rotten,
as rotten, I tell you, as last winter’s apples. There is consequently no greater pleasure than
to make such a young chap dance. You play, he dances; you whistle, he retrieves. It is a real
treat!”

He laughed hysterically, and then had a coughing spell. He coughed so violently that the black
cord suspended from his nose-glasses became tangled about a button on his great coat, and his
glasses fell from his nose. In his awkwardness, intensified by his short-sightedness, he fumbled
the button and the cord with his bony fingers until Eleanore came to the rescue. One move,
and everything was again in order.

Herr Carovius was struck dumb with surprise. He would never have imagined that a young girl
could be so natural and unembarrassed. He suspected a trap: was she making fun of him, or did
she wish to do him harm? It had never occurred to him that one might voluntarily assist him
when in distress.

Suddenly he became ashamed of himself; he lifted his eyes and smiled like a simpleton; he cast
a glance of almost dog-like tenderness at Eleanore. And then, without saying a word, without
even saying good-bye to her, he hastened across the street to hide as soon as he might in some
obscure corner.

                                   V

One afternoon in the last week of August, the Rüdiger sisters sent the boy who attended to
their garden over to Eleanore with the urgent request that she call as soon as she possibly
could. Feeling that some misfortune had befallen Daniel and that the sisters wished to tell
her about it, Eleanore was not slow about making up her mind: exactly one quarter of an hour
later she entered the Rüdigers’ front door.

A lamentable sight greeted her. Each of the three sisters was sitting in a high-backed chair,
her arms hanging lifeless from her sides. The curtains were drawn; in the shaded light their
faces looked like mummies. Nor was the general impression measurably brightened by the “Medea,”
the “Iphigenie,” and the “Roman Woman” that hung on the wall, copies of the paintings of their
idol.

Eleanore’s greeting was not returned. She did not dare leave without finding what was the matter,
and the silence with which she was received was broken only when she herself decided to ask
some questions.

Fräulein Jasmina took out her handkerchief and dried her eyes. Fräulein Saloma looked around
somewhat like a judge at a session of court. And then she began to speak: “We three lonely
women, forgotten by the world, have asked you to come to our house so that we might tell you
of a crime that has been committed in our innocent home. We never heard of it until this morning.
It is such an unexampled, gruesome, abominable deed that we have been sitting here ever since
it was brought to our attention, wringing our hands in vain attempt to make up our minds as
to what course we should pursue.”

Fräulein Jasmina and Fräulein Albertina nodded their heads in sadness and without looking up.

“Can we put the unfortunate girl out of the house?” continued Fräulein Saloma, “can we, sisters?
No! Can we afford to keep her? No! What are we to do then? She is an orphan; she is all alone,
abandoned by her infamous seducer, and exposed to unmitigated shame. What are we to do?”

“And you,” said Fräulein Saloma turning to Eleanore, “you who are bound to that gifted monster
by ties the precise nature of which we are in no position to judge, you are to show us a way
out of this labyrinth of our affliction.”

“If I only knew what you are talking about,” said Eleanore, a great burden falling from her
heart as she realised that her initial fears were groundless. “By the monster you evidently
mean Daniel Nothafft. What crime has he committed?”

Fräulein Saloma was indignant at the flippancy of her manner. She rose to her full stature,
and said with punitive lips: “He has made our maid an ordinary prostitute, and the consequences
are no longer to be concealed. Do you know what we are talking about now?”

Eleanore uttered a faint “Oh!” and blushed to the roots of her hair. In her embarrassment she
opened her mouth to laugh, but she came very near to crying.

Her saddened feelings slowly crept back to Daniel, and as the picture of him rose before her
mind’s eye, she turned from it in disgust. But she did not wish to allow this picture to remain
in her memory: it was too flabby, petty, and selfish. Before she knew what she was doing, she,
as a woman, had pardoned him. Then she shuddered, opened wide her eyes, and resumed her accustomed
cheerfulness. She was again in complete control of herself.

The court had in the meanwhile examined the silent woman with stern scrutiny: “Where is Daniel
Nothafft at present?” asked Fräulein Saloma.

“I do not know,” replied Eleanore, “he hasn’t written for over three weeks.”

“We must request you to inform him at once of the condition of the prostitute, for so long
as such a person is in our house, we cannot sleep at night nor rest by day.”

“I am sorry that you take the matter so to heart,” said Eleanore, “and it is a rather disagreeable
affair. But I have no right to mix myself up in it, nor have I the least desire to do so.”

The three sisters received this statement with despair; they wrung their hands. They would
rather die, they said, than meet this voluptuary face to face again; they would endure all
manner of martyrdom before they would have him come in. All three spoke at once; they threatened
Eleanore; they implored her. Jasmina told with bated breath how Meta had come to them and confessed
the whole business. Albertina swore that there was not another living soul on earth who could
help them out of this shameless situation. Saloma said that there was nothing for them to do
but to send the wicked creature back to the streets where she belonged.

Eleanore was silent. She had fixed her eyes on the “Medea,” and was doing some hard thinking.
Finally she came to a conclusion: she asked whether she might speak to Meta. Filled at once
with anxiety and hope, Saloma asked her what she wanted with Meta. She replied that she would
tell them later what her purpose was. Fräulein Jasmina showed her the way to Meta’s room.

When Meta caught sight of Eleanore, her features became at once beclouded in sombre amazement.

She was sitting at the open window of her attic room knitting. She got up and looked into the
face of the beautiful girl without saying a word. Eleanore was moved on seeing the tall, youthful
figure, and yet it was quite impossible for her to subdue a feeling of horror.

At Eleanore’s very first words, Meta began to sob. Eleanore comforted her; she asked her where
she was planning to go during her confinement.

“Why, there are institutions,” she murmured, holding her apron before her face, “I can go to
one of them.”

Eleanore sat down on the side of the bed. She unrolled her plans to the girl with a delicacy
and consideration just as if she were speaking to a pampered lady. She spoke with a silver-clear
vivacity just as if she were discussing some hardy prank. Meta looked at her at first with
the air of one oppressed; later she assumed the attitude of a grateful listener.

Pained by the ethereal and inhuman primness of her three employers, angry at the man who had
abandoned her to her present fate, and fighting against the reproaches of her own conscience,
Meta became as wax in Eleanore’s hands, submissive, obedient, and appreciative.

The Rüdiger sisters, all but bursting with curiosity to know what Eleanore had in mind, could
draw nothing from her other than that she was going to take Meta away and that Meta was agreed.

                                  VI

It was Eleanore’s intention to take the pregnant girl to Daniel’s mother at Eschenbach.

She knew of the dissension between Daniel and his mother. She knew that the two avoided each
other’s presence; that Daniel in his defiance felt it his duty to avenge himself for the lack
of love on the part of his mother. Back of the picture of the unloving and impatient son she
saw that of an old woman worrying her life away in silent care.

She had often given way to a painful feeling of sympathy when she thought of the unknown mother
of her friend. It seemed to her now as if she could play the rôle of an emissary of reconciliation;
as if it were her duty to take the deserted woman here to the deserted woman there; as if she
were called to take the mother-to-be to the mother who had just reasons for regretting that
she had ever been a mother.

It seemed to her as if she must create a bond which could not even be sundered by crime, to
say nothing of misunderstanding or caprice; it seemed to her that Daniel had to effect a reconciliation
in the home of the Rüdigers as well as in that of his mother; and that, conscious as she was
of doing what was right, she would meet with no opposition, would have no settling of accounts
to fear.

She also took the practical side of the matter into careful consideration: Meta would have
no trouble in making her living in Eschenbach; she could help Daniel’s mother, or she could
do day work among the peasants.

When the child was born, Daniel’s mother would have a picture of young life to look at; it
would alleviate her longing; it would appease her bitterness to see a child of Daniel’s own blood.

Eleanore told the people at home that she was going on an excursion with a school friend to
the Ansbach country. She studied the time-table, and wrote a postcard to Meta telling her to
be at the station at eight o’clock in the morning.

Jordan approved of Eleanore’s outing, though he warned her against bandits and cold drinks.
Gertrude was not wholly without suspicion. She had a feeling that something was wrong, that
these unspoken words referred to Daniel, for she was always thinking about him.

If she received a letter from him, which was very rare, she would let it lie on the table for
a long while, imagining that it was full of the most glorious declarations of his love for
her, expressed in language which she could not command. In a sort of moon-struck ecstasy she
made an inner, dreamed music out of what he wrote.

When she read his letter, she was satisfied merely to see the words he had written and to feel
the paper on which his hand had rested. She submitted in silence to the laws of his nature,
which would not permit him to be excessive in his remarks or unusually communicative. Each
of his dry reports was a tiding of glad joy to her, though her own replies were just as dry,
giving not the slightest picture of the enraptured soul from which they came.

She felt that Eleanore was lying, and that the lie she was telling was somehow connected with
Daniel. That is why she went up to Eleanore’s bed in the dead of night, and whispered into
her ear: “Tell me, Eleanore, has anything happened to Daniel?”

But before Eleanore could reply, reassured by her sister’s astonished behaviour, and angry
at herself for having suspected Eleanore of a falsehood, she hurried back to her own bed. She
had come to think more and more of her sister every day.

“How she must love him,” thought Eleanore to herself, and buried her smiling face in the pillow.

                                  VII

“Wait for me at the fountain,” said Eleanore to her companion, as she crossed the market place
in Eschenbach at midday: “I’ll call for you as soon as everything has been discussed.”

The coachman pointed out the little house of the widow Nothafft.

A woman with a stern face and unusually large eyebrows asked her what she wanted as she entered
the little shop, which smelled of vinegar and cheese.

Eleanore replied that she would like to talk with her for a few minutes quite undisturbed and
alone.

The profound seriousness of Marian’s features, which resembled more than anything else an incurable
suffering, did not disappear. She closed the shop and took Eleanore into the living room, and,
without saying a word, pointed to one chair and took another herself.

Above the leather sofa hung the picture of Gottfried Nothafft. Eleanore looked at it for a
long while.

“Dear mother,” she finally began, laying her hand on Marian’s knee. “I am bringing you something
from Daniel.”

Marian twitched. “Good or bad?” she asked. She had not heard from Daniel for twenty-two months.
“Who are you?” she asked, “what have you to do with him?”

Eleanore saw at once that she would have to be extremely cautious if she did not wish to offend
the sensitive—and offended—woman by some inconsiderate remark. With all the discrimination
she could command she laid her case before Daniel’s mother.

And behold—the unusual became usual, just as the natural seemed strange. Eleanore pictured
Daniel’s hardships and rise to fame, boasted loyally of his talents and of the enthusiasm for
him of those who believed in him, referred to his future renown, and insisted that all his
guilt, including that toward his mother, be forgotten and forgiven.

Marian reviewed the past; she understood a great many things now that were not clear to her
years ago; she understood Daniel better; she understood virtually everything, except this girl’s
relation to him and the girl herself. If it was peculiar that this strange woman had to come
to her to tell her who Daniel was and what he meant to the people, it was wholly inexplicable
that she had brought some one with her who had been the sweetheart of the very man for whom
she now showed unreserved affection.

Eleanore read Marian’s face and became a trifle more deliberate. It occurred to her, too, to
ask herself a few questions: What am I, any way? What is the matter with me?

She could not give a satisfactory answer to these questions. His friend? He my friend? The
words seemed to contain too much peace and calm. Brother? Companion? Either of these words
brought up pictures of intimate association, inner relationship. Little Brother! Yes, that
is what she had called out to him once from behind the mask. Well then: Little sister behind
the mask?

Yes, that was what it should be: Little sister behind the mask. She had to have a hiding place
for so many things of which she had only a vague presentiment and which in truth she did not
care to visualise in brighter outlines. A subdued heart, a captured heart—it glows, it cools
off, you lift it up, you weigh it down just as fate decrees. To be patient, not to betray anything,
that was the all-important point: Little sister behind the mask—that was the idea.

Marian said: “My child, God himself has inspired you with the idea of coming to me and telling
me about Daniel. I will put fresh flowers in the window as I did some time ago, and I will
leave the front door open so that the swallows can fly in and build their nests. Perhaps he
will think then from time to time of his mother.”

Then she asked to see Meta. Eleanore went out, and returned in a few minutes with her charge.
Marian looked at the pregnant girl compassionately. Meta was ill at ease; to every question
that was put to her she made an incoherent reply. She could stay with her, said Marian, but
she would have to work, for there was no other way for the two to live. The girl referred to
the fact that she had already worked out for four years, and that no one had ever accused her
of lack of industry or willingness. Thereupon Marian told her she would have to be very quiet,
that the people in the neighbourhood were very curious, and that if she ever gave them her
family history she would have to leave.

This attended to, Eleanore went on her way. She refused quite emphatically to stay for dinner.
Marian thought that she was in a hurry to catch the next coach, and accompanied her across
the square. They promised to write to each other; before Eleanore got into the rickety old
coach, Marian kissed her on the cheek.

She watched the coach until it had passed out through the city gate. A drunken man poked her
in the ribs, the blacksmith called to her as she passed by, the doctor’s wife leaned out of
the window and asked her who the cityfied lady was. Marian paid not the slightest attention
to any of them; she went quietly and slowly back to her house.

                                 VIII

Thus it came about that five weeks later a daughter of Daniel Nothafft saw the light of the
world under Marian’s roof.

As soon as the child was born, Marian took a great liking to it, despite the fact that she
had thought of it before its birth only with aversion. It was a fine little creature: its little
legs and arms were delicately formed, its head was small, there was something peculiarly human
about its first cries and laughter, and it showed quite distinctly that there was something
noble in its character.

The people of Eschenbach were astonished. “Where did the child come from?” they asked. “Who
is its mother? Who is its father?” The records in the office of the registrar of births showed
that Meta Steinhäger was the mother of the illegitimate child, Eva Steinhäger, and that its
father was unknown.

It was to be presumed, however, that widow Nothafft knew the details. The old women, and the
young ones too, came on this account more frequently now than ever to her shop. They wanted
to know how the little thing was getting along, whether its milk agreed with it, whether it
had begun to teethe, whether it would speak German or some foreign tongue, and so on.

In order to quiet them, Marian told them that Meta was a poor relative and that she was bringing
up the child at her own expense. It was not difficult to make this story seem plausible, for
Meta had very little to do with her daughter. Shortly after her confinement, she got a job
with a baker over in Dinkelsbühl, and never visited Eva more than once a month. She cared very
little for the child. A young fellow in the bakery had fallen in love with Meta, and wanted
to marry her and move to America.

At Christmas they were married, and left the country at once. Marian was glad of it: the child
now belonged entirely to her.

Though the people soon became accustomed to the existence of their diminutive fellow-townswoman,
Eva was and remained the mysterious child of Eschenbach.

                                  IX

The opera company made its rounds through the small cities that lie between the Danube and
the Main, the Saale and the Neckar—and there are many of them,—its stay in any one place depending
naturally on the interest shown by the public.

“The province is the enchanted Sleeping Beauty,” said the impresario Dörmaul to Wurzelmann
and Daniel, “the province is still asleep, and you must rouse it from its slumbers by pressing
the kiss of the Muse on its forehead.”

But the impresario was unwilling to open his pockets. The princes who were to release Sleeping
Beauty did not have sufficient means to make a presentable appearance, while their retinue
was seedy-looking indeed.

The tenor had long since passed the zenith of his career. His massive paunch placed deadening
strictures on his credentials as the impersonator of heroes. The buffo was an inveterate toper
who had often been placed behind bars by the police for his nocturnal excesses. The barytone
had a big lawsuit on his hands about an estate; his lawyers were two stars of obscurity from
a small village; and at times he became so vexed at the cuts of his opponents that he lost
his voice. The soprano was incessantly quarrelling with her colleagues, and the alto was an
intriguing vixen quite without talent. In addition to these there were a dozen or so super-numeraries
and under-studies, who were bored, who played practical jokes on each other, drew starvation
wages, and had never learned anything.

The musicians were also a sorry lot. It was not rare that one or the other of them had pawned
his instrument. Once a performance had to be postponed because the violinists had stayed over
their time at a village dance where they were playing in order to add to their paltry income.
The inspector, who was scene-shifter, promoter, ticket seller, and publicity agent all in one,
and who was not equal to any of these positions, took French leave in the second year and ran
off with one of the chorus girls, taking the box-office receipts for the evening with him.

One time the costumes were sent to the wrong address, with the result that Boieldieu’s “La
Dame Blanche” had to be played in woollen frocks, patched velvet skirts, filthy cotton blouses,
and French wadding.

Another time the mob in “Martha” consisted of a distempered woman, a waiter brought in at the
last minute from a herring restaurant, and the door-keeper of an orphanage: the chorus had
gone on a strike because their salaries had been held up.

In Karlstadt the final act of the “Merry Wives of Windsor” could not be played, because during
the intermission Falstaff and Mrs. Quickly had got into a fight, and the lady had scratched
a huge piece of skin from the singer’s nose.

If these musical strollers, as acting-director Wurzelmann called the company, nevertheless
made some money, it was due to the superhuman efforts of Daniel. Wurzelmann was always mixed
up in some kind of love affair, introduced in time a ruinous system of favouritism, and became
lazier and lazier as the weeks passed by.

Daniel had to pull the singers out of their beds to get them to go to rehearsals; Daniel had
to help out with the singing when the chorus was too weak; Daniel had to distribute the rôles,
tame down refractory women, and make brainless dilettants subordinate their noisy opinions
to the demands of a work which he himself generally detested. He had to drill beginners, abbreviate
scores, transpose voices, and produce effects with lamentably inadequate material. And from
morning to night he had to wage war eternal against libellous action, inattention, and inability.

Nobody loved him for this; they merely feared him. They swore they would take vengeance on
him, but they knuckled under whenever they seemed to have a chance. He had a habit of treating
them with crushing coldness, he could make them look like criminals. He had a look of icy contempt
that made them clench their fists when his eye fell on them. But they bowed before a power
which seemed uncanny to them, though it consisted in nothing more than the fact that he did
his duty while they did not.

At the close of each quarter, the impresario Dörmaul appeared on the scene to take invoice
in person. His presence was invariably celebrated by a gala performance of “Fra Diavolo,” or
“The Daughter of the Regiment,” or “Frou Frou.” On these occasions the buffo did not get drunk,
the barytone rested from the torments of his lawsuit, the alto had a charming smile for the
sympathetic house, the soprano was as peaceful as a mine immediately after an explosion. Not
one of the chorus stayed too long in the café; and since Wurzelmann directed, and the orchestra
did not have to feel the burning, basilisk eye of Kapellmeister Nothafft resting on it and
floating over it, it played with more precision and produced a more pleasing feast for the
ears than ordinarily.

Dörmaul was not stingy with his praise. “Bravo Wurzelmann,” he cried, “one more short year
of hard work, and I’ll get you a position in the Royal Opera House.”

“Nothafft will likewise rise to fame and office,” he said, “although I was so stupid as to
publish his music, and now all this waste paper is lying in my shop like a pound of brick cheese
in a sick stomach.”

The impresario Dörmaul wore black and white striped trousers of imported cut, a vest that looked
like a bit of tapestry made of pressed leather, a massive gold watch-chain from which dangled
countless fobs, a blood red tie with a diamond as big as the Koh-i-noor and as false as an
April sun, and a grey silk tile hat which he lifted only when in the presence of privy councillors,
generals, and police presidents.

To a man of this kind Daniel had the boldness to remark: “Had you eaten cheese you would at
least have digested it. Your crowded shops are after all more desirable in my estimation than
many a head which would remain empty even if some one stuffed the whole of the ‘Passion of
St. Matthew’ into it.”

Dörmaul decided to laugh. “Oho, my good fellow,” he said, and pushed his tile hat on to the
back of his head, “you are getting all puffed up. Look out that you don’t burst. You remember
the story of Hänschen: He was awfully proud of his porridge while sitting behind the stove;
but when he went out on to the street, he fell into the puddle.”

The little slave tittered. Daniel had known for a long time that Wurzelmann was working against
him. Quite innocently, to be sure, for half souls can admire and betray at the same time.

“Envy is my only virtue,” said Wurzelmann quite openly, “I am a genius at envying.”

Daniel was not equal to such cynicism. He was stupefied by Wurzelmann’s remark, but he did
not break with the little slave; he continued to use him. He was the only individual with whom
he could speak of himself and his work. And though he was overburdened, owing to his present
position, he nevertheless managed to steal a few hours every day for his own work. And the
pressure from all sides fanned the flame within him.

It was then that he staked out his field in order to be master in his own realm; he turned
to the song; he chose the clear, restrained forms of chamber music; he studied with unwavering
industry the old masters; he deduced from their works the right rules of composition; and he
set these up before him like a dam against arbitrariness and æsthetic demoralisation.

He was not unmindful of the fact that by so doing he was cutting himself off from association
with men, and renouncing, probably forever, the satisfaction that comes from monetary reward
and outward success. He knew, too, that he was not making his life easier by adopting this
course, nor was he gaining the popular favour of the emotionalists.

When he would sit in a café late at night and show Wurzelmann one score after another, sing
a few bars in order to bring out the quality of a song, improvise an accompaniment, praise
a melody, or explain the peculiarity of a certain rhythm, he surprised the little slave, and
drove him into an attitude of self-defence. All this was fundamentally new to Wurzelmann. If
Daniel proved that the new was not new after all, that the trouble lay in the fact that the
deranged and shattered souls of the present century had lost the power to assimilate unbroken
lines in their complete purity, Wurzelmann at once became an advocate of modern freedom, insisting
that each individual should be allowed to do all that his innate talent enabled him to vindicate.

Daniel remained unconvinced. Was not the whole of life, the rich contents of human existence,
to be found in the beautiful vessel that had been proved long ago? Could any one say that he
was displaying a spirit of greediness in his love for the classical? And were joy and sorrow,
however intense, less perceptible when expressed through a concise, well ordered medium? “What
a distorted view a man takes when he becomes so narrow-minded,” thought Daniel. “His ambition
makes it impossible for him to feel; his very wit militates against clear thinking.”

Thus they went from town to town, month after month, year after year. The company had in time
its traditions, its chronique scandaleuse, its oft-tested drawing cards, its regular patrons,
its favourite stands, and its stands that it avoided if humanly possible.

The local paper greeted them editorially; the children stood on the sidewalks to gape their
fill at the ladies from the theatre; the retired major bought a reserved seat for the first
performance; the barber offered his services; and the faculty of the Latin School held a special
meeting to decide whether they should permit their pupils to go to the opera or not. The Young
Men’s Christian Association voiced its protest against the nude shoulders of the artistes;
the members of the Casino turned up their noses at the achievements of the company; the police
insisted that the booth or hotel lobby in which they performed should be fireproof; the wife
of the mining engineer fell in love with the barytone, and her husband hired a number of hoodlums
to take their places in the gallery and hoot and hiss when the time came. And those who nag
under any circumstances requested more cheerfulness. They found the “Czar and Zimmermann” too
dull, the “Muette de Portici” too hackneyed. They insisted on “Madame Angot” and “Orpheus in
the Under World.”

There was always something wrong.

Daniel shuddered at the mere presence of these people; he was repelled by their occupations,
their amusements, and the cadavers of their ideals. He did not like the way they laughed; nor
could he stand their dismal feelings. He despised the houses out of which they crept, the detectives
at their windows, their butcher shops and hotels, their newspapers, their Sundays and their
work days. The world was pressing hard upon him. He had to look these people straight in the
face, and they compelled him to haggle with them for money, words, feelings, and ideas.

He learned in time, however, to see other things: the forests on the banks of the Main; the
great meadows in the hills of Franconia; the melancholy plains of Central Germany; the richly
variegated slopes of the Jura Mountains; the old cities with their walls and cathedrals, their
gloomy alleys and deserted castles. In time he came to see people in a different and easier
light. He saw the young and the old, the fair and the homely, the cheerful and the sad, the
poor—and the rich so far away and peaceful. They gave him, without discrimination, of their
wealth and their poverty. They laid their youth and their old age, their beauty and their ugliness,
their joys and their sorrows, at his feet.

And the country gave him the forests and the fields, the brooks and the rivers, the clouds
and the birds, and everything that is under the earth.

                                   X

It was winter. The company came to Ansbach, where they were to play in the former Margrave
Theatre. “Freischütz” was to be given, and Daniel had held a number of special rehearsals.

But a violent snow storm broke out on the day of the performance; scarcely two dozen people
attended.

How differently the violins sounded in this auditorium! The voices were, as it seemed, automatically
well balanced; there was in them an element of calm and assurance. The orchestra? Daniel had
so charmed it that it obeyed him as if it were a single instrument. At the close of the last
act, an old, grey-haired man stepped up to Daniel, smiled, took him by the hand, and thanked
him. It was Spindler.

Daniel went home with him; they talked about the past, the future, men and music. They could
not stop talking; nor could the snow stop falling. This did not disturb them. They met again
on the following day; but at the end of the week Spindler was taken ill, and had to go to bed.

As Daniel entered the residence of his old friend one morning, he learned that he had died
suddenly the night before. It had been a peaceful death.

On the third day, Daniel followed the funeral procession to the cemetery. When he left the
cemetery—there were but few people at the funeral—he went out into the snow-covered fields,
and spent the remainder of the day walking around.

That same night he sat down in his wretched quarters, and began his composition of Goethe’s
“Harzreise im Winter.” It was one of the profoundest and rarest of works ever created by a
musician, but it was destined, like the most of Daniel’s compositions, not to be preserved
to posterity. This was due to a tragic circumstance.

                                  XI

In the spring of 1886, the company went north to Hesse, then to Thuringia, gave performances
in a few of the towns in the Spessart region and along the Rhoen, the box receipts growing
smaller and smaller all the while. Dörmaul had not been seen since the previous autumn; the
salaries had not been paid for some time. Wurzelmann prophesied a speedy and fatal end of the
enterprise.

An engagement of unusual length had been planned for the town of Ochsenfurt. The company placed
its last hopes on the series, although it was already June and very warm. The thick, muggy
air of the gloomy hall in which they were to play left even the enthusiasts without much desire
to brighten up the monotony of provincial life by the enjoyment of grand opera.

They drew smaller houses from day to day. Finally there was no more money in the till; they
did not even have enough to move to the next town. To make matters worse, the tenor was taken
down with typhus, and the other singers refused to sing until they had been paid. Daniel wrote
to Dörmaul, but received no reply. Wurzelmann, instead of helping, fanned the easily inflamed
minds of the company into a fire of noise, malevolence, and hostility. They demanded that Daniel
give them what was due them, besieged him in his hotel, and finally brought matters to such
a pitch that the whole town was busied with their difficulties.

One afternoon, a stately gentleman between fifty-five and fifty-six years old entered Daniel’s
room, and introduced himself as Sylvester von Erfft, the owner of an estate.

His mission was as follows: Every year, at this season, the Chancellor of the German Empire
was taking the cure at the nearby Kissingen Baths. Herr von Erfft had made his acquaintance,
and the Prince, an enthusiastic landowner, had expressed the desire to visit Herr von Erfft’s
estate, the management of which was widely known as excellent in every way. In order to celebrate
the coming of the distinguished guest with befitting dignity, it had been decided not to have
any tawdry fireworks or cheap shouting, but to give a special performance of the “Marriage
of Figaro” in a rococo pavilion that belonged to the Erfft estate.

“This idea comes from my wife,” said Herr von Erfft. “Some ladies and gentlemen of noble birth
who belong to our circle will sing the various parts, and my daughter Sylvia, who studied for
two years in Milan with Gallifati, will take the part of the page. The only thing we lack is
a trained orchestra. For this reason I have come to you, Herr Kapellmeister, to see if you
could not bring your orchestra over and play for us.”

Daniel, though pleased with the kindly disposition of Herr von Erfft, could not make him any
definite promise, for he felt bound to the helpless, if not hopeless, opera company now in
his care. Herr von Erfft inquired more closely into the grounds of his doubt as to his ability
to have his orchestra undertake the special engagement, and then asked him whether he would
accept his help. “Gladly,” replied Daniel, “but such help as you can offer us will hardly be
of any avail. Our chief is a hardened sinner.”

Herr von Erfft went with Daniel to the mayor; a half-hour later an official dispatch was on
its way to the impresario Dörmaul. It was couched in language that was sufficient to inspire
any citizen with respect, referred to the desperate plight in which the company then found
itself, and demanded in a quite imperious tone that something be done at once.

Dörmaul was frightened; he sent the necessary money by return wire. In another telegram to
Wurzelmann he declared the company dissolved; most of the contracts had expired, and those
members of the company who put in claims were satisfied in one way or another.

Daniel was free. Wurzelmann said to him on taking leave: “Nothafft, you will never amount to
anything. I have been disappointed in you. You have far too much conscience. You cannot make
children out of morality, much less music. The swamp is quaggy, the summit rocky. Commit some
act of genuine swinishness, so that you may put a little ginger into your life.”

Daniel laid his hand on his shoulder, looked at him with his cold eyes, and said: “Judas.”

“All right, Judas so far as I am concerned,” said Wurzelmann. “I was not born to be nailed
to the cross; I am much more for the feasts with the Pharisees.”

He had got a position as critic on the Phœnix, one of the best known musical magazines.

Daniel found the members of the orchestra only too glad to take the excursion over to Herr
von Erfft’s. They were put up in a hotel; Daniel himself lived in the castle. The rehearsals
were held with zeal and seriousness. Though the name of the Chancellor was still darkened by
the clouds of political life, by the enmity of his opponents, by pettiness and misunderstanding,
all these young people felt the power of the great Immortal, and were delighted with the idea
of meaning something to him, even in the guise of an imaginary world and for only a fleeting
hour or two. Agatha von Erfft, the wife of Herr von Erfft, was indefatigable in preparing the
costumes, surmounting technical difficulties, and entertaining her guests. The twenty-four-year-old
Sylvia had inherited neither the strength of her mother nor the amiability of her father: she
was delicate and reserved. Nevertheless, she managed to put a great deal of winsomeness and
roguishness into the rôle of the cherub. Even her parents were surprised at the unexpected
wealth of her natural ability. Moreover, her voice was velvety and well trained. Accustomed
as he had been for years to the mediocre accomplishments of sore throats, Daniel nodded approval
when she sang.

The other members of the improvised company he handled with no greater indulgence than he had
shown the singers of the Dörmaul troupe. They had to put up with his gruffness and snappishness,
and to do it without a murmur. Herr von Erfft attended the rehearsals regularly, observing
Daniel at all times with quiet admiration. If Daniel spoke to any one with such seeming harshness
that the case was taken up with Herr von Erfft, the latter said: “Let the man have his way;
he knows his business; there are not many like him.”

Sylvia was the only one he treated with consideration. As soon as Herr von Erfft mentioned
her name, Daniel listened; and as soon as he had seen her, he knew that he had seen her before.
It was the time he was on his journey; he was standing out at the entrance to the park; some
one called to her. It seemed strange to him that he should remember this. Now he was with her,
and yet he was just as much of a stranger to her as ever.

But the thing that drew him to the beautiful girl had nothing to do with this chance incident;
nor was there the slightest trace of sensuousness in his feelings. It was all a sort of dream-like
sympathy, similar to the quest of memory in search of a forgotten happiness. It was a vaguer
and more plaguing sensation than the one that bound him so inviolably to Gertrude; it was more
sorrow than joy, more unrest than consciousness.

This forgotten happiness slumbered deep down in his soul; it had been washed away by the waves
of life. It was not Sylvia herself; it was perhaps a movement of her hand: where had he known
this same movement before? It was the way she tossed her head back; it was her proud look,
the blue of her eyes—but where had he seen all this before?

Forgotten, forgotten....

                                  XII

Just as everything was in full swing, just as they had decorated the buildings and arranged
the Herrenhaus, the news came of the death of King Ludwig of Bavaria. The newspapers bore a
broad black margin, and were crowded with details concerning the tragedy at the Starnbergersee.
The entire country, including the family of Herr von Erfft, mourned the loss of the art-loving
monarch genuinely and for a long while.

Of an operatic performance there could be no thought. The Chancellor cancelled his engagement,
and the young men who had assembled for the rehearsals went quietly home. Herr von Erfft gave
Daniel a considerable purse with which he might recompense his musicians for their trouble,
and, not wishing to treat Daniel himself as though he were an ordinary mechanic, he invited
him to spend a few more days on his estate.

Daniel did not decline; he had not in truth given one minute’s thought to where he would go
when he left.

After he distributed the present from Herr von Erfft among the musicians and discharged them,
he took a long walk in the woods. He ate a frugal meal in a village restaurant, and then sauntered
around until evening. When he returned, he found his hosts sitting at the table. He neglected
to beg their pardon; Frau Agatha looked at her husband and smiled, and told the maids to bring
in something for the Herr Kapellmeister. Sylvia had a book in her hand and was reading.

Daniel was a trifle ill at ease; he merely took a bite here and there. When Frau von Erfft
left the table, walked over to the window, and looked out into the cloudy sky, Daniel got up,
went into the adjoining room, and sat down at the piano.

He began to play Schubert’s “Song to Sylvia.” Having finished the impetuous, heart-felt song,
he struck up a variation, then a second, a third, and a fourth. The first was melancholy, the
second triumphant, the third meditative, the fourth dreamy. Each was a hymn to forgotten joy.

Herr von Erfft and Agatha were standing in the open door. Sylvia had sat down close beside
him on a tabourette; there was a pleasing, far-away look in her eyes, riveted though they were
to the floor.

He suddenly stopped, as if to avoid both thanks and applause. Sylvester von Erfft took a seat
opposite him, and asked him in a most kindly tone whether he had any definite plans for the
immediate future.

“I am going back to Nuremberg and get married,” said Daniel. “My fiancée has been waiting for
me for a long time.”

Herr von Erfft asked him whether he was not afraid of premature marriage bonds. Daniel replied
rather curtly that he needed some one to stand between him and the world.

“You need some one to act as a sort of buffer,” said Frau Agatha sarcastically. Daniel looked
at her angrily.

“Buffer? No, but a guardian angel if such a creature can shield me from rebuffs,” said Daniel,
even more brusquely than he had spoken the first time.

“Why do you wish to settle down and live in Nuremberg, a city of such one-sided commercial
interests?” continued Herr von Erfft, with an almost solicitous caution. “Would you not have
a much better opportunity as a composer in one of the great cities?”

“It is impossible to separate the daughter from her father,” replied Daniel with unusual candour.
“It is impossible. Nor is it possible to get the old man to tear himself away from his former
associations. He was born and reared there. And I do not wish to live alone any longer. Everybody
needs a companion; even the miner digs with a better heart, when he knows that up on the earth
above his wife is preparing the soup. I must say, however, that I am not so much taken up with
the soup phase of married life: it is the dear little soul that will belong to me that interests
me.”

He turned around, and struck a minor chord.

“And even if everything were different, your great cities would not attract me,” he began again,
wrinkling his face in a most bizarre way. “What would I get out of them? Companions? I have
had enough of them. Music I can study at home. I can summon the masters of all ages to my study.
Fame and riches will find their way to me, if they wish to. The dawn is missed only by those
who are too indolent to get up, and real music is heard by all except the deaf. God attends
to everything else; man has nothing to do with it.”

He struck another chord, this time in a major key.

Herr von Erfft and his wife looked at him with evident joy and sympathy. Sylvia whispered something
to her mother, who then said to Daniel: “I have a sister living in Nuremberg, Baroness Clotilde
von Auffenberg. From the time she was a mere child she was an ardent lover of good music. If
I give you a letter of introduction to her, I am quite sure she will welcome you with open
arms. She is unfortunately not in the best of health, and a heavy fate is just now hanging
over her; but she has a warm heart, and her affections are trustworthy.”

Daniel looked down at the floor. He thought of Gertrude and his future life with her, and murmured
a few words of gratitude. Frau von Erfft went at once to her desk, and wrote a detailed letter
to her sister. When she had finished it, she gave it to Daniel with a good-natured smile.

The next morning he left the castle with the feeling of regret that one experiences on leaving
the dwelling place of peace and separating from noble friends.

                                 XIII

The streets of Nuremberg were hung with black banners. It was raining. Daniel took a cheap
room in The Bear.

It had already grown dark when he started to Jordan’s. He met Benno at the front door. He did
not recognise the foppishly-dressed young man, and was on the point of passing by without speaking
to him; but Benno stopped, and laughed out loud.

“Whew, the Herr Kapellmeister!” he cried, and his pale face, already showing the signs of dissipation,
took on a scornful expression. “Be careful, my friend, or Gertrude will swoon.”

Daniel asked if they were all well. Benno replied that there was no lack of good health, though
some of the family were a little short of change. Then he laughed again. He spoke of his father,
said the old gentleman was not getting along very well, that he was having quite a little trouble
to get anything to do, but then what could be expected with a man of his age, and the competition
and the hard times! Daniel asked if Eleanore was at home. No, she was not at home: she had
gone on a visit with Frau Rübsam over to Pommersfelden, and planned to stay there for a few
weeks. “Well, I’ll have to be hurrying along,” said Benno, “my fraternity brothers are waiting
for me.”

“Good gracious! Do you have fraternity brothers too?”

“Of course! They are the spice of my life! We have a holiday to-day: The King’s funeral. Well,
God bless you, Herr Kapellmeister, I must be going.”

Daniel went up and rang the bell; Gertrude came to the door. It was dark; each could see only
the outline of the other.

“Oh, it’s you, Daniel!” she whispered, happy as happy could be. She came up to him, and laid
her face on his shoulder.

Daniel was surprised at the regularity of his pulse. Yesterday the mere thought of this meeting
took his breath. Now he held Gertrude in his arms, and was amazed to find that he was perfectly
calm and composed.

In the room he led her over to the lamp, and looked at her for a long while, fixedly and seriously.
She grew pale at the sight of him: he was so strange and so terrible.

Then he took her by the hand, led her over to the sofa, sat down beside her, and told her of
his plans. Her wishes and his tallied exactly. He wanted to get married within four weeks.
Very well; she would get married.

He found her the same unqualifiedly submissive girl. In her eyes there was an expression of
fatal docility; it terrified him. There was no cowardly doubt in her soul; her cool hand lay
in his and did not twitch. With her hand her whole soul, her whole life, lay in his hand. He
wanted to raise some doubt in her mind: he spoke in a down-hearted tone of his future prospects;
he said that there was very little hope of his ever winning recognition from the world for
his compositions.

“What is the good of recognition?” she asked. “They can take nothing from you, and what they
give you is clear gain.”

He became silent. The feeling of her worth to him swept like a fiery meteor through the heaven
of his existence.

The statement that they were going to remain in Nuremberg made her happy, particularly because
of her father. She said there was a small apartment for rent on Ægydius Place, three rooms,
a very quiet neighbourhood. They went over to the window; Gertrude showed him the house. It
was close to the church, right where the Place makes a turn.

Jordan came in, and welcomed Daniel with a long handshake. His hair had become greyer, he walked
with more of a stoop, and his clothes showed traces of neglect.

When he heard what Daniel and Gertrude were planning to do, he shook his head: “It is a bad
year, children. Why are you in such a hurry? Both of you are still young.”

“If we were older, we would have less courage,” replied Daniel.

Jordan took a seat, and buried his face in his hands. In course of time he looked up, and said
that three years ago he had only eight thousand marks in the bank; that hard times had forced
him to draw on this sum to keep the house going; and that to-day there was hardly a third of
it left. Two thousand marks was all he could give Gertrude as a dowry; with that they would
have to be satisfied, and get along as well as they could.

“We don’t need any more,” said Daniel; “as a matter of fact I did not expect that much. Now
I haven’t a care in the world; I am ready for anything.”

A bat flew in at the open window, and then quietly flew out again. It had stopped raining.
You could still hear the water trickling and splashing down the leaders and in the pipes. There
was something heavy, portentous, in the air of this June evening.

                                  XIV

At first Daniel had received small bits of news from England about Benda, but for a year and
a half he had not heard a word. When Eleanore returned from Pommersfelden in July, she told
him that she had received a letter from Benda in April, and that she had sent him this letter
when he was at Naumburg. Daniel, however, had never received it, and the investigations which
he made proved fruitless.

Benda’s mother was not in the city; she was living with relatives in Worms, but had kept her
apartment at Herr Carovius’s.

Frau von Auffenberg was at Bad Ems, and did not plan to return until September. Daniel looked
up old friends, and rebound the ties of former days. He also succeeded in getting a number
of students to tutor, an occupation that netted him a little spending money.

He had to attend to a great deal of business for which he was quite unfit. He had imagined
that he could get married just as he might go to a shop and buy something: he would not make
any noise, nor would it take much time. He had a hundred moods, a hundred objections, a hundred
grimaces. The apartment on Ægydius Place was already rented. It embittered him to think that
in order to live with a person you loved, you had to have tables, beds, chairs, cupboards,
lamps, glasses, plates, garbage cans, water pails, window cushions, and a thousand and one
other foolish objects.

There was a great deal of talk in the city about the marriage. The people said they did not
know what Jordan could be thinking of. They were convinced that he was in desperate financial
straits if he would marry his daughter to an impecunious musician.

Daniel found everything hard: every day was his Day of Judgment. A melody was gnawing at his
heart, trying to take on a pure and finished form. Freedom sounded in his ears with voices
from above; his quiet fiancée begged for comradeship. The task to which he had dedicated himself
demanded loneliness; then his blood carried him along and away, and he became like wax, but wild.

He would rush to Jordan’s house, enter the living room, his hair all dishevelled, sit down
where the two sisters were working on Gertrude’s trousseau, and never utter a syllable until
Gertrude would come up to him and lay her hand on his forehead. He thrust her back, but she
smiled gently. At times, though none too frequently, he would take her by the arms and pull
her down to him. When he did this, Eleanore would smile with marked demureness, as if it were
not right for her to see two people in love.

There was a second-hand baby grand piano in Jordan’s living room. Daniel played on it in the
evening, and the sisters listened. Gertrude was like a woman wrapt in peaceful slumber, her
every wish having been fulfilled, with kindly spirits watching over her. Eleanore, however,
was wide awake; she was awake and meditating.

                                  XV

The day of the wedding arrived. At half past nine in the morning, Daniel appeared in Jordan’s
house. He wore an afternoon suit and a high hat! He was vexed, and villanous to behold, a picture
of misery.

Benno, the man of the world, was forced to leave the room. No sooner was he outside than he
laughed so heartily that he fell into a clothes basket. He did not approve of this marriage;
he was ashamed to tell his friends about it.

Gertrude wore a plain street dress and a little virgin bonnet, then prescribed by fashion.
She sat by the table, and gazed into space with wide-opened eyes.

Eleanore came into the room with a wreath of myrtle. “You must put this on, Gertrude,” she
said, “just to please us; just to make us feel that you are a real bride. Otherwise you look
too sober, too much as though you two were going to the recorder’s office on profane business.”

“Where did you get that wreath?” asked Jordan.

“I found it in an old chest; it is mother’s bridal wreath.”

“Really? Mother’s bridal wreath?” murmured Jordan, as he looked at the faded myrtle.

“Put it on, Gertrude,” Eleanore again requested, but Gertrude looked first at Daniel, and then
laid it to one side.

Eleanore went up to the mirror, and put it on her own head.

“Don’t do that, child,” said Jordan with a melancholy smile. “Superstitious people say that
you will remain an old maid forever, if you wear the wreath of another.”

“Then I will remain an old maid, and gladly so,” said Eleanore.

She turned away from the mirror, and looked at Daniel half unconscious of what she was doing.
The blond of her eyelashes had turned almost grey, the red of her lips had been dotted with
little spots from her smiling, and her neck was like something liquid and disembodied.

Daniel saw all this. He looked at the Undine-like figure of the girl. It seemed to him that
he had not seen her since the day of his return, that he had not noticed that she had become
more mature, more beautiful, and more lovely. All of a sudden he felt as if he were going to
swoon. It went through him like a flash: Here, here was what he had forgotten; here was the
countenance, the eye, the figure, the movement that had stood before him, and he, fool, unspeakable
fool, had been struck by blindness.

Gertrude had a fearful suspicion of the experience he was going through. She arose, and looked
at Daniel in horror. He hastened up to her as if he were fleeing, and seized her hands. Eleanore,
believing she had aroused Daniel’s displeasure by some word or gesture, snatched the myrtle
wreath from her hair.

Jordan had paid no attention to these incidents. Bringing at last his restless pacing back
and forth to an end, he took out his watch, looked at it, and said it was time they were going.
Eleanore, who had displayed a most curious disposition the whole morning, asked them to wait
a minute. Before they could find out why she wished them to wait, the door bell rang, and she
ran out.

She returned with a radiant expression on her face; Marian Nothafft followed her. Marian composed
herself only with extreme difficulty. Her eyes roamed about over the circle of people before
her, partly as if she were frightened, partly as if she were looking for some one.

Mother and son stood face to face in absolute silence. That was the work of Eleanore.

Marian said she was living with her sister Theresa; that she had arrived the day before; and
that she wished to return this evening.

“I am glad, Mother, that you could come,” said Daniel with a stifled voice.

Marian laid her hand on his head; she then went up to Gertrude, and did the same.

After the wedding, Jordan gave a luncheon for his children. In the afternoon they all started
off in two hired coaches. Daniel had never seen his mother so cheerful; but it was useless
to ask her to prolong her visit. While this was being discussed, she and Eleanore exchanged
knowing glances.

As evening drew on, Daniel and Gertrude betook themselves to their home.

                                  XVI

It is night. The antiquated old square is deserted. The bell in the church tower has struck
eleven; the lights in the windows die out, slowly, one by one.

The figure of a woman is seen coming up the alley. She is spying anxiously about, before her
and behind her. Finally she stops before the little house in which Daniel and Gertrude live.
Is it a living creature? Is it not rather an uncanny gnome? The garments hang loose about the
unshapely body; a crumpled straw hat covers the mad-looking face; the shoulders are raised;
the fists are clenched; the eyes are glassy.

Suddenly there is a scream. The woman hastens over toward the church, falls on her knees, and
sinks her teeth with frenzied madness into the wooden pickets of the fence. After some time
she rises, stares up once more at the windows with distorted lips, and then moves away with
slow, dragging steps.

It was Philippina Schimmelweis. She kept going about the streets in this fashion until break
of day.

                          DANIEL AND GERTRUDE

                                   I

The Reichstag had voted to extend the period during which the Socialist law would be in effect;
the passing of a new army bill was also to be expected. These two measures had provoked tumultuous
discord in many parts of the country.

The Social Democrats were planning a parade through the main streets of the city in October,
but the police had already forbidden their demonstration. The evening the edict was issued
the regiments stood at alert in the barracks; feeling ran high throughout the entire city.
In Wöhrd and Plobenhof there had been a number of riots; in the narrow streets of the central
zone thousands of workmen had stormed the Rathaus.

Every now and then there would come a long, shrill whistle from the silent mass, followed at
once by the heavy rolling of drums at the guard house.

Among those who came down from the direction of Koenig Street was the workman Wachsmuth. In
the vicinity of the Schimmelweis shop he delivered an excited harangue against the former member
of the party; his words fell on fruitful soil. A locksmith’s apprentice who had lost some money
through the Prudentia violently defamed the character of the bookseller.

The mob gathered before the lighted shop window. Wachsmuth stood by the door, and demanded
that the traitor be suspended from a lamp post before this day’s sun had set. A stone flew
through the air over their heads, and crashed through the window; pieces of glass flew in all
directions. Thereupon a dozen fellows rushed into the shop, exclaiming, “Where is the dirty
dog? Let us get at the blood-sucker!” They wanted to teach him a lesson he would never forget.

Before Theresa could open her mouth, scraps of books and newspapers were flying in every direction,
and pamphlets were being trampled under foot. A forest of arms were reaching out for the shelves,
and bundles of books were falling to the floor, like stacks of cards piled up by a child and
blown over by the wind. Zwanziger had taken refuge at the top of the ladder; he was howling.
Theresa stood by the till looking like the ghost of ages. Philippina came in through the back
door, and eyed what was going on without one visible trace of surprise or discomfort; she merely
smiled. Just then the policeman’s whistle blew; in less time than it takes to draw one breath,
the rebellious insurgents were beating a hasty retreat.

When Theresa regained consciousness, the shop was empty; and the street in front of the shop
was as deserted as it ordinarily is at midnight. After some time, the chief of police came
up; he was followed by a crowd of curious people, who stood around and gaped at the scene of
devastation.

Jason Philip, seeing what was coming, had left the shop betimes and hidden in his house. He
had even locked the front door and was sunk down on a chair, his teeth clappering with vigour
and regularity.

He returned at last to the shop, and with heart-rending dignity faced the dispenser of justice,
who by this time had put in his appearance. He said: “And this is what I get from people for
whom I have sacrificed my money and my blood.”

In giving his testimony as an eyewitness, Zwanziger displayed boastful hardiness in his narration
of details. Philippina looked at him with venomous contempt from under the imbecile locks that
hung down over her forehead, and murmured: “You disgusting coward!”

When Jason Philip came back from the inn, he said: “To believe that people can be ruled without
the knout is a fatal delusion.” With that he stepped into his embroidered slippers—“For tired
Father—Consolation.” The slippers had aged, and so had Jason Philip. His beard was streaked
with grey.

Theresa took an invoice of the damage the mob had done: she felt that Jason Philip was a ruined
man.

As he lay stretched out in bed, Jason Philip said: “The first thing I want to do is to have
a serious, heart-to-heart talk with Baron Auffenberg. The Liberal Party is going to take direct
action against the impudence of the lower classes, or it is going to lose a constituent.”

“How many quarts of beer did you drink?” asked Theresa from the depths of the pillows.

“Two.”

“You are a liar.”

