But perhaps you "do not care for out-door things?"  Then get a bit of wood and a few carving
tools, and see what dainty wonders you can make at home.  Or lose your cares in "illuminating";
or bury them fathom deep in German.  From any of these, well begun and carried on, you will
come back re-created for your work: made over "as good as new."  Not poisoned with bad air,
nor wearied by late hours; not singed and jaded with chagrin, vanity, and disappointment. 
Riding, rowing, archery, fishing, ought to give Christian people enough exercise, without their
being obliged to frequent ball rooms to find it; and as for the "grace" people talk of, nothing
teaches that like a heart full of graces--"love, joy, peace," and the rest.  Do they flourish
at your doubtful entertainments? do they not rather droop and hang their heads, like the dear
flowers in your bouquet?

And if people sought their refreshment among all those sweet and wholesome things, conversation
would no longer be the difficult and the dry thing it is in many a company.  There would be
something to talk about worth talking of; and men of sense would venture to talk sense, even
to women; and gossip would go down.  How much more interesting is a butterfly, than the curtains
of the house across the way!--

The world is full of joys and pleasures and wonders, even yet, outside of Eden.  So full that
as I said, you can only begin to taste them all, in all your life.  I think it is stated that
no ordinary life-term would suffice for the thorough study of merely the great family of orchids.
And all these things which I have named (the list is really much longer), yes, every one of
them, rightly used, will ennoble you, and build you up, and refresh you, with every time of
using.  Not like the snail which crawled up three feet every day and fell back two feet every
night: onward and upward shall be your course; with soul and body and mind re-created, restored
by right means, to right ends.  Only make one rule to yourself: where anything is doubtful,
let it alone.

If you tell me I do not know the fascination of these other things, I tell you that I do; and
in one line at least have known it as deeply as any one could.  But I have also known, that
with the coming of Christ into my heart, with the new knowledge of his presence, the old taste
fell dead in a moment, and never arose again.  I cannot say it was not much to give up, for
it was nothing.  The former fascination fell off, like the dry skin of a chrysalis when the
butterfly spreads its wings.  And here we reach the very point of the whole difficulty.  For
with all their crosses, privations, and givings-up, the Lord's people are not meant to dwell
in any land of darkness or of drought.  Listen to some of the promises.

"The righteous shall hold on his way, and he that hath clean hands shall be stronger and stronger."
[3]

"They go from strength to strength." [4]

"They that wait on the Lord shall renew their strength." [5]

For why?

"For the joy of the Lord is your strength." [6]

I believe the words are true for the body as for the mind.  It is nowhere promised that you
shall not be tired; but so waiting, so living, so abiding by the head waters of all strength,
the most lovely, fresh, ever-renewed life shall be yours.

"The righteous shall flourish like the palm tree." [7]

"Their souls shall be as a watered garden." [8]

It is the man "whose delight is in the law of the Lord" who not only "bringeth forth his fruit
in his season," but also when the time for freshness and life and growth seems over,

"They shall still bring forth fruit in old age." [9]

