Mr. Madison, a shapeless hillock with a large, harassed, red face, evidently suffered from
the heat: his gray hair was rumpled back from a damp forehead; the sleeves of his black alpaca
coat were pulled up to the elbow above his uncuffed white shirtsleeves; and he carried in one
mottled hand the ruins of a palm-leaf fan, in the other a balled wet handkerchief which released
an aroma of camphor upon the banana-burdened air. He bore evidences of inadequate adjustment
after a disturbed siesta, but, exercising a mechanical cordiality, preceded himself into the
room by a genial half-cough and a hearty, "Well-well-well," as if wishing to indicate a spirit
of polite, even excited, hospitality.

"I expected you might be turning up, after your letter," he said, shaking hands. "Well, well,
well! I remember you as a boy. Wouldn't have known you, of course; but I expect you'll find
the town about as much changed as you are."

With a father's blindness to all that is really vital, he concluded his greeting inconsequently:
"Oh, this is my little girl Cora."

"Run along, little girl," said the fat father.

His little girl's radiant glance at the alert visitor imparted her thorough comprehension of
all the old man's absurdities, which had reached their climax in her dismissal. Her parting
look, falling from Corliss's face to the waste-basket at his feet, just touched the rose in
his hand as she passed through the door.

CHAPTER TWO

Cora paused in the hall at a point about twenty feet from the door, a girlish stratagem frequently
of surprising advantage to the practitioner; but the two men had begun to speak of the weather.
Suffering a momentary disappointment, she went on, stepping silently, and passed through a
door at the end of the hall into a large and barren looking dining-room, stiffly and skimpily
furnished, but well-lighted, owing to the fact that one end of it had been transformed into
a narrow "conservatory," a glass alcove now tenanted by two dried palms and a number of vacant
jars and earthen crocks.

Here her sister sat by an open window, repairing masculine underwear; and a handsome, shabby,
dirty boy of about thirteen sprawled on the floor of the "conservatory" unloosing upon its
innocent, cracked, old black and white tiles a ghastly family of snakes, owls, and visaged
crescent moons, in orange, green, and other loathsome chalks. As Cora entered from the hall,
a woman of fifty came in at a door opposite, and, a dust-cloth retained under her left arm,
an unsheathed weapon ready for emergency, leaned sociably against the door-casing and continued
to polish a tablespoon with a bit of powdered chamois-skin. She was tall and slightly bent;
and, like the flat, old, silver spoon in her hand, seemed to have been worn thin by use; yet
it was plain that the three young people in the room "got their looks" from her. Her eyes,
if tired, were tolerant and fond; and her voice held its youth and something of the music of
Cora's.

"What is he like?" She addressed the daughter by the window.

"Why don't you ask Coralie?" suggested the sprawling artist, relaxing his hideous labour. He
pronounced his sister's name with intense bitterness. He called it "Cora-lee," with an implication
far from subtle that his sister had at some time thus Gallicized herself, presumably for masculine
favour; and he was pleased to receive tribute to his satire in a flash of dislike from her
lovely eyes.

"I ask Laura because it was Laura who went to the door," Mrs. Madison answered. "I do not ask
Cora because Cora hasn't seen him. Do I satisfy you, Hedrick?"

"`Cora hasn't seen him!'" the boy hooted mockingly. "She hasn't? She was peeking out of the
library shutters when he came up the front walk, and she wouldn't let me go to the door; she
told Laura to go, but first she took the library waste-basket and laid one o' them roses----"

"Those roses," said Cora sharply. "He will hang around the neighbours' stables. I think you
ought to do something about it, mother."

"Them roses!" repeated Hedrick fiercely. "One o' them roses Dick Lindley sent her this morning.
Laid it in the waste-basket and sneaked it into the reception room for an excuse to go galloping
in and----"

"`Galloping'?" said Mrs. Madison gravely.

"It was a pretty bum excuse," continued the unaffected youth, "but you bet your life you'll
never beat our Cora-lee when there's a person in pants on the premises! It's sickening." He
rose, and performed something like a toe-dance, a supposed imitation of his sister's mincing
approach to the visitor. "Oh, dear, I am such a little sweety! Here I am all alone just reeking
with Browning-and-Tennyson and thinking to myself about such lovely things, and walking around
looking for my nice, pretty rose. Where can it be? Oh heavens, Mister, are you here? Oh my,
I never, never thought that there was a man here! How you frighten me! See what a shy little
thing I am? You do see, don't you, old sweeticums? Ta, ta, here's papa. Remember me by that
rose, 'cause it's just like me. Me and it's twins, you see, cutie-sugar!" The diabolical boy
then concluded with a reversion to the severity of his own manner: "If she was my daughter
I'd whip her!"

His indignation was left in the air, for the three ladies had instinctively united against
him, treacherously including his private feud in the sex-war of the ages: Cora jumped lightly
upon the table and sat whistling and polishing the nails of one hand upon the palm of another;
Laura continued to sew without looking up, and Mrs. Madison, conquering a tendency to laugh,
preserved a serene countenance and said ruminatively:

"They were all rather queer, the Corlisses."

Hedrick stared incredulously, baffled; but men must expect these things, and this was no doubt
a helpful item in his education.

"I wonder if he wants to sell the house," said Mrs. Madison.

"I wish he would. Anything that would make father get out of it!" Cora exclaimed. "I hope Mr.
Corliss will burn it if he doesn't sell it."

"He might want to live here himself."

"He!" Cora emitted a derisive outcry.

Her mother gave her a quick, odd look, in which there was a real alarm. "What is he like, Cora?"

"Awfully foreign and distinguished!"

This brought Hedrick to confront her with a leap as of some wild animal under a lash. He landed
close to her; his face awful.

"Princely, I should call him," said Cora, her enthusiasm undaunted. "Distinctly princely!"

"Princely," moaned Hedrick. "Pe-rin-sley!"

"Hedrick!" Mrs. Madison reproved him automatically. "In what way is he `foreign,' Cora?"

"Oh, every way." Cora let her glance rest dreamily upon the goaded boy. "He has a splendid
head set upon a magnificent torso----"

"Torso!" Hedrick whispered hoarsely.

"Tall, a glorious figure--like a young guardsman's." Madness was gathering in her brother's
eyes; and observing it with quiet pleasure, she added: "One sees immediately he has the grand
manner, the bel air."

Hedrick exploded. "`Bel air'!" he screamed, and began to jump up and down, tossing his arms
frantically, and gasping with emotion. "Oh, bel air! Oh, blah! `Henry Esmond!' Been readin'
`Henry Esmond!' Oh, you be-yoo-tiful Cora-Beatrix-a-lee! Magganifisent torso! Gullo-rious figgi-your!
Bel air! Oh, slush! Oh, luv-a-ly slush!" He cast himself convulsively upon the floor, full
length. "Luv-a-ly, luv-a-ly slush!"

"He is thirty, I should say," continued Cora, thoughtfully. "Yes--about thirty. A strong, keen
face, rather tanned. He's between fair and dark----"

Hedrick raised himself to the attitude of the "Dying Gaul." "And with `hair slightly silvered
at the temples!' Ain't his hair slightly silvered at the temples?" he cried imploringly. "Oh,
sister, in pity's name let his hair be slightly silvered at the temples? Only three grains
of corn, your Grace; my children are starving!"

He collapsed again, laid his face upon his extended arms, and writhed.

"He has rather wonderful eyes," said Cora. "They seem to look right through you."

"Slush, slush, luv-a-ly slush," came in muffled tones from the floor.

"And he wears his clothes so well--so differently! You feel at once that he's not a person,
but a personage."

Hedrick sat up, his eyes closed, his features contorted as with agony, and chanted, impromptu:

    "Slush, slush, luv-a-ly, slush!
    Le'ss all go a-swimmin' in a dollar's worth o' mush.
    Slush in the morning, slush at night,
    If I don't get my slush I'm bound to get tight!"

"Hedrick!" said his mother.

"Altogether I should say that Mr. Valentine Corliss looks as if he lived up to his name," Cora
went on tranquilly. "Valentine Corliss of Corliss Street--I think I rather like the sound of
that name." She let her beautiful voice linger upon it, caressingly. "Valentine Corliss."

Hedrick opened his eyes, allowed his countenance to resume its ordinary proportions, and spoke
another name slowly and with honeyed thoughtfulness:

"Ray Vilas."

This was the shot that told. Cora sprang down from the table with an exclamation.

Hedrick, subduing elation, added gently, in a mournful whisper:

"Poor old Dick Lindley!"

His efforts to sting his sister were completely successful at last: Cora was visibly agitated,
and appealed hotly to her mother. "Am I to bear this kind of thing all my life? Aren't you
ever going to punish his insolence?"

"Hedrick, Hedrick!" said Mrs. Madison sadly.

Cora turned to the girl by the window with a pathetic gesture. "Laura----" she said, and hesitated.

Laura Madison looked up into her sister's troubled eyes.

"I feel so morbid," said Cora, flushing a little and glancing away. "I wish----" She stopped.

The silent Laura set aside her work, rose and went out of the room. Her cheeks, too, had reddened
faintly, a circumstance sharply noted by the terrible boy. He sat where he was, asprawl, propped
by his arms behind him, watching with acute concentration the injured departure of Cora, following
her sister. At the door, Cora, without pausing, threw him a look over her shoulder: a full-eyed
shot of frankest hatred.

A few moments later, magnificent chords sounded through the house. The piano was old, but tuned
to the middle of the note, and the keys were swept by a master hand. The wires were not hammered;
they were touched knowingly as by the player's own fingers, and so they sang--and from out
among the chords there stole an errant melody. This was not "piano-playing" and not a pianist's
triumphant nimbleness--it was music. Art is the language of a heart that knows how to speak,
and a heart that knew how was speaking here. What it told was something immeasurably wistful,
something that might have welled up in the breast of a young girl standing at twilight in an
April orchard. It was the inexpressible made into sound, an improvisation by a master player.

"You hear what she's up to?" said Hedrick, turning his head at last. But his mother had departed.

He again extended himself flat upon the floor, face downward, this time as a necessary preliminary
to rising after a manner of his own invention. Mysteriously he became higher in the middle,
his body slowly forming first a round and then a pointed arch, with forehead, knees, and elbows
touching the floor. A brilliantly executed manoeuvre closed his Gothic period, set him upright
and upon his feet; then, without ostentation, he proceeded to the kitchen, where he found his
mother polishing a sugar-bowl.

He challenged her with a damnatory gesture in the direction of the music. "You hear what Cora's
up to?"

Mrs. Madison's expression was disturbed; she gave her son a look almost of appeal, and said,
gently:

"I believe there's nothing precisely criminal in her getting Laura to play for her. Laura's
playing always soothes her when she feels out of sorts--and--you weren't very considerate of
her, Hedrick. You upset her."

"Mentioning Ray Vilas, you mean?" he demanded.

"You weren't kind."

"She deserves it. Look at her! You know why she's got Laura at the piano now."

"It's--it's because you worried her," his mother faltered evasively. "Besides, it is very hot,
and Cora isn't as strong as she looks. She said she felt morbid and----"

"Morbid? Blah!" interrupted the direct boy. "She's started after this Corliss man just like
she did for Vilas. If I was Dick Lindley I wouldn't stand for Cora's----"

"Hedrick!" His mother checked his outburst pleadingly. "Cora has so much harder time than the
other girls; they're all so much better off. They seem to get everything they want, just by
asking: nice clothes and jewellery--and automobiles. That seems to make a great difference
nowadays; they all seem to have automobiles. We're so dreadfully poor, and Cora has to struggle
so for what good times she----"

"Her?" the boy jibed bitterly. "I don't see her doing any particular struggling." He waved
his hand in a wide gesture. "She takes it all!"

"There, there!" the mother said, and, as if feeling the need of placating this harsh judge,
continued gently: "Cora isn't strong, Hedrick, and she does have a hard time. Almost every
one of the other girls in her set is at the seashore or somewhere having a gay summer. You
don't realize, but it's mortifying to have to be the only one to stay at home, with everybody
knowing it's because your father can't afford to send her. And this house is so hopeless,"
Mrs. Madison went on, extending her plea hopefully; "it's impossible to make it attractive,
but Cora keeps trying and trying: she was all morning on her knees gilding those chairs for
the music-room, poor child, and----"

"`Music-room'!" sneered the boy. "Gilt chairs! All show-off! That's all she ever thinks about.
It's all there is to Cora, just show-off, so she'll get a string o' fellows chasin' after her.
She's started for this Corliss just exactly the way she did for Ray Vilas!"

"Hedrick!"

"Just look at her!" he cried vehemently. "Don't you know she's tryin' to make this Corliss
think it's her playin' the piano right now?"

"Oh, no----"

"Didn't she do that with Ray Vilas?" he demanded quickly. "Wasn't that exactly what she did
the first time he ever came here--got Laura to play and made him think it was her? Didn't she?"

"Oh--just in fun." Mrs. Madison's tone lacked conviction; she turned, a little confusedly,
from the glaring boy and fumbled among the silver on the kitchen table. "Besides--she told
him afterward that it was Laura."

"He walked in on her one day when she was battin' away at the piano herself with her back to
the door. Then she pretended it had been a joke, and he was so far gone by that time he didn't
care. He's crazy, anyway," added the youth, casually. "Who is this Corliss?"

"He owns this house. His family were early settlers and used to be very prominent, but they're
all dead except this one. His mother was a widow; she went abroad to live and took him with
her when he was about your age, and I don't think he's ever been back since."

"Did he use to live in this house?"

"No; an aunt of his did. She left it to him when she died, two years ago. Your father was agent
for her."

"You think this Corliss wants to sell it?"

"It's been for sale all the time he's owned it. That's why we moved here; it made the rent low."

"Is he rich?"

"They used to have money, but maybe it's all spent. It seemed to me he might want to raise
money on the house, because I don't see any other reason that could bring him back here. He's
already mortgaged it pretty heavily, your father told me. I don't----" Mrs. Madison paused
abruptly, her eyes widening at a dismaying thought. "Oh, I do hope your father will know better
than to ask him to stay to dinner!"

Hedrick's expression became cryptic. "Father won't ask him," he said. "But I'll bet you a thousand
dollars he stays!"

The mother followed her son's thought and did not seek to elicit verbal explanation of the
certainty which justified so large a venture. "Oh, I hope not," she said. "Sarah's threatening
to leave, anyway; and she gets so cross if there's extra cooking on wash-days."

"Well, Sarah'll have to get cross," said the boy grimly; "and I'll have to plug out and go
for a quart of brick ice-cream and carry it home in all this heat; and Laura and you'll have
to stand over the stove with Sarah; and father'll have to change his shirt; and we'll all have
to toil and moil and sweat and suffer while Cora-lee sits out on the front porch and talks
toodle-do-dums to her new duke. And then she'll have you go out and kid him along while----"

"Hedrick!"

"Yes, you will!--while she gets herself all dressed and powdered up again. After that, she'll
do her share of the work: she'll strain her poor back carryin' Dick Lindley's flowers down
the back stairs and stickin' 'em in a vase over a hole in the tablecloth that Laura hasn't
had time to sew up. You wait and see!"

The gloomy realism of this prophecy was not without effect upon the seer's mother. "Oh, no!"
she exclaimed, protestingly. "We really can't manage it. I'm sure Cora won't want to ask him----"

"You'll see!"

"No; I'm sure she wouldn't think of it, but if she does I'll tell her we can't. We really can't,
to-day."

Her son looked pityingly upon her. "She ought to be my  daughter," he said, the sinister implication
all too plain;--"just about five minutes!"

With that, he effectively closed the interview and left her.

He returned to his abandoned art labours in the "conservatory," and meditatively perpetrated
monstrosities upon the tiles for the next half-hour, at the end of which he concealed his box
of chalks, with an anxiety possibly not unwarranted, beneath the sideboard; and made his way
toward the front door, first glancing, unseen, into the kitchen where his mother still pursued
the silver. He walked through the hall on tiptoe, taking care to step upon the much stained
and worn strip of "Turkish" carpet, and not upon the more resonant wooden floor. The music
had ceased long since.

The open doorway was like a brilliantly painted picture hung upon the darkness of the hall,
though its human centre of interest was no startling bit of work, consisting of Mr. Madison
pottering aimlessly about the sun-flooded, unkempt lawn, fanning himself, and now and then
stooping to pull up one of the thousands of plantain-weeds that beset the grass. With him the
little spy had no concern; but from a part of the porch out of sight from the hall came Cora's
exquisite voice and the light and pleasant baritone of the visitor. Hedrick flattened himself
in a corner just inside the door.

"I should break any engagement whatsoever if I had one," Mr. Corliss was saying with what the
eavesdropper considered an offensively "foreign" accent and an equally unjustifiable gallantry;
"but of course I haven't: I am so utterly a stranger here. Your mother is immensely hospitable
to wish you to ask me, and I'll be only too glad to stay. Perhaps after dinner you'll be very,
very kind and play again? Of course you know how remarkable such----"

"Oh, just improvising," Cora tossed off, carelessly, with a deprecatory ripple of laughter.
"It's purely with the mood, you see. I can't make myself do things. No; I fancy I shall not
play again today."

There was a moment's silence.

"Shan't I fasten that in your buttonhole for you," said Cora.

"You see how patiently I've been awaiting the offer!"

There was another little silence; and the listener was able to construct a picture (possibly
in part from an active memory) of Cora's delicate hands uplifted to the gentleman's lapel and
Cora's eyes for a moment likewise uplifted.

"Yes, one has moods," she said, dreamily. "I am all moods. I think you are too, Mr. Corliss.
You look moody. Aren't you?"

A horrible grin might have been seen to disfigure the shadow in the corner just within the doorway.

CHAPTER THREE

It was cooler outdoors, after dinner, in the dusk of that evening; nevertheless three members
of the Madison family denied themselves the breeze, and, as by a tacitly recognized and habitual
house-rule, so disposed themselves as to afford the most agreeable isolation for the younger
daughter and the guest, who occupied wicker chairs upon the porch. The mother and father sat
beneath a hot, gas droplight in the small "library"; Mrs. Madison with an evening newspaper,
her husband with "King Solomon's Mines"; and Laura, after crisply declining an urgent request
from Hedrick to play, had disappeared upstairs. The inimical lad alone was inspired for the
ungrateful role of duenna.

He sat upon the topmost of the porch steps with the air of being permanently implanted; leaning
forward, elbows on knees, cheeks on palms, in a treacherous affectation of profound reverie;
and his back (all of him that was plainly visible in the hall light) tauntingly close to a
delicate foot which would, God wot! willingly have launched him into the darkness beyond. It
was his dreadful pleasure to understand wholly the itching of that shapely silk and satin foot.

The gas-light from the hall laid a broad orange path to the steps--Cora and her companion sat
just beyond it, his whiteness gray, and she a pale ethereality in the shadow. She wore an evening
gown that revealed a vague lilac through white, and shimmered upon her like a vapour. She was
very quiet; and there was a wan sweetness about her, an exhalation of wistfulness. Cora, in
the evening, was more like a rose than ever. She was fragrant in the dusk. The spell she cast
was an Undine's: it was not to be thought so exquisite a thing as she could last. And who may
know how she managed to say what she did in the silence and darkness? For it was said--without
words, without touch, even without a look--as plainly as if she had spoken or written the message:
"If I am a rose, I am one to be worn and borne away. Are you the man?"

With the fall of night, the street they faced had become still, save for an infrequent squawk
of irritation on the part of one of the passing automobiles, gadding for the most part silently,
like fireflies. But after a time a strolling trio of negroes came singing along the sidewalk.

    "In the evening, by the moonlight, you could hear
      those banjos ringing;
    In the evening, by the moonlight, you could hear
      those darkies singing.
    How the ole folks would injoy it; they would sit
      all night an' lis-sun,
    As we sang I-I-N the evening BY-Y-Y the moonlight.'

"Ah, that takes me back!" exclaimed Corliss. "That's as it used to be. I might be a boy again."

"And I suppose this old house has many memories for you?" said Cora, softly.

"Not very many. My, old-maid aunt didn't like me overmuch, I believe; and I wasn't here often.
My mother and I lived far down the street. A big apartment-house stands there now, I noticed
as I was walking out here this afternoon--the `Verema,' it is called, absurdly enough!"

"Ray Vilas lives there," volunteered Hedrick, not altering his position.

"Vilas?" said the visitor politely, with a casual recollection that the name had been once
or twice emphasized by the youth at dinner. "I don't remember Vilas among the old names here."

"It wasn't, I guess," said Hedrick. "Ray Vilas has only been here about two years. He came
from Kentucky."

"A great friend of yours, I suppose."

"He ain't a boy," said Hedrick, and returned to silence without further explanation.

"How cool and kind the stars are to-night," said Cora, very gently.

She leaned forward from her chair, extending a white arm along the iron railing of the porch;
bending toward Corliss, and speaking toward him and away from Hedrick in as low a voice as
possible, probably entertaining a reasonable hope of not being overheard.

"I love things that are cool and kind," she said. "I love things that are cool and strong.
I love iron." She moved her arm caressingly upon the railing. "I love its cool, smooth touch.
Any strong life must have iron in it. I like iron in men."

She leaned a very little closer to him.

"Have you iron in you, Mr. Corliss?" she asked.

At these words the frayed edge of Hedrick's broad white collar was lifted perceptibly from
his coat, as if by a shudder passing over the back and shoulders beneath.

"If I have not," answered Corliss in a low voice, "I will have--now!"

"Tell me about yourself," she said.

"Dear lady," he began--and it was an effective beginning, for a sigh of pleasure parted her
lips as he spoke--"there is nothing interesting to tell. I have spent a very commonplace life."

"I think not. You shouldn't call any life commonplace that has escaped this!" The lovely voice
was all the richer for the pain that shook it now. "This monotony, this unending desert of
ashes, this death in life!"

"This town, you mean?"

"This prison, I mean! Everything. Tell me what lies outside of it. You can."

"What makes you think I can?"

"I don't need to answer that. You understand perfectly."

Valentine Corliss drew in his breath with a sound murmurous of delight, and for a time they
did not speak.

"Yes," he said, finally, "I think I do."

"There are meetings in the desert," he went on, slowly. "A lonely traveller finds another at
a spring, sometimes."

"And sometimes they find that they speak the same language?"

His answer came, almost in a whisper:

"`Even as you and I.'"

"`Even as you and I,'" she echoed, even more faintly.

"Yes."

Cora breathed rapidly in the silence that followed; she had every appearance of a woman deeply
and mysteriously stirred. Her companion watched her keenly in the dusk, and whatever the reciprocal
symptoms of emotion he may have exhibited, they were far from tumultuous, bearing more likeness
to the quiet satisfaction of a good card-player taking what may prove to be a decisive trick.

After a time she leaned back in her chair again, and began to fan herself slowly.

"You have lived in the Orient, haven't you, Mr. Corliss?" she said in an ordinary tone.

"Not lived. I've been East once or twice. I spend a greater part of the year at Posilipo."

"Where is that?"

"On the fringe of Naples."

"Do you live in a hotel?"

"No." A slight surprise sounded in his voice. "I have a villa there."

"Do you know what that seems to me?" Cora asked gravely, after a pause; then answered herself,
after another: "Like magic. Like a strange, beautiful dream."

"Yes, it is beautiful," he said.

"Then tell me: What do you do there?"

"I spend a lot of time on the water in a boat."

"Sailing?"

"On sapphires and emeralds and turquoises and rubies, melted and blown into waves."

"And you go yachting over that glory?"

"Fishing with my crew--and loafing."

"But your boat is really a yacht, isn't it?"

"Oh, it might be called anything," he laughed.

"And your sailors are Italian fishermen?"

Hedrick slew a mosquito upon his temple, smiting himself hard. "No, they're Chinese!" he muttered
hoarsely.

"They're Neapolitans," said Corliss.

"Do they wear red sashes and earrings?" asked Cora.

"One of them wears earrings and a derby hat!"

"Ah!" she protested, turning to him again. "You don't tell me. You let me cross-question you,
but you don't tell me things! Don't you see? I want to know what life is! I want to know of
strange seas, of strange people, of pain and of danger, of great music, of curious thoughts!
What are the Neapolitan women like?"

"They fade early."

She leaned closer to him. "Before the fading have you--have you loved--many?"

"All the pretty ones I ever saw," he answered gayly, but with something in his tone (as there
was in hers) which implied that all the time they were really talking of things other than
those spoken. Yet here this secret subject seemed to come near the surface.

She let him hear a genuine little snap of her teeth. "I thought you were like that!"

He laughed. "Ah, but you were sure to see it!"

"You could 'a' seen a Neapolitan woman yesterday, Cora," said Hedrick, obligingly, "if you'd
looked out the front window. She was working a hurdy-gurdy up and down this neighbourhood all
afternoon." He turned genially to face his sister, and added: "Ray Vilas used to say there
were lots of pretty girls in Lexington."

Cora sprang to her feet. "You're not smoking," she said to Corliss hurriedly, as upon a sudden
discovery. "Let me get you some matches."

She had entered the house before he could protest, and Hedrick, looking down the hall, was
acutely aware that she dived desperately into the library. But, however tragic the cry for
justice she uttered there, it certainly was not prolonged; and the almost instantaneous quickness
of her reappearance upon the porch, with matches in her hand, made this one of the occasions
when her brother had to admit that in her own line Cora was a miracle.

"So thoughtless of me," she said cheerfully, resuming her seat. She dropped the matches into
Mr. Corliss's hand with a fleeting touch of her finger-tips upon his palm. "Of course you wanted
to smoke. I can't think why I didn't realize it before. I must have----"

A voice called from within, commanding in no, uncertain tones.

"Hedrick! I should like to see you!" Hedrick rose, and, looking neither to the right nor, to
the left, went stonily into the house, and appeared before the powers.

"Call me?" he inquired with the air of cheerful readiness to proceed upon any errand, no matter
how difficult.

Mr. Madison countered diplomacy with gloom.

"I don't know what to do with you. Why can't you let your sister alone?"

"Has Laura been complaining of me?"

"Oh, Hedrick!" said Mrs. Madison.

Hedrick himself felt the justice of her reproof: his reference to Laura was poor work, he knew.
He hung his head and began to scrape the carpet with the side of his shoe.

"Well, what'd Cora say I been doing to her?"

"You know perfectly well what you've been doing," said Mr. Madison sharply.

"Nothing at all; just sitting on the steps. What'd she say?"

His father evidently considered it wiser not to repeat the text of accusation. "You know what
you did," he said heavily.

"Oho!" Hedrick's eyes became severe, and his sire's evasively shifted from them.

"You keep away from the porch," said the father, uneasily.

"You mean what I said about Ray Vilas?" asked the boy.

Both parents looked uncomfortable, and Mr. Madison, turning a leaf in his book, gave a mediocre
imitation of an austere person resuming his reading after an impertinent interruption.

"That's what you mean," said the boy accusingly. "Ray Vilas!"

"Just you keep away from that porch."

"Because I happened to mention Ray Vilas?" demanded Hedrick.

"You let your sister alone."

"I got a right to know what she said, haven't I?"

There was no response, which appeared to satisfy Hedrick perfectly. Neither parent met his
glance; the mother troubled and the father dogged, while the boy rejoiced sternly in some occult
triumph. He inflated his scant chest in pomp and hurled at the defeated pair the well-known words:

"I wish she was my daughter--about five minutes!"

