The commissioners of Parliament considered that they had been lucky to reduce the colony without
bloodshed, even though forced to agree to such mild terms. At the same time the event suggests
that the bitterness which existed in England between Roundheads and Cavaliers was not quite
so extreme in the colonies, where little blood had been shed for the cause of either. The colonies
had interests of their own which ran counter to those of the mother country, whether in the
hands of King or Parliament. Governor, Council, and Burgesses in Virginia were closer to each
other economically and politically than they were to their respective counterparts in England.
What held the colonies to the mother country was not self-interest but ties of historical tradition
and racial patriotism. The execution of Charles I and seizure of the colony by the Parliamentary
fleet loosened these ties. The Crown, symbol of continuity with past ages of English subjects
and of unity among all the King's realms, was now not only removed but denounced by those who
had done the deed.

Virginia never showed sympathy for those who had killed the King, and the Assembly took to
heart Governor Berkeley's warning of 1651 that the blood of Charles I "will yet staine your
garments if you willingly submit to those murtherers hands that shed it." It is true that following
the surrender the Parliamentary commissioners agreed with the representatives of the people
on a provisional government for Virginia, but the bonds that held Virginia to England had lost
much of the cement of love and tradition. Local and self-interest were now to dominate to a
great extent Virginia's actions. Such motives had always been latent, and indeed active. But
under royal government, the Governor could often exert a countervailing force to prevent such
interests from overriding the interests of nation and morality.

Under the terms of the settlement the Grand Assembly was to continue to function, and the Assembly
and commissioners agreed that Richard Bennett, one of the commissioners, should act as Governor
for a year. It was expected that orders would shortly arrive from England establishing new
patterns of government. Such instructions were especially necessary to determine the role and
authority of the Governor and Council, formerly appointed by the King. The new rulers in England
were made aware of the need for a new policy for the colonies, but they never found time to
make the necessary decisions. At intervals the colonists were informed that Cromwell had not
forgotten them and that His Highness would soon let them know his pleasure. But instructions
never came except spasmodically and inadequately. The merchants who stood to gain from the
Navigation Act of 1651, which generally excluded foreign ships from the colonies and attempted
to restrain colonial trade with foreign countries, complained at the failure of the colonists
to obey the act and demanded that orders be sent to enforce it, but no adequate provisions
were ever made.

Thus the colony was left to its own devices during the period. Virginia traders paid little
attention to Parliamentary restrictions on their commerce. They insisted that the provision
of the Articles of Surrender allowing them free trade with all nations according to the laws
of the Commonwealth did not prevent them from trading with foreigners. They argued that since
the first article of the surrender agreement guaranteed them the rights of freeborn Englishmen,
an act discriminating against them in matters of trade because they happened to live in the
colonies was illegal. Dutch ships called often, though perhaps not so frequently as some have
believed, and individual Virginians traded as they pleased with the Dutch and English colonies
in America.

EXPANSION IN VIRGINIA, 1650-1656

