The Duchesse de Bourgogne being in the family way this spring, was much inconvenienced.  The
King wished to go to Fontainebleau at the commencement of the fine season, contrary to his
usual custom; and had declared this wish.  In the mean time he desired to pay visits to Marly.
Madame de Bourgogne much amused him; he could not do without her, yet so much movement was
not suitable to her state.  Madame de Maintenon was uneasy, and Fagon gently intimated his
opinion.  This annoyed the King, accustomed to restrain himself for nothing, and spoiled by
having seen his mistresses travel when big with child, or when just recovering from their confinement,
and always in full dress.  The hints against going to Marly bothered him, but did not make
him give them up.  All he would consent to was, that the journey should put off from the day
after Quasimodo to the Wednesday of the following week; but nothing could make him delay his
amusement, beyond that time, or induce him to allow the Princess to remain at Versailles.

On the following Saturday, as the King was taking a walk after mass, and amusing himself at
the carp basin between the Chateau and the Perspective, we saw the Duchesse de Lude coming
towards him on foot and all alone, which, as no lady was with the King, was a rarity in the
morning.  We understood that she had something important to say to him, and when he was a short
distance from her, we stopped so as to allow him to join her alone.  The interview was not
long.  She went away again, and the King came back towards us and near the carps without saying
a word. Each saw clearly what was in the wind, and nobody was eager to speak.  At last the
King, when quite close to the basin, looked at the principal people around, and without addressing
anybody, said, with an air of vexation, these few words:

"The Duchesse de Bourgogne is hurt."

M. de la Rochefoucauld at once uttered an exclamation.  M. de Bouillon, the Duc de Tresmes,
and Marechal de Boufflers repeated in a, low tone the words I have named; and M. de la Rochefoucauld
returning to the charge, declared emphatically that it was the greatest misfortune in the world,
and that as she had already wounded herself on other occasions, she might never, perhaps, have
any more children. 

The same change had passed over both. Our eyes met, and each looked into the other's heart, and
there dwelt hate--bitter, loathing, and eternal hate. I had changed my nature; I was no longer
the gentle, up-looking mortal he had loved.  Are the not all equally
my grandchildren?"  And immediately, with impetuosity he added, "Thank God, she is wounded,
since she was to be so; and I shall no longer be annoyed in my journeys and in everything I
wish to do, by the representations of doctors, and the reasonings of matrons.  I shall go and
come at my pleasure, and shall be left in peace."

A silence so deep that an ant might be heard to walk, succeeded this strange outburst.  All
eyes were lowered; no one hardly dared to breathe. All remained stupefied.  Even the domestics
and the gardeners stood motionless.

