[19] This treacherous and barbarous murder of the good high priest Jonathan, by the contrivance
of this wicked procurator, Felix, was the immediate occasion of the ensuing murders by the
Sicarii or ruffians, and one great cause of the following horrid cruelties and miseries of
the Jewish nation, as Josephus here supposes; whose excellent reflection on the gross wickedness
of that nation, as the direct cause of their terrible destruction, is well worthy the attention
of every Jewish and of every Christian reader. And since we are soon coming to the catalogue
of the Jewish high priests, it may not be amiss, with Reland, to insert this Jonathan among
them, and to transcribe his particular catalogue of the last twenty-eight high priests, taken
out of Josephus, and begin with Ananelus, who was made by Herod the Great. See Antiq. B. XV.
ch. 2. sect. 4, and the note there. 1. Ananelus. 2. Aristobulus. 3. Jesus, the son of Fabus.
4. Simon, the son of Boethus. 5. Marthias, the son of Theophiltu. 6. Joazar, the son of Boethus.
7. Eleazar, the son of Boethus. 8. Jesus, the son of Sic. 9. [Annas, or] Ananus, the son of
Seth. 10. Ismael, the son of Fabus. 11. Eleazar, the son of Ananus. 12. Simon, the son of Camithus.
13. Josephus Caiaphas, the son-in-law to Ananus. 14. Jonathan, the son of Ananus. 15. Theophilus,
his brother, and son of Ananus. 16. Simon, the son of Boethus. 17. Matthias, the brother of
Jonathan, and son of Ananus. 18. Aljoneus. 19. Josephus, the son of Camydus. 20. Ananias, the
son of Nebedeus. 21. Jonathas. 22. Ismael, the son of Fabi. 23. Joseph Cabi, the son of Simon.
24. Ananus, the son of Artanus. 25. Jesus, the son of Damnetas. 26. Jesus, the son of Gamaliel.
27. Matthias, the son of Theophilus. 28. Phannias, the son of Samuel. As for Ananus and Joseph
Caiaphas, here mentioned about the middle of this catalogue, they are no other than those Annas
and Caiaphas so often mentioned in the four Gospels; and that Ananias, the son of Nebedeus,
was that high priest before whom St. Paul pleaded his own cause, Acts 24.

[20] Of these Jewish impostors and false prophets, with many other circumstances and miseries
of the Jews, till their utter destruction, foretold by our Savior, see Lit. Accompl. of Proph.
p. 58-75. Of this Egyptian impostor, and the number of his followers, in Josephus, see Acts 21:38.

[21] The wickedness here was very peculiar and extraordinary, that the high priests should
so oppress their brethren the priests, as to starve the poorest of them to death. See the like
presently, ch. 9. sect. 2. Such fatal crimes are covetousness and tyranny in the clergy, as
well as in the laity, in all ages.

[22] We have here one eminent example of Nero's mildness and goodness in his government towards
the Jews, during the first five years of his reign, so famous in antiquity; we have perhaps
another in Josephus's own Life, sect. 3; and a third, though of a very different nature here,
in sect. 9, just before. However, both the generous acts of kindness were obtained of Nero
by his queen Poppea, who was a religious lady, and perhaps privately a Jewish proselyte, and
so were not owing entirely to Nero's own goodness.

[23] It hence evidently appears that Sadducees might be high priests in the days of Josephus,
and that these Sadducees were usually very severe and inexorable judges, while the Pharisees
were much milder, and more merciful, as appears by Reland's instances in his note on this place,
and on Josephus's Life, sect. 31, and those taken from the New Testament, from Josephus himself,
and from the Rabbins; nor do we meet with any Sadducees later than this high priest in all
Josephus.

[24] Of this condemnation of James the Just, and its causes, as also that he did not die till
long afterwards, see Prim. Christ. Revived, vol. III. ch. 43-46. The sanhedrim condemned our
Savior, but could not put him to death without the approbation of the Roman procurator; nor
could therefore Ananias and his sanhedrim do more here, since they never had Albinus's approbation
for the putting this James to death.

[25] This Ananias was not the son of Nebedeus, as I take it, but he who was called Annas or
Ananus the elder, the ninth in the catalogue, and who had been esteemed high priest for a long
time; and, besides Caiaphas, his son-in-law, had five of his own sons high priests after him,
which were those of numbers 11, 14, 15, 17, 24, in the foregoing catalogue. Nor ought we to
pass slightly over what Josephus here says of Annas, or Ananias, that he was high priest a
long time before his children were so; he was the son of Seth, and is set down first for high
priest in the foregoing catalogue, under number 9. He was made by Quirinus, and continued till
Ismael, the 10th in number, for about twenty-three years, which long duration of his high priesthood,
joined to the successions of his son-in-law, and five children of his own, made him a sort
of perpetual high priest, and was perhaps the occasion that former high priests kept their
titles ever afterwards; for I believe it is hardly met with be fore him.

[26] This insolent petition of some of the Levites, to wear the sacerdotal garments when they
sung hymns to God in the temple, was very probably owing to the great depression and contempt
the haughty high priests had now brought their brethren the priests into; of which see ch.
8. sect. 8, and ch. 9, sect. 2.

[27] Of these cloisters of Solomon, see the description of the temple, ch. 13. They seem, by
Josephus's words, to have been built from the bottom of the valley.

[28] See the Life at the beginning of the volume.

[29] What Josephus here declares his intention to do, if God permitted, to give the public
again an abridgement of the Jewish War hear of it elsewhere, whether he performed what he now
intended or not. Some of the reasons of this design of his might possibly be, his observation
of the many errors he had been guilty of in the two first of those seven books of the War,
which were written when he was comparatively young, and less acquainted with the Jewish antiquities
than he now was, and in which abridgement we might have hoped to find those many passages which
himself, as well as those several passages which others refer to, as written by him, but which
are not extant in his present works. However, since many of his own references to what he had
written elsewhere, as well as most of his own errors, belong to such early times as could not
well come into this abridgement of the Jewish War; and since none of those that quote things
not now extant in his works, including himself as well as others, ever cite any such abridgement;
I am forced rather to suppose that he never did publish any such work at all; I mean, as distinct
from his own Life, written by himself, for an appendix to these Antiquities, and this at least
seven years after these Antiquities were finished. Nor indeed does it appear to me that Josephus
ever published that other work here mentioned, as intended by him for the public also: I mean
the three or four books concerning God and his essence, and concerning the Jewish laws; why,
according to them, some things were permitted the Jews, and others prohibited; which last seems
to be the same work which Josephus had also promised, if God permitted, at the conclusion of
his preface to these Antiquities; nor do I suppose that he ever published any of them. The
death of all his friends at court, Vespasian, Titus, and Domitian, and the coming of those
he had no acquaintance with to the crown, I mean Nerva and Trajan, together with his removal
from Rome to Judea, with what followed it, might easily interrupt such his intentions, and
prevent his publication of those works.