'To pray in all places where privacy inviteth: in any house, highway, or street: and to know
no street or passage in this city which may not witness that I have not forgot God and my Saviour
in it; and that no parish or town where I have been may not say the like.

'To take occasion of praying upon the sight of any church which I see or pass by as I ride about.

'Since the necessities of the sick, and unavoidable diversions of my profession, keep me often
from church; yet to take all possible care that I might never miss sacraments upon their accustomed
days.

'To pray daily and particularly for sick patients, and in general for others, wheresoever,
howsoever, under whose care soever; and at the entrance into the house of the sick, to say,
The peace and mercy of God be in this place. 

Well, he happened to be in our trench one day, showing our Sub a new
case of knives, when Charlie Black was carried in on a stretcher in
an awful mess.

"'I must operate at once to save your life,' he says.

"Charlie smiled
as best he could and said he was agreeable.

'Upon sight of beautiful persons, to bless God for His creatures: to pray for the beauty of
their souls, and that He would enrich them with inward grace to be answerable to the outward.
Upon sight of deformed persons, to pray Him to send them inward graces, and to enrich their
souls, and give them the beauty of the resurrection.'

* * * * *

'But the greatest of these is charity.'  Charity is greater than great talents.  Charity is
greater than great industry.  Charity is greater than great learning and great literature.
Charity is greater than great faith.  Charity is greater than great prayer.  For charity is
nothing less than the Divine Nature Itself in the heart of man.  In all English literature
two books stand out beside one another and are alone in this supreme respect of charity: William
Law's Spirit of Love, and Sir Thomas Browne's Religio Medici.  I take my circle to be above
three hundred and sixty.  'I am that I am,' was His own definition unto Moses; and it was a
short one, to confound mortality, that durst question God, or ask Him what He was; indeed He
only is; all others have been and shall be.

Rest not in the high-strained paradoxes of old philosophy, supported by naked reason, and the
reward of mortal felicity; but labour in the ethics of faith, built upon heavenly assistance,
and the happiness of both beings.  Understand the rules, but swear not unto the doctrines of
Zeno or Epicurus.  Look beyond Antonius, and terminate not thy morals in Seneca or Epictetus.
Let not the twelve but the two tables be thy law: let Pythagoras be thy remembrancer, not thy
textuary and final instructor: and learn the vanity of the world, rather from Solomon than
Phocylydes.  Sleep not in the dogmas of the Peripatus, Academy, or Porticus.  Be a moralist
of the mount, an Epictetus in the faith, and christianise thy notions.

I could never pass that sentence of Paracelsus, without an asterisk, or annotation; Ascendens
constellatum multa revelat, quaerentibus magnalia naturae, i.e. opera Dei.  And thus we may
say that St. Paul, whether in the body, or out of the body, was yet in heaven. . . .  Moses,
that was bred up in all the learning of the Egyptians, committed a gross absurdity in philosophy
when with these eyes of flesh he desired to see God, and petitioned his Maker, that is truth
itself, to a contradiction.  There was more than one hell in Magdalene, when there were seven
devils; for every devil is a hell unto himself.  He holds enough of torture in his own ubi,
and needs not the misery of circumference to afflict him.

