  Art. 2. Of Wells and Cisterns,                             145.

The Precautions the Ancients used in digging their Wells, to discover bad Water, and in making
their Cisterns, 145.

  Art. 3. Of Machines for carrying and lifting up great
    Stones and Burthens,                                      146.

Machines for drawing Pillars, 147. Architraves, 147. for raising great Weights, three sorts;
first, with a Handmill; second, with a Windlas, 147. third, with several Ropes, to be drawn
by Mens Hands, 148.

  Art. 4. Of Machines for elevating Waters,                  149.

Five sorts; I. The Tympan, 149. II. A Wheel with Boxes. III. A Chain with Buckets. IV. The
Vice of Archimedes. V. The Pomp of Cresibius, 151.

  Art. 5. Of Water-mills for grinding Corn,                  152.

The Water-mills of the Ancients were like ours.

  Art. 6. Of other Hydraulick Machines,                      153.

Three sorts of Water-Machines; first, for shewing the hour, 153. Second, Organs, 154. Third,
for measuring the Way by Water, 154. by Land, 155.

  Art. 7. Of Machines of War,                                155.

Three kinds; I. To dart Arrows, &c. 155. II. To batter down Walls, 157. III. To cover them
in their Approaches to the Walls of the Besieged, 158.

                                 AN
                             ABRIDGMENT
                               OF THE
                              TEN BOOKS
                               OF THE
                            ARCHITECTURE
                                 OF
                             VITRUVIUS.

THE INTRODUCTION.

ARTICLE I.

  Of the great Merits of Vitruvius, and the Excellencies
    of his Works.

There are so many things in the Works of Vitruvius that do not directly appertain to Architecture,
that one would think they were less fitted to Instruct those that have a design to learn the
Precepts of this Art, than to perswade the World that the Author was the most knowing Architect
that ever was, and a Person of the greatest Merit: He had the Honour to serve Julius Cæsar
and Augustus, the two Greatest and most Magnificent Princes of the World, in an Age when all
things were come to the highest degree of Perfection.

[Sidenote: Lib. 6. Preface.]

For one may see in reading his Works, which are full of a wonderful variety of Matters, which
he treats of with a singular Erudition, that this great Man had acquired that Profound Knowledge
which is necessary for his Profession by more excellent Methods, and more capable of producing
something excellent, than the bare exercise and ordinary practice of a Mechanical Art could
possibly do; being compleat in all the Liberal Arts and Sciences, and his great Wit being accustomed,
even from his Cradle, to understand the most difficult Matters: He had acquired a certain Facility
which meer Artizans have not, of penetrating the deepest Secrets, and all the difficulties
of so vast an Art, as that of Architecture.

[Sidenote: Lib. 2. Pref.]

[Sidenote: Lib. 6. Pref.]

Now as it's true that in the Practice and Exercise of Arts, one does not always easily distinguish
the Abilities of those that work in them. The great Capacity of Vitruvius before the publishing
of his Book, which he Composed when he was in Years, had not all the Esteem it deserved; which
he complains of in his Preface, and in the Age he lived; though it was full of the most refined
Wits, yet he had the fortune of others, to find few to defend him from the Surprizes and Attacks
of false Reasoning, and from the injustice that prejudice creates, to those who apply themselves
more to cultivate the Talents they possess, than to make parade of them. 3. pref.]

[Sidenote: Lib. 3. Pref.]

[Sidenote: Lib. 6. Pref.]

Vitruvius was a Man, who, as to the exteriour, made a small Figure, and who had not heaped
up great Riches by the practice of his Profession; and having, as it were, buried himself in
study, and wholly given himself over to the Contemplation of Sciences, understood little of
the Arts of the Court, or the Crafty Slights of pushing on his Fortune and making himself considerable;
for though he was bestowed upon, and recommended to Augustus, by the Princess Octavia his Sister,
we cannot find that he was employed in any Works of great Importance. The Noblest Edifice that
we can learn that Augustus caused to be built, was, the Theatre of Marcellus; and this was
done by another Architect: And the only Fabrick we can find he was employed in was not at Rome,
but at Fano, a very little City; insomuch, that the greatest part of the Architects of that
Age, who had gained the general Vogue, being so ignorant, that they did not know even (as himself
is forced to declare) the first Principles of their Art: The Quality of a mere Architect was
become so Contemptible, that if his Books had not carried all the Marks of an extraordinary
Knowledge, and rare abilities, and undeceived the World by taking away the prejudice that his
small employ created him, the Precepts he has left us would have wanted that Authority that
was necessary to support them.

For Architecture being an Art that has scarce any other Rule to walk by, in performing all
those Excellencies her Works are capable of, than what we call a Good Fancy, which truly distinguishes
that which is Beautiful and Good from that which is not so; it's absolutely necessary that
one be perswaded that the Fancy he follows is better than any other; to the end, that this
Perswasion insinuating it self into them that study this Art, it may form in them a Correct
and Regular Idea, which without this Perswasion, would be always floating and uncertain; so
that to establish this Good Fancy, it's necessary to have one to whom we give great deference,
and who has merited great Credit by the Learning that is found in his Writings; and is believed
to have had sufficient abilities of chusing well among all Antiquity, that which is most solid
and capable of founding the Precepts of Architecture.

The Veneration we have for the first Inventers of Arts, is not only Natural, but it's founded
upon Reason; which makes us judge, that he that had the first Thought, and first invented any
Thing, must needs have had a fitter Genius, and a better Capacity for it, than all those that
afterwards laboured to bring it to its utmost Perfection. The Greeks, who were the Inventers
of Architecture, as well as of other Sciences, having left many Works behind them as well in
Building as in Books, which were looked upon in the time of Vitruvius, as the Models of what
was perfect and accomplished in this Art, Vitruvius chiefly followed and imitated them; and
in the Composition of his Book, gathered from them all that was to be found Excellent and Rare
in all their Works; which makes us believe, that he has omitted nothing that was necessary,
to form the General Idea of Good and Beautiful, since there is not the least probability that
any thing could escape so Rare a Wit, Illuminated with so many different Lights.

