The sight made him unhappy, and his unhappiness roused his latent fears. His wife had never
shown any jealousy of Mattie, but of late she had grumbled increasingly over the house-work
and found oblique ways of attracting attention to the girl's inefficiency. Zeena had always
been what Starkfield called "sickly," and Frome had to admit that, if she were as ailing as
she believed, she needed the help of a stronger arm than the one which lay so lightly in his
during the night walks to the farm. Mattie had no natural turn for housekeeping, and her training
had done nothing to remedy the defect. She was quick to learn, but forgetful and dreamy, and
not disposed to take the matter seriously. Ethan had an idea that if she were to marry a man
she was fond of the dormant instinct would wake, and her pies and biscuits become the pride
of the county; but domesticity in the abstract did not interest her. At first she was so awkward
that he could not help laughing at her; but she laughed with him and that made them better
friends. He did his best to supplement her unskilled efforts, getting up earlier than usual
to light the kitchen fire, carrying in the wood overnight, and neglecting the mill for the
farm that he might help her about the house during the day. He even crept down on Saturday
nights to scrub the kitchen floor after the women had gone to bed; and Zeena, one day, had
surprised him at the churn and had turned away silently, with one of her queer looks.

Of late there had been other signs of her disfavour, as intangible but more disquieting. One
cold winter morning, as he dressed in the dark, his candle flickering in the draught of the
ill-fitting window, he had heard her speak from the bed behind him.

"The doctor don't want I should be left without anybody to do for me," she said in her flat whine.

He had supposed her to be asleep, and the sound of her voice had startled him, though she was
given to abrupt explosions of speech after long intervals of secretive silence.

He turned and looked at her where she lay indistinctly outlined under the dark calico quilt,
her high-boned face taking a grayish tinge from the whiteness of the pillow.

"Nobody to do for you?" he repeated.

"If you say you can't afford a hired girl when Mattie goes."

Frome turned away again, and taking up his razor stooped to catch the reflection of his stretched
cheek in the blotched looking-glass above the wash-stand.

"Why on earth should Mattie go?"

"Well, when she gets married, I mean," his wife's drawl came from behind him.

"Oh, she'd never leave us as long as you needed her," he returned, scraping hard at his chin.

"I wouldn't ever have it said that I stood in the way of a poor girl like Mattie marrying a
smart fellow like Denis Eady," Zeena answered in a tone of plaintive self-effacement.

Ethan, glaring at his face in the glass, threw his head back to draw the razor from ear to
chin. His hand was steady, but the attitude was an excuse for not making an immediate reply.

"And the doctor don't want I should be left without anybody," Zeena continued. "He wanted I
should speak to you about a girl he's heard about, that might come--"

Ethan laid down the razor and straightened himself with a laugh.

"Denis Eady! If that's all, I guess there's no such hurry to look round for a girl."

"Well, I'd like to talk to you about it," said Zeena obstinately.

He was getting into his clothes in fumbling haste. "All right. But I haven't got the time now;
I'm late as it is," he returned, holding his old silver turnip-watch to the candle.

Zeena, apparently accepting this as final, lay watching him in silence while he pulled his
suspenders over his shoulders and jerked his arms into his coat; but as he went toward the
door she said, suddenly and incisively: "I guess you're always late, now you shave every morning."

That thrust had frightened him more than any vague insinuations about Denis Eady. It was a
fact that since Mattie Silver's coming he had taken to shaving every day; but his wife always
seemed to be asleep when he left her side in the winter darkness, and he had stupidly assumed
that she would not notice any change in his appearance. Once or twice in the past he had been
faintly disquieted by Zenobia's way of letting things happen without seeming to remark them,
and then, weeks afterward, in a casual phrase, revealing that she had all along taken her notes
and drawn her inferences. Of late, however, there had been no room in his thoughts for such
vague apprehensions. Zeena herself, from an oppressive reality, had faded into an insubstantial
shade. All his life was lived in the sight and sound of Mattie Silver, and he could no longer
conceive of its being otherwise. But now, as he stood outside the church, and saw Mattie spinning
down the floor with Denis Eady, a throng of disregarded hints and menaces wove their cloud
about his brain....

II

As the dancers poured out of the hall Frome, drawing back behind the projecting storm-door,
watched the segregation of the grotesquely muffled groups, in which a moving lantern ray now
and then lit up a face flushed with food and dancing. The villagers, being afoot, were the
first to climb the slope to the main street, while the country neighbours packed themselves
more slowly into the sleighs under the shed.

"Ain't you riding, Mattie?" a woman's voice called back from the throng about the shed, and
Ethan's heart gave a jump. From where he stood he could not see the persons coming out of the
hall till they had advanced a few steps beyond the wooden sides of the storm-door; but through
its cracks he heard a clear voice answer: "Mercy no! Not on such a night."

She was there, then, close to him, only a thin board between. In another moment she would step
forth into the night, and his eyes, accustomed to the obscurity, would discern her as clearly
as though she stood in daylight. A wave of shyness pulled him back into the dark angle of the
wall, and he stood there in silence instead of making his presence known to her. It had been
one of the wonders of their intercourse that from the first, she, the quicker, finer, more
expressive, instead of crushing him by the contrast, had given him something of her own ease
and freedom; but now he felt as heavy and loutish as in his student days, when he had tried
to "jolly" the Worcester girls at a picnic.

He hung back, and she came out alone and paused within a few yards of him. She was almost the
last to leave the hall, and she stood looking uncertainly about her as if wondering why he
did not show himself. Then a man's figure approached, coming so close to her that under their
formless wrappings they seemed merged in one dim outline.

"Gentleman friend gone back on you? Say, Matt, that's tough! No, I wouldn't be mean enough
to tell the other girls. I ain't as low-down as that." (How Frome hated his cheap banter!)
"But look a here, ain't it lucky I got the old man's cutter down there waiting for us?"

Frome heard the girl's voice, gaily incredulous: "What on earth's your father's cutter doin'
down there?"

"Why, waiting for me to take a ride. I got the roan colt too. I kinder knew I'd want to take
a ride to-night," Eady, in his triumph, tried to put a sentimental note into his bragging voice.

The girl seemed to waver, and Frome saw her twirl the end of her scarf irresolutely about her
fingers. Not for the world would he have made a sign to her, though it seemed to him that his
life hung on her next gesture.

"Hold on a minute while I unhitch the colt," Denis called to her, springing toward the shed.

She stood perfectly still, looking after him, in an attitude of tranquil expectancy torturing
to the hidden watcher. Frome noticed that she no longer turned her head from side to side,
as though peering through the night for another figure. She let Denis Eady lead out the horse,
climb into the cutter and fling back the bearskin to make room for her at his side; then, with
a swift motion of flight, she turned about and darted up the slope toward the front of the church.

"Good-bye! Hope you'll have a lovely ride!" she called back to him over her shoulder.

Denis laughed, and gave the horse a cut that brought him quickly abreast of her retreating figure.

"Come along! Get in quick! It's as slippery as thunder on this turn," he cried, leaning over
to reach out a hand to her.

She laughed back at him: "Good-night! I'm not getting in."

By this time they had passed beyond Frome's earshot and he could only follow the shadowy pantomime
of their silhouettes as they continued to move along the crest of the slope above him. He saw
Eady, after a moment, jump from the cutter and go toward the girl with the reins over one arm.
The other he tried to slip through hers; but she eluded him nimbly, and Frome's heart, which
had swung out over a black void, trembled back to safety. A moment later he heard the jingle
of departing sleigh bells and discerned a figure advancing alone toward the empty expanse of
snow before the church.

In the black shade of the Varnum spruces he caught up with her and she turned with a quick "Oh!"

"Think I'd forgotten you, Matt?" he asked with sheepish glee.

She answered seriously: "I thought maybe you couldn't come back for me."

"Couldn't? What on earth could stop me?"

"I knew Zeena wasn't feeling any too good to-day."

"Oh, she's in bed long ago." He paused, a question struggling in him. "Then you meant to walk
home all alone?"

"Oh, I ain't afraid!" she laughed.

They stood together in the gloom of the spruces, an empty world glimmering about them wide
and grey under the stars. He brought his question out.

"If you thought I hadn't come, why didn't you ride back with Denis Eady?"

"Why, where were you? How did you know? I never saw you!"

Her wonder and his laughter ran together like spring rills in a thaw. Ethan had the sense of
having done something arch and ingenious. To prolong the effect he groped for a dazzling phrase,
and brought out, in a growl of rapture: "Come along."

He slipped an arm through hers, as Eady had done, and fancied it was faintly pressed against
her side, but neither of them moved. It was so dark under the spruces that he could barely
see the shape of her head beside his shoulder. He longed to stoop his cheek and rub it against
her scarf. He would have liked to stand there with her all night in the blackness. She moved
forward a step or two and then paused again above the dip of the Corbury road. Its icy slope,
scored by innumerable runners, looked like a mirror scratched by travellers at an inn.

"There was a whole lot of them coasting before the moon set," she said.

"Would you like to come in and coast with them some night?" he asked.

"Oh, would you, Ethan? It would be lovely!"

"We'll come to-morrow if there's a moon."

She lingered, pressing closer to his side. "Ned Hale and Ruth Varnum came just as near running
into the big elm at the bottom. We were all sure they were killed." Her shiver ran down his
arm. "Wouldn't it have been too awful? They're so happy!"

"Oh, Ned ain't much at steering. I guess I can take you down all right!" he said disdainfully.

He was aware that he was "talking big," like Denis Eady; but his reaction of joy had unsteadied
him, and the inflection with which she had said of the engaged couple "They're so happy!" made
the words sound as if she had been thinking of herself and him.

"The elm is dangerous, though. It ought to be cut down," she insisted.

"Would you be afraid of it, with me?"

