In the end, being old and poor, and having very few works to do, Giuliano applied himself with
extraordinary and even incredible pains to make a Pietà in a tabernacle that was to go to Spain,
with figures of no great size, and executed it with such diligence, that it seems a strange
thing to think of an old man of his age having the patience to do such a work for the love
that he bore to art. On the doors of that tabernacle, in order to depict the darkness that
fell at the death of the Saviour, he painted a Night on a black ground, copied from the one
by the hand of Michelagnolo which is in the Sacristy of S. Lorenzo. But since that statue has
no other sign than an owl, Giuliano, amusing himself over his picture of Night by giving rein
to his fancy, painted there a net for catching thrushes by night, with the lantern, and one
of those little vessels holding a candle, or rather, a candle-end, that are carried about at
night, with other suchlike things that have something to do with darkness and gloom, such as
night-caps, coifs, pillows, and bats; wherefore Buonarroti was like to dislocate his jaw with
laughing when he saw this work and considered with what strange caprices Bugiardini had enriched
his Night.

Finally, after having always been that kind of man, Giuliano died at the age of seventy-five,
and was buried in the Church of S. Marco at Florence, in the year 1556.

Giuliano once relating to Bronzino how he had seen a very beautiful woman, after he had praised
her to the skies, Bronzino said, "Do you know her?" "No," answered Giuliano, "but she is a
miracle of beauty. Just imagine that she is a picture by my hand, and there you have her."

CRISTOFANO GHERARDI, CALLED DOCENO

LIFE OF CRISTOFANO GHERARDI [CALLED DOCENO] OF BORGO SAN SEPOLCRO

PAINTER

While Raffaello dal Colle of Borgo San Sepolcro, who was a disciple of Giulio Romano and helped
him to paint in fresco the Hall of Constantine in the Papal Palace at Rome, and the apartments
of the Te in Mantua, was painting, after his return to the Borgo, the altar-piece of the Chapel
of SS. Gilio e Arcanio (in which, imitating Giulio and Raffaello da Urbino, he depicted the
Resurrection of Christ, a work that was much extolled), with another altar-piece of the Assumption
for the Frati de' Zoccoli without the Borgo, and some other works for the Servite Friars at
Città di Castello; while, I say, Raffaello was executing these and other works in the Borgo,
his native place, acquiring riches and fame, a young man sixteen years of age, called Cristofano,
and by way of by-name, Doceno, the son of Guido Gherardi, a man of honourable family in that
city, was attending from a natural inclination and with much profit to painting, drawing and
colouring so well and with such grace, that it was a marvel. Wherefore the above-named Raffaello,
having seen some animals by the hand of this Cristofano, such as dogs, wolves, hares, and various
kinds of birds and fishes, executed very well, and perceiving that he was most agreeable in
his conversation and very witty and amusing, although he lived a life apart, almost like a
philosopher, was well pleased to form a friendship with him and to have him frequent his workshop
in order to learn.

Now, after Cristofano had spent some time drawing under the discipline of Raffaello, there
arrived in the Borgo the painter Rosso, with whom he contracted a friendship, and received
some of his drawings; and these Doceno studied with great diligence, considering, as one who
had seen no others but those by the hand of Raffaello, that they were very beautiful, as indeed
they were. But these studies were broken off by him, for, when Giovanni de' Turrini of the
Borgo, at that time Captain of the Florentines, went with a band of soldiers from the Borgo
and from Città di Castello to the defence of Florence, which was besieged by the armies of
the Emperor and of Pope Clement, Cristofano went thither among the other soldiers, having been
led away by his many friends. It is true that he did this no less in the hope of having some
occasion to study the works in Florence than with the intention of fighting; but in this he
failed, for his captain, Giovanni, had to guard not a place within the city, but the bastions
on the hill without. That war finished, and the guard of Florence being commanded not long
afterwards by Signor Alessandro Vitelli of Città di Castello, Cristofano, drawn by his friends
and by his desire to see the pictures and sculptures of the city, enlisted as a soldier in
that guard. And while he was in that service, Signor Alessandro, having heard from Battista
della Bilia, a painter and soldier from Città di Castello, that Cristofano gave his attention
to painting, and having obtained a beautiful picture by his hand, determined to send him with
that same Battista della Bilia and with another Battista, likewise of Città di Castello, to
decorate with sgraffiti and paintings a garden and loggia that he had begun at Città di Castello.
But the one Battista having died while that garden was being built up, and the other Battista
having taken his place, for the time being, whatever may have been the reason, nothing more
was done.

Meanwhile Giorgio Vasari had returned from Rome, and was passing his time with Duke Alessandro
in Florence, until his patron Cardinal Ippolito should return from Hungary; and he had received
rooms in the Convent of the Servites, that he might make a beginning with the execution of
certain scenes in fresco from the life of Cæsar in the chamber at the corner of the Medici
Palace, where Giovanni da Udine had decorated the ceiling with stucco-work and pictures. Now
Cristofano, having made Giorgio's acquaintance at the Borgo in the year 1528, when he went
to see Rosso in that place, where he had shown him much kindness, resolved that he would attach
himself to Vasari and thus find much more opportunity for giving attention to art than he had
done in the past. Giorgio, then, after a year's intercourse with him as his companion, finding
that he was likely to make an able master, and that he was pleasant and gentle in manners and
a man after his own heart, conceived an extraordinary affection for him. Wherefore, having
to go not long afterwards, at the commission of Duke Alessandro, to Città di Castello, in company
with Antonio da San Gallo and Pier Francesco da Viterbo (who had been in Florence to build
the castle, or rather, citadel, and on their return were taking the road by Città di Castello),
in order to repair the walls of the above-mentioned garden of Vitelli, which were threatening
to fall, he took Cristofano with him, to the end that after Vasari himself had designed and
distributed in their due order the friezes that were to be executed in certain apartments,
and likewise the scenes and compartments of a bath-room, and other sketches for the walls of
the loggia, Gherardi and the above-named Battista might carry the whole to completion. All
this they did so well and with such grace, and particularly Cristofano, that a past master
in art, well practised in his work, could not have done so much; and, what is more, experimenting
in that work, he became facile and able to a marvel in drawing and colouring.

Then, in the year 1536, the Emperor Charles V coming to Italy and to Florence, as has been
related in other places, the most magnificent festive preparations were ordained, among which
Vasari, by order of Duke Alessandro, received the charge of the decorations of the Porta a
S. Piero Gattolini, of the façade at S. Felice in Piazza, at the head of the Via Maggio, and
of the pediment that was erected over the door of S. Maria del Fiore; and, in addition, of
a standard of cloth for the castle, fifteen braccia in depth and forty in length, into the
gilding of which there went fifty thousand leaves of gold. Now the Florentine painters and
others who were employed in these preparations, thinking that Vasari was too much in favour
with Duke Alessandro, and wishing to leave him disgraced in that part of the decorations--a
part truly great and laborious--which had fallen to him, so went to work that he was not able
to enlist the services of any master of architectural painting, whether young or old, among
all those that were in the city, to assist him in any single thing. Of which having become
aware, Vasari sent for Cristofano, Raffaello dal Colle, and Stefano Veltroni of Monte Sansovino,
his kinsman; and with their assistance and that of other painters from Arezzo and other places,
he executed the works mentioned above, in which Cristofano acquitted himself in such a manner,
that he caused everyone to marvel, doing honour to himself and also to Vasari, who was much
extolled for those works. After they were finished, Cristofano remained many days in Florence,
assisting the same Vasari in the preparations that were made in the Palace of Messer Ottaviano
de' Medici for the nuptials of Duke Alessandro; wherein, among other things, Cristofano executed
the coat of arms of the Duchess Margherita of Austria, with the balls, upheld by a most beautiful
eagle, with some boys, very well done.

Not long afterwards, when Duke Alessandro had been assassinated, a compact was made in the
Borgo to hand over one of the gates of the city to Piero Strozzi, when he came to Sestino,
and letters were therefore written to Cristofano by some soldiers exiled from the Borgo, entreating
him that he should consent to help them in this: which letters received, although Cristofano
did not grant their request, yet, in order not to do a mischief to the soldiers, he chose rather
to tear them up, as he did, than to lay them, as according to the laws and edicts he should
have done, before Gherardo Gherardi, who was then Commissioner for the Lord Duke Cosimo in
the Borgo. When the troubles were over and the matter became known, many citizens of the Borgo
were exiled as rebels, and among them Doceno; and Signor Alessandro Vitelli, who knew the truth
of this affair and could have helped him, did not do so, to the end that Cristofano might be
as it were forced to serve him in the work of his garden at Città di Castello, of which we
have spoken above.

After having consumed much time in this service, without any profit or advantage, Cristofano
finally took refuge, almost in despair, with other exiles, in the village of S. Giustino in
the States of the Church, a mile and a half distant from the Borgo and very near the Florentine
frontier. In that place, although he stayed there at his peril, he painted for Abbot Bufolini
of Città di Castello, who has most beautiful and commodious apartments there, a chamber in
a tower, with a pattern of little boys and figures very well foreshortened to be seen from
below, and with grotesques, festoons, and masks, the most lovely and the most bizarre that
could be imagined. This chamber, when finished, so pleased the Abbot that he caused him to
do another, in which, desiring to make some ornaments of stucco, and not having marble to grind
into powder for mixing it, for this purpose he found a very good substitute in some stones
from a river-bed, veined with white, the powder from which took a good and very firm hold.
And within these ornaments of stucco Cristofano then painted some scenes from Roman history,
executing them so well in fresco that it was a marvel.

