RAINBOW'S END

By REX BEACH

Author of "THE AUCTION BLOCK" "THE SPOILERS" "THE IRON TRAIL" Etc.

Illustrated

CONTENTS

     I. THE VALLEY OF DELIGHT

    II. SPANISH GOLD

   III. "THE O'REILLY"

    IV. RETRIBUTION

     V. A CRY FROM THE WILDERNESS

    VI. THE QUEST BEGINS

   VII. THE MAN WHO WOULD KNOW LIFE

  VIII. THE SPANISH DOUBLOON

    IX. MARAUDERS

     X. O'REILLY TALKS HOG LATIN

    XI. THE HAND OF THE CAPTAIN-GENERAL

   XII. WHEN THE WORLD RAN BACKWARD

  XIII. CAPITULATION

   XIV. A WOMAN WITH A MISSION

    XV. FILIBUSTERS

   XVI. THE CITY AMONG THE LEAVES

  XVII. THE CITY OF BEGGARS

 XVIII. SPEAKING OF FOOD

   XIX. THAT SICK MAN FROM SAN ANTONIO

    XX. EL DEMONIO'S CHILD

   XXI. TREASURE

  XXII. THE TROCHA

 XXIII. INTO THE CITY OF DEATH

  XXIV. ROSA

   XXV. THE HAUNTED GARDEN

  XXVI. HOW COBO STOOD ON HIS HEAD

 XXVII. MORIN, THE FISHERMAN

XXVIII. THREE TRAVELERS COME HOME

  XXIX. WHAT HAPPENED AT SUNDOWN

   XXX. THE OWL AND THE PUSSY-CAT

I

THE VALLEY OF DELIGHT

In all probability your first view of the valley of the Yumuri will be from the Hermitage of
Montserrate, for it is there that the cocheros drive you. Up the winding road they take you,
with the bay at your back and the gorge at your right, to the crest of a narrow ridge where
the chapel stands. Once there, you overlook the fairest sight in all Christendom--"the loveliest
valley in the world," as Humboldt called it--for the Yumuri nestles right at your feet, a vale
of pure delight, a glimpse of Paradise that bewilders the eye and fills the soul with ecstasy.

It is larger than it seems at first sight; through it meanders the river, coiling and uncoiling,
hidden here and there by jungle growths, and seeking final outlet through a cleft in the wall
not unlike a crack in the side of a painted bowl. The place seems to have been fashioned as
a dwelling for dryads and hamadryads, for nixies and pixies, and all the fabled spirits of
forest and stream. Fairy hands tinted its steep slopes and carpeted its level floor with the
richest of green brocades. Nowhere is there a clash of color; nowhere does a naked hillside
or monstrous jut of rock obtrude to mar its placid beauty; nowhere can you see a crude, disfiguring
mark of man's handiwork--there are only fields, and bowers, with an occasional thatched roof
faded gray by the sun.

Royal palms, most perfect of trees, are scattered everywhere. They stand alone or in stately
groves, their lush fronds drooping like gigantic ostrich plumes, their slim trunks as smooth
and regular and white as if turned in a giant lathe and then rubbed with pipe- clay. In all
Cuba, island of bewitching vistas, there is no other Yumuri, and in all the wide world, perhaps,
there is no valley of moods and aspects so varying. You should see it at evening, all warm
and slumberous, all gold and green and purple; or at early dawn, when the mists are fading
like pale memories of dreams and the tints are delicate; or again, during a tempest, when it
is a caldron of whirling vapors and when the palm-trees bend like coryphees, tossing their
arms to the galloping hurricane. But whatever the time of day or the season of the year at
which you visit it, the Yumuri will render you wordless with delight, and you will vow that
it is the happiest valley men's eyes have ever looked upon.

Standing there beside the shrine of Our Lady of Montserrate, you will see beyond the cleft
through which the river emerges another hill, La Cumbre, from which the view is almost as wonderful,
and your driver may tell you about the splendid homes that used to grace its slopes in the
golden days when Cuba had an aristocracy. They were classic Roman villas, such as once lined
the Via Appia-- little palaces, with mosaics and marbles and precious woods imported from Europe,
and furnished with the rarest treasures--for in those days the Cuban planters were rich and
spent their money lavishly. Melancholy reminders of this splendor exist even now in the shape
of a crumbled ruin here and there, a lichened pillar, an occasional porcelain urn in its place
atop a vine-grown bit of wall. Your cochero may point out a certain grove of orange-trees,
now little more than a rank tangle, and tell you about the quinta of Don Esteban Varona, and
its hidden treasure; about little Esteban and Rosa, the twins; and about Sebastian, the giant
slave, who died in fury, taking with him the secret of the well.

The Spanish Main is rich in tales of treasure-trove, for when the Antilles were most affluent
they were least secure, and men were put to strange shifts to protect their fortunes. Certain
hoards, like jewels of tragic history, in time assumed a sort of evil personality, not infrequently
exercising a dire influence over the lives of those who chanced to fall under their spells.
It was as if the money were accursed, for certainly the seekers often came to evil. Of such
a character was the Varona treasure. Don Esteban himself was neither better nor worse than
other men of his time, and although part of the money he hid was wrung from the toil of slaves
and the traffic in their bodies, much of it was clean enough, and in time the earth purified
it all. Since his acts made so deep an impress, and since the treasure he left played so big
a part in the destinies of those who came after him, it is well that some account of these
matters should be given.

The story, please remember, is an old one; it has been often told, and in the telling and retelling
it is but natural that a certain glamour, a certain tropical extravagance, should attach to
it, therefore you should make allowance for some exaggeration, some accretions due to the lapse
of time. In the main, however, it is well authenticated and runs parallel to fact.

Dona Rosa Varona lived barely long enough to learn that she had given birth to twins. Don Esteban,
whom people knew as a grim man, took the blow of his sudden bereavement as became one of his
strong fiber. Leaving the priest upon his knees and the doctor busied with the babies, he strode
through the house and out into the sunset, followed by the wails of the slave women. From the
negro quarters came the sound of other and even louder lamentations, for Dona Rosa had been
well loved and the news of her passing had spread quickly.

Don Esteban was at heart a selfish man, and now, therefore, he felt a sullen, fierce resentment
mingled with his grief. What trick was this? he asked himself. What had he done to merit such
misfortune? Had he not made rich gifts to the Church? Had he not gone on foot to the shrine
of Our Lady of Montserrate with a splendid votive offering--a pair of eardrops, a necklace,
and a crucifix, all of diamonds that quivered in the sunlight like drops of purest water? Had
he not knelt and prayed for his wife's safe delivery and then hung his gifts upon the sacred
image, as Loyola had hung up his weapons before that other counterpart of Our Lady? Don Esteban
scowled at the memory, for those gems were of the finest, and certainly of a value sufficient
to recompense the Virgin for any ordinary miracle. They were worth five thousand pesos at least,
he told himself; they represented the price of five slaves--five of his finest girls, schooled
in housekeeping and of an age suitable for breeding. An extravagance, truly! Don Esteban knew
the value of money as well as anybody, and he swore now that he would give no more to the Church.

He looked up from his unhappy musings to find a gigantic, barefooted negro standing before
him. The slave was middle-aged; his kinky hair was growing gray; but he was of superb proportions,
and the muscles which showed through the rents in his cotton garments were as smooth and supple
as those of a stripling. His black face was puckered with grief, as he began:

"Master, is it true that Dona Rosa--" The fellow choked.

"Yes," Esteban nodded, wearily, "she is dead, Sebastian."

Tears came to Sebastian's eyes and overflowed his cheeks; he stood motionless, striving to
voice his sympathy. At length he said:

"She was too good for this world. God was jealous and took her to Paradise."

The widowed man cried out, angrily:

"Paradise! What is this but paradise?" He stared with resentful eyes at the beauty round about
him. "See! The Yumuri!" Don Esteban flung a long arm outward. "Do you think there is a sight
like that in heaven? And yonder--" He turned to the harbor far below, with its fleet of sailing-ships
resting like a flock of gulls upon a sea of quicksilver. Beyond the bay, twenty miles distant,
a range of hazy mountains hid the horizon. Facing to the south, Esteban looked up the full
length of the valley of the San Juan, clear to the majestic Pan de Matanzas, a wonderful sight
indeed; then his eyes returned, as they always did, to the Yumuri, Valley of Delight. "Paradise
indeed!" he muttered. "I gave her everything. She gained nothing by dying."

With a grave thoughtfulness which proved him superior to the ordinary slave, Sebastian replied:

"True! She had all that any woman's heart could desire, but in return for your goodness she
gave you children. You have lost her, but you have gained an heir, and a beautiful girl baby
who will grow to be another Dona Rosa. I grieved as you grieve, once upon a time, for my woman
died in childbirth, too. You remember? But my daughter lives, and she has brought sunshine
into my old age. That is the purpose of children." He paused and shifted his weight uncertainly,
digging his stiff black toes into the dirt. After a time he said, slowly: "Excellency! Now,
about the--well--?"

"Yes. What about it?" Esteban lifted smoldering eyes.

"Did the Dona Rosa confide her share of the secret to any one? Those priests and those doctors,
you know--?"

"She died without speaking."

"Then it rests between you and me?"

"It does, unless you have babbled."

"Master!" Sebastian drew himself up and there was real dignity in his black face.

"Understand, my whole fortune is there--everything, even to the deeds of patent for the plantations.
If I thought there was danger of your betraying me I would have your tongue pulled out and
your eyes torn from their sockets."

The black man spoke with a simplicity that carried conviction. "You have seen me tested. You
know I am faithful. But, master, this secret is a great burden for my old shoulders, and I
have been thinking--Times are unsettled, Don Esteban, and death comes without warning. You
are known to be the richest man in this province and these government officials are robbers.
Suppose--I should be left alone? What then?"

The planter considered for a moment. "They are my countrymen, but a curse on them," he said,
finally. "Well, when my children are old enough to hold their tongues they will have to be
told. If I'm gone, you shall be the one to tell them. Now leave me; this is no time to speak
of such things."

Sebastian went as noiselessly as he had come. On his way back to his quarters he took the path
to the well--the place where most of his time was ordinarily spent. Sebastian had dug this
well, and with his own hands he had beautified its surroundings until they were the loveliest
on the Varona grounds. The rock for the building of the quinta had been quarried here, and
in the center of the resulting depression, grass-grown and flowering now, was the well itself.
Its waters seeped from subterranean caverns and filtered, pure and cool, through the porous
country rock. Plantain, palm, orange, and tamarind trees bordered the hollow; over the rocky
walls ran a riot of vines and ferns and ornamental plants. It was Sebastian's task to keep
this place green, and thither he took his way, from force of habit.

Through the twilight came Pancho Cueto, the manager, a youngish man, with a narrow face and
bold, close-set eyes. Spying Sebastian, he began:

"So Don Esteban has an heir at last?"

The slave rubbed his eyes with the heel of his huge yellow palm and answered, respectfully:

"Yes, Don Pancho. Two little angels, a boy and a girl." His gray brows drew together in a painful
frown. "Dona Rosa was a saint. No doubt there is great rejoicing in heaven at her coming. Eh?
What do you think?"

"Um-m! Possibly. Don Esteban will miss her for a time and then, I dare say, he will remarry."
At the negro's exclamation Cueto cried: "So! And why not? Everybody knows how rich he is. From
Oriente to Pinar del Rio the women have heard about his treasure."

"What treasure?" asked Sebastian, after an instant's pause.

Cueto's dark eyes gleamed resentfully at this show of ignorance, but he laughed.

"Ho! There's a careful fellow for you! No wonder he trusts you. But do you think I have neither
eyes nor ears? My good Sebastian, you know all about that treasure; in fact, you know far more
about many things than Don Esteban would care to have you tell. Come now, don't you?"

Sebastian's face was like a mask carved from ebony. "Of what does this treasure consist?" he
inquired. "I have never heard about it."

"Of gold, of jewels, of silver bars and precious ornaments." Cueto's head was thrust forward,
his nostrils were dilated, his teeth gleamed. "Oh, it is somewhere about, as you very well
know! Bah! Don't deny it. I'm no fool. What becomes of the money from the slave girls, eh?
And the sugar crops, too? Does it go to buy arms and ammunition for the rebels? No. Don Esteban
hides it, and you help him. Come," he cried, disregarding Sebastian's murmurs of protest, "did
you ever think how fabulous that fortune must be by this time? Did you ever think that one
little gem, one bag of gold, would buy your freedom?"

"Don Esteban has promised to buy my freedom and the freedom of my girl."

"So?" The manager was plainly surprised. "I didn't know that." After a moment he began to laugh.
"And yet you pretend to know nothing about that treasure? Ha! You're a good boy, Sebastian,
and so I am. I admire you. We're both loyal to our master, eh? But now about Evangelina." Cueto's
face took on a craftier expression. "She is a likely girl, and when she grows up she will be
worth more than you, her father. Don't forget that Don Esteban is before all else a business
man. Be careful that some one doesn't make him so good an offer for your girl that he will
forget his promise and--sell her."

Sebastian uttered a hoarse, animal cry and the whites of his eyes showed through the gloom.
"He would never sell Evangelina!"

Cueto laughed aloud once more. "Of course! He would not dare, eh? I am only teasing you. But
see! You have given yourself away. Everything you tell me proves that you know all about that
treasure."

"I know but one thing," the slave declared, stiffening himself slowly, "and that is to be faithful
to Don Esteban." He turned and departed, leaving Pancho Cueto staring after him meditatively.

In the days following the birth of his children and the death of his wife, Don Esteban Varona,
as had been his custom, steered a middle course in politics, in that way managing to avoid
a clash with the Spanish officials who ruled the island, or an open break with his Cuban neighbors,
who rebelled beneath their wrongs. The words stopped, frozen on his lips. Before the parka edge
his close cropped hair seemed to rise, and his breath stopped midway in his lungs. Sharp electric
shocks shook him, for there, half revealed in the feeble flashlight's glare, was a sight which
shook his sanity to the snapping point. Not fifty feet away two eyes, large as dinner plates,
with narrow vertical red irises, were trained on him. Rooted to the ground by the paralysis of
utter horror, Nelson saw that their color was a weird, unhealthy, greenish white, rather like the color
of a radio-light watch dial.

Strangely intense, these huge orbs wavered not at all, filling him with an unnameable dread,
while the strong odor of musk assailed his nostrils. The flashlight slipped from between Nelson's
fingers and, no longer having his thumb on the button, flickered out.

Helpless, Nelson stood transfixed against a boulder, aware that the strange, musky scent was
becoming stronger.

Then to his ears came a dry scrabbling as of some large body stealthily advancing. Those horrible,
unearthly eyes were coming nearer! Fierce, terrible shocks of fear gripped the exhausted aviator.
Then the impulse of self-preservation, that most elementary of all instincts, forced him to
snatch up the rifle, to sight hastily, blindly, between those two, great greenish eyes. Choking
out a strangled sob of desperation, Nelson made his trembling finger close over the cold strip
of steel that must be the trigger.

* * * * *

Like a stage trick, the cavern was momentarily lit by a strong, orange yellow glare. Then the
Winchester's report thundered and roared deafeningly; coincidentally arose a nerve-shattering scream.
An exhalation, foul as a corpse long unburied, fanned his face. Terrified, he flattened to
the rock wall as a huge, though dangerously agile body hurtled by with the speed of a runaway
horse. Presently followed the sound of a ponderous fall, then a series of shrill, ear-piercing
gibberings and squeakings, like those of a titanic rat--squeaks that
rang like the chorus of Hell itself.

Gradually they grew fainter, while in the darkness the heavy air of the tunnel became rank with
the odor of clotting blood.

Nelson remained where he was, shaking like a frightened horse and bathed with a cold sweat.

"Wonder what it was?" he muttered numbly.

He broke off, for in the terrible darkness sounded a low but perfectly audible thud! thud! thud!
thud!--and also the subtle noise of some rough surface rasping gently over the stone. His nerves
crisped and shrieked for relief.

"It's coming again!" he told himself, and ejected the spent cartridge from the Winchester. "No use--it'll
get me, but I may as well fight as long as I can."

Even stronger grew the musty smell of blood while that uncanny thud!
thud! sound continued at regular intervals.

Nelson waited, breath halted and finger on trigger, but still the darkness yielded no glimpse of those awful
saucer-like eyes.

* * * * *

Emboldened, he stooped and, jerking off his left glove, commenced
to grope among the boulders.

Somewhere near at his feet the flashlight must be lying. Hoping against hope that its fall had
not shattered the bulb, he ran his fingers over the cold, damp stones, every instant expecting
to feel the clutch of the unseen monster. How tiny, how puny he was! All at once his fingers
encountered the smooth familiar shape of the flash and he raised
it cautiously through the darkness.

Patiently he shifted the Winchester to his left hand in order to
set the flashlight on the top of a flat rock, pointing it as nearly
as he could determine in the direction from whence came those ominous,
stealthy sounds.

"Guess I'll switch on the light," he decided, "and trust to drop whatever it is before it reaches
me."

Taking a fresh grip on his quivering nerves, Nelson cautiously cocked
the .38-55, cuddled the familiar stock to his shoulder.

He sighted, then with his right hand pushed down the catch lever of the flashlight.

Instantly a dazzling white beam shot forth to shatter the gloom.

The hair on the back of Nelson's hands itched unbearably, while the cold fingers of madness
clutched at his brain, for the sight which met his eyes all but bereft him of his wavering sanity.
There, belly up, across a low ridge of basalt, lay a hideous reptile,
which in form faintly resembled an enormous and fantastic kangaroo.

Its scabby belly was of the unhealthy yellow of a grub, a hue which
gave way to a leaden gray as the wart-covered skin reached the back.

Two enormous hind legs, each thick as a man's torso and each equipped
with three dagger-like talons, struck out in helpless fury at the
air, while a long, lizard-like tail threshed powerfully back and forth,
scattering ponderous boulders right and left as though they had been
marbles.

The flashlight being trained as it was, the monster's head and forequarters were invisible, all
save two very much smaller and shorter front legs which, like the
hinder ones, clawed spasmodically.

"The D. T's!" gasped Nelson, conscious that he was trembling like an aspen. He suppressed a wild
desire to laugh.

"Yes, I've gone crazy!"

* * * * *

He glanced downwards and leaped swiftly back, for, creeping over the
stones towards his fur outer boots, meandered a wide rivulet of bright
scarlet blood.

From its surface rose small curling feathers of steam which, drifting towards the tunnel's
roof, merged with that gray, vaporous current flowing steadily towards the sunless Arctic expanse
outside.

It took Nelson a long five minutes to sufficiently recover his equilibrium
for action.

All he could do was to stare at that grotesque, gargoyle-like creature
as it writhed in leisurely and persistent death throes.

"Guess I winged it all right! My God, what a nasty beast! Looks like one of those allosaurs I
read about in college. It couldn't be, though--that tribe of dinosaurs died out five million
years ago."

Cautiously he scrambled around among the high black stones, casting the search light beams before
him and holding the Winchester always ready in his hand while trying
to recall snatches of palaeontology studied at college long years ago.

"Yes, it must be a survival of one of the carnivorous dinosaurs,"
he decided, then paused, increasingly conscious of that steady thudding
noise.

What caused it?

* * * * *

At last he found himself before the creature's gigantic and repulsive head which lay limp over
a blood bathed stone, huge jaws partially open, and serrated rows
of wicked, stiletto-sharp teeth gleaming yellowly in the flashlight's
rays.

The head in shape was bullet-like, ending in a blunt nose as big as a bushel basket and in
two prominent nostrils. The green, lidless eyes were still open, shining faintly, and seemed
to follow his movements, but the steaming blood poured with the force of a small hose from between
triple row of bayonetlike teeth that curved inward like those of a shark, to splash and bubble
freely to the rock floor and to dribble horribly over the warty, gray hide.

Then Nelson discovered an amazing fact. About the great scaly neck, thick as a boy's waist,
was fastened a ponderous collar, set with short, sharp spikes.

Nelson gasped.

"What in hell!" he cried. "This damn thing's somebody's property!" His mind, staggered at the
thought of dealing with a race that could and would domesticate such a hideous monster. "Well,
it's no use standing here," he muttered, wiping the sweat from his eyes. "This isn't getting
poor Alden away from those devils."

Thud! thud! In the act of turning he paused, listened once more.

Then he discovered to his amazement that the heart of the apparently dead reptile was still
beating strongly. He could even see the yellow skin of its belly rise and fall. The effect was
grotesque, uncanny.

"Of course," muttered the shaken aviator, "I'd forgotten a reptile's
ganglions will keep on beating for hours, like that shark we killed
off Paumotu.

Its heart didn't stop for five hours."

* * * * *

Leaving the slain allosaurus behind, the aviator limped onwards, doggedly following a trail
which wound down, ever onwards, into the depths of the earth. Gradually the air became so filled
with steam that he stripped off his fur jumper and trousers.

Clad in a khaki flannel shirt, serge trousers and shoepacks, he paused long enough to count
his cartridges, and found there were just fourteen.

Hell! Not very many with which to venture into an unknown abyss. He distributed them in his
pockets, and, somewhat relieved of the weight of the fur suit, took up his advance, playing the
flashlight ahead of him as he went.

"Poor Alden," he thought. "I wonder if he's still alive?"

Every moment expecting to stumble over the mangled corpse of his friend
he hurried on, making better time over the cavern floor, but soon
even the lighter clothing commenced to feel oppressive.

"Must be the earth's heat," he muttered, while the steam clouds rolled
by him like ghostly serpents.

"Guess the crust is very thin here--something like Yellowstone.

Probably I'll find some thermal springs ahead."

Just as he spoke the tunnel took a sharp turn to the right. He scrambled around the bend to stand
petrified, for with the suddenness of lightning a flood of dazzling orange-red light sprang into
being. Momentarily it blinded him, then revealed strange, incomprehensible
scenes.

It appeared that two short shafts of incandescent flame roared through
transparent columns of glass on either side of the passage some fifty
yards distant.

Subconsciously Nelson realized that these columns began and ended
in stonework that was smooth and well joined.

* * * * *

As his eyes became accustomed to the glare he distinguished beside
each light pillar two bronze doors, some eight feet high and semicircular
in shape.

These had been evidently pulled back to expose the lights.

Then his breath stopped in his throat, for there, standing beside them, was a gleaming group
of six or eight of the strangest creatures Nelson could ever have imagined. They were men--there
was no mistaking that--men of normal size, but they were so helmeted and incased in a curious
type of armor that for a moment he believed them gargoyles.

Quite motionless he stood, clutching the cold barrel of the Winchester in a spasmodic grip and
staring up at those two watch-towers, built like gigantic swallows' nests into sheer rock wall.
He could see the warriors stationed there, peering curiously down at him from the depths of
heavy, bronze helmets--helmets which in shape much resembled those of an ancient Grecian hoplite,
for the nose guards and cheek pieces descended so low as to completely mask the features of those
strange guards.

For crests these helmets bore exquisitely wrought bronze dolphins,
with brilliant blue eyes of sapphire.

But what fascinated Nelson most was the curious armor they wore. Beneath breast plates of polished
bronze, these strange warriors wore what seemed to be a kind of chain mail--yet it was not that,
for the texture had more the appearance of some heavy but pliant leather, finished with a metallic
surfacing.

Suddenly the spell of mutual amazement was broken, for a tall warrior in a breast plate that glittered
with diamonds and seemed altogether more ornate than the rest, clapped
a short brass horn to his lips and blew a single piercing note.

At once there appeared on the tunnel's floor, not a hundred yards from the startled aviator,
a rank of perhaps twenty soldiers, accoutred exactly like those he
beheld by the light boxes.

They came scrambling over the boulders, their shadows grotesquely
preceding them.

In their hands were long shafted spears, and on their left arms rectangular
shields, charged with a lively dolphin in the act of swimming.

Some of them, however, held short hoses in their hands, hoses that sprouted from tight brass coils
strapped to their broad shoulders.

* * * * *

Again the commanding figure aloft raised the horn. From the tail of his eye Nelson caught the
gleam of metal in the orange glare. While a blast, harsh as the scream of a fire siren, echoed
and re-echoed eerily through the passage, there appeared a fresh detachment. Nelson shrank
back in horror, for these bronze-armored warriors led, at the end
of a powerful chain, two more of those huge, ferocious allosaurs,
exactly like the one he had slain but a short while back.

Like well regulated automatons the hoplite rank opened to permit the passage of those repulsive,
eager monsters, then closed up again and halted, spears levelled
before them in the precise manner of an ancient Grecian phalanx, while
the men with those curious hose-like contrivances ran out to guard
the flanks.

"I'm done for now," thought Nelson as he threw off the Winchester's
safety catch.

"I suppose they'll turn those nightmares loose on me."

He was right.

For all the world as though they led war dogs, the keepers in brazen
armor advanced, the dull metallic clank of their accoutrement clearly
discernible above the sibilant hiss of their hideous charges, which
hopped along grotesquely like kangaroos, using their long and powerful
tails as a counterpoise.

Then the officer watching from the left hand swallow's nest shouted a hoarse, unintelligible command,
whereupon one of the keepers raised his right hand in a sharp gesture that instantly flattened
the incredible monster to earth, exactly like an obedient bird dog.

As in a fantastic dream Nelson watched one of the armored guardians unsnap the hook of the powerful
chain by which his allosaurus was secured. Then, whistling sharply, he clapped his hands and pointed
straight at the motionless aviator.

The creature's green white eyes flickered back and forth, and a chill, colder than the outer Arctic,
invaded Nelson's breast as those unearthly eyes came to rest upon him.

* * * * *

Meanwhile the other allosaurus remained crouched, whining impatiently for its keepers to cast
it loose.

Fixing burning eyes upon the American, the foremost keeper threw back
his head.

"Ahre-e-e!" he shouted. Instantly the freed allosaurus arose, balanced its enormous bulk, then
commenced to leap forward at tremendous speed, clearing fifteen or
twenty feet with each jump and uttering a curious, whistling scream
as it bore down, a terrifying vision of gleaming teeth and talons.

Shaking off the paralysis of despair, Nelson whipped up the Winchester and, as before, sighted
squarely between those blazing, gemlike eyes.

When the huge monster was but twenty feet away he fired, and the report thundered and banged
in the cavern like the crash of a summer storm. In mid-air the ghastly carnivore teemed to stagger.
Its tail twitched sharply as in an effort to recover its balance. Then, quite like any normal
creature that is shot through the head, it lost all sense of direction
and made great convulsive leaps, around and around, clawing madly
at the air, bumping into the rock walls and uttering soul-shaking
shrieks of agony.

Like a gargoyle gone mad it reeled back towards the startled rank of spearmen. As it came,
Nelson saw the second allosaurus rear itself backwards and, balanced on its tail, strike out with
powerful hind legs as its maddened fellow drew near.

Like razors the great talons ripped through the dying allosaurus' belly, exposing the gray-red
intestines as the stricken creature raced by, snapping crazily at the empty air.

A single mighty sweep of the monster's tail crushed five or six of the panic-stricken keepers
and guards, strewing them like broken and abandoned marionettes among the stones. Hissing and
obviously terrified, the second dinosaur watched the dying struggles of its mate; then, obedient
to a terrified shout from its keepers, wheeled about to join in a
frantic rout of the spearmen, who, casting aside shield, spear and
brass coil, fled for dear life in the direction of those invisible
passages through which they had appeared.

CHAPTER II

No less amazed and alarmed than those vanished soldiers, Nelson remained
rooted to the ground, conscious that in the swallow's nest overhead
there remained only the officer--a tall, broad shouldered man with
golden beard showing from under the cheek pieces of his helmet.

Across the body of the still writhing monster their glances met. Nelson could see by the light
of those strange pillars of fire that the other's eyes were blue
as any Norseman's. Leaning far out over the stone parapet the other
stared down upon the aviator from the depths of his jewelled helmet
in a strange mixture of curiosity and awe.

Suddenly Nelson's nerves snapped and he shook a trembling fist at
the martial figure above.

"Go away!" he shrieked, and reeled back on the edge of collapse. "Go away, you damn phantom! You're
driving me crazy--crazy, I tell you!"

The other stiffened, then turned and, uttering a hoarse shout, vanished, leaving the noiseless
and apparently heatless pillar of fire flaring steadily.

Recovering somewhat, Nelson set his teeth, advanced to the nearest corpse, stooped and regarded
him who lay there, with bronze helmet fallen off.

"It's a man and not a ghost," he murmured as his finger encountered
flesh that was still warm.

"Red headed too, or I'm a liar.

Now what in hell is all this?"

For all his bewilderment he began to feel better and his swaying reason
became steadier.

"Bronze, bronze--nothing but bronze," the aviator told himself as
he further examined the scattered equipment.

"Evidently these fellows don't know the use of iron or steel."

* * * * *

With increased curiosity he bent over another splendidly
built dead man who lay with back broken and sightless eyes staring
fixedly onto the steam current meandering silently along the cavern's
roof. From the fallen man's belt were slung half a dozen curious weapons
that looked not unlike potato mashers, except that they were bronze
headed and had wooden handles.

"Hum," he commented, "kind of like
the grenades the Boche used in the late lamented. Wonder what the
devil these are?"

Suddenly his ear detected the sound of a footstep
and, on looking swiftly up, he beheld that same yellow bearded officer
who had directed the attack. This strange being had taken off his
ponderous helmet to carry it in his left hand, while his right was
held vertically in the immemorial sign of peace. On he came with powerful
martial strides, a brilliant green cloak flapping gently behind him
and the jewels in his brazen armor glinting like so many tiny colored
eyes. The stranger was indeed handsome, Nelson noticed--and then he
received perhaps the greatest shock of the whole chimerical adventure.
The gold bearded man halted some twenty feet away, smiled and spoke
in a curiously inflected but perfectly recognizable voice.

"Welcome
to the Empire of the Atlans. Prithee, Wanderer, what be thy name?"

For
a long moment Nelson was entirely too taken back to make a reply.
Desperately his already perplexed brain tried to comprehend. Here
was a handsome six-footer, dressed in the arms of an ancient race,
speaking English of the seventeenth century!

* * * * *

As at a phantom,
he regarded the stalwart, faintly ominous figure, from heavy leather
sandals to bronze greaves, thence to wide belt from which dangled
more of those curious grenadelike objects. His glance paused on the
officer's beautifully wrought bronze cuirasse or breast plate which
showed in relief an emerald scaled dolphin and trident. These, Nelson
decided, must be the national emblems of this incomprehensible nation.

Then
their eyes met, held each other a long moment until the tall officer's
features, disfigured by a long red scar across the jaw, broke into
a hard smile.

"Hero Giles Hudson begs thy pardon," he said, "but
methought thou spoke in the language of Sir Henry Hudson, my ancestor?"

"Sir
Henry Hudson!" stammered Nelson incredulously. "The old explorer whose
men turned him adrift? So that's why you're talking embalmed English!"
In desperation his weary brain strove to understand.

"I know naught,"
replied the other with a grave smile, "save that the founder of our
royal line spoke what he called English. He came from the Ice World
to rule wisely over Atlans. He was the greatest Atlantean of history."

"Atlantean?"
echoed Nelson, while his mind groped frantically in the recess of
his memory. "Atlans, Atlantis!" A great light broke upon him. "The
lost Atlantis! Great God!" Had he stumbled upon a remnant of that
powerful people whose fabled empire had been drowned ten centuries
ago in the cold waves of the Atlantic?

* * * * *

"Aye," the yellow
haired warrior continued as though reading his thoughts, "long centuries
ago this valley was peopled by those who escaped the great cataclysm
which ended the mother country. Later came another race, barbarian
wanderers like thyself." He bowed for all the world like a courtly
English gentleman. "But methinks thou art in need of food and sustenance?"

"You
bet I'm hungry," was Nelson's emphatic reply. But there is much--pieces of Spanish gold, silver coins in casks and
in little boxes--the boxes are bound with iron and have hasps and staples; bars of precious
metal and little paper packages of gems, all tied up and hidden in leather bags." Sebastian
could hear his listener panting; her bloodless fingers were wrapped tightly around the bars
above his head.--

"Yes! Go on."

"There are ornaments, too. God knows they must have come from heaven, they are so beautiful;
and pearls from the Caribbean as large as plums."

"Are you speaking the truth?"

"Every peso, every bar, every knickknack I have handled with my own hands. Did I not make the
hiding-place all alone? Senora, everything is there just as I tell you--and more. The grants
of title from the crown for this quinta and the sugar-plantations, they are there, too. Don
Esteban used to fear the government officials, so he hid his papers securely. Without them
the lands belong to no one. You understand?"

"Of course! Yes, yes! But the jewels--God! where are they hidden?"

"You would never guess!" Sebastian's voice gathered strength. "Ten thousand men in ten thousand
years would never find the place, and nobody knows the secret but Don Esteban and me."

"I believe you. I knew all the time it was here. Well? Where is it?"

Sebastian hesitated and said, piteously, "I am dying--"

Isabel could scarcely contain herself. "I'll give you water, but first tell me where--where!
God in heaven! Can't you see that I, too, am perishing?"

"I must have a drink."

"Tell me first."

Sebastian lifted his head and, meeting the speaker's eyes, laughed hoarsely.

At the sound of his unnatural merriment Isabel recoiled as if stung. She stared at the slave's
face in amazement and then in fury. She stammered, incoherently, "You--you have been--lying!"

"Oh no! The treasure is there, the greatest treasure in all Cuba, but you shall never know
where it is. I'll see to that. It was you who sold my girl; it was you who brought me to this;
it was your hand that whipped me. Well, I'll tell Don Esteban how you tried to bribe his secret
from me! What do you think he'll do then? Eh? You'll feel the lash on your white back--"

"You FOOL!" Dona Isabel looked murder. "I'll punish you for this; I'll make you speak if I
have to rub your wounds with salt."

But Sebastian closed his eyes wearily. "You can't make me suffer more than I have suffered,"
he said. "And now--I curse you. May that treasure be the death of you. May you live in torture
like mine the rest of your days; may your beauty turn to ugliness such that men will spit at
you; may you never know peace again until you die in poverty and want--"

But Dona Isabel, being superstitious, fled with her fingers in her ears; nor did she undertake
to make good her barbarous threat, realizing opportunely that it would only serve to betray
her desperate intentions and put her husband further on his guard. Instead she shut herself
into her room, where she paced the floor, racking her brain to guess where the hiding-place
could be or to devise some means of silencing Sebastian's tongue. To feel that she had been
overmatched, to know that there was indeed a treasure, to think that the two who knew where
it was had been laughing at her all this time, filled the woman with an agony approaching that
which Sebastian suffered from his flies.

As the sun was sinking beyond the farther rim of the Yumuri and the valley was beginning to
fill with shadows. Esteban Varona rode up the hill. His temper was more evil than ever, if
that were possible, for he had drunk again in an effort to drown the memory of his earlier
actions. With him rode half a dozen or more of his friends, coming to dine and put in another
night at his expense. There were Pablo Peza, and Mario de Castano, once more; Col. Mendoza
y Linares, old Pedro Miron, the advocate, and others of less consequence, whom Esteban had
gathered from the Spanish Club. The host dismounted and lurched across the courtyard to Sebastian.

"So, my fine fellow," he began. "Have you had enough of rebellion by this time?"

"Why did you have him flogged?" the advocate inquired.

Esteban explained, briefly, "He dared to raise his hand in anger against one of my guests."

Sebastian's face was working as he turned upon his master to say: "I would be lying if I told
you that I am sorry for what I did. It is you have done wrong. Your soul is black with this
crime. Where is my girl?"

"The devil! To hear you talk one would think you were a free man." The planter's eyes were
bleared and he brandished his riding-whip threateningly. "I do as I please with my slaves.
I tolerate no insolence. Your girl? Well, she's in the house of Salvador, Don Pablo's cochero,
where she belongs. I've warned him that he will have to tame her unruly spirit, as I have tamed
yours."

Sebastian had hung sick and limp against the grating, but at these words he suddenly roused.
It was as if a current of electricity had galvanized him. He strained at his manacles and the
bars groaned under his weight. His eyes began to roll, his lips drew back over his blue gums.
Noting his expression of ferocity, Esteban cut at his naked back with the riding-whip, crying:

"Ho! Not subdued yet, eh? You need another flogging."

"Curse you and all that is yours," roared the maddened slave. "May you know the misery you
have put upon me. May you rot for a million years in hell." The whip was rising and falling
now, for Esteban had lost what little self-control the liquor had left to him. "May your children's
bodies grow filthy with disease; may they starve; may they--"

Sebastian was yelling, though his voice was hoarse with pain. The lash drew blood with every
blow. Meanwhile, he wrenched and tugged at his bonds with the fury of a maniac.

"Pablo! Your machete, quick!" panted the slave-owner. "God's blood! I'll make an end of this
black fiend, once for all."

Esteban Varona's guests had looked on at the scene with the same mild interest they would display
at the whipping of a balky horse: and, now that the animal threatened to become dangerous,
it was in their view quite the proper thing to put it out of the way. Don Pablo Peza stepped
toward his mare to draw the machete from its scabbard. But he did not hand it to his friend.
He heard a shout, and turned in time to see a wonderful and a terrible thing.

Sebastian had braced his naked feet against the wall; he had bowed his back and bent his massive
shoulders--a back and a pair of shoulders that looked as bony and muscular as those of an ox--and
he was heaving with every ounce of strength in his enormous body. As Pablo stared he saw the
heavy grating come away from its anchorage in the solid masonry, as a shrub is uprooted from
soft ground. The rods bent and twisted; there was a clank and rattle and clash of metal upon
the flags; and then--Sebastian turned upon his tormentor, a free man, save only for the wide
iron bracelets and their connecting chain. He was quite insane. His face was frightful to behold;
it was apelike in its animal rage, and he towered above his master like some fabled creature
out of the African jungle of his forefathers.

Sebastian's fists alone would have been formidable weapons, but they were armored and weighted
with the old-fashioned, hand- wrought irons which Pancho Cueto had locked upon them. Wrapping
the chain in his fingers, the slave leaped at Esteban and struck, once. The sound of the blow
was sickening, for the whole bony structure of Esteban Varona's head gave way.

There was a horrified cry from the other white men. Don Pablo Peza ran forward, shouting. He
swung his machete, but Sebastian met him before the blow could descend, and they went down
together upon the hard stones. Again Sebastian smote, with his massive hands wrapped in the
chain and his wrists encased in steel, and this time it was as if Don Pablo's head had been
caught between a hammer and an anvil. The negro's strength, exceptional at all times, was multiplied
tenfold; he had run amuck. When he arose the machete was in his grasp and Don Pablo's brains
were on his knuckles.

It all happened in far less time than it takes to tell. The onlookers had not yet recovered
from their first consternation; in fact they were still fumbling and tugging at whatever weapons
they carried when Sebastian came toward them, brandishing the blade on high. Pedro Miron, the
advocate, was the third to fall. He tried to scramble out of the negro's path, but, being an
old man, his limbs were too stiff to serve him and he went down shrieking.

By now the horses had caught the scent of hot blood and were plunging furiously, the clatter
of their hoofs mingling with the blasphemies of the riders, while Sebastian's bestial roaring
made the commotion even more hideous.

Esteban's guests fought as much for their lives as for vengeance upon the slayer, for Sebastian
was like a gorilla; he seemed intent upon killing them all. He vented his fury upon whatever
came within his reach; he struck at men and animals alike, and the shrieks of wounded horses
added to the din.

It was a frightful combat. It seemed incredible that one man could work such dreadful havoc
in so short a time. Varona and two of his friends were dead; two more were badly wounded, and
a Peruvian stallion lay kicking on the flagging when Col. Mendoza y Linares finally managed
to get a bullet home in the black man's brain.

Those who came running to learn the cause of the hubbub turned away sick and pallid, for the
paved yard was a shambles. Pancho Cueto called upon the slaves to help him, but they slunk
back to their quarters, dumb with terror and dismay.

All that night people from the town below came and went and the quinta resounded to sobs and
lamentations, but of all the relatives of the dead and wounded, Dona Isabel took her bereavement
hardest. Strange to say, she could not be comforted. She wept, she screamed, she tore her hair,
tasting the full nauseousness of the cup her own avarice had prepared. Now, when it was too
late, she realized that she had overreached herself, having caused the death of the only two
who knew the secret of the treasure. She remembered, also, Sebastian's statement that even
the deeds of patent for the land were hidden with the rest, where ten thousand men in ten thousand
years could never find them.

Impressed by her manifestations of grief, Esteban's friends reasoned that the widow must have
loved her husband dearly. They told one another they had wronged her.

III

"THE O'REILLY"

Age and easy living had caused Don Mario de Castano, the sugar merchant, to take on weight.
He had, in truth, become so fat that he waddled like a penguin when he walked; and when he
rode, the springs of his French victoria gave up in despair. They glued themselves together,
face to face, and Don Mario felt every rut and every rock in the road. Nor was the merchant
any less heavy in mind than in body, for he was both very rich and very serious, and nothing
is more ponderous than a rich, fat man who takes his riches and his fatness seriously. In disposition
Don Mario was practical and unromantic; he boasted that he had never had an illusion, never
an interest outside of his business. And yet, on the day this story opens, this prosaic personage,
in spite of his bulging waistband and his taut neckband, in spite of his short breath and his
prickly heat, was in a very whirl of pleasurable excitement. Don Mario, in fact, suffered the
greatest of all illusions: he was in love, and he believed himself beloved. The object of his
adoration was little Rosa Varona, the daughter of his one-time friend Esteban. At thought of
her the planter glowed with ardor--at any rate he took it to be ardor, although it might have
been the fever from that summer rash which so afflicted him-- and his heart fluttered in a
way dangerous to one of his apoplectic tendencies. To be sure, he had met Rosa only twice since
her return from her Yankee school, but twice had been enough; with prompt decision he had resolved
to do her the honor of making her his wife.

Now, with a person of Don Mario's importance, to decide for himself is to decide for others,
and inasmuch as he knew that Dona Isabel, Rosa's stepmother, was notoriously mercenary and
had not done at all well since her husband's death, it did not occur to him to doubt that his
suit would prosper. It was, in fact, to make terms with her that he rode forth in the heat
of this particular afternoon.

Notwithstanding the rivulets of perspiration that were coursing down every fold of his flesh,
and regardless of the fact that the body of his victoria was tipped at a drunken angle, as
if struggling to escape the burdens of his great weight, Don Mario felt a jauntiness of body
and of spirit almost like that of youth. He saw himself as a splendid prince riding toward
the humble home of some obscure maiden whom he had graciously chosen to be his mate.

His arrival threw Dona Isabel into a flutter; the woman could scarcely contain her curiosity
when she came to meet him, for he was not the sort of man to inconvenience himself by mere
social visits. Their first formal greetings over, Don Mario surveyed the bare living-room and
remarked, lugubriously:

"I see many changes here."

"No doubt," the widow agreed. "Times have been hard since poor Esteban's death."

"What a terrible calamity that was! I shudder when I think of it," said he. "I was his guest
on the night previous, you remember? In fact, I witnessed his wager of the negro girl, Evangelina--the
root of the whole tragedy. Well, well! Who would have believed that old slave, her father,
would have run mad at losing her? A shocking affair, truly! and one I shall never get out of
my mind."

"Shocking, yes. But what do you think of a rich man, like Esteban, who would leave his family
destitute? Who would die without revealing the place where he had stored his treasure?"

Dona Isabel, it was plain, felt her wrongs keenly; she spoke with as much spirit as if her
husband had permitted himself to be killed purely out of spite toward her.

De Castano shook his round bullet head, saying with some impatience: "You still believe in
that treasure, eh? My dear senora, the only treasure Varona left was his adorable children--
and your admirable self." Immediately the speaker regretted his words, for he remembered, too
late, that Dona Isabel was reputed to be a trifle unbalanced on this subject of the Varona
treasure.

"I do not believe; I KNOW!" the widow answered, with more than necessary vehemence. "What became
of all Esteban's money if he did not bury it? He never gave any to me, for he was a miser.
You know, as well as I, that he carried on a stupendous business in slaves and sugar, and it
was common knowledge that he hid every peso for fear of his enemies. But where? WHERE? That
is the question."

"You, if any one, should know, after all the years you have spent in hunting for it," the merchant
observed. "Dios mio! Almost before Esteban was buried you began the search. People said you
were going to tear this house down."

"Well, I never found a trace. I had holes dug in the gardens, too."

"You see? No, senora, it is possible to hide anything except money. No man can conceal that
where another will not find it."

Isabel's face had grown hard and avaricious, even during this brief talk; her eyes were glowing;
plainly she was as far as ever from giving up her long-cherished conviction.

"I don't ask anybody to believe the story," she said, resentfully. "All the same, it is true.
There are pieces of Spanish gold and silver coins, in boxes bound with iron and fitted with
hasps and staples; packages of gems; pearls from the Caribbean as large as plums. Oh? Sebastian
told me all about it."

"Of course, of course! I shall not argue the matter."' Don Mario dismissed the subject with
a wave of his plump hand. "Now, Dona Isabel--"

"As if it were not enough to lose that treasure," the widow continued, stormily, "the Government
must free all our slaves. Tse! Tse! And now that there is no longer a profit in sugar, my plantations--"

"No profit in sugar? What are you saying?" queried the caller.

"Oh, you have a way of prospering! What touches your fingers turns to gold. But you are not
at the mercy of an administrador."

"Precisely! I am my own manager. If your crops do not pay, then Pancho Cueto is cheating you.
He is capable of it. Get rid of him. But I didn't come here to talk about Esteban's hidden
treasure, nor his plantations, nor Pancho Cueto. I came here to talk about your step-daughter,
Rosa."

"So?" Dona Isabel looked up quickly.

"She interests me. She is more beautiful than the stars." Don Mario rolled his eyes toward
the high ceiling, which, like the sky, was tinted a vivid cerulean blue. "She personifies every
virtue; she is--delectable." He pursed his wet lips, daintily picked a kiss from between them
with his thumb and finger, and snapped it into the air.

Inasmuch as Isabel had always hated the girl venomously, she did not trust herself to comment
upon her caller's enthusiasm.

"She is now eighteen," the fat suitor went on, ecstatically, "and so altogether charming--But
why waste time in pretty speeches? I have decided to marry her."

De Castano plucked a heavily scented silk handkerchief from his pocket and wiped a beading
of moisture from his brow and upper lip. He had a habit of perspiring when roused from his
usual lethargy.

"Rosa has a will of her own," guardedly ventured the stepmother.

Don Mario broke out, testily: "Naturally; so have we all. Now let us speak plainly. You know
me. I am a person of importance. I am rich enough to afford what I want, and I pay well. You
understand? Well, then, you are Rosa's guardian and you can bend her to your desires."

"If that were only so!" exclaimed the woman. "She and Esteban-- what children! What tempers!--Just
like their father's! They have never liked me; they disobey me at every opportunity; they exercise
the most diabolical ingenuity in making my life miserable. They were to be their father's heirs,
you know, and they blame me for his death, for our poverty, and for all the other misfortunes
that have overtaken us. We live like cats and dogs."

Don Mario had been drumming his fat fingers impatiently upon the arm of his chair. Now he exclaimed:

"Your pardon, senora, but I am just now very little interested in your domestic relations;
they do not thrill me--as my own prospective happiness does. What you say about Rosa only makes
me more eager, for I loathe a sleepy woman. Now tell me, is she--Has she any-affairs of the heart?"

"N-no, unless perhaps a flirtation with that young American, Juan O'Reilly." Dona Isabel gave
the name its Spanish pronunciation of "O'Rail-ye."

"Juan O'Reilly? O'Reilly? Oh yes! But what has he to offer a woman? He is little more than
a clerk."

"That is what I tell her. Oh, it hasn't gone far as yet."

"Good!" Don Mario rose to leave, for the exertion of his ride had made him thirsty. "You may
name your own reward for helping me and I will pay it the day Rosa marries me. Now kindly advise
her of my intentions and tell her I shall come to see her soon."

It was quite true that Johnnie O'Reilly--or "The O'Reilly," as his friends called him--had
little in the way of worldly advantage to offer any girl, and it was precisely because of this
fact that he had accepted a position here in Cuba, where, from the very nature of things, promotion
was likely to be more rapid than in the New York office of his firm. He had come to this out-of-the-way
place prepared to live the lonely life of an exile, if an O'Reilly could be lonely anywhere,
and for a brief time he had been glum enough.

But the O'Reillys, from time immemorial, had been born and bred to exile; it was their breath,
their meat and drink, and this particular member of the clan thrived upon it quite as well
as had the other Johnnies and Michaels and Andys who had journeyed to far shores. The O'Reillys
were audacious men, a bit too heedless of their own good, perhaps; a bit too light-hearted
readily to impress a grave world with their varied abilities, but sterling men, for all that,
ambitious men, men with lime in their bones and possessed of a high and ready chivalry that
made friends for them wherever their wandering feet strayed. Spain, France, and the two Americas
had welcomed O'Reillys of one sort or another; even Cuba had the family name written large
upon her scroll. So Johnnie, of New York and Matanzas, although at first he felt himself a
stranger in a strange land, was not so considered by the Cubans.

A dancing eye speaks every language; a singing heart gathers its own audience. Before the young
Irish-American had more than a bowing acquaintance with the commonest Spanish verbs he had
a calling acquaintance with some of the most exclusive people of Matanzas. He puzzled them,
to be sure, for they could not fathom the reason for his ever-bubbling gladness, but they strove
to catch its secret, and, striving, they made friends with him. O'Reilly did not puzzle their
daughters nearly so much: more than one aristocratic senorita felt sure that she quite understood
the tall, blond stranger with the laughing eyes, or could understand him if he gave her half
a chance, and so, as had been the case with other O'Reillys in other lands, Johnnie's exile
became no exile at all. He had adjusted himself serenely to his surroundings when Rosa Varona
returned from school, but with her coming, away went all his complacency. His contentment vanished;
he experienced a total change in his opinions, his hopes, and his ambitions.

He discovered, for example, that Matanzas was by no means the out- of-the-way place he had
considered it; on the contrary, after meeting Rosa once by accident, twice by design, and three
times by mutual arrangement, it had dawned upon him that this was the chief city of Cuba, if
not, perhaps, the hub around which the whole world revolved; certainly it was the most agreeable
of all cities, since it contained everything that was necessary for man's happiness. Yet, despite
the thrill of his awakening, O'Reilly was not at all pleased with himself, for, as it happened,
there was another girl back home, and during his first year of loneliness he had written to
her more freely and more frequently than any man on such a salary as his had a right to do.

O'Reilly laid no claims to literary gifts; nevertheless, it seemed to him, as he looked back
upon it, that his pen must have been dipped in magic and in moonlight, for the girl had expressed
an eager willingness to share his interesting economic problems, and in fact was waiting for
him to give her the legal right. Inasmuch as her father was O'Reilly's "Company" it may be
seen that Rosa Varona's home-coming seriously complicated matters, not only from a sentimental,
but from a business standpoint.

It was in a thoughtful mood that he rode up La Cumbre, toward the Quinta de Esteban, late on
the afternoon of Don Mario's visit. Instead of going directly to the house as the merchant
had done, O'Reilly turned off from the road and, after tethering his horse in a cluster of
guava bushes, proceeded on foot. He did not like Dona Isabel, nor did Dona Isabel like him.
Moreover, he had a particular reason for avoiding her to-day.

Just inside the Varona premises he paused an instant to admire the outlook. The quinta commanded
an excellent view of the Yumuri, on the one hand, and of the town and harbor on the other;
no one ever climbed the hill from the city to gaze over into that hidden valley without feeling
a pleasurable surprise at finding it still there. We are accustomed to think of perfect beauty
as unsubstantial, evanescent; but the Yumuri never changed, and in that lay its supremest wonder.

Through what had once been well-tended grounds, O'Reilly made his way to a sort of sunken garden
which, in spite of neglect, still remained the most charming nook upon the place; and there
he sat down to wait for Rosa. The hollow was effectually screened from view by a growth of
plantain, palm, orange, and tamarind trees; over the rocky walls ran a profusion of flowering
plants and vines; in the center of the open space was an old well, its masonry curb all but
crumbled away.

When Rosa at last appeared, O'Reilly felt called upon to tell her, somewhat dizzily, that she
was beyond doubt the sweetest flower on all the Quinta de Esteban, and since this somewhat
hackneyed remark was the boldest speech he had ever made to her, she blushed prettily, flashing
him a dimpled smile of mingled pleasure and surprise.

"Oh, but I assure you I'm in no sweet temper," said she. "Just now I'm tremendously angry."

"Why?"

"It's that stepmother--Isabel."

"So! You've been quarreling again, eh? Well, she's the easiest woman in all Matanzas to quarrel
with--perhaps the only one who doesn't see something good in me. I'm afraid to talk to her
for fear she'd convince me I'm wholly abominable."

Rosa laughed, showing her fine, regular teeth--O'Reilly thought he had never seen teeth so
even and white. "Yes, she is a difficult person. If she dreamed that I see you as often as
I do--Well--" Rosa lifted her eloquent hands and eyes heavenward. "I suppose that's why I enjoy
doing it--I so dearly love to spite her."

"I see!" O'Reilly puckered his brows and nodded. "But why, in that case, haven't you seen me
oftener? We might just as well have made the good lady's life totally unbearable."

"Silly! She knows nothing about it." With a flirtatious sigh Rosa added: "That's what robs
the affair of its chief pleasure. Since it does not bother her in the least, I think I will
not allow you to come any more."

After judicious consideration, O'Reilly pretended to agree.

"There's no fun in wreaking a horrible revenge, when your enemy isn't wise to it," he acknowledged.
"Since it's your idea to irritate your stepmother, perhaps it would annoy her more if I made
love directly to her."

Rosa tittered, and then inquired, naively, "Can you make love, senor?"

"Can I? It's the one ability an O'Reilly inherits. Listen to this now." Reaching forth, he
took Rosa's fingers in his. "Wait!" he cried as she resisted. "Pretend that you're Mrs. Varona,
your own stepmother, and that this is her dimpled hand I'm holding."

"Oh-h!" The girl allowed his grasp to remain. "But Isabel's hand isn't dimpled: it's thin and
bony. I've felt it on my ears often enough."

"Don't interrupt," he told her. "Isabel, my little darling--"

"'Little'! La! La! She's as tall and ugly as a chimney."

"Hush! I've held my tongue as long as I can, but now it's running away of its own accord, and
I must tell you how mad I am about you. The first time I saw you--it was at the ball in the
Spanish Club--" Again Rosa drew away sharply, at which O'Reilly laid his other hand over the
one in his palm, saying, quickly: "You and your stepdaughter, Rosa. Do you remember that first
waltz of ours? Sure, I thought I was in heaven, with you in my arms and your eyes shining into
mine, and I told you so."

"So you make the same pretty speeches to all women, eh?" the girl reproached him.

"Isabel, sweetheart, I lose my breath when I think of you; my lips pucker up for kisses--"

"'ISABEL'!" exclaimed a voice, and the lovers started guiltily apart. They turned to find Esteban,
Rosa's twin brother, staring at them oddly. "Isabel?" he repeated. "What's this?"

"You interrupted our theatricals. I was rehearsing an impassioned proposal to your beloved
stepmother," O'Reilly explained, with a pretense of annoyance.

"Yes, Senor O'Reilly believes he can infuriate Isabel by laying siege to her. He's a--foolish
person--" Rosa's cheeks were faintly flushed and her color deepened at the amusement in Esteban's
eyes. "He makes love wretchedly."

"What little I overheard wasn't bad," Esteban declared; then he took O'Reilly's hand.

Esteban was a handsome boy, straight, slim, and manly, and his resemblance to Rosa was startling.
With a look engaging in its frank directness, he said: "Rosa told me about your meetings here
and I came to apologize for our stepmother's discourtesy. I'm sorry we can't invite you into
our house, but--you understand? Rosa and I are not like her; we are quite liberal in our views;
we are almost Americans, as you see. I dare say that's what makes Isabel hate Americans so
bitterly."

"Wouldn't it please her to know that I'm becoming Cubanized as fast as ever I can?" ventured
the caller.

"Oh, she hates Cubans, too!" laughed the brother. "She's Spanish, you know. Well, it's fortunate
you didn't see her to-day. Br-r! What a temper! We had our theatricals, too. I asked her for
money, as usual, and, as usual, she refused. It was like a scene from a play. She'll walk in
her sleep to-night, if ever."

Rosa nodded soberly, and O'Reilly, suppressing some light reply that had sprung to his lips,
inquired, curiously, "What do you mean by that?"

Brother and sister joined in explaining that Dona Isabel was given to peculiar actions, especially
after periods of excitement or anger, and that one of her eccentricities had taken the form
of somnambulistic wanderings. "Oh, she's crazy enough," Esteban concluded. "I believe it's
her evil conscience."

Rosa explained further: "She used to steal about at night, hoping to surprise papa or Sebastian
going or coming from the treasure. They were both killed, as you know, and the secret of the
hiding- place was lost. Now Isabel declares that they come to her in her sleep and that she
has to help them hunt for it, whether she wishes or not. It is retribution." The speaker drew
up her shoulders and shivered, but Esteban smiled.

"Bah!" he exclaimed. "I'll believe in ghosts when I see one." Then, with a shake of his head:
"Isabel has never given up the hope of finding that treasure. She would like to see Rosa married,
and me fighting with the Insurrectos, so that she might have a free hand in her search."

O'Reilly scanned the speaker silently for a moment; then he said, with a gravity unusual in
him, "I wonder if you know that you're suspected of--working for the Insurrecto cause."

"Indeed? I didn't know."

"Well, it's a fact." O'Reilly heard Rosa gasp faintly. "Is it true?" he asked.

"I am a Cuban." Esteban's smile was a trifle grim.

"Cuban? Your people were Spanish."

"True. But no Spaniard ever raised a Spanish child in Cuba. We are Cubans, Rosa and I."

At this statement the sister cried: "Hush! It is dangerous to speak in that way, with this
new war growing every day."

"But O'Reilly is our good friend," Esteban protested.

"Of course I am," the American agreed, "and for that reason I spoke. I hope you're not too
deeply involved with the rebels."

"There, Esteban! Do you hear?" Turning to O'Reilly, Rosa said, imploringly: "Please reason
with him. He's young and headstrong and he won't listen to me."

Esteban frowned. "Young, eh? Well, sometimes the young are called upon to do work that older
men wouldn't care to undertake."

"What work?" O'Reilly's eyes were still upon him. "You can tell ME."

"I think I can," the other agreed. "Well, then, I know everybody in Matanzas; I go everywhere,
and the Spanish officers talk plainly before me. Somebody must be the eyes and the ears for
Colonel Lopez."

"Colonel Lopez!" exclaimed O'Reilly.

Esteban nodded.

Rosa's face, as she looked. at the two men, was white and worried. For a time the three of
them sat silent; then the American said, slowly, "You'll be shot if you're caught."

Rosa whispered: "Yes! Think of it!"

"Some one must run chances," Esteban averred. "We're fighting tyranny; all Cuba is ablaze.
I must do my part."

"But sooner or later you'll be discovered--then what?" persisted O'Reilly.

Esteban shrugged. "Who knows? There'll be time enough when--"

"What of Rosa?"

At this question the brother stirred uneasily and dropped his eyes. O'Reilly laid a hand upon
his arm. "You have no right to jeopardize her safety. Without you, to whom could she turn?"
The girl flashed her admirer a grateful glance.

"Senor, you for one would see that she--"

"But--I'm going away." O'Reilly felt rather than saw Rosa start, for his face was averted.
Purposely he kept his gaze upon Esteban, for he didn't wish to see the slow pallor that rose
in the girl's cheeks, the look of pain that crept into her eyes. "I came here to tell you both
good-by. I may be gone for some time. I--I don't know when I can get back."

"I'm sorry," Esteban told him, with genuine regret. "We have grown very fond of you. You will
leave many friends here in Matanzas, I'm sure. But you will come back before long, eh?"

"Yes, as soon as I can. That is, if--" He did not finish the sentence.

"Good. You're one of us. In the mean time I'll remember what you say, and at least I'll be
careful." By no means wanting in tact, Esteban rose briskly and, after shaking hands with O'Reilly,
left the two lovers to say farewell as best suited them.

But for once O'Reilly's ready tongue was silent. The laughter was gone from his blue eyes when
he turned to the girl at his side.

"You say you are going away?" Rosa inquired, breathlessly. "But why?"

"I'm going partly because of this war, and partly because of-- something else. I tried to tell
you yesterday, but I couldn't. When the revolution started everybody thought it was merely
a local uprising, and I wrote my company to that effect; but, bless you, it has spread like
fire, and now the whole eastern end of the island is ablaze."

"Esteban says it will be more terrible than the Ten Years' War."

"God forbid! And yet all the old fighters are back again. Nobody believed that Maximo Gomez
had returned, but it's true. And the Maceos are here, too, from Costa Rica. Antonio has already
gained control of most of Santiago Province, and he's sweeping westward. Of course the Spaniards
minimize the reports of his success, and we, here, don't understand what's really going on.
Anyhow, business has stopped, and my employers have ordered me home to find out what's happened
to their profits. They seem to hold me personally responsible for this insurrection."

"I see. And when you have told them the truth you will come back. Is that it?"

"I--Perhaps."

"You said there was something else--"

O'Reilly's hesitation became an embarrassed silence. He tried to laugh it off.

"There is, otherwise I'd stay right here and tell my penurious friends to whistle for their
profits. It seems I'm cursed with a fatal beauty. You may have noticed it? No? Well, perhaps
it's a magnificent business ability that I have. Anyhow, the president of my company has a
notion that I'd make him a good son-in-law."

"I--Oh!" cried Rosa.

And at her tone O'Reilly hurried on:

"These rich men have the most absurd ideas. I suppose I'll have to--"

"Then you are in love, senor?"

The young man nodded vigorously. "Indeed I am--with the sweetest girl in Cuba. That's the whole
trouble. That's why I'm hurrying home to resign before I'm fired." Not daring to look too long
or too deeply into Rosa Varona's eyes until she had taken in the whole truth, he waited, staring
at his feet. "I'm sort of glad it has come to a show-down and I can speak out. I'm hoping she'll
miss me." After a moment he ventured, "Will she--er--will you, Rosa?"

"I? Miss you?" Rosa lifted her brows in pretended amazement. Then she tipped her head daintily
to one side, as if weighing his question earnestly. "You are amusing, of course, but--I won't
have much time to think about you, for I am so soon to be married."

"Married? WHAT?" O'Reilly started violently, and the girl exclaimed, with well-feigned concern:

"Oh, senor! You have wounded yourself again on that thorn-bush. This place is growing up to
brambles."

"It wasn't my finger! Something pierced me through the heart. MARRIED? Nonsense!"

"Indeed! Do you think I'm so ugly nobody would have me?"

"Good Lord! You--" O'Reilly swallowed hard. "I won't tell you the truth when you know it so well."

"The richest man in Matanzas asked for my hand this very afternoon."

"Who? Mario de Castano?"

"Yes."

O'Reilly laughed with relief, and though Rosa tried to look offended, she was forced to smile.
"He's fat, I know," she admitted, "and he makes funny noises when he breathes; but he is richer
than Croesus, and I adore rich men."

"I hate 'em!" announced O'Reilly. Then for a second time he took Rosa's dimpled hand, saying,
earnestly: "I'm sure you know now why I make love so badly, dear. It's my Irish conscience.
And you'll wait until I come back, won't you?"

"Will you be gone--very long?" she asked.

O'Reilly looked deeply now into the dark eyes turned to his, and found that at last there was
no coquetry in them anywhere--nothing but a lonesome, hungry yearning--and with a glad, incoherent
exclamation he held out his arms. Rosa Varona crept into them; then with a sigh she upturned
her lips to his.

"I'll wait forever," she said.

IV

RETRIBUTION

Although for a long time Dona Isabel had been sure in her own mind that Pancho Cueto, her administrador,
was robbing her, she had never mustered courage to call him to a reckoning. And there was a
reason for her cowardice. Nevertheless, De Castano's blunt accusation, coupled with her own
urgent needs, served to fix her resolution, and on the day after the merchant's visit she sent
for the overseer, who at the time was living on one of the plantations.

Once the message was on its way, Isabel fell into a condition bordering upon panic, and was
half minded to countermand her order. She spent an evening of suspense, and a miserable night.
This last, however, was nothing unusual with her; she was accustomed to unpleasant dreams,
and she was not surprised when old familiar shapes came to harass her. Nor, in view of her
somnambulistic vagaries, was she greatly concerned to find, when she woke in the morning, that
her slippers were stained and that her skirt was bedraggled with dew and filled with burs.

Scarcely a month passed that she did not walk in her sleep.

Cueto was plainly curious to learn why he had been sent for, but since he asked no questions,
his employer was forced to open the subject herself. Several times he led up to it unsuccessfully;
then she took the plunge. Through dry, white lips she began:

"My dear Pancho, times are hard. The plantations are failing, and so--" Pancho Cueto's eyes
were set close to his nose, his face was long and thin and harsh; he regarded the speaker with
such a sinister, unblinking stare that she could scarcely finish: "--and so I--can no longer
afford to retain you as administrador."

"Times will improve," he said.

"Impossible! This war threatens to bring utter ruin; and now that Esteban and Rosa are home
they spend money like water. I groan with poverty."

"Yes, they are extravagant. It is the more reason for me to remain in your service."

"No, no! I tell you I'm bankrupt."

"So? Then the remedy is simple--sell a part of your land."

Although this suggestion came naturally enough, Dona Isabel turned cold, and felt her smile
stiffen into a grimace. She wondered if Cueto could be feeling her out deliberately. "Sell
the Varona lands?" she queried, after a momentary struggle with herself. "Esteban would rise
from his grave. No. It was his wish that the plantations go to his children intact."

"And his wish is sacred to you, eh?" Cueto nodded his approval, although his smile was disconcerting.
"An admirable sentiment! It does you honor! But speaking on this subject, I am reminded of
that dispute with Jose Oroz over the boundary to La Joya. He is a rascal, that Oroz; he would
steal the sap out of your standing cane if he could. I have promised to show him the original
deed to La Joya and to furnish him with the proofs about the boundary line. That would be better
than a lawsuit, wouldn't it?"

"Decidedly! But--I will settle with him myself."

Cueto lifted an admonitory hand, his face alight with the faintest glimmer of ironic mirth.
"I couldn't trust you to the mercies of that rascal," he said, piously. "No, I shall go on
as I am, even at a sacrifice to myself. I love Don Esteban's children as my very own; and you,
senora--"

Isabel knew that she must win a complete victory at once or accept irretrievable defeat,

"Never!" she interrupted, with a tone of finality. "I can't accept your sacrifice. I am not
worthy. Kindly arrange to turn over your books of account at once. I shall make you as handsome
a present as my circumstances will permit in recognition of your long and faithful service."

Then Pancho Cueto did an unexpected thing: he laughed shortly and shook his head.

Dona Isabel was ready to faint and her voice quavered as she went on: "Understand me, we part
the best of friends despite all I have heard against you. I do not believe these stories people
tell, for you probably have enemies. Even if all they say were true I should force myself to
be lenient because of your affection for my husband."

The man rose, still smiling. "It is I who have been lenient," said he.

"Eh? Speak plainly."

"Gladly. I have long suspected that Don Esteban hid the deeds of his property with the rest
of his valuables, and now that you admit--"

Dona Isabel recoiled sharply. "Admit! Are you mad? Deeds! What are you talking about?" Her
eyes met his bravely enough, but she could feel her lips trembling loosely.

Casting aside all pretense, the overseer exclaimed: "Por el amor de Dios! An end to this! I
know why you sent for me. You think I have been robbing you. Well, to be honest, so I have.
Why should I toil as I do while you and those twins live here in luxury and idleness, squandering
money to which you have no right?"

"Have I lost my reason?" gasped the widow. "No right?"

"At least no better right than I. Don't you understand? You have no title to those plantations!
They are mine, for I have paid the taxes out of my own pockets now these many years."

"Taxes! What do you mean?"

"I paid them. The receipts are in my name."

"God! Such perfidy! And you who knew him!"

"The deeds have been lost for so long that the property would have reverted to the crown had
it not been for me. You doubt that, eh? Well, appeal to the court and you will find that it
is true. For that matter, the officials make new laws to fit each case, and should they learn
that Esteban Varona died intestate they would arrange somehow to seize all his property and
leave you without a roof over your head. Fortunately I can prevent that, for I have a title
that will stand, in want of a better one."

There was a momentary silence while the unhappy woman struggled with herself. Then:

"You took advantage of my ignorance of business to rob me," she declared. "Well, I know something
about the Government officials: if they would make a law to fit my case they will make one
to fit yours. When I tell them what you have done perhaps you will not fare so well with them
as you expect." She was fighting now with the desperation of one cornered.

"Perhaps." Cueto shrugged. "That is what I want to talk to you about, if only you will be sensible.
Now then, let us be frank. Inasmuch as we're both in much the same fix, hadn't we better continue
our present arrangements?" He stared unblinkingly at his listener. "Oh, I mean it! Is it not
better for you to be content with what my generosity prompts me to give, rather than to risk
ruin for both of us by grasping for too much?"

"Merciful God! The outrage! I warrant you have grown rich through your stealing." Isabel's
voice had gone flat with consternation.

"Rich? Well, not exactly, but comfortably well off." Cueto actually smiled again. "No doubt
my frankness is a shock to you. You are angry at my proposition, eh? Never mind. You will think
better of it in time, if you are a sensible woman."

"What a fiend! Have you no sentiment?"

"Oh, senora! I am all sentiment. Don Esteban was my benefactor. I revere his memory, and I
feel it my duty to see that his family does not want. That is why I have provided for you,
and will continue to provide--in proper measure. But now, since at last we enjoy such confidential
relations, let us have no more of these miserable suspicions of each other. Let us entirely
forget this unpleasant misunderstanding and be the same good friends as before."

Having said this, Pancho Cueto stood silent a moment in polite expectancy; then receiving no
intelligible reply, he bowed low and left the room.

To the avaricious Dona Isabel Cueto's frank acknowledgment of theft was maddening, and the
realization that she was helpless, nay, dependent upon his charity for her living, fairly crucified
her proud spirit.

All day she brooded, and by the time evening came she had worked herself into such a state
of nerves that she could eat no dinner. Locking herself into her room, she paced the floor,
now wringing her hands, now twisting in agony upon her bed, now biting her wrists in an endeavor
to clear her head and to devise some means of outwitting this treacherous overseer. But mere
thought of the law frightened her; the longer she pondered her situation the more she realized
her own impotence. There was no doubt that the courts were corrupt: they were notoriously venal
at best, and this war had made them worse. Graft was rampant everywhere. To confess publicly
that Esteban Varona had left no deeds, no title to his property, would indeed be the sheerest
folly. No, Cueto had her at his mercy.

Sometime during the course of the evening a wild idea came to Isabel. Knowing that the manager
would spend the night beneath her roof, she planned to kill him. At first it seemed a simple
thing to do--merely a matter of a dagger or a pistol, while he slept-- but further thought
revealed appalling risks and difficulties, and she decided to wait. Poison was far safer.

That night she lay awake a long time putting her scheme into final shape, and then for an interval
that seemed longer she hung poised in those penumbral regions midway between wakefulness and
slumber. Through her mind meanwhile there passed a whirling phantasmagoria, an interminable
procession of figures, of memories, real yet unreal, convincing yet unconvincing. When she
did at last lose all awareness of reality the effect was merely to enhance the vividness of
those phantoms, to lend substance to her vaporous visions. Constant brooding over the treasure
had long since affected Dona Isabel's brain, and as a consequence she often dreamed about it.
She dreamed about it again to-night, and, strangely enough, her dreams were pleasant. Sebastian
appeared, but for once he neither cursed nor threatened her; and Esteban, when he came, was
again the lover who had courted her in Habana. It was all very wonderful, very exciting, very
real. Dona Isabel found herself robed for him in her wedding-gown of white, and realized that
she was beautiful. It seemed also as if her powers of attraction were magically enhanced, for
she exercised a potent influence over him. Her senses were quickened a thousandfold, too. For
instance, she could see great distances--a novel and agreeable sensation; she enjoyed strange,
unsuspected perfumes; she heard the music of distant waterfalls and understood the whispered
language of the breeze. It was amazing, delightful. Esteban and she were walking through the
grounds of the quinta and he was telling her about his casks of Spanish sovereigns, about those
boxes bound with iron, about the gold and silver ornaments of heavenly, beauty and the pearls
as large as plums. As he talked, Isabel felt herself grow hot and cold with anticipation; she
experienced spasms of delight. She felt that she must dance, must run, must cast her arms aloft
in ecstasy. Never had she experienced so keen an intoxication of joy as now, while Esteban
was leading her toward the treasure and wooing her with youthful ardor.

Then of a sudden Isabel's whole dream-world dissolved. She awoke, or thought she did, at hearing
her name shouted. But although she underwent the mental and the physical shock of being startled
from slumber, although she felt the first swift fright of a person aroused to strange surroundings,
she knew on the instant that she must still be asleep; for everything about her was dim and
dark, the air was cold and damp, wet grass rose to her knees. It flashed through her mind that
she had simply been whirled from a pleasant dream into one of terror. As she fought with herself
to throw off the illusion of this nightmare its reality became overwhelming. Warring, incongruous
sensations, far too swift for her mind to compass, were crowded into the minutest fraction
of time. Before she could half realize her own condition she felt herself plunged into space.
Now the sensation of falling was not strange to Isabel--it is common to all sufferers from
nightmare-- nevertheless, she experienced the dawn of a horror such as she had never guessed.
She heard herself scream hoarsely, fearfully, and knew, too late, that she was indeed awake.
Then--whirling chaos--A sudden, blinding crash of lights and sounds--Nothing more!

Esteban Varona sat until a late hour that night over a letter which required the utmost care
in its composition. It was written upon the thinnest of paper, and when it was finished the
writer inclosed it in an envelope of the same material. Esteban put the letter in his pocket
without addressing it. Then he extinguished his light, tip-toed to the door connecting his
and Rosa's rooms, and listened. No sound whatever came to his ears, for his sister slept like
a kitten. Reassured, he stole out into the hall. Here he paused a moment with his ear first
to Pancho Cueto's door, and then to the door of his step-mother's room. He could hear the overseer's
heavy breathing and Isabel's senseless babbling--the latter was moaning and muttering ceaselessly,
but, being accustomed to her restlessness, Esteban paid no heed.

Letting himself out into the night, he took the path that led to the old sunken garden. Nocturnal
birds were chirruping; his way was barred with spider-webs, heavy with dew and gleaming in
the moonlight like tiny ropes of jewels; the odor of gardenias was overpowering. He passed
close by the well, and its gaping black mouth, only half protected by the broken coping, reminded
him that he had promised Rosa to cover it with planks. In its present condition it was a menace
to animals, if not to human beings who were unaware of its presence. He told himself he would
attend to it on the morrow.

Seating himself on one of the old stone benches, the young man lit a cigarette and composed
himself to wait. He sat there for a long time, grumbling inwardly, for the night was damp and
he was sleepy; but at last a figure stole out of the gloom and joined him. The new-comer was
a ragged negro, dressed in the fashion of the poorer country people.

"Well, Asensio, I thought you'd never come. I'll get a fever from this!" Esteban said, irritably.

"It is a long way, Don Esteban, and Evangelina made me wait until dark. I tell you we have
to be careful these days."

"What is the news? What did you hear?"

Asensio sighed gratefully as he seated himself. "One hears a great deal, but one never knows
what to believe, There is fighting in Santa Clara, and Maceo sweeps westward."

Taking the unaddressed letter from his pocket, Esteban said, "I have another message for Colonel
Lopez."

"That Lopez! He's here to-day and there to-morrow; one can never find him."

"Well, you must find him, and immediately, Asensio. This letter contains important news--so
important, in fact"--Esteban laughed lightly--"that if you find yourself in danger from the
Spaniards I'd advise you to chew it up and swallow it as quickly as you can."

"I'll remember that," said the negro, "for there's danger enough. Still, I fear these Spaniards
less than the guerrilleros: they are everywhere. They call themselves patriots, but they are
nothing more than robbers. They--"

Asensio paused abruptly. He seized his companion by the arm and, leaning forward, stared across
the level garden into the shadows opposite. Something was moving there, under the trees; the
men could see that it was white and formless, and that it pursued an erratic course.

"What's that?" gasped the negro. He began to tremble violently and his breath became audible.
Esteban was compelled to hold him down by main force. "Jesus Cristo! It's old Don Esteban,
your father. They say he walks at midnight, carrying his head in his two hands."

Young Varona managed to whisper, with some show of courage: "Hush! Wait! I don't believe in
ghosts." Nevertheless, he was on the point of setting Asensio an example of undignified flight
when the mysterious object emerged from the shadows into the open moonlight; then he sighed
with relief: "Ah-h! Now I see! It is my stepmother. She is asleep."

"Asleep?" Asensio was incredulous. He was still so unnerved by his first fright that Esteban
dared not release him.

"Yes; her eyes are open, but she sees nothing."

"I don't like such things," the negro confessed in a shaky voice. "How can she walk if she
is asleep? If her eyes are open, how can she help seeing us? You know she hates Evangelina and me."

"I tell you she sees nothing, knows nothing--" For a moment or two they watched the progress
of the white-robed figure; then Esteban stirred and rose from his seat. "She's too close to
that well. There is--" He started forward a pace or two. "They say people who walk at night
go mad if they're awakened too suddenly, and yet--"

Dona Isabel was talking in a low, throaty, unnatural tone. Her words were meaningless, but
the effect, at that hour and in those surroundings, was bizarre and fearsome. Esteban felt
his scalp prickling uncomfortably. This was very creepy.

When the somnambulist's deliberate progress toward the mouth of the well continued he called
her name softly. "Dona Isabel!" Then he repeated it louder. "Dona Isabel! Wake up."

The woman seemed to hear and yet not to hear. She turned her head to listen, but continued to walk.

"Don't be alarmed," he said, reassuringly. "It is only Esteban-- DONA ISABEL! STOP!" Esteban
sprang forward, shouting at the top of his voice, for at the sound of his name Isabel had abruptly
swerved to her right, a movement which brought her dangerously close to the lip of the well.

"STOP! GO BACK!" screamed the young man.

Above his warning there came a shriek, shrill and agonized--a wail of such abysmal terror as
to shock the night birds and the insects into stillness. Dona Isabel slipped, or stumbled,
to her knees, she balanced briefly, clutching at random while the earth and crumbling cement
gave way beneath her; then she slid forward and disappeared, almost out from between Esteban's
hands. There was a noisy rattle of rock and pebble and a great splash far below; a chuckle
of little stones striking the water, then a faint bubbling. Nothing more. The stepson stood
in his tracks, sick, blind with horror; he was swaying over the opening when Asensio dragged
him back.

Pancho Cueto, being a heavy sleeper, was the last to be roused by Esteban's outcries. When
he had hurriedly slipped into his clothes in response to the pounding on his door, the few
servants that the establishment supported had been thoroughly awakened. Esteban was shouting
at them, explaining that Dona Isabel had met with an accident. He was calling for a lantern,
too, and a stout rope. Cueto thought they must all be out of their minds until he learned what
had befallen the mistress of the house. Then, being a man of action, he, too, issued swift
orders, with the result that by the time he and Esteban had run to the well both rope and lantern
were ready for their use. Before Esteban could form and fit a loop for his shoulders there
was sufficient help on hand to lower him into the treacherous abyss.

It was a commentary upon Dona Isabel's character that during the long, slow moments of uncertainty
while Esteban was being lowered the negroes exhibited more curiosity than concern over her
fate. In half-pleased excitement they whispered and giggled and muttered together, while Pancho
lay prone at the edge of the orifice, directing them how to manipulate the rope.

That was a gruesome task which fell to Esteban, for the well had been long unused, its sides
were oozing slime, its waters were stale and black. He was on the point of fainting when he
finally climbed out, leaving the negroes to hoist the dripping, inert weight which he had found
at the bottom.

Old Sebastian's curse had come true; Dona Isabel had met the fate he had called down upon her
that day when he hung exhausted in his chains and when the flies tormented him. The treasure
for which the woman had intrigued so tirelessly had been her death. Like an ignis fatuus, it
had lured her to destruction. Furthermore, as if in orirnmest irony, she had been permitted
at the very last to find it. Living, she had searched to no purpose whatsoever; dying, she
had almost grasped it in her arms.

Once the first excitement had abated and a messenger had been sent to town, Cueto drew Esteban
aside and questioned him.

"A shocking tragedy and most peculiar," said the overseer. "Nothing could amaze me more."

"Exactly! And all because of her sleep-walking. I'm all in a tremble."

"She was asleep? You are sure?"

"Have I not told you so?" Esteban was impatient.

"But it is said that people given to that peculiarity never come to grief. They say some sixth
sense guides them--gives them warning of pitfalls and dangers. I--I can't understand--"

"That well was a menace to a waking person. I didn't realize how near to it she was; and when
I cried out to her it seemed only to hasten her steps." The young man shuddered, for the horror
of the thing was still in his mind.

"Tell me, how did you come to be there at such an hour, eh?"

Esteban saw the malevolent curiosity in Cueto's face and started. "I--That is my affair. Surely
you don't think--"

"Come, come! You can trust me." The overseer winked and smiled.

"I had business that took me there," stiffly declared the younger man.

"Exactly! And a profitable business it proved!" Cueto laughed openly now. "Well, I don't mind
telling you, Dona Isabel's death is no disappointment to any one. Anybody could see--"

"Stop!" Esteban was turning alternately red and white. "You seem to imply something outrageous."

"Now let us be sensible. I understand you perfectly, my boy. But an officer of the Guardia
Civil may arrive at any moment and he will want to know how you came to be with your stepmother
when she plunged into that trap. So prepare yourself. If only you had not given the alarm.
If only you had waited until morning. But--in the dead of night! Alone! He will think it queer.
Suppose, too, he learns that you and Dona Isabel quarreled the other day over money matters?"

Young Varona recovered himself quickly. He was watching his inquisitor now with a faintly speculative
frown. When Cueto had finished, Esteban said:

"Dona Isabel and I frequently quarreled over money matters, so there is nothing strange in
that. You would like me to confess to some black iniquity that would make us better friends,
eh? Well, it so happens that I was not alone to-night, but that another person saw the poor
woman's death and can bear me out in everything I say. No, Pancho, you overreach yourself.
Now then"-- Esteban was quick-tempered, and for years he had struggled against an instinctive
distrust and dislike of the plantation manager-- "remember that I have become the head of this
house, and your employer. You will do better to think of your own affairs than of mine. Do
you understand me? I have long suspected that certain matters of yours need attention, and
at the first opportunity I intend to have a careful reckoning with you. I think you know I
have a good head for figures." Turning his back upon the elder man, he walked away.

Now it did not occur to Cueto really to doubt the boy's innocence, though the circumstances
of Dona Isabel's death were suspicious enough to raise a question in any mind; but in view
of Esteban's threat he thought it wise to protect himself by setting a back- fire. It was with
some such vague idea in his head that he turned to the sunken garden as the first gray light
of dawn appeared. He hoped to gain some inspiration by examining the place again, and, as it
proved, he succeeded beyond his most sanguine expectations.

As he sat on an old stone bench, moodily repicturing the catastrophe as Esteban had described
it, his attention fell upon an envelope at his feet. It was sealed; it was unaddressed. Cueto
idly broke it open and began to read. Before he had gone far he started; then he cast a furtive
glance about. But the place was secluded; he was unobserved. When he finished reading he rose,
smiling. He no longer feared Esteban. On the contrary, he rather pitied the young fool; for
here between his fingers was that which not only promised to remove the boy from his path forever,
but to place in his hands the entire Varona estates. Fate was kind. After years of patient
scheming Cueto had obtained his reward.

One afternoon, perhaps a week later, Don Mario de Castano came puffing and blowing up to the
quinta, demanding to see Rosa without a moment's delay. The girl appeared before her caller
had managed to dry up the streams of perspiration resulting from his exertions. With a directness
unusual even in him Don Mario began:

"Rosa, my dear, you and Esteban have been discovered! I was at lunch with the comandante when
I learned the truth. Through friendship I prevailed upon him to give you an hour's grace."

"What do you mean, Don Mario?" inquired the girl.

"Come, come!" the planter cried, impatiently. "Don't you see you can trust me? God! The recklessness,
the folly of young people! Could you not leave this insurrection to your elders? Or perhaps
you thought it a matter of no great importance, an amusing thing-- "

"Don Mario!" Rosa interrupted. "I don't know what you are talking about."

"You don't, eh?" The caller's wet cheeks grew redder; he blew like a porpoise. "Then call Esteban
quickly! There is not a moment to lose." When the brother appeared De Castano blurted out at
him accusingly: "Well, sir! A fine fix you've put yourself in. I came here to warn you, but
Rosa pretends ignorance. Perhaps you will be interested to learn that Colonel Fernandez has
issued orders to arrest you and your sister as agents of the Insurrectos."

"What?" Esteban drew back. Rosa turned white as a lily and laid a fluttering hand upon her throat.

"You two will sleep to-night in San Severino," grimly announced the rotund visitor. "You know
what that means. Cubans who enter the Castillo seldom come out. Have you noticed the big sharks
that swim about under the walls of it? Do you know what bait keeps them there? Well, I'll tell
you! It's the bodies of rebel sympathizers- -foolish people like you who call themselves patriots."

Rosa uttered a smothered cry.

"Colonel Fernandez," Don Mario proceeded, impressively, "did me this favor, knowing me to be
a suitor for Rosa's hand. In spite of his duty and the evidence he--"

"Evidence? What evidence?" Esteban asked, sharply.

"For one thing, your own letter to Lopez, the rebel, warning him to beware of the trap prepared
for him in Santa Clara, and advising him of the Government force at Sabanilla. Oh, don't try
to deny it! I read it with my own eyes, and it means--death."

In the ensuing silence the fat man's asthmatic breathing sounded loudly; it was like the respirations
of an excited eavesdropper.

At last Rosa said, faintly: "Esteban! I warned you."

Esteban was taken aback, but it was plain that he was not in the least frightened. "They haven't
caught me yet," he laughed.

"You say they intend to arrest me also?" Rosa eyed the caller anxiously.

"Exactly!"

"But why?"

"Yes! Who accuses her, and of what?" Esteban indignantly demanded.

"That also I have discovered through the courtesy of Colonel Fernandez. Your accuser is none
other than Pancho Cueto."

"Cueto!"

"Yes, he has denounced both of you as rebels, and the letter is only part of his proof, I believe.
I don't know what other evidence he has, but, take my word for it, the Government does not
require much proof these days. Suspicion is enough. Now, then, you can guess why I am here.
I am not without influence; I can save Rosa, but for you, Esteban, I fear I can do nothing.
You must look out for yourself. Well? What do you say? We're wasting precious time standing
here with our mouths open."

When Esteban saw how pale his sister had grown, he took her in his arms, saying, gently: "I'm
sorry, dear. It's all my fault." Then to the merchant, "It was very good of you to warn us."

"Ha!" Don Mario fanned himself. "I'm glad you appreciate my efforts. It's a good thing to have
the right kind of a friend. I'll marry Rosa within an hour, and I fancy my name will be a sufficient
shield--"

Rosa turned to her elderly suitor and made a deep courtesy. "I am unworthy of the honor," said
she. "You see, I--I do not love you, Don Mario."

"Love!" exploded the visitor. "God bless you! What has love to do with the matter? Esteban
will have to ride for his life in ten minutes and your property will be seized. So you had
better make yourself ready to go with me." But Rosa shook her head.

"Eh? What ails you? What do you expect to do?"

"I shall go with Esteban," said the girl.

This calm announcement seemed to stupefy De Castano. He sat down heavily in the nearest chair,
and with his wet handkerchief poised in one pudgy hand he stared fixedly at the speaker. His
eyes were round and bulging, the sweat streamed unheeded from his temples. He resembled some
queer bloated marine monster just emerged from the sea and momentarily dazzled by the light.

"You--You're mad," he finally gasped. "Esteban, tell her what it means."

But this Esteban could not do, for he himself had not the faintest notion of what was in store
for him. War seemed to him a glorious thing; he had been told that the hills were peopled with
patriots. He was very young, his heart was ablaze with hatred for the Spaniards and for Pancho
Cueto. He longed to risk his life for a free Cuba. Therefore he said: "Rosa shall do as she
pleases. If we must be exiles we shall share each other's hardships. It will not be for long."

"Idiot!" stormed the fat man. "Better that you gave her to the sharks below San Severino. There
is no law, no safety for women outside of the cities. The island is in anarchy. These patriots
you talk about are the blacks, the mulattoes, the--lowest, laziest savages in Cuba."

"Please! Don Mario!" the girl pleaded. "I cannot marry you, for--I love another."

"Eh?"

"I love another. I'm betrothed to O'Reilly, the American--and he's coming back to marry me."

De Castano twisted himself laboriously out of his chair and waddled toward the door. He was
purple with rage and mortification. On the threshold he paused to wheeze: "Very well, then.
Go! I'm done with both of you. I would have lent you a hand with this rascal Cueto, but now
he will fall heir to your entire property. Well, it is a time for bandits! I--I--" Unable to
think of a parting speech sufficiently bitter to match his disappointment, Don Mario plunged
out into the sunlight, muttering and stammering to himself.

Within an hour the twins were on their way up the Yumuri, toward the home of Asensio and Evangelina;
for it was thither that they naturally turned. It was well that they had made haste, for as
they rode down into the valley, up the other side of the hill from Matanzas came a squad of
the Guardia Civil, and at its head rode Pancho Cueto.

V

A CRY FROM THE WILDERNESS

New York seemed almost like a foreign city to Johnnie O'Reilly when he stepped out into it
on the morning after his arrival. For one thing it was bleak and cold: the north wind, hailing
direct from Baffin's Bay, had teeth, and it bit so cruelly that he was glad when he found shelter
in the building which housed the offices of the Carter Importing Company. The tropics had thinned
O'Reilly's blood, for the Cuban winds bear a kiss instead of a sting; therefore he paused in
the lower hallway, jostled by the morning crowds, and tried to warm himself. The truth is O'Reilly
was not only cold, but frightened.

He was far from weak-hearted. In fact, few O'Reillys were that, and Johnnie had an ingrained
self-assurance which might have been mistaken for impudence, but for the winning smile that
went with it. Yet all the way from Havana he had seen in his mind's eye old Sam Carter intrenched
behind his flat-topped desk, and that picture had more than once caused him to forget the carefully
rehearsed speech in which he intended to resign his position as an employee and his prospects
as a son-in-law.

That desk of Mr. Carter's was always bare and orderly, cleared for action, like the deck of
a battle-ship, and over it many engagements had been fought, for the man behind it never shirked
a conflict. His was a vigorous and irascible temperament, compounded of old-fashioned, slow-burning
black powder and nitroglycerine--a combination of incalculable destructive power. It was a
perilously unstable mixture, tool, at times nothing less than a flame served to ignite it;
on other occasions the office force pussy-footed past Carter's door on felt soles, and even
then the slightest jar often caused the untoward thing to let go. In either event there was
a deafening roar, much smoke, and a deal of damage. O'Reilly felt sure that whatever the condition
of Mr. Carter's digestion or the serenity of his mind at the beginning of their interview,
the news he had to impart would serve as an effective detonator, after which it would be every
man for himself. It was not the effect of his report concerning the firm's unprofitable Cuban
connections which O'Reilly feared would cause the decks to heave and the ship to rock--Samuel
Carter could take calmly the most disturbing financial reverse--it was the blow to his pride
at learning that anybody could prefer another girl to his daughter. Johnnie shook his shoulders
and stamped his feet, but the chill in his bones refused to go.

He did gain courage, however, by thinking of Rosa Varona as he had last seen her, with arms
outstretched, with eyes tear-filled, with yearning lips aquiver at his going. The picture warmed
him magically, and it was with a restored determination to make a clean breast of the matter
and face the worst that he took the elevator.

The office force of the Carter Importing Company looked up when the firm's Cuban representative
entered the door, but its personnel having changed as the result of one of those periodical
disruptions that occurred in the inner office, he was not recognized until he presented himself
to Mr. Slack, Samuel Carter's private and intimidated secretary.

Mr. Slack smiled wanly, and extended a clammy, nerveless hand as cold and limber as a dead fish.

"You're expected," said he. "Mr. Carter is waiting to see you before leaving for California."

"Seeing me won't make his trip any pleasanter," O'Reilly said, somberly.

"We were afraid you wouldn't get out of Cuba; thought we might have to get the American consul
at work."

"Really? I didn't know I was so important."

"Oh, you're the office pet, and well you know it." Mr. Slack's pleasantry was tinged with envy,
for he had never been able to appreciate O'Reilly. "Conditions are bad, eh?"

"Yes. Anybody can leave," the other told him. "It's getting back that's difficult. The Spaniards
don't like us, and I dare say they have good reason, with all this talk of intervention and
the secret help we're lending the Insurrectos. They held me up in Havana; tried to prove I
was a spy. They were positively peeved when they failed. Snippy people, those Spaniards."

"Well, I'll tell Mr. Carter you're here." The secretary glided unobtrusively toward the private
office, disappeared, glided softly into view again, and waggled a boneless forefinger invitingly.
O'Reilly went to meet his employer as a man marches to execution.

His heart sank further at the welcome he received, for the importer gave him a veritable embrace;
he patted him on the back and inquired three times as to his health. O'Reilly was anything
but cold now; he was perspiring profusely, and he felt his collar growing limp. To shatter
this old man's eager hopes would be like kicking a child in the face. Carter had never been
so enthusiastic, so demonstrative; there was something almost theatrical in his greeting. It
dismayed O'Reilly immensely to realize what a hold he must have upon his employer's affections.
Although the latter had a reputation for self-control, he appeared to be in a perfect flutter
now. He assumed a boisterousness which seemed strained and wholly out of keeping with the circumstances.
His actions vaguely reminded the younger man of an ambling draft- horse trying to gallop; and
when, for the fourth time, Mr. Carter inquired solicitously concerning his visitor's well-being,
Johnnie's dismay turned to amazement. With a heavy playfulness Mr. Carter at length remarked:

"Well, my boy, you made a fizzle of it, didn't you?" The tone was almost complimentary.

"Yes, sir, I'm a bright and shining failure," O'Reilly acknowledged, hopefully.

"Now, don't 'yes, sir' me. We're friends, aren't we? Good! Understand, I don't blame you in
the least--it's that idiotic revolution that spoiled our business. I can't understand those
people. Lord! You did splendidly, under the circumstances."

"They have reason enough to revolt--oppression, tyranny, corruption." O'Reilly mumbled the
familiar words in a numb paralysis at Mr. Carter's jovial familiarity.

"All Latin countries are corrupt," announced the importer--"always have been and always will
be. They thrive under oppression. Politics is purely a business proposition with those people.
However, I dare say this uprising won't last long."

O'Reilly welcomed this trend of the conversation; anything was better than fulsome praise,
and the discussion would delay the coming crash. It seemed strange, however, that Samuel Carter
should take time to discourse about generalities. Johnnie wondered why the old man didn't get
down to cases.

"It's more than an uprising, sir," he said. "The rebels have overrun the eastern end of the
island, and when I left Maceo and Gomez were sweeping west."

"Bah! It takes money to run a war."

"They have money," desperately argued O'Reilly. "Marti raised more than a million dollars,
and every Cuban cigar-maker in the United States gives a part of his wages every week to the
cause. The best blood of Cuba is in the fight. The rebels are poorly armed, but if our Government
recognizes their belligerency they'll soon fix that. Spain is about busted; she can't stand
the strain."

"I predict they'll quit fighting as soon as they get hungry. The Government is starving them
out. However, they've wound up our affairs for the time being, and--" Mr. Carter carefully
shifted the position of an ink-well, a calendar, and a paper-knife--"that brings us to a consideration
of your and my affairs, doesn't it? Ahem! You remember our bargain? I was to give you a chance
and you were to make good before you--er--planned any--er--matrimonial foolishness with my
daughter."

"Yes, sir." O'Reilly felt that the moment had come for his carefully rehearsed speech, but,
unhappily, he could not remember how the swan-song started. He racked his brain for the opening
words.

Mr. Carter, too, was unaccountably silent. He opened his lips, then closed them. Both men,
after an awkward pause, cleared their throats in unison and eyed each other expectantly. Another
moment dragged past, then they chorused:

"I have an unpleasant--"

Each broke off at the echo of his own words.

"What's that?" inquired the importer.

"N-nothing. You were saying--"

"I was thinking how lucky it is that you and Elsa waited. Hm-m! Very fortunate." Again Mr.
Carter rearranged his desk fittings. "She has deep feelings--got a conscience, too. Conscience
is a fine thing in a woman--so few of 'em have it. We sometimes differ, Elsa and I, but when
she sets her heart on a thing I see that she gets it, even if I think she oughtn't to have
it. What's the use of having children if you can't spoil 'em, eh?" He looked up with a sort
of resentful challenge, and when his listener appeared to agree with him he sighed with satisfaction.
"Early marriages are silly--but she seems to think otherwise. Maybe she's right. Anyhow, she's
licked me. I'm done. She wants to be married right away, before we go West. That's why I waited
to see you at once. You're a sensible fellow, Johnnie--no foolishness about you. You won't
object, will you? We men have to take our medicine."

"It's quite out of the question," stammered the unhappy O'Reilly.

"Come, come! It's tough on you, I know, but--" The fuse had begun to sputter. Johnnie had a
horrified vision of himself being dragged unwillingly to the altar. "Elsa is going to have
what she wants, if I have to break something. If you'll be sensible I'll stand behind you like
a father and teach you the business. I'm getting old, and Ethelbert could never learn it. Otherwise--"
The old man's jaw set; his eyes began to gleam angrily.

"Who is--Ethelbert?" faintly inquired O'Reilly.

"Why, dammit! He's the fellow I've been telling you about. He's not so bad as he sounds; he's
really a nice boy--"

"Elsa is in love with another man? Is that what you mean?"

"Good Lord, yes! Don't you understand English? I didn't think you'd take it so hard--I was
going to make a place for you here in the office, but of course if--Say! What the deuce ails you?"

Samuel Carter stared with amazement, for the injured victim of his daughter's fickleness had
leaped to his feet and was shaking his hand vigorously, meanwhile uttering unintelligible sounds
that seemed to signify relief, pleasure, delight--anything except what the old man expected.

"Are you crazy, or am I?" he queried.

"Yes, sir; delirious. It's this way, sir; I've changed my mind, too."

"Oh--! You have?"

"I've met the dearest, sweetest"--O'Reilly choked, then began again--"the dearest, loveliest--"

"Never mind the bird-calls--don't coo! I get enough of that at home. Don't tell me she's dearer
and sweeter than Elsa. Another girl! Well, I'll be damned! Young man, you're a fool."

"Yes, sir."

Slightly mollified by this ready acknowledgment, Mr. Carter grunted with relief. "Humph! It
turned out better than I thought. Why, I--I was positively terrified when you walked in. And
to think you didn't need any sympathy!"

"I do need that job, though. It will enable me to get married."

"Nonsense! Better wait. I don't believe in early engagements."

"Oh yes, you do."

"Well, that depends. But, say--you're a pretty nervy youth to turn down my daughter and then
hold me up for a job, all in the same breath. Here! Don't dance on my rug. I ought to be offended,
and I am, but--Get out while I telephone Elsa, so she can dance, too."

O'Reilly spent that evening in writing a long letter to Rosa Varona. They are severely serious.
It may be that, like so many Americans, we have lost faith in the courts, and Heaven knows
we have had abundant reason for so doing, but there's hope. They have too often and too long listened
to the clamors of public opinion, put too much faith and credit in
the utterances of latter-day journalism, coloring their opinions to
suit the one, or to escape the criticism of the other.

Under the pernicious doctrine of public policy and in fortifying that undefined and indefinable
legal notion of police power, courts have wiped aside Constitutional limitations, and disregarded
what the profession at least had learned to consider as almost fixed precedents of the law, but
even with all these defects admitted, there remains the startling truth that to these governmental
agencies we must look for the righting of our wrongs and the redress of our grievances. We have
shunned the courts too often in our temporal affairs, fearing, it seems, further adverse decisions,
or waiting a proper adjustment at some other forum. In my own State it might now be compulsory upon
you, or any other decent self-respecting person of the race, in travelling from here to New York
or elsewhere in the North, to ride in the so-called "Jim-Crow" cars provided by an indulgent
Maryland legislature for Negro patrons of its railroads, had it not
have been for a member of the Faculty of this institution.

William H. H. Hart knew that legislation of that character was an attempt to restrict interstate
traffic, and the Court of Appeals of Maryland agreed with him. The case of State vs. Hart, reported
in 100 Md. at page 595, is a landmark in our Maryland law, and under its influence "Jim-Crow"
cars have almost disappeared from the railroads of our State. Another distinguished member of the
Faculty of Howard University, but of another department, in travelling over the railroads
in the eastern part of our State last fall, discovered that the compartments provided by the roads
for their colored passengers, in point of cleanliness, appointment, and convenience, were notably
inferior to those furnished others.


O'Reilly chafed: he cursed the revolution which had made communication so uncertain; at length
he cabled, but still the days dragged on with no result. Gradually his impatience gave way
to apprehension. Unreasonable conjectures besieged his mind and destroyed his peace.

Great was his relief, therefore, when one day a worn, stained envelope addressed in Rosa's
hand was laid upon his desk. The American stamp, the Key West postmark, looked strange, but--Her
first letter! O'Reilly wondered if his first letter to her could possibly have moved her as
this moved him. He kissed the envelope where her lips had caressed it in the sealing. Then
with eager fingers he broke it open.

It was a generous epistle, long and closely written, but as he read his keen delight turned
to dismay, and when he had turned the last thin page his brain was in wildest turmoil. He thought
he must be dreaming. He turned sick, aching eyes upon his surroundings to prove this thing
a nightmare, but the prosaic clink of a typewriter and the drone of a voice dictating quotations
on Brazilian coffee were conclusive evidence to the contrary. Those pages between his thumb
and finger were real. Yes, and that was Rosa's writing. Could it be that he had misunderstood
anything? He turned to the beginning and attempted to read, but his hands shook so that he
was obliged to lay the letter flat upon his desk.

Rosa's Spanish training had been severely tried. The stiff, quaint formality of her opening
paragraphs only served to emphasize her final frightened cry for help.

MY DEARLY BELOVED,--It is with diffidence and hesitation that I take my pen in hand, for I
fear you may consider me unduly forward in writing to you without solicitation. Believe me,
I appreciate the reserve which a young lady of refinement should practise even in her correspondence
with the gentleman who has honored her with his promise of marriage, but my circumstances are
such as to banish consideration of the social niceties.

Alas! What events have followed your departure from Matanzas! What misfortunes have overtaken
Esteban and me. That happiness could be so swiftly succeeded by misery, that want could follow
plenty, that peril could tread so closely upon the heels of safety! Where to begin, how to
tell you, I scarcely know; my hand shakes, my eyes are blinded--nor dare I trust myself to
believe that this letter will ever reach you, for we are refugees, Esteban and I-- fugitives,
outcasts, living in the manigua with Asensio and Evangelina, former slaves of our father. Such
poverty, such indescribable circumstances! But they were our only friends and they took us
in when we were homeless, so we love them.

I see you stare at these words. I hear you say, "That Rosa has gone mad, like her wicked stepmother!"
Indeed, sometimes I think I have. But, no. I write facts. It is a relief to put them down,
even though you never read them. Good Asensio will take this letter on his horse to the Insurrecto
camp, many miles away, and there give it to Colonel Lopez, our only friend, who promises that
in some mysterious way it will escape the eyes of our enemies and reach your country. Yes,
we have enemies! We, who have harmed no one. Wait until I tell you.

But if this letter reaches you--and I send it with a prayer--what then? I dare not think too
long of that, for the hearts of men are not like the hearts of women. What will you say when
you learn that the Rosa Varona whom you favored with your admiration is not the Rosa of to-day?
I hear you murmur, "The girl forgets herself!" But, oh, the standards of yesterday are gone
and my reserve is gone, too! I am a hunted creature.

O'Reilly felt a great pain in his breast at the thought that Rosa had for an instant doubted
him. But she did not really doubt; those misgivings were but momentary; the abandon of her
appeal showed that in her heart of hearts she knew his love to be unshakable.

She had compelled herself to start with the death of Dona Isabel and to give him a succinct
account of all that had followed. O'Reilly read the story, fascinated. Here, amid these surroundings,
with the rattle of typewriters and the tinkle of telephone-bells in his ears, it all seemed
wholly improbable, fancifully unreal--like the workings of some turgid melodrama.

That is how we came to live with Asensio and his wife [the letter went on]. Imagine it! A bohio,
hidden away far up the Yumuri, and so insignificant as to escape attention. We are no longer
people of consequence or authority; our safety depends upon our inconspicuousness. We hide
as do the timid animals, though nature has not given us their skill in avoiding danger. I do
not like the wilderness; it frightens me. At night I hear things rustling through the thatch
above my head; in the morning my feet touch a bare earthen floor. We live on fruits and vegetables
from Evangelina's garden, with now and then a fowl or a bite of meat when Asensio is fortunate.
Esteban does not seem to mind, but I cannot accommodate myself to these barbarous surroundings.
Sometimes I bite my tongue to keep from complaining, for that, I know, would grieve him.

The whole country is in chaos. There is no work--nothing but suspicion, hatred, and violence.
Oh, what desolation this war has wrought! Esteban has already become a guerrillero. He has
stolen a cow, and so we have milk for our coffee; but there is only a handful of coffee left,
and little hope of more. Marauding bands of Spaniards are everywhere, and the country people
tell atrocious tales about them. How will it end? How long before they will discover us and
the worst will happen?

Soon after our arrival Esteban went to the camp of Colonel Lopez to arrange for us to join
his army, but returned heart-broken. It was impossible, it seems, on my account. Conditions
with the patriots are worse than with us here, and the colonel acknowledged frankly that he
could not be burdened with a woman in his command. So Esteban has given up for the present
his dream of fighting, and devotes himself to protecting me. You see there is no sanctuary,
no help but his right arm. The towns are in Spanish hands, the manigua is infested with lawless
men, and there is no place in which to hide me. So I feel myself a burden. Esteban has plans
to arm a band of his own. I am numb with dread of what it may lead to, for his hatred is centered
upon Cueto, that false servant whose wickedness reduced us to this extremity. Esteban is so
young and reckless. If only you were here to counsel him.

If only you were here--Oh, my dearest Juan! If only you were here- -to take me in your arms
and banish this ever constant terror at my heart. If only you were here to tell me that you
love me still in spite of my misfortune. See! The tears are falling as I write. My eyes are
dim, my fingers trace uncertain letters on the sheet, and I can only steady them when I remember
that you promised to return. You WILL return, will you not? I could not write like this if
I were sure that you would read these lines. My nightly prayer- -But I will not tell you of
my prayers, for fate may guide this letter to you, after all, and the hearts of men do change.
In those dark hours when my doubts arise I try to tell myself that you will surely come and
search me out.

Sometimes I play a game with Evangelina--our only game. We gather wild flowers. We assort the
few belongings that I managed to bring with me and I array myself for you. And then I smile
and laugh for a little while, and she tells me I am beautiful enough to please you. But the
flowers fade, and I know that beauty, too, will fade in such surroundings. What then? I ask myself.

When you return to Cuba--see, my faith is strong again--avoid Matanzas, for your own sake and
mine. I wrote to Fraulein Pruckl to-day. She is staying at Achensee. I should like to see her. Every
afternoon we bathe and then go for a walk. But to-day it has been raining all day. Such a bore.
I forgot to bring my paint-box and I'm not allowed to read all day. Mother says, if you gobble
all your books up now you'll have nothing left to read. That's quite true, but I can't even
go and swing.

Afternoon. I must write some more. I've had a frightful row with Dora. She says I've been fiddling with
her things.

It's all because she's so untidy. As if her things could interest me. Yesterday she left her
letter to Erika lying about on the table, and all I read was: He's
as handsome as a Greek god.

I don't know who "he" was for she came in at that moment. It's probably Krail Rudi, with whom
she is everlastingly playing tennis and carries on like anything. As for handsome--well, there's
no accounting for tastes.

July 26th.

It's a good thing I brought my dolls' portmanteau. Mother said: You'll be glad to have it
on rainy days. Of course I'm much too old to play with dolls, but even though I'm 11 I can make
dolls' clothes still. One learns something while one is doing it, and when I've finished something
I do enjoy it so. Mother cut me out some things and I was tacking them together. Then Dora
came into the room and said Hullo, the child is sewing things for her dolls. What cheek, as
if she had never played with dolls.

Besides, I don't really play with dolls any longer.

When she sat down beside me I sewed so vigorously that I made a great
scratch on her hand, and said: Oh, I'm so sorry, but you came too
close.

I hope she'll know why I really did it. Of course she'll go and sneak
to Mother. Let her. What right has she to call me child. Come quickly, if you love me.

VI

THE QUEST BEGINS

When O'Reilly had finished his second reading of the letter there were fresh blots upon the
pitifully untidy pages. "I write nicely, only the ink is poor--" "There is little of anything
here at Asensio's house--" "It is cold before the dawn--" ... Poor little Rosa! He had always
thought of her as so proud, so high-spirited, so playful, but another Rosa had written this
letter. Her appeal stirred every chord of tenderness, every impulse of chivalry in his impressionable
Irish nature. She doubted him; she feared he would not come' to her. Well, he would set her
doubts at rest. "O God! Come quickly, if you love me." He leaped to his feet; he dashed the
tears from his eyes.

Mr. Slack looked up astonished at the apparition which burst in upon him. He was accustomed
to O'Reilly's high head of steam and disapproved of it, but he had never seen the fellow so
surcharged as now. He was positively jumpy; his voice was sharp; his hands were unsteady; his
eyes were bright and blue and hard.

"I want my salary, quick," Johnnie began.

Mr. Slack resented emotion, he abominated haste; he had cultivated what he considered to be
a thorough commercial deliberation.

"My dear man," he said, "I'd advise you--"

"I don't want advice; I want money," snapped the other. "I've quit, resigned, skipped, fled."

"Indeed? When does your resignation take effect?"

"Immediately, and if you don't move like lightning it will take effect upon your person."

"Mr. Carter would never--"

"Bother Mr. Carter! Now stiffen your spine long enough to write my check. If you don't--" O'Reilly
compressed his lips and breathed ominously through his nostrils. He laid a heavy and persuasive
hand upon the secretary's shoulder. "Hump yourself, old jellyfish!"

There was a queer, wild light in O'Reilly's eye and for once Mr. Slack took orders from an
underling. He humped himself.

Johnnie's other preparations were conducted with equal vigor and promptitude; within two hours
his belongings were packed. But for all his haste his mind was working clearly. Rosa's warning
not to come to Matanzas was no doubt warranted, and his own unpleasant experiences with the
customs men at Havana were still fresh enough to be vivid. The Spaniards were intensely suspicious
of all Americans, especially incoming ones, as he had reason to know, and since he was nearly
as well acquainted in the one place as in the other it seemed to be the part of wisdom to slip
into the country through a side door. The seat of war was in the east. The rebels held that
part of the island. Once there and in touch with them it would surely be no difficult task
to evade the local authorities and join Colonel Lopez.

O'Reilly pondered these thoughts briefly, then seized his hat and hastened down-town to the
office of the Cuban Junta.

At this time the newspapers of the United States were devoting much space to the insular uprising;
the first stories of Spanish atrocities later, alas! destined to become all too familiar, were
gaining public attention, and there were few readers who did not know something about the activities
of that body of patriots who made their headquarters at 56 New Street. It was from this place
that the revolution was largely financed, so the papers said. It was there that the filibustering
expeditions supplying arms and ammunition originated. To 56 New Street O'Reilly went.

There was nothing martial about the atmosphere of the Junta's offices; there were no war maps
on the walls, no stands of arms nor recruiting officers in evidence--not even a hint of intrigue
or conspiracy. The place was rather meanly furnished, and it was disappointingly commonplace.
A business-like young man inquired O'Reilly's errand.

Johnnie made known a part of it, and then asked to see some one in authority. In consequence,
perhaps, of his Irish smile or of that persuasiveness which he could render almost irresistible
when he willed, it was not long before he gained admittance to the presence of Mr. Enriquez,
a distinguished, scholarly Cuban of middle age.

"You say you have important business with me?" the latter inquired, speaking with an accent
of refinement.

O'Reilly plunged boldly into the heart of the matter which had brought him thither. When he
had finished his tale Mr. Enriquez inquired:

"But how do you expect me to help you?"

"I want your advice more than your help, although you might tell me where I can find Colonel
Lopez."

Enriquez eyed his caller keenly. "That information would be very well worth having," said he.
"But, you understand, we know little about what is going on in Cuba--far less than the Spaniards
themselves. I'm afraid I can't help you."

"You don't take me for a spy, do you?" Johnnie asked, with his friendly grin.

"Ah! You don't look like one, but we never know whom to trust. This young lady in whom you
are interested, who is she?"

"Her name is Varona; Miss Rosa Varona."

"So?" Enriquez raised his brows. "Not by any chance the heiress to that famous Varona treasure?"

"Exactly!--if there is such a thing." There ensued a pause while the Cuban drummed softly upon
his desk with his finger-tips. "Her brother Esteban told me that he was working for your cause.
I warned him to be careful, but--" O'Reilly's voice grew suddenly husky. "Here! Read this.
I want you to believe me." Reverently he laid Rosa's letter before her countryman. "I'm not
in the habit of showing my letters to strangers, but--I guess that'll convince you I'm not a spy."

He sat silently while the letter was being read; nor was he disappointed in the result. * * *
* *

For answer, a yellow arm clutching a helmet-light broke through the
grotesquely milling mass and struck at the cuttlefish's great pools
of eyes.

It missed, but the switch flicked on, and there stabbed through the gloom a broad, glaringly
white ray.

Its effect was astounding. The beam smote the octopus squarely in its huge eyes, and immediately
the creature shuddered; writhed with pain. The tentacles released the men--and the monster fled
back into the protecting shadows!

A shout from the men roared in the commander's earphones. "They can't stand the light!" he
cried. "Thank God! Beams on, everyone! Flash 'em in their eyes! Forward!"

Fourteen shafts of eye-dazzling light forked through the corridor. The tiny company, beating
their path with criss-crossing shafts of white, forged ahead. They thrashed the shadows with
their beams, probing each inch of water--clearing their way even as a tank hoses machine-gun bullets
before its clumsy body. Their former slender chance grew; they filled with hope.

Another swarm of devil-fish, long arms whipping before them, raced from branching corridors and
bore down on the company of humans.

The men were ready, and fourteen tongues of white met them squarely.
They faltered; the weight of their fellows behind shoved them on;
but the rays steadied, and the front row of octopi broke in panic.
The others at once followed in wild retreat.

"Keep together, men!"
Keith ordered sharply. "One beam to each octopus--straight in its
eyes till it retreats! Forward!"

* * * * *

They pressed on. The
octopi, with eyes used only to the soft blue glow of the cavern, could
not stand against the brilliant rays. "It would be madness, under
the circumstances, even to be seen in Matanzas: those enemies of--your friends--would have
you deported. But just how to reach the Insurrectos--"

"If you'd merely give me a letter saying I'm a friend--"

The doctor promptly negatived this suggestion. "Surely you don't think it can be done as easily
as that?" he inquired. "In the first place, wherever you land, you will be watched and probably
searched. Such a letter, if discovered, would not only end your chances, but it would bring
certain disaster upon those to whom it was written. I have no right to jeopardize the lives
of those I hold dear. These are perilous times for all good Cubans, Mr. O'Reilly. Enriquez
told me about that poor girl. She bears a famous name and--I want to help her." He removed
his glasses and wiped them, absent-mindedly. "There are three Alvarados living," he resumed.
"My two brothers, Tomas and Ignacio, reside in Cuba, and we all work for the cause of independence
in our own ways. I am fortunately situated, but they are surrounded by dangers, and I must
ask you to be extremely careful in communicating with them, for I am placing their lives in
your hands and--I love them dearly."

"I shall do exactly as you say."

"Very well, then! Go to Neuvitas, where Tomas lives--there is a steamer leaving in three of
four days, and you can arrange passage on her. He is a dentist. Meet him, somehow, and make
yourself known by repeating this sentence: 'I come from Felipe. He told me how you whipped
him to keep him from going to the Ten Years' War!' That will be enough; he will ask you who
you are and what you want."

"I see. It's a sort of password."

"No. I've never had reason to communicate with him in this way." Noting the bewilderment in
O'Reilly's face, Alvarado smiled. "You won't need to say anything more. No living soul, except
Tomas and I, knows that he thrashed me, but it is true. I was young, I wanted to go to the
war, but he took it out of me with a bamboo. Later we bound ourselves never to mention it.
He will understand from the message that I trust you, and he will help you to reach the rebels,
if such a thing is possible. But tell me, when you have found Miss Varona, what then?"

"Why, I'll bring her out."

"How? Do you think you can walk into any seaport and take ship? You will be tagged and numbered
by the authorities. Once you disappear into the manigua, you will be a marked man."

"Well, then, I'll marry her right there. I'm an American citizen-- "

"Don't build too much on that fact, either," the doctor warned. "Spanish jails are strong,
and your country has never compelled that respect for its nationals which other countries insist
upon."

"Perhaps! But the first thing is to find Miss Varona and learn that she's safe. I don't much
care what happens after that."

Alvarado nodded and smiled. "Good! What would this world be without sentiment? It loves a lover.
I like your spirit and I hope soon to have the pleasure of again seeing you and meeting your--
wife."

O'Reilly flushed and stammered, whereupon the good Cuban patted him on the shoulder. "Come
and see me when you get back, and bring me news of Tomas. Now, adios, compadre."

"Adios, senor! I am deeply grateful!"

O'Reilly had no difficulty in securing passage direct to Neuvitas on the English steamer Dunham
Castle, and a few days later he saw the Atlantic Highlands dissolve into the mists of a winter
afternoon as the ship headed outward into a nasty running sea.

It proved to be a wretched trip. Off Hatteras the Dunham Castle labored heavily for twelve
hours, and bad weather followed her clear into the old Bahama Channel. Not until she had thrust
her nose into the narrow entrance of Neuvitas harbor did she wholly cease her seasick plunging,
but then the weather changed with bewildering suddenness.

Cuba, when it came fairly into sight, lay bathed in golden sunshine, all warmth and welcome,
like a bride upon an azure couch. The moist breath from her fragrant shores swept over the
steamer's decks and Johnnie O'Reilly sniffed it joyfully.

He had brought little luggage with him, only an extra suit of khaki, a few toilet articles,
and a Colt's revolver, the companion of his earlier Cuban days. He was holding the weapon in
his hand, debating how and where to conceal it, when the first officer paused in the state-room
door and, spying it, exclaimed:

"Hello! Smuggling arms to the Insurrectos, eh?"

O'Reilly laughed. "It's an old friend. I don't know just what to do with it."

"I'll tell you," the mate volunteered. "Lead your old friend out here to the rail, shake hands
with him, and drop him overboard before he gets you into trouble."

"Really?"

"I mean it. They won't let you land with that hardware. Take my tip."

But Johnnie hesitated. Though his intentions were far from warlike, he could not bring himself,
in view of his secret plans, to part with his only weapon. He examined his extra pair of khaki
trousers, and discovering a considerable surplus of cloth at each inside seam, he took needle
and thread and managed to sew the gun in so that it hung close against the inside of his right
leg when he donned the garment. It felt queer and uncomfortable, but it did not appear to be
noticeable so long as he stood upright. With some pride in his stratagem, he laid off his winter
suit and changed into lighter clothing.

Neuvitas was scorching under a midday sun when he came on deck. Its low, square houses were
glaring white; here and there a splotch of vivid Cuban blue stood out; the rickety, worm-eaten
piling of its water-front resembled rows of rotten, snaggly teeth smiling out of a chalky face
mottled with unhealthy, artificial spots of color. Gusts of wind from the shore brought feverish
odors, as if the city were sick and exhaled a tainted breath. But beyond, the hills were clean
and green, the fields were rich and ripe. That was the Cuba which O'Reilly knew.

A Spanish transport, close by, was languidly discharging uniformed troops; lighters of military
supplies were being unloaded; the sound of a bugle floated from the shore. Moored to the docks
or anchored in the harbor were several shallow-draught "tin-clad" coast-patrol craft from the
staffs of which streamed the red and yellow bars of Spain.

Although there were but a few passengers on the Dunham Castle, they were subjected to a long
delay during which suspicious customs men searched their baggage and questioned them. Finally,
however, O'Reilly found himself free to go ashore. He had passed the ordeal handily, and now
he was eager to reach some lodging- place where he could remove that revolver which knocked
against his leg so awkwardly at every step. Once on the dock, he gave his bag to a negro and
led the way toward the street. At the last moment, however, just as he was about to plant his
feet upon solid earth, he was halted by two men who rose from a bench where they had been idling.
They carried the tasseled canes of the Secret Service, and O'Reilly felt his heart jump.

With a murmured apology one of them relieved the negro of the valise while the other began
to search O'Reilly's person for concealed weapons. He began at Johnnie's shoulders and patted
one pocket after another, "fanning" him in the fashion approved of policemen. Now, too late,
the American regretted his refusal to heed the mate's warning. It seemed certain that he was
in for trouble, but he drew his heels together and stood with the revolver pressed between
his legs, praying that those exploratory palms would not encounter it. When the officer had
slapped every pocket, ending at the hips, he nodded; his companion snapped shut the valise,
and handed it back to the porter.

O'Reilly paused a moment or two later to wipe the abundant perspiration from his face; even
yet his pulse was pounding erratically. He hoped the future held no more surprises of this
sort, for he feared that his nerve might fail him.

El Gran Hotel Europea, Neuvitas's leading hostelry, belied its name. It was far from large,
and certainly it was anything but European, except, perhaps, in its proprietor's extravagant
and un- American desire to please, at any cost. The building was old and dirty, the open cafe,
fronting upon the sidewalk of the main street, was full of flies, and dust from the unclean
roadway lay thick upon its stone-topped tables; moreover, a recognizable odor of decay issued
from the patio--or perhaps from the kitchen behind it. After O'Reilly's first meal he was sure
it came from the latter place; even suspected that the odor flattered actual conditions. But
it was the best hotel the place afforded, and Senor Carbajal was the most attentive of hosts.

He was a globular, unctuous little man, this Carbajal; he reminded O'Reilly of a drop of oil.
He evinced an unusual interest in the affairs of his American guest, and soon developed a habit
of popping into the latter's room at unexpected moments, ostensibly to see that all was as
it should be. Now there was very little in the room to need attention--only a bed with a cheese-cloth
mosquito-net, a wash-stand, and a towering, smelly clothes-press of Spanish architecture, which
looked as if it might have a dark and sinister history. When, for the third time, he appeared
without knocking, O'Reilly suspected something.

"You have everything, eh?" Mr. Carbajal teetered upon the balls of his feet while his small
black eyes roved inquisitively.

"Everything in abundance."

"There is water, eh?" The proprietor peered dutifully into the pitcher, incidentally taking
stock of O'Reilly's toilet articles.

"A veritable ocean of it."

"One never knows. These servants are so lazy. But--your other baggage, your trunk?"

"I have no trunk."

"So? I took you to be a great traveler."

"I am."

"Selling goods, eh?"

"No."

"Indeed? Then you are a pleasure traveler? You see the sights, is that it? Well, Cuba is beautiful."

"Most beautiful, judging from what I have seen."

Mr. Carbajal wagged a pudgy forefinger at his guest. "Tut! Tut! You know Cuba. You speak the
language better than a native. You can't fool me, sly one!" He wrinkled his face and winked
both eyes. It was an invitation to further confidence, and he was disappointed when it passed
unnoticed. "Well, you Americans are a brave people," he continued, with an obvious effort to
keep the conversation going. "You like to be where the fighting is."

"Not I. I'm a timid man."

"Ho! Ha! Ha!" the proprietor cackled. Then he became pensive. "There is nothing here at Neuvitas
to interest a tourist--except the war."

"I'm not a tourist."

"Indeed? Now that is interesting." Mr. Carbajal seated himself on the edge of the bed, where
he could look into O'Reilly's traveling-bag. "Not a tourist, not a traveling-man. Now what
could possibly bring you to Cuba?"

O'Reilly eyed his inquisitor gravely; a subtle melancholy darkened his agreeable countenance.
"I travel for my health," said he.

"You--Health--!" Carbajal's frame began to heave; his bulging abdomen oscillated as if shaken
by some hidden hand. "Good! Ha! There's another joke for you."

"I'm a sick man," O'Reilly insisted, hollowly.

"From what malady do you suffer?" inquired the hotel-keeper.

"Rheumatism."

"Rheumatism? That is no more than a pain in the joints, a stiffness--"

"There! I knew it!" O'Reilly exclaimed in triumph. Rising, he seized his host's moist hands
and shook them violently. "You give me courage! You make a new man of me. These doctors enjoy
a fellow's agony; they'd like to bury him. They'd never recommend this climate. No! 'Pain in
the joints,' you say, 'stiffness.' That proves the abominable affliction is practically unknown
here. I thank you, sir."

"You don't look sick," mumbled Carbajal. "Not like the other American."

"What other American?"

"A peculiar fellow. He went on to Puerto Principe. What a cough! And he was as thin as a wire.
He bled at the mouth, too, all the time, when he was not reviling my hotel. You'll see him
if you go there, provided he hasn't come apart with his coughing. I believe he writes for newspapers.
Well, it is my pleasure to serve you. Command me at any hour." Mr. Carbajal rose reluctantly
and went wheezing down-stairs to his grimy tables and the flies.

O'Reilly was not in the least deceived; it was plain to him that the hotel man was in close
touch with the Spanish authorities, and he began to feel the need of some better excuse, some
valid business reason, for being here, such as would allay suspicion once for all. But he could
think of nothing better than his rheumatism, and to that he determined to cling.

VII

THE MAN WHO WOULD KNOW LIFE

Later that day O'Reilly set out to reconnoiter the city of Neuvitas. He was followed, of course--he
had expected as much, and the circumstances amused rather than alarmed him. But when he returned
to his hotel and found that his room had been visited during his absence he felt a hint of
uneasiness. Evidently, as Doctor Alvarado had forecast, the authorities were interested in
him; and he had further evidence of the fact when he learned that the room next him was occupied
by the very man who had shadowed him on the street. Inasmuch as the intervening wall was no
more than a thin partition, through which his very breathing could be heard, while his every
movement could doubtless be spied upon, O'Reilly saw the need of caution, and he began to cast
about for a place to hide that Colt's revolver, the presence of which was assuming the proportions
of a menace. Now that his belongings had been examined three times that day, the next step
would probably be another search of his person. Unless in the mean time he could definitely
establish his innocence of purpose, which was unlikely, it behooved him to rid himself of the
weapon without delay. This, however, was a problem. He could not bring himself to throw the
thing away, and his bare bedroom offered no place of concealment. Late that evening he called
Mr. Carbajal and asked him if it were possible to take a bath.

Mr. Carbajal assured him that it was. El Gran Hotel Europea was first class in every respect;
no expense had been spared in its equipment. Senor O'Rail-ye had indeed done well in patronizing
it, for it boasted the best cuarto de bano in the whole city--a room, moreover, which was devoted
exclusively to the purposes of bathing. And it was a large room--large enough to accommodate
a dozen guests at once. To be sure, it would require, say, half an hour to make it ready, for
it was stored with hay for the horses which drew the 'bus to and from the depot, but if the
senor would have patience it could soon be restored to its original purpose. Mr. Carbajal himself
would see that there was a river of hot water.

O'Reilly thanked him. An hour later he paraded, bare-foot, down the hall, wrapped in a blanket.
He had purposely left his clothes behind him, and the door of his room unlocked, but under
his naked left arm he carried the revolver.

He was a long time in his bath. When he returned to his chamber he found his garments very
nearly as he had left them. He smiled as he crept into bed and tucked the netting under his
thin mattress. They could search him now, whenever they pleased, for the revolver and its box
of precious cartridges reposed on a duty beam over the bathroom, where no one would ever think
of looking.

During breakfast, and afterward throughout an aimless morning stroll, O'Reilly felt watchful
eyes upon him. When he returned to his hotel he found Mr. Carbajal in the cafe concocting refrescos
for some military officers, who scanned the American with bold, hostile glances. O'Reilly complained
to the proprietor of a toothache.

At once Mr. Carbajal was sympathetic; he was also admonitory, blaming the affliction upon that
bath of the previous evening. Excessive bathing, he declared, was injurious, particularly in
the winter season; it opened one's pores, and it dried one's skin and rendered one liable to
the attacks of every disease. Heat? Perspiration? Was it wise to resort to unnatural and artificial
means in order to rid oneself of a trifling annoyance? If perspiration were injurious, nature
would not have provided it. In fact, it was nature's method of keeping the body clean, and
if people were unreasonably fastidious about such things a little cologne would render them
even more agreeable to the senses than any number of baths. That was the purpose of cologne.
This habit of bathing at fixed intervals of a week or two, regardless of conditions, might
be, and probably was, responsible for all of O'Reilly's rheumatism. Mr. Carbajal, for one,
knew better than to overdo the thing. He had never suffered an ache or a pain in his life and
his teeth were perfectly sound, as he demonstrated by beating vigorously upon them with his
mixing-spoon.

O'Reilly was impressed by this argument, he acknowledged, but unfortunately it did not remedy
the pain which was killing him. During the hottest part of the day, when he knew the town would
be asleep, he reappeared in the cafe, his cheek in his hand. He declared that something had
to be done, at once, and inquired the name and address of the best local dentist.

Mr. Carbajal named several, among them Dr. Tomas Alvarado, whereupon his guest hurried away,
followed at a respectful distance by the secret agent.

Finding Doctor Alvarado's office was closed, as he had anticipated, O'Reilly proceeded to the
doctor's residence. There was some delay when he rang the bell, but eventually the dentist
himself appeared. O'Reilly recognized him from his resemblance to his brother. He addressed
him in English.

"I come from Felipe," he began. "He well remembers the day you whipped him to keep him from
going to the Ten Years' War."

The languor of Doctor Alvarado's siesta vanished. He started, his eyes widened.

"Who are you?" he muttered.

"My name is O'Reilly. I am an American, a friend, so don't be alarmed. The man you see approaching
is following me, but he thinks I have come to you with a toothache."

"What do you want?"

"I want your help in joining the Insurrectos."

By this time the detective had come within earshot. Making an effort at self-possession, the
dentist said: "Very well. I will meet you at my office in a half-hour and see what can be done."
Then he bowed.

O'Reilly raised his hat and turned away.

Doctor Alvarado's dentist's chair faced a full-length window, one of several which, after the
Cuban fashion, opened directly upon the sidewalk, rendering both the waiting-room and the office
almost as public as the street itself. Every one of these windows was wide open when Johnnie
arrived; but it seemed that the dentist knew what he was about, for when his patient had taken
his seat and he had begun an examination of the troublesome tooth, he said, under his breath:

"I, too, am watched. Talk to me in English. When I press, thus, upon your gum, you will know
that some one is passing. Now then, what is the meaning of your amazing message from Felipe?"

While Doctor Alvarado pretended to treat a perfectly sound molar, Johnnie managed, despite
frequent interruptions, to make known the reason and circumstances of his presence.

"But there are no rebels around here," Alvarado told him. "You could escape to the country,
perhaps, but what then? Where would you go? How would they know who you are?"

"That's what I want to find out."

The Cuban pondered. "You'll have to go to Puerto Principe," he said, at length. "Our men are
operating in that neighborhood, and my brother Ignacio will know how to reach them. I'll give
you a message to him, similar to the one you brought me from Felipe." Then he smiled. "I've
just thought of the very thing. Years ago I lent him a book which I particularly prized, and
one of his children damaged it. I was furious. I declared I would never lend him another, and
I never have. Now then, I'll give you that very volume; hand it to him and say that I asked
you to return it to him. I'd like to see his face when he receives it."

O'Reilly thanked him, promising to use every precaution in delivering the message. The very
care necessary in communicating between brother and brother made him realize more clearly than
hitherto that he was among enemies.

The next morning he paid Carbajal's score and took the train to the interior. In his bag was
Tomas Alvarado's precious volume, and in the same coach with him rode the Secret Service man.

In its general features Puerto Principe differed little from the other Cuban cities O'Reilly
knew. It was compactly built, it was very old and it looked its centuries. Its streets were
particularly narrow and crooked, having been purposely laid out in labyrinthian mazes, so the
story goes, in order to fool the pirates. In some ways it was quaint and unusual. For instance,
here and there were queer tinajones, vast venerable earthen jars for holding rain-water, each
inscribed with the date when it left the potter's wheel; then, too, there was a remarkable
number of churches--massive structures, grayed by time--and in the northern distance, blue
against the sky, O'Reilly had a glimpse of the Cubitas range, where he knew the insurrectos
were in camp. That was his goal: it seemed almost within his grasp. He was tempted to abandon
caution and make a dash for it, until he discovered that the city was well guarded. One needed
a pass to enter or to leave Puerto Principe, and, moreover, the city had no suburbs, no scattered
residences outside its boundaries: when one came to the end of a street one found oneself in
an open field faced by a barbed-wire barrier, and on every road leading from the town stood
a fortina, a little fort of brick or logs, in which were stationed Spanish soldiers. The streets
were alive with uniformed men, patrols were everywhere, and martial law prevailed. For the
first time O'Reilly began to perceive the strength of that mailed hand which held the island
so tightly. Judging from the preparations here, one must conclude that Spain had no intention
of relinquishing her last New World possession.

After a stroll through the city, during which he carefully used his eyes, Johnnie asked himself
how the ill-drilled, ill-equipped, loosely organized Insurrectos could hope to overthrow so
solid a power as this, backed as it seemed to be by unlimited means and unlimited armies of
trained troops. It looked like a hopeless undertaking. No seaport, no city, scarcely a hamlet,
in fact, so far as O'Reilly knew, was held by the rebels; they lurked in the woods or rode
the savannas in ragged bands, here to-day, there to- morrow. To aid or comfort them was treason.
They appeared out of the jungles at unexpected moments; they faded like the mists of the dawn.
Theirs was an apparitional warfare, and even their biggest victories were signals for retreat.
How could they think to win?

It seemed impossible that such resistance as they offered could wear down and conquer the resources
of Spain, yet the very numbers and alertness of the Spanish troops argued a somewhat formidable
opposition. Did it not also argue an all-pervading restlessness which might some day escape
control? O'Reilly, of course, had no part in this quarrel: but it struck him as a wicked waste
to destroy, to ravage, and to slay when settlement was so easy. The motive behind this prodigal
extravagance of blood and gold was nothing but foolish resistance of a principle. A little
yielding, a little diminution of harshness, a little compassion on the part of the mother country,
and these men who were killing one another would embrace and proclaim their blood brotherhood.

Pondering such thoughts as these, O'Reilly returned to his hotel. As he sat in the cafe, sipping
an orangeade, he heard some one speaking in atrocious Spanish, and looked up to see that another
American had entered. The stranger was a tall, funereal young man, with pallid cheeks and hollow,
burning eyes: he was asking for ice-water, but what he said resembled anything except the language
of the country.

"Hey, George!" he cried. "Try gimme a vasso of agwa con yellow." He pronounced the words with
elaborate pains. "Make it a long one."

A waiter eyed him tolerantly, but with no faintest sign of understanding.

"Agwa con yellow--agwa with ice. Ice! ICE!" the man repeated loudly. Still failing of a response,
he shouted, "Don't you know what 'ice' is?" He wrapped his long, lean arms about himself and
shivered. "Cold! Icie! Freezum! Br-r-r! Savvy?"

Inspiration came to the waiter; a smile irradiated his countenance, and with a murmured apology
for his stupidity he hurried away.

O'Reilly stepped over to the stranger's table and introduced himself. "The hotel-keeper in
Neuvitas told me I'd find you here," he said. "Your name is--"

"Branch; Leslie Branch. So Carbajal said you'd find me here, eh? Oh, the greasy little liar.
He didn't believe it. He thought his cooking would have killed me, long ago, and it nearly
did." This time Mr. Branch's bony frame underwent a genuine shudder and his face was convulsed
with loathing. "Did you try his butter? 'Made in Denmark' during the early Victorian period.
I hate antiques-- can't eat anything oily. Carbajal's in the Secret Service. Nice fat little spy."

"So I suspected."

Mr. Branch's beverage appeared at this moment. With a flourish the waiter placed a small glass
and a bottle of dark liquid before him. Branch stared at it, then rolled a fiercely smoldering
eye upward.

"What's that?" he inquired.

O'Reilly read the label. "It's bitters," said he.

"BITTERS! And I asked for 'yellow'--a glass of agwa with yellow." Branch's voice shook. "I'm
dying of a fever, and this ivory-billed toucan brings me a quart of poison. Bullets!" It was
impossible to describe the suggestion of profanity with which the speaker colored this innocuous
expletive. "Weak as I am, I shall gnaw his windpipe." He bared his teeth suggestively and raised
two talon- like hands.

The waiter was puzzled, but not alarmed. He embraced himself as his customer had done, and
shuddered; then pointing at the bitters, he nodded encouragingly.

O'Reilly forestalled an outburst by translating his countryman's wants. "Un vaso de agua con
hielo," said he, and the attendant was all apologies.

"So, you speak the lingo?" marveled Mr. Branch. "Well, I can't get the hang of it. Don't like
it. Don't like anything Spanish. Hell of a country, isn't it? where the ice is 'YELLOW' and
the butter is 'MEANT TO KILL YOU,' and does."

O'Reilly laughed. "You've been studying a guide-book, 'with complete glossary of Spanish phrases.'
By the way, Carbajal said you are a writer."

Mr. Branch nodded listlessly. "I'm supposed to report this insurrection, but the Spaniards
won't let me. They edit my stuff to suit themselves. I'm getting tired of the farce."

"Going home?"

"Don't dare." The speaker tapped his concave chest. "Bum lungs. I came down here to shuffle
off, and I'm waiting for it to happen. What brings you to Cuba?"

"I'm here for my health, too." The real invalid stared. "I have rheumatism."

"Going to sweat it out, eh? Well, there's nothing to do but sweat"--Branch was racked by a
coughing spasm that shook his reedy frame--"sweat and cough. Bullets! No mistake about that
hospital bark, is there?" When he had regained his breath he said: "See here! I'm going to
take a chance with you, for I like your looks. My newspaper work is a bluff: I don't send enough
stuff to keep me alive. I come here to cure my lungs, and--I want you to help me do it."

O'Reilly stared at the man in surprise. "How can I help you?" he asked.

"By taking me with you."

"With me? Where?"

"To the Insurrectos, of course."

The men eyed each other fixedly. "What makes you think--" O'Reilly began.

"Oh, don't say it! I've got a hunch! I don't know what your game is--probably dynamite: there's
a story that the rebels have sent for some American experts to teach them how to use the stuff,
and God knows they need instruction! Anyhow, I can't swallow that rheumatism talk. I thought
you might give me a lift. Take me along, will you?"

"And how would that benefit your cough?" Johnnie inquired, curiously.

Mr. Branch hesitated. "Well, I'll tell you," he said, after a moment. "I'm afraid to die this
way, by inches, and hours. I'm scared to death." It seemed impossible that the sick man's cheeks
could further blanch, but they became fairly livid, while a beading of moisture appeared upon
his upper lip. "God! You've no idea how it gets on a fellow's nerves to see himself slipping--
slipping. I'd like to end it suddenly, like that!" He voiced the last sentence abruptly and
snapped his fingers. "I've tried to bump off, but--no courage! Funny, isn't it? Well, the doctors
told me another New York winter would put me in a rosewood show-case. I've tried Colorado and
it's no good. See? So I decided to join the Cubans and--let a bullet do the trick. I never
did like the Spaniards--their cooking is too greasy. Then, too, I'd like to have a thrill before
I cash in--taste 'the salt of life,' as somebody expressed it. That's war. It's the biggest
game in the world. What do you think of the idea?"

"Not much," O'Reilly said, honestly.

"Difference in temperament. I suppose it IS a sick fancy, but I've got it. Unfortunately, now
that I'm here, these Romeos won't let me get out of town. If you're what I think you are, give
me a hand. I'm a rotten coward, but I'll fight if the Cubans will take me."

"Where are the Cubans?"

"Oh, they're out yonder in the hills. I know all about 'em. Come over to my quarters, and I'll
show you a map, if you're interested."

"I am," said O'Reilly, and, rising, he followed his new acquaintance.

VIII

THE SPANISH DOUBLOON

On the whole, Pancho Cueto's plans had worked smoothly. After denouncing the Varona twins as
traitors he had managed to have himself appointed trustee for the crown, for all their properties,
consummation for which he had worked from the moment he read that letter of Esteban's on the
morning after Dona Isabel's death. To be sure, the overseer had acquired title, of a sort,
to the plantation by paying the taxes over a period of years, but it was the quinta itself
which he desired, the Quinta de Esteban with its hidden gold. That there was a treasure Cueto
had never doubted, and, once the place was his to do with as he chose, he began his search.

Cueto was a tireless, thorough-going man, therefore he did not set about his explorations in
the haphazard manner of Dona Isabel. Commencing at the lower edge of the grounds, he ripped
them up with a series of deep trenches and cross-cuts. It was a task that required the labor
of many men for several weeks, and when it was finished there was scarcely a growing thing
left upon the place. Only a few of the larger trees remained. Cueto was disappointed at finding
nothing, but he was not discouraged. Next he tore down the old slave barracoons and the outbuildings,
after which he completely wrecked the residence itself. He pulled it apart bit by bit, brick
by brick. He even dug up its foundations, but without the reward of so much as a single peseta.
Finally, when the villa was but a heap of rubbish and the grounds a scar upon the slope of
La Cumbre, he desisted, baffled, incredulous, while all Matanzas laughed at him. Having sacrificed
his choicest residence, he retired in chagrin to the plantation of La Joya.

But Cueto was now a man with a grievance. He burned with rage, and his contempt for the boy
and girl he had wronged soured into hatred. Such time as he did not spend in racking his brain
to explain the disappearance of the dead Esteban's riches, he devoted to cursing the living
Esteban and his sister, who, it seemed to him, were somehow to blame for his wrecked hopes.

In time he began to realize also that so long as they lived they would jeopardize his tenure
of their property. Public feeling, at present, was high; there was intense bitterness against
all rebels; but the war would end some day. What then? Cueto asked himself. Sympathy was ever
on the side of the weak and oppressed. There would come a day of reckoning. 

Spearing, 1913, Preface of Medea.

[328] To the Readers, prefixed to Troas, in Spearing, The Elizabethan
Translations of Seneca's Tragedies.

[329] A Medicinable Moral, that is, the two books of Horace his satires Englished acccording to
the prescription of St. Hierome, London, 1566, To the Reader.

[330] Preface to the Earl of Oxford, in The Abridgment of the Histories of Trogus Pompeius collected
and written in the Latin tongue by Justin, London, 1563.

[331] To the Gentle Reader, in Phaer's Virgil, 1583.

[332] Epistle Dedicatory to A Compendious Form of Living, quoted in Introduction to News out
of Powles Churchyard, reprinted London, 1872, p. xxx.

[333] The Bucolics of Virgil together with his Georgics, London, 1589,
The Argument.

[334] Preface in Gregory Smith, vol. 1, p. 137.

[335] The Schoolmaster, in Works, London, 1864, vol.

3, p. 226.

[336] To the Reader, prefixed to translation of Eclogues of Mantuan,
1567.

[337] To the Reader, in The Elizabethan Translations of Seneca's Tragedies.

[338]

Stanyhurst's Aeneid, in Arber's Scholar's Library, p. 5.

[339] Ibid., Introduction, p. xix, quoted from The Art of English Poesy.

[340] Preface to Greene's Menaphon, in Gregory Smith, vol. 1, p. 315.

[341] Dedication, dated 1573, in edition of 1584.

[342] Gregory Smith, vol. 1, p. 313.

[343] Dedicated to Cheke.

[344] See Cheke's Letter in The Courtier, Tudor Translations, London, 1900.

[345] See Epistle prefixed to translation.

[346] Quoted in Life prefixed to The Governor, ed.

Croft.

[347] Address to Queen Katherine prefixed to Paraphrase.

[348] Address to Katharine prefixed to Luke.

[349] To the Reader, in edition of 1564, literally reprinted Boston, Lincolnshire, 1877.

[350] To the Reader, in Marcus Tullius Cicero's Three Books of Duties, 1558.

[351] Translated by Christopher Featherstone, reprinted, Edinburgh, 1844.

[352] London, 1577.

[353] To the Gentlemen Readers, in Herodotus, translated by B. R., London, 1584.

[354] Op. cit.

[355] Dedication, in edition of 1576, reprinted, ed. Spingarn, Boston, 1914.

[356] Preface, in Godfrey of Bulloigne, London, 1594, reprinted in
Grosart, Occasional Issues, 1881.

[357] To the Reader, in edition of 1549.

[358] The Printer to the Reader, reprinted in Shakespeare's Library,
1875.

[359] To the Reader.

[360] See Works, ed.

Grosart, II, 50.

[361] Dedication, London, 1590.

[362] To the Reader, in The Iliads of Homer, Charles Scribner's Sons,
p. xvi.

[363] P. xxv.

[364] P. xv.

IV. FROM COWLEY TO POPE

IV

FROM COWLEY TO POPE

Although the ardor of the Elizabethan translator as he approached the vast, almost unbroken
field of foreign literature may well awaken the envy of his modern
successor, in many respects the period of Dryden and Pope has more
claim to be regarded as the Golden Age of the English translator.

Patriotic enthusiasm had, it is true, lost something of its earlier fire, but national conditions
were in general not unfavorable to translation.

Though the seventeenth century, torn by civil discords, was very
unlike the period which Holland had lovingly described as "this long
time of peace and tranquillity, wherein ... all good literature hath
had free course and flourished,"[365] yet, despite the rise and fall
of governments, the stream of translation flowed on almost uninterruptedly.

Sandys' Ovid is presented by its author, after his visit to America, as "bred in the New World,
of the rudeness whereof it cannot but participate; especially having wars and tumults to bring
it to light instead of the Muses,"[366] but the more ordinary translation, bred at home in England
during the seventeenth century, apparently suffered little from the
political strife which surrounded it, while the eighteenth century
afforded a "peace and tranquillity" even greater than that which had
prevailed under Elizabeth.

Throughout the period translation was regarded as an important labor,
deserving of every encouragement.

As in the sixteenth century, friends and patrons united to offer advice and aid to the author
who engaged in this work. Henry Brome, dedicating a translation of Horace to Sir William Backhouse,
writes of his own share of the volume, "to the translation whereof my pleasant retirement and conveniencies
at your delightsome habitation have liberally contributed."[367] Doctor Barten Holiday includes
in his preface to a version of Juvenal and Persius an interesting list of "worthy friends" who
have assisted him. "My honored friend, Mr. John Selden (of such eminency in the studies of antiquities
and languages) and Mr. Farnaby ... procured me a fair copy from the
famous library of St. James's, and a manuscript copy from our herald
of learning, Mr. Camden.

My dear friend, the patriarch of our poets, Ben Jonson, sent in an ancient manuscript partly written
in the Saxon character." Then follow names of less note, Casaubon, Anyan, Price.[368] Dryden tells
the same story. He has been permitted to consult the Earl of Lauderdale's
manuscript translation of Virgil.

"Besides this help, which was not inconsiderable," he writes, "Mr.
Congreve has done me the favor to review the Aeneis, and compare my
version with the original."[369] Later comes his recognition of indebtedness
of a more material character.

The great Dryden thought it not unworthy of his powers to engage in putting classical verse
into English garb.

His successor Pope early turned to the same pleasant and profitable task. Johnson, the literary
dictator of the next age, described Rowe's version of Lucan as "one of the greatest productions
of English poetry."[371] The comprehensive editions of the works of British poets which began
to appear towards the end of the eighteenth century regularly included
English renderings, generally contemporaneous, of the great poetry
of other countries.

The growing dignity of this department of literature and the Augustan fondness for literary
criticism combined to produce a large body of comment on methods
of translation.

The more ambitious translations of the eighteenth century, for example, were accompanied by long
prefaces, containing, in addition to the elaborate paraphernalia of contemporary scholarship,
detailed discussion of the best rules for putting a foreign classic into English. Almost every
possible phase of the art had been broached in one place and another before the century ended. In
its last decade there appeared the first attempt in English at a complete and detailed treatment
of the theory of translation as such, Tytler's Essay on the Principles of Translation.

From the sixteenth-century theory of translation, so much of which is incidental and uncertain
in expression, it is a pleasure to come to the deliberate, reasoned
statements, unmistakable in their purpose and meaning, of the earlier
critics of our period, men like Denham, Cowley, and Dryden.

In contrast to the mass of unrelated individual opinions attached to the translations of Elizabeth's
time, the criticism of the seventeenth century emanates, for the most part, from a small group
of men, who supply standards for lesser commentators and who, if they do not invariably agree
with one another, are yet thoroughly familiar with one another's views. The field of discussion
also has narrowed considerably, and theory has gained by becoming less scattering. Translation
in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries showed certain new developments, the most marked
of which was the tendency among translators who aspired to the highest
rank to confine their efforts to verse renderings of the Greek and
Latin classics.

A favorite remark was that it is the greatest poet who suffers most in being turned from one language
into another. In spite of this, or perhaps for this reason, the common ambition was to undertake
Virgil, who was generally regarded as the greatest of epic poets,
and attempts to translate at least a part of the Aeneid were astonishingly
frequent.

As early as 1658 the Fourth Book is described as "translated ...
in our day at least ten times into English."[372] Horace came next
in popularity; by the beginning of the eighteenth century, according
to one translator, he had been "translated, paraphrased, or criticized
on by persons of all conditions and both sexes."[373] As the century
progressed, Homer usurped the place formerly occupied by Virgil as
the object of the most ambitious effort and the center of discussion.

But there were other translations of the classics. Cooke, dedicating his translation of Hesiod
to the Duke of Argyll, says to his patron: "You, my lord, know how the works of genius lift
up the head of a nation above her neighbors, and give as much honor as success in arms; among these
we must reckon our translations of the classics; by which when we
have naturalized all Greece and Rome, we shall be so much richer than
they by so many original productions as we have of our own."[374]
Seemingly there was an attempt to naturalize "all Greece and Rome."

Anacreon, Pindar, Apollonius Rhodius, Lucretius, Tibullus, Statius, Juvenal, Persius, Ovid, Lucan,
are names taken almost at random from the list of seventeenth and eighteenth-century translations.
Criticism, however, was ready to concern itself with the translation
of any classic, ancient or modern.

Denham's two famous pronouncements are connected, the one with his own translation of the Second
Book of the Aeneid, the other with Sir Richard Fanshaw's rendering of Il Pastor Fido. In the
later eighteenth century voluminous comment accompanied Hoole's Ariosto and Mickle's Camoens.

At present, however, we are concerned not with the number and variety of these translations, but
with their homogeneity. As translators showed themselves less inclined to wander over the whole
field of literature, the theory of translation assumed much more
manageable proportions.

A further limitation of the area of discussion was made by Denham, who expressly excluded from
his consideration "them who deal in matters of fact or matters of faith,"[375] thus disposing
of the theological treatises which had formerly divided attention with the classics.

The aims of the translator were also clarified by definition of his audience. John Vicars, publishing
in 1632 The XII.

Aeneids of Virgil translated into English decasyllables, adduces as one of his motives "the common good
and public utility which I hoped might accrue to young students and grammatical tyros,"[376]
but later writers seldom repeat this appeal to the learner. The next year John Brinsley issued
Virgil's Eclogues, with his book De Apibus, translated grammatically, and also according to
the propriety of our English tongue so far as Grammar and the verse will permit. A significant
comment in the "Directions" runs: "As for the fear of making truants
by these translations, a conceit which arose merely upon the abuse
of other translations, never intended for this end, I hope that happy
experience of this kind will in time drive it and all like to it utterly
out of schools and out of the minds of all."

Apparently the schoolmaster's ban upon the unauthorized use of translations was establishing
the distinction between the English version which might claim to
be ranked as literature and that which Johnson later designated as
"the clandestine refuge of schoolboys."[377]

Another limitation of
the audience was, however, less admirable.

For the widely democratic appeal of the Elizabethan translator was substituted an appeal to
a class, distinguished, if one may believe the philosopher Hobbes, as much by social position
as by intellect.

In discussing the vocabulary to be employed by the translator, Hobbes
professes opinions not unlike those of the sixteenth-century critics.

Like Puttenham, he makes a distinction between words as suited or unsuited for the epic style.
"The names of instruments and tools of artificers, and words of art," he says in the preface
to his Homer, "though of use in the schools, are far from being fit to be spoken by a hero.
He may delight in the arts themselves, and have skill in some of
them, but his glory lies not in that, but in courage, nobility, and
other virtues of nature, or in the command he has over other men."

In Hobbes' objection to the use of unfamiliar words, also, there
is nothing new; but in the standards by which he tries such terms
there is something amusingly characteristic of his time.

In the choice of words, "the first indiscretion is in the use of such words as to the readers of
poesy (which are commonly Persons of the best Quality)"--it is only fair to reproduce Hobbes'
capitalization--"are not sufficiently known.

For the work of an heroic poem is to raise admiration (principally) for three virtues, valor,
beauty, and love; to the reading whereof women no less than men have
a just pretence though their skill in language be not so universal.

And therefore foreign words, till by long use they become vulgar, are unintelligible to them." Dryden
is similarly restrained by the thought of his readers. He does not try to reproduce the "Doric
dialect" of Theocritus, "for Theocritus writ to Sicilians, who spoke that dialect; and I direct
this part of my translations to our ladies, who neither understand, nor will take pleasure in
such homely expressions."[378] In translating the Aeneid he follows what he conceives to have been
Virgil's practice. A changed attitude towards the achievements of foreign translators becomes evident
early in the seventeenth century. In the prefaces to an edition of the works of Du Bartas in
English there are signs of a growing satisfaction with the English
language as a medium and an increasing conviction that England can
surpass the rest of Europe in the work of translation.

Thomas Hudson, in an address to James VI of Scotland, attached to his translation of The History
of Judith, quotes an interesting conversation which he held on one occasion with that pedantic
monarch.

"It pleased your Highness," he recalls, "not only to esteem the peerless
style of the Greek Homer and the Latin Virgil to be inimitable to
us (whose tongue is barbarous and corrupted), but also to allege (partly
through delight your majesty took in the haughty style of those most
famous writers, and partly to sound the opinion of others) that also
the lofty phrases, the grave inditement, the facund terms of the French
Salust (for the like resemblance) could not be followed nor sufficiently
expressed in our rough and unpolished English language."[380] It was
to prove that he could reproduce the French poet "succinctly and sensibly
in our vulgar speech" that Hudson undertook the Judith.

According to the complimentary verses addressed to the famous Sylvester
on his translations from the same author, the English tongue has responded
nobly to the demands put upon it.

Sylvester has shown

... that French tongue's plenty to be such.

And yet that ours can utter full as much.[381]

John Davies of Hereford, writing of another of Sylvester's translations, describes English
as acquitting itself well when it competes with French, and continues

If French to English were so strictly bound It would but passing lamely
strive with it; And soon be forc'd to lose both grace and ground,
Although they strove with equal skill and wit.[382]

An opinion characteristic
of the latter part of the century is that of the Earl of Roscommon,
who, after praising the work of the earlier French translators, says,

From
hence our generous emulation came, We undertook, and we performed
the same: But now we show the world another way, And in translated
verse do more than they.[383]

Dryden finds little to praise in the
French and Italian renderings of Virgil.

Earlier writers were forgotten, or remembered only to be condemned. W. L., Gent., who in 1628
published a translation of Virgil's Eclogues, expresses his surprise that a poet like Virgil
"should yet stand still as a noli me tangere, whom no man either durst or would undertake; only
Master Spenser long since translated the Gnat (a little fragment of Virgil's excellence), giving
the world peradventure to conceive that he would at one time or other
have gone through with the rest of this poet's work."[386] Vicars'
translation of the Aeneid is accompanied by a letter in which the
author's cousin, Thomas Vicars, congratulates him on his "great pains
in transplanting this worthiest of Latin poets into a mellow and neat
English soil (a thing not done before)."[387] Denham announces, "There
are so few translations which deserve praise, that I scarce ever saw
any which deserved pardon; those who travail in that kind being for
the most part so unhappy as to rob others without enriching themselves,
pulling down the fame of good authors without raising their own."

Brome,[388] writing in 1666, rejoices in the good fortune of Horace's "good friend Virgil ...
who being plundered of all his ornaments by the old translators, was restored to others with
double lustre by those standard-bearers of wit and judgment, Denham and Waller,"[389] and in
proof of his statements puts side by side translations of the same passage by Phaer and Denham.
Later, in 1688, an anonymous writer recalls the work of Phaer and Stanyhurst only to disparage
it. Introducing his translation of Virgil, "who has so long unhappily continued a stranger to
tolerable English," he says that he has "observed how Player and
Stainhurst of old ... had murdered the most absolute of poets."[390]
One dissenting note is found in Robert Gould's lines prefixed to a
1687 edition of Fairfax's Godfrey of Bulloigne.

See here, you dull translators, look with shame Upon this stately monument of fame, And to
amaze you more, reflect how long It is, since first 'twas taught the English tongue: In what a dark
age it was brought to light; Dark? No, our age is dark, and that was bright. Of all these versions
which now brightest shine, Most, Fairfax, are but foils to set off thine: Ev'n Horace can't
of too much justice boast, His unaffected, easy style is lost: And
Ogilby's the lumber of the stall; But thy translation does atone for
all.[391]

Dryden, too, approves of Fairfax, considered at least as
a metrist.

He includes him with Spenser among the "great masters of our language,"
and adds, "many besides myself have heard our famous Waller own that
he derived the harmony of his numbers from Godfrey of Bulloign, which
was turned into English by Mr. Fairfax."[392] But even Dryden, who
sometimes saw beyond his own period, does not share the admiration
which some of his friends entertain for Chapman.

"The Earl of Mulgrave and Mr. Waller," he writes in the Examen Poeticum, "two of the best judges
of our age, have assured me that they could never read over the translation of Chapman without incredible
pleasure and extreme transport. This admiration of theirs must needs proceed from the author himself,
for the translator has thrown him down as far as harsh numbers, improper
English, and a monstrous length of verse could carry him."[393]

In
this satisfaction with their own country and their own era there lurked
certain dangers for seventeenth-century writers.

The quality becomes, as we shall see, more noticeable in the eighteenth century, when the shackles
which English taste laid upon original poetry were imposed also upon
translated verse.

The theory of translation was hampered in its development by the narrow complacency of its exponents,
and the record of this time is by no means one of uniform progress.

The seventeenth century shows clearly marked alternations of opinion;
now it sanctions extreme methods; now, by reaction, it inclines towards
more moderate views.

The eighteenth century, during the greater part of its course, produces
little that is new in the way of theory, and adopts, without much
attempt to analyze them, the formulas left by the preceding period.

We may now resume the history of these developments at the point where it was dropped in Chapter
III, at the end of Elizabeth's reign.

In the first part of the new century the few minor translators who described their methods held
theories much like those of Chapman.

W. L., Gent., in the extremely flowery and discursive preface to his version of Virgil's Eclogues,
says, "Some readers I make no doubt they (the translations) will
meet with in these dainty mouthed times, that will tax me with not
coming resolved word for word and line for line with the author....
I used the freedom of a translator, not tying myself to the tyranny
of a grammatical construction but breaking the shell into many pieces,
was only careful to preserve the kernel safe and whole from the violence
of a wrong or wrested interpretation."

After a long simile drawn from the hunting field he concludes, "No more do I conceive my course
herein to be faulty though I do not affect to follow my author so
close as to tread upon his heels."

John Vicars, who professes to have robed Virgil in "a homespun English gray-coat plain," says
of his manner, "I have aimed at these three things, perspicuity of the matter, fidelity to the
author, and facility or smoothness to recreate thee my reader. Now if any critical or curious
wit tax me with a Frustra fit per plura &c. and blame my not curious confinement to my author
line for line, I answer (and I hope this answer will satisfy the moderate and ingenuous) that though
peradventure I could (as in my Babel's Balm I have done throughout
the whole translation) yet in regard of the lofty majesty of this
my author's style, I would not adventure so to pinch his spirits,
as to make him seem to walk like a lifeless ghost.

But on thinking on that of Horace, Brevis esse laboro obscurus fio, I presumed (yet still having
an eye to the genuine sense as I was able) to expatiate with poetical liberty, where necessity
of matter and phrase enforced."

Vicars' warrant for his practice is the oftquoted caution of Horace, Nec verbum verbo curabis
reddere.

But the seventeenth century was not disposed to continue uninterruptedly
the tradition of previous translators.

In translated, as in original verse a new era was to begin, acclaimed
as such in its own day, and associated like the new poetry, with the
names of Denham and Cowley as both poets and critics and with that
of Waller as poet.

Peculiarly characteristic of the movement was its hostility towards
literal translation, a hostility apparent also, as we have seen, in
Chapman.

 From the
nearest conflagration a great snapping and crackling of juicy stalks arose. The thin, dry strippings
with which the earth was carpeted formed a vast tinder bed, and once the fire was started there
was no checking it. Smoke billowed upward and was hurried westward before the breeze; in a
dozen places the fields burst into flame. From somewhere came a faint shouting, then a shot
or two, and finally the ringing of a bell.

Esteban waited only until he saw that his work of devastation was well under way, then he led
his followers back toward the hills. At sunset he reined in upon the crest of a ridge and looked
behind him into the valley. The whole sky was black with smoke, as if a city were in flames.

Removing his wide jipi-japa hat, the young man swept a mocking salutation to the east.

"So now, good Pancho Cueto," he cried, "I leave you the compliments of those twins you love
so well."

In the shelter of a ravine the party took time to eat supper, their first meal since leaving
home, and it was after dark when they finished. The negroes, who were thoroughly tired, were
for spending the night here, but Esteban, more cautious than they, would not have it so. Accordingly,
the men remounted their weary horses, though not without some grumbling, and set out. It was
slow traveling, for the woods were dark and the trails were blind; the men were fairly obliged
to feel their way. At length they crossed the summit and worked down toward the Yumuri, but
it seemed as if daylight would never come.

"A weary ride," Esteban yawned. "I shall sleep for a week."

Asensio agreed. "That Cueto will be furious," said he. "Some day, perhaps, he and I will meet
face to face. Then I shall kill him."

Esteban reined in his horse. "Look!" said he. "Yonder is a light."

The other horsemen crowded close, staring through the darkness. It was very still in the woods;
dawn was less than half an hour away.

"What is Evangelina thinking about?" Asensio muttered.

"But, see! It grows brighter." There followed a moment or two during which there was no sound
except the breathing of the horses and the creak of saddle leathers as the riders craned their
necks to see over the low tree-tops below them. Then Esteban cried:

"Come! I'm--afraid it's our house." Fear gripped him, but he managed to say, calmly, "Perhaps
there has been an--accident."

Asensio, muttering excitedly, was trying to crowd past him; for a few yards the two horses
brushed along side by side. The distant point of light had become a glare now; it winked balefully
through the openings as the party hurried toward it. But it was still a long way off, and the
eastern sky had grown rosy before the dense woods of the hillside gave way to the sparser growth
of the low ground.

Esteban turned a sick, white face over his shoulder and jerked out his orders; then he kicked
his tired mount into a swifter gallop. It was he who first broke out into the clearing. One
glance, and the story was told.

The hut was but a crumbling skeleton of charred poles. Strung out across the little field of
malangas, yuccas, and sweet-potatoes were several hilarious Volunteers, their arms filled with
loot from the cabin. Behind them strode an officer bearing Rosa struggling against his breast.

Esteban did not pause; he drove his horse headlong through the soft red earth of the garden.
His sudden appearance seemed briefly to paralyze the marauders. It was a moment before they
could drop their spoils, unsling their rifles, and begin to fire at him, and by that time he
had covered half the distance to his sister. Those rifle-shots came faintly to Esteban's ears;
he scarcely heard them; he merely lowered his head and rode straight at that black- visaged
colonel, sobbing and whimpering in his fury.

But in spite of his speed he made no difficult target. A bullet brought his horse down and
the boy went flying over its neck. Nothing but the loose loam saved him from injury. As he
rose to his feet, breathless and covered with the red dirt, there came a swift thudding of
hoofs and Asensio swept past him like a rocket. Esteban caught one glimpse of the negro's face,
a fleeting vision of white teeth bared to the gums, of distended yellow eyes, of flat, distorted
features; then Asensio was fairly upon Colonel Cobo. The colonel, who had dropped his burden,
now tried to dodge. Asensio slashed once at him with his long, murderous machete, but the next
instant he was engaged with a trooper who had fired almost into his face.

The other negroes also were in the open by this time, yelling and firing as fast as they could
work the bolts of their rifles, and although they aimed at nothing in particular, the effect
of their fusillade was all that could be wished. Cobo's men, led by the terrified Pancho Cueto,
turned and fled for cover, believing themselves in danger of annihilation. Nor was the colonel
himself in any condition to rally them, for Asensio's blade had cloven one full dark cheek
to the bone, and the shock and pain had unnerved him; he was frightened at sight of the blood
that streamed down over the breast of his white tunic, and so, when he saw his men turn tail,
he followed suit, lunging through the lush garden growth, holding his wound in his hand and
shrieking profane commands which went unheeded.

The field was small, the jungle was close at hand. A moment and the interlopers had vanished
into it, all but one, who lay kicking among the broad malanga-leaves, and over whom Asensio
kept spurring his terrified horse, hacking downward with insane fury.

This was the first hand-to-hand encounter Esteban's men had had, and their swift victory rendered
them ferocious. Flinging their guns aside, they went crashing into the brush on the trail of
their enemies.

Rosa found herself in her brother's arms, sobbing out the story of the outrage and quivering
at every sound of the chase. He was caressing her, and telling her to have no further fears;
both of them were fairly hysterical. Even before Esteban had heard all, Lorenzo, the mulatto,
reappeared, leading three cavalry horses and shouting extravagant praises of his own bravery.
Esteban complimented him and the fellow galloped away again, voicing the most blood-curdling
threats.

Evangelina, thanks to her thick skull, was not dead. In the course of time under Rosa's and
Esteban's ministrations she regained her senses, and when the other men returned they found
her lying sick and dazed, but otherwise quite whole.

Then, there beside the ruins of the hut, was a strange scene of rejoicing. Asensio, recovered
now from his burst of savagery, was tearful, compassionate; his comrades laughed and chattered
and bragged about their prodigious deeds of valor. Over and over they recounted their versions
of the encounter, each more fanciful than the other, until it seemed that they must have left
the forest filled with corpses.

Esteban alone was grave. He had heard of Colonel Cobo, and, remembering that denim-clad figure
out yonder in the trampled garden, he knew that serious consequences would follow. The Volunteers
were revengeful; their colonel was not the sort of man to forgive a deep humiliation. Doubtless
he would put a price upon the heads of all of them, and certainly he would never allow them
another encounter upon anything like even terms. Then, too, the narrowness of Rosa's escape
caused the boy's heart to dissolve with terror.

After a conference with Asensio he decided that they must prepare for flight, and late that
afternoon they all set out to seek a safer refuge, Evangelina in tears at leaving her precious
garden plot. Their led horse, one of those Lorenzo had captured, carried a pitifully light
burden--only some tools, some pans and kettles, and a roll of charred bedclothes. Johnnie O'Reilly
had no difficulty in locating the Residence of Ignacio Alvarado, but to communicate with him
was quite another matter, inasmuch as his every step was dogged by that persistent shadow from
Neuvitas. Leslie Branch had told him enough about conditions here in Puerto Principe to make
him extremely cautious, and after their first talk he had once more concealed his revolver
in a safe hiding- place, taking good care thereafter that nothing in his conduct should awaken
suspicion.

Unfortunately his room was on the second floor of the hotel, and hence his goings and comings
were always open to observation. But he noted that a window at one end of the upper hall overlooked
a sloping, tile-roofed shed, and that the garden wall behind the hotel premises was not provided
with those barbarous spikes or broken bottles which decorate so many Cuban walls. It promised
him a means of egress when the time should come to use it. In this hall, moreover, directly
opposite his door there was an oil bracket-lamp which gave light to the passageway, and which
was forever going out, a fact which the young man noted with satisfaction.

One evening, several days after his arrival, a sudden rain-storm drove O'Reilly indoors, and
as he ascended to his room he saw that the lamp in the hallway flared and smoked at every gust
of wind. It was very dark outside; he reasoned that the streets would be deserted. Hastily
securing that book which Alvarado, the dentist, had given him, he took a position close inside
his door. When he heard the spy pass and enter the next chamber he stole out into the hall
and breathed into the lamp-chimney. A moment later he was safely through the window and was
working his way down the shed roof, praying that his movements had not been seen and that the
tiles were firm. The rain was driving in sheets and he was wet to the skin when he dropped
into the patio; nevertheless he was laughing to himself. He nimbly scaled the wall, crossed
an inclosure, climbed a second wall, and descended into a dark side street. Taking advantage
of the densest shadows and the numerous overhanging balconies, he set out at a brisk trot.

A light showed through the barred windows of the Alvarado home, indicating that the family
was in. After some fumbling O'Reilly laid hold of the latch; then, without knocking, he opened
the front door and stepped in.

He found himself, as he had expected, in the parlor, a high- ceilinged, sparsely furnished
room with a glazed floor of Spanish mosaics. His sudden appearance threw the occupants into
alarm: a woman cried out sharply; a man whom O'Reilly identified as Ignacio Alvarado himself
leaped to his feet and faced him, exclaiming:

"Who are you?"

"I'm a friend. Don't be alarmed." Johnnie summoned his most agreeable smile, then he extended
the sodden package he had carried beneath his arm. "I come from your brother Tomas. He asked
me to hand you this book and to say that he is returning it with his thanks."

"What are you saying?" Plainly the speaker did not comprehend; there was nothing but apprehension
in his voice.

O'Reilly tore the wet paper from the volume and laid it in Alvarado's hand. "Look at it, please,
and you'll understand. I didn't take time to knock, for fear I might be followed."

Alvarado stared first at the book, then at his caller. After a moment he made a sign to his
wife, who left the room. Wetting his lips, he inquired, with an effort, "What do you want?"

O'Reilly told him in a few words. Alvarado showed relief; he even smiled. "I see, but--Caramba!
You gave me a start. And this book! Ha! Tomas will have his jokes. It is well you took precautions,
for I am under surveillance. I'll help you, yes! But you must not come here again. Return to
your hotel and--Let me think." Senor Alvarado frowned in deepest thought; then he said: "I
have it! Every morning at half past nine a man wearing a Panama hat and a gray silk necktie
with a large gold pin will pass along the sidewalk across the street from the Isla de Cuba.
You will know him. One day, I cannot promise how soon, he will lift his hat thus, and wipe
his face. You understand? Good. Follow him. He will give you final directions. Meanwhile I
will make known your presence to certain of our friends who can be trusted. You know Manin,
the druggist? Well, you can talk to him, and he will keep you posted as to our progress. Now
go before some one comes."

O'Reilly wrung the Cuban's hand. Then he stepped out into the night, leaving a pool of water
on the clean blue tiles where he had stood.

X

O'REILLY TALKS HOG LATIN

In the days that followed his call on Ignacio Alvarado, O'Reilly behaved so openly that the
Secret Service agent detailed to watch him relaxed his vigilance. Certainly there was nothing
suspicious in the conduct of a fellow who sat all the morning tipped back in a hotel chair,
languidly scanning the passers-by, whose afternoons were spent on the streets or at the soda-fountain
in Martin's drug-store, and whose evenings were devoted to aimless gossip with his countryman,
the newspaper writer. Manifestly this O'Reilly was a harmless person. But the spy did not guess
how frantic Johnnie was becoming at this delay, how he inwardly chafed and fretted when two
weeks had rolled by and still no signal had come. Manin told him to be patient; he assured
him that word had been sent into the Cubitas hills, and that friends were busy in his behalf;
but Johnnie was eager to be up and doing. This inaction paralyzed him; it made him almost ill
to think how much time had slipped away. Then, too, his money was running low.

At last, however, the day arrived when the man with the gray necktie raised his hat and wiped
his brow as he passed the Isla de Cuba. Johnnie could scarcely hold himself in his chair. By
and by he rose, stretching himself, and sauntered after the fellow. For several blocks he kept
him in sight, but without receiving any further sign. The man paused to greet friends, he stopped
at several shops, and his aimless wanderings continued for the best part of an hour, during
which he led the way to the outskirts of the city. Fortunately O'Reilly's shadow was nowhere
in sight.

Without a glance over his shoulder the man turned into a large, walled inclosure. When Johnnie
followed he found himself in one of the old cemeteries. Ahead of him, up a shady avenue bordered
with trees, the stranger hurried; then he swerved to his left, and when O'Reilly came to the
point where he had disappeared there was nobody in sight. Apprehending that he had made some
mistake in the signal, O'Reilly hastened down the walk. Then at last, to his great relief,
he heard a sibilant:

"Psst! Psst!"

It came from behind a screen of shrubbery, and there he found the Cuban waiting. The latter
began rapidly:

"Our plans are complete. Listen closely. One week from to-day, at ten o'clock in the morning,
you must be in Manin's drug-store. Directly across the street you will see two negroes with
three horses. At fifteen minutes past ten walk out San Rafael Street to the edge of the city,
where the hospital stands. The negroes will follow you. There is a fort near by--"

"I know."

"It commands the road. You will be challenged if you pass it, so turn in at the hospital. But
do not enter the gates, for the negroes will overtake you at that point. They will stop to
adjust the saron of the lead horse. That will be your signal; mount him and ride fast. The
Spaniards will fire at you, but if you are hit one of the blacks will take you on his horse.
If one of them is hit or his horse falls you must stop and take him up. Ride out half a mile
and you will find a band of Insurrectos in the woods at the right. They know you are coming.
Now, adois and good luck."

With a smile and a quick grip of the hand the messenger walked swiftly away. O'Reilly returned
to his hotel.

At last! One week, and this numbing, heartbreaking delay would end; he would be free to take
up his quest. O'Reilly choked at the thought; the blood drummed in his ears. Rosa would think
he was never coming; she would surely believe that his heart had changed. As if it could! "O
God! Come quickly, if you love me." Well, a week was only seven days. He longed to risk those
Spanish bullets this very hour.

But those seven days were more than a week, they were seven eternities. The hours were like
lead; O'Reilly could compose his mind to nothing; he was in a fever of impatience.

Meanwhile, he was compelled to see a good deal of Leslie Branch. The reporter was anything
but cheerful company, for, believing firmly in the steady progress of his malady, he was weighed
down by the deepest melancholy. The fellow was a veritable cave of despair; he voiced never-ceasing
complaints; nothing suited him; and but for something likable in the man--an effect due in
part to the fact that his chronic irritation took amusing forms--he would have been an intolerable
bore. To cheer him up was quite impossible, and although it seemed to Johnnie that the Cuban
climate agreed with him and that he lacked only strength of will to cheat the grave, the mere
suggestion of such a thought was offensive to the invalid. He construed every optimistic word,
every effort at encouragement, either as a reflection upon his sincerity or as the indication
of a heartless indifference to his sufferings. He continued to talk wistfully about joining
the Insurrectos, and O'Reilly would have been glad to put him in the way of realizing his fantastic
ambition to "taste the salt of life" had it been in his power; but, since he himself depended
upon friends unknown to him, he did not dare to risk complicating matters. In fact, he did
not even tell Branch of his coming adventure.

The day of days dawned at last, and Johnnie was early at Manin's soda-fountain, drinking insipid
beverages and anxiously watching the street. In due time the negroes appeared, their straw
sarons laden with produce which they innocently disposed of. O'Reilly began to consult his
watch with such frequency that the druggist joked him.

Manin's banter was interrupted by a bugle-call. Down the street came perhaps two hundred mounted
troops. They wheeled into San Rafael Street at a gallop and disappeared in the direction of
the suburbs.

"Now what does that mean?" murmured the druggist. "Wait here while I go to the roof where I
can see something."

O'Reilly tried to compose himself, meanwhile becoming aware of a growing excitement in the
street. Pedestrians had halted, shopkeepers had come to their doors, questions were flying
from mouth to mouth. Then from the direction of the fort at the end of San Rafael Street sounded
a faint rattling fusillade, more bugle- calls, and finally the thin, distant shouting of men.

"Rebels!" some one cried.

"Dios mio, they are attacking the city!"

"They have audacity, eh?"

The roofs were black with people now. Manin came hurrying down into the store.

"Something has gone wrong," he whispered. "They're fighting out yonder in the woods. There
has been some treachery."

"It is ten-fifteen," said O'Reilly. "I must be going."

Manin stared at him. "You don't understand--"

"Those black fellows are getting their horses ready. I'm going."

The druggist tried to force Johnnie into a chair. "Madman!" he panted. "I tell you our friends
have been betrayed; they are retreating. Go back to your hotel quickly."

For the first time during their acquaintance Manin heard the good- natured American curse;
O'Reilly's blue eyes were blazing; he had let go of himself completely.

"I'm going!" he cried, hoarsely. "All the damned Spaniards in Cuba won't stop me. God! I've
waited too long--I should have made a break--"

"Idiot!" stormed the druggist. "You wish to die, eh?"

O'Reilly ripped out another oath and fought off the other's restraining hands.

"Very well, then," cried Manin, "but have some thought of us who have risked our lives for
you. Suppose you should escape? How would our troops receive you now? Would they not think
you had cunningly arranged this trap?"

A light of reason slowly reappeared in the younger man's eyes.

"No!" Manin pressed his advantage. "You must wait until--" He broke off abruptly and stepped
behind his counter, for a man in the uniform of a Spanish lieutenant had entered the store.

The new-comer walked directly to O'Reilly; he was a clean-cut, alert young fellow. After a
searching glance around the place he spoke in a voice audible to both men:

"Senor, you are in danger. To-night, at midnight, you will be arrested. I beg of you to see
that there is nothing incriminating in your possession."

O'Reilly's face betrayed his amazement. "Arrested? What for? On what charge--"

The stranger shrugged. "I don't know. That newspaper man will be arrested at the same moment,
so you had better warn him. But be careful where and how you do so, for all his movements are
watched, all his words are overheard."

"Why do you tell me this--you? Is it some scheme to--to incriminate me?" O'Reilly inquired.

Manin was leaning over the counter, his face drawn with anxiety, his lips framing the same
question.

"No!" The lieutenant shook his head. "I am a friend--a Cuban, in spite of this uniform. If
you repeat my words I shall be shot within the hour. I implore you"--his voice became more
urgent--"to heed my warning. I don't know what you had to do with this skirmish out San Rafael
Street, but a short time ago a message came from the fortina that Insurrectos were in the woods
close by. I hope it will not prove to be a bloody encounter. And now remember--midnight!" He
bowed, turned to the door, and was gone.

Manin heaved a sigh of relief. "Caramba! He gave me a fright: I thought my time had come. But
what did I tell you, eh?"

"That fellow is a Cuban spy!"

"No doubt. We have many friends. Well! You see what would have happened if you had tried to
go. Now then, you must prepare yourself for the worst."

Perhaps a half-hour later O'Reilly saw the cavalry squadron returning to its barracks. The
men were laughing; they were shouting brief boastful accounts of their encounter to the people
on the sidewalks. Two of them were sick and white; they lurched in their saddles, and were
supported by their comrades, but it was not upon them that the eyes of the onlookers centered.
Through the filth of the street behind the cavalcade trailed a limp bundle of rags which had
once been a man. It was tied to a rope and it dragged heavily; its limbs were loose; its face,
blackened by mud, stared blindly skyward.

O'Reilly gazed at the object with horrified fascination; then with a sudden sick feeling of
dizziness he retired to his room, asking himself if he were responsible for that poor fellow's
death.

Meanwhile the citizens of Puerto Principe looked on with stony eyes. There was no cheering
among them, only a hush in their chatter, above which sounded the rattle of accoutrements,
the clump-clump of hoofs, and the exultant voices of the Spanish troopers.

For some reason or other Leslie Branch was nowhere to be found; his room was locked and no
one had seen him; hence there was no possibility of warning him, until that evening, when he
appeared while O'Reilly was making a pretense of eating dinner.

"Where the devil have you been?" the latter inquired, anxiously.

"Been getting out my weekly joke about the revolution. Had to write up this morning's 'battle.'
Couldn't work in my room, so I-- "

"Sit down; and don't jump when I tell you what has happened. We're going to be pinched at midnight."

"Why midnight?"

"I don't know, unless that's the fashionable hour for military calls."

"What's it all about?"

"I guess they don't like us. Have you got anything incriminating about you?"

"N-no! Nothing, except my citizen's papers and--a letter of introduction to General Maximo Gomez."

O'Reilly suddenly lost what appetite remained to him.

"Nothing EXCEPT a letter to General Gomez!" he cried. "Good Lord, Branch! Were you ever shot
at sunrise?"

The reporter coughed dismally. "N-no! It's too damp. I suppose you mean to hint I'd better
destroy that letter, eh?"

"Just as quickly as possible. Where is it?"

"In my room."

"Hm-m! Then I'm not sure you'll have a chance to destroy it." O'Reilly was thinking rapidly.
"From what I was told I suspect you are being watched even there."

"Bullets! I thought as much."

"Would you mind using some other oath?" O'Reilly broke out, irritably. "I've always considered
'bullets' weak and ineffective, but--it has a significance."

"There's a new lodger in the room next to me. I've heard him moving around. I'll bet he's got
a peephole in the wall." Branch was visibly excited.

"Quite likely. I have the same kind of a neighbor; that is he watching us now."

Leslie cast a hostile eye at the man his friend indicated. "Looks like a miserable spy, doesn't
he? But, say, how am I going to make away with that letter?"

"I'm trying to think," said Johnnie. After a time he rose from the table and the two strolled
out. Johnnie was still thinking.

When the two arrived at Branch's quarters O'Reilly scrutinized the room as closely as he dared,
and then sat for some time idly gossiping. Both men were under a considerable strain, for they
thought it more than likely that hostile eyes were upon them. It gave them an uncomfortable
thrill; and while it seemed a simple thing to burn that letter of introduction, they realized
that if their suspicions were correct such a procedure would only serve to deepen their difficulties.
Nothing they could later say would explain to the satisfaction of the authorities so questionable
an act. The mere destruction of a mysterious document, particularly at this late hour, would
look altogether too queer; it might easily cause their complete undoing. Inasmuch as his enemies
were waiting only for an excuse to be rid of him, O'Reilly knew that deportation was the least
he could expect, and at the thought his fingers itched to hold that letter over the lamp-chimney.
Imprisonment, almost any punishment, was better than deportation. That would mean beginning
all over again.

While he was talking he used his eyes, and finally a plan suggested itself. To make doubly
sure that his words would not be understood he inquired, casually:

"Do you speak any foreign languages?"

"Sure! Spanish and--hog Latin."

In spite of himself O'Reilly grinned; then making use of that incoherent derangement of syllables
upon the use of which every American boy prides himself, he directed Branch's attention to
the tiles of the roof overhead.

The reporter's wits were sharp; his eyes brightened; he nodded his instant understanding. The
house had but one story, its roof was constructed of the common, half-round Cuban tiling, each
piece about two feet long. These tiles were laid in parallel rows from ridge-pole to eave,
and these rows were locked together by other tiling laid bottom side up over them. Where the
convex faces of the lower layer overlapped, after the fashion of shingles, were numerous interstices
due to imperfections in manufacture; more than one of these was large enough to form a hiding-place
for a letter.

Continuing to disguise his language, O'Reilly directed his companion to open the table drawer
in which the unwelcome document reposed and to see that it was where he could instantly lay
hands upon it in the dark. Branch did as he was told.

For some time longer they talked; then they rose as if to leave the room. O'Reilly took his
stand near the door and directly beneath the most promising crevice in the roof, which at this
point was perhaps nine feet from the floor.

Branch stooped over the table and breathed into the lamp-chimney; the room was plunged into
darkness. There followed a faint rustling of paper; the next instant he was at O'Reilly's side.
Stooping, Johnnie seized him about the knees and lifted him. There was the briefest pause;
then feeling a pinch upon his shoulder, O'Reilly lowered his burden noiselessly, and the two
men left the room.

When they were safely out in the street Branch rubbed his head and complained: "Bullets, you're
strong! You nearly broke a rafter with my head. But I guess I got 'em out of sight."

"THEM?"

"Yes. I hid my American 'papers,' too. These Dons are sore on Yankees, you know. I'm going
to be an Englishman, and you'd better follow suit. I'm the--the youngest son of the Earl of
Pawtucket, and you'd better tell 'em your uncle was the Duke of Ireland, or something."

XI

THE HAND OF THE CAPTAIN-GENERAL

On the stroke of midnight O'Reilly was arrested. After a thorough search of his person and
his premises he was escorted to Government headquarters, where he found Leslie Branch.

The invalid looked taller, thinner, more bloodless than ever, and his air of settled gloom
admirably became the situation.

"Hello, Earl. What luck?" Johnnie flashed at him.

"Good!"

An officer sharply commanded them to be silent.

There ensued a long delay, introduced, perhaps, for its effect upon the prisoners; then they
were led into a large room where, it seemed, the entire staff of the Spanish garrison was waiting.
It was an imposing collection of uniforms, a row of grim faces and hostile eyes, which the
two Americans beheld. Spread out upon a table in front of the officers were the personal belongings
of both men.

The prisoners were ordered to stand side by side, facing their accusers. Then each in turn
was subjected to a rigorous examination. Owing to his acquaintance with Spanish, O'Reilly was
able to defend himself without the aid of an interpreter. He began by asserting that he had
come to Cuba for his health, and declared that he had endeavored at all times since his arrival
to conduct himself in strict conformity with local regulations. If in any way he had offended,
he had not done so intentionally, He denied having the remotest connection with the rebels,
and demanded an explanation of his arrest.

But his plausible words did not in the least affect his hearers. General Antuna, the comandante,
a square-faced man with the airs of a courtier, but with the bold, hard eyes of a fighter,
leaned forward, saying:

"So you suffer from ill health, senor?"

"I do, severely. Rheumatism."

The general nodded. "Three days ago you were overtaken by a rain- storm while walking through
the city."

"Yes, sir."

"When the rain had passed, you returned to your hotel. At the junction of San Rafael and Estrella
streets a pool of water had gathered and you leaped it. Am I right?"

"No doubt."

General Antuna consulted a report before him. "That pool measured six feet four inches in width.
Do you ask me to believe that a person suffering from rheumatism could do that?"

Leslie Branch shifted his weight and wet his lips, but O'Reilly only shrugged impatiently.
"My dear General," said he, "did you never experience a neuralgia? Well then, was the pain
continuous? In this climate my affliction troubles me very little. That is why I remain here."

From among the articles in front of him the general selected a solitary 44-caliber revolver
cartridge and, holding it up, said:

"What do you say to this?"

"I don't know what to say. Where did it come from?"

"It was found in the cloth pocket of your valise."

O'Reilly frowned; then a light of understanding irradiated his frank countenance. "It must
have lain there ever since I left Matanzas, three months ago."

"Ha! Matanzas!" fiercely ejaculated a colonel. "What were you doing in Matanzas?"

It was unnecessary to prevaricate now. Johnnie told of his earlier connection with the Carter
Importing Company, gave names, dates, and facts to bear out his statements, and challenged
his accusers to verify them.

Undoubtedly some of his hearers were impressed, but they were by no means convinced of the
innocence of his present purpose, and, in fact, the ferocious colonel seemed to regard past
residence in Cuba as proof conclusive of a present connection with the rebels. Johnnie gathered
that he was suspected of being one of those American engineers who were reported to have been
engaged to instruct the enemy in the use of explosives: his inquisitors did their best to wring
such an admission from him or to entrap him into the use of some technical phrase, some slip
of the tongue which would verify their suspicions. They even examined his hands with minutest
care, as if to find some telltale callous or chemical discoloration which would convict him.
Then finally, to give him the lie absolute, the aggressive colonel seized a nickel- plated
atomizer from the table and brandished it triumphantly before the young men's eyes.

"Enough of this pretense!" he cried. "What is this instrument, eh?"

"It is evidently an atomizer, a nasal syringe. I never saw it before."

"It's mine," said Leslie Branch; but the colonel did not heed the interruption.

"Ha! And pray explain its use."

Johnnie undertook to do so, but it was plain that his words carried no conviction, for his
mocking inquisitor gave a loud snort and gestured eloquently to his commander. "There you have
it!" he declared, proudly. "This impostor betrays himself."

The other officers were eying the unfamiliar article curiously; one of them ventured gingerly
to handle it; they exchanged whispers.

"What do you call it?" the general inquired, leaning forward.

This was the colonel's moment. "I will tell you!" he said, with a sneer at O'Reilly. "I am
something of a genius at mechanical inventions, and therefore I am not for a moment deceived
by this fellow's common lies. This"--he paused dramatically and held his brother officers with
a burning glance--"this instrument, in my opinion, was devised for the purpose of injecting
fulminate of mercury into dynamite."

There was a breathless hush. The Spaniards stared at the little syringe with amazement.

"And how does it operate?" queried one.

"It is one of those ingenious Yankee contrivances. I have never seen one quite like it, but
my intelligence makes its principle plain. Evidently one inserts the tube into the dynamite,
so, and presses the bulb---"

There came a loud cry from General Antuna, who had bent closer; he clapped his hands to his
face and staggered from his chair, for in suiting his action to his words the colonel had squeezed
the bulb, with the result that a spray of salt water had squirted fairly into his superior
officer's interested and attentive countenance.

"My eyes! Dios mio! I am blinded for life!" shouted the unhappy general, and his subordinates
looked on, frozen with consternation.

The author of this calamity blanched; he was stricken dumb with horror.

Some one cried: "A doctor, quickly. Jesus Cristo! Such carelessness!"

"This is terrible!" another stammered. "It will explode next."

There was a concerted scramble away from the table.

Leslie Branch laughed--it was the first time that O'Reilly had ever heard him give audible
evidence of amusement. His reedy frame was shaken as by a painful spasm; his colorless face
was distorted, and from his lips issued queer, hysterical barks and chortles. "Tell 'em it's
nothing but brine," he said, chokingly.

When this welcome intelligence had been translated, and when the general had proved it to be
true, there was a great sigh of relief, followed by a subdued titter at the colonel's expense.
The latter was chagrined. Having made himself and the comandante ridiculous, he took refuge
behind an assumption of somber and offended dignity. But it was plain that he still considered
these Americans dangerous people, and that his suspicions were as keen as ever.

The interruption served to end O'Reilly's ordeal, for the moment at least, and attention was
now turned to his companion. It was evident from the first that Branch's case was hopeless.
He readily acknowledged himself to be a newspaper writer, and admitted having sent articles
for publication through the mails. This was quite enough; from the attitude of the military
men it promised to go hard with him. But he sprung a surprise by boldly proclaiming himself
an English citizen and warning his captors not to treat him with the contempt or with the severity
they reserved for Americans. Curiously his words had an effect. Judgment for the moment was
suspended, and the two prisoners were led away, after which another delay ensued.

At last O'Reilly was recalled; but when he re-entered the big room he found General Antuna
awaiting him, alone.

"Permit me to apologize for the inconvenience we have put you to," the comandante began.

"Then am I free?"

"You are."

"I thank you."

The general's hard eyes gleamed. "Personally I at no time put faith in the idea that you are
a powder expert," said he. "No. I had my own suspicions and I regret to say this inquiry has
not in the least served to lessen them."

"Indeed? May I ask of what you suspect me?" Johnnie was genuinely interested.

The general spoke with force and gravity: "Mr. O'Reilly, I believe you to be a far greater
menace to the interests of my country than--well, than a score of dynamite experts. I believe
you are a writer."

The American smiled. "Are writers such dangerous people?"

"That altogether depends upon circumstances. The United States is inclined to recognize the
belligerency of these Cuban rebels, and her relations with Spain are becoming daily more strained;
ill- feeling grows, and all because of the exaggerations, the mendacities, that have gone forth
from here to your newspapers. We are determined to put down this uprising in our own way; we
will tolerate no foreign interference. War is never a pleasant thing, but you journalists have
magnified its horrors and misrepresented the cause of Spain until you, threaten to bring on
another and a more horrible combat. Now then, you understand what I mean when I say that you
are more dangerous than a powder expert; that your pen can do more injury, can cause the death
of more Spanish troops than could a regiment of Americans with dynamite. Your English friend
makes no secret of his business, so we shall escort him to Neuvitas and see him safely out
of the country, once for all."

"And yet you permit me to remain?" Johnnie was surprised.

"For the present, yes! That is my official message to you. Privately, however"--the speaker
eyed O'Reilly with a disconcerting expression--"I would like to warn you. You are a bright
fellow, and you have a way with you--there's no denying it. Under other conditions it would
be a pleasure to know you better. It grieves me, therefore, to warn you that your further stay
in Cuba will not be--pleasant. I almost regret that there is no conclusive evidence against
you; it would so simplify matters. Come now, hadn't you better acknowledge that I have guessed
your secret?"

O'Reilly's perplexity was, changing to dismay, for it seemed to him he was being played with;
nevertheless, he shook his head. "I would only be deceiving you, sir," he said.

General Antuna sighed. "Then I see embarrassments ahead for both of us."

"More arrests?"

"Not necessarily. Understand me, I speak as one gentleman to another, but--you must have noticed
that Americans are unpopular with our troops. Eh? They are impulsive, these troopers; accidents
cannot be prevented. Suppose something should happen to you? There is the trouble. You came
to Cuba to enjoy its climate; you cannot be expected to remain indoors. Of course not. Well!
Among our soldiers are many new recruits, patriotic, enthusiastic young fellows, but--careless.
They are wretchedly unproficient marksmen, and they haven't learned the dangers of promiscuous
rifle fire. They are forever shooting at things, merely to score a hit. Would you believe it?
Oh, I have to discipline them frequently. To think of you going abroad through the streets,
therefore, worries me intensely."

"Your solicitude is touching." O'Reilly bowed mockingly; but disregarding his tone, General
Antuna proceeded in the same false key:

"Suppose you should be found dead some day. Imagine my feelings." The speaker's tone and expression
were eloquent of concern. "How could I fix the responsibility?"

"By having me followed, as usual, I dare say," O'Reilly said, bitterly.

"Oh, you will of course be shadowed day and night; in fact, to be quite sure of your--er--safety
I shall ask you to permit one of my men to accompany you everywhere and even to share your
room. We shall try never to lose sight of you, depend upon it. But these detectives are careless
fellows at best; I don't trust them. Of course such precautions would exonerate me from all
blame and relieve my Government from any responsibility for injury to you, but, nevertheless,
it would tend to complicate relations already strained. You see I am quite honest with you."
The general allowed time for his words to sink in; then he sighed once more. "I wish you could
find another climate equally beneficial to your rheumatism. It would lift a great load from
my mind. I could offer you the hospitality of an escort to Neuvitas, and your friend Mr. Branch
is such good company he would so shorten your trip to New York!" The speaker paused hopefully;
that same sardonic flicker was on his lips.

Johnme could not summon an answering smile, for his heart was like lead. He realized now the
utter futility of resistance; he knew that to remain in Puerto Principe after this thinly veiled
warning would be to court destruction--and destruction of a shocking character against which
it would be impossible to guard. Even an espionage stricter than that to which he had been
subjected would utterly defeat his plans. After a moment of thought he said, gravely:

"I appreciate the delicacy of your consideration, sir, and--I shall go."

General Antuna leaped to his feet, his grim face alight; striding to O'Reilly, he pressed his
hands--he seemed upon the point of embracing him. "I thank you!" he cried. "You render me a
supreme service. See, I breathe easy. Permit me to offer you refreshment-- one of our famous
Spanish wines. No? Then the best cigar in all Cuba!"

His expressions of gratitude were fulsome; he swore that O'Reilly had done him the greatest
favor of his life, but his words were like poison to his hearer.

"You embarrass me," O'Reilly told him, endeavoring to carry off his defeat with some show of
grace. In his bitterness he could not refrain from adding, "If my accursed affliction returns,
perhaps we shall meet again before long, either here or elsewhere."

"Oh, I have little hope for such a pleasure," the general quickly replied. "But if we do meet,
remember we Spaniards have a cure for rheumatism. It is unpleasant, but efficacious. A little,
nickel- plated pill, that is all." General Antuna's teeth shone for an instant. "There is another
remedy, not quite so immediate in its effect, but a good one. I have tried it and found it
excellent. Drink plenty of cocoanut-water! That is the Cuban remedy; the other I call the Spanish
cure. Cocoanuts are splendid. I shall see that a crate of the choicest fruit is placed aboard
your steamer. Accept them with my compliments, and when you partake of them think of me."

O'Reilly did think of General Antuna, not only when he was escorted to the railway station
at daylight, but when he and Branch took their seats and their guards filed in behind them.
He assured himself moodily that he would not cease to think of that sardonic old joker for
a long time to come. He cursed savagely; the memory of these wasted weeks, the narrow margin
of his failure, filled him with a sick feeling of dismay and impotence. His mind quailed at
the consequence of this new delay. Where was Rosa now? How and when would he return? With difficulty
he resisted the impulse to fling himself from the moving train; but he composed himself by
the thought that Cuba was not fenced about with bayonets. He would come back.

Leslie Branch broke in upon his gloomy preoccupation by asking, "How much money have you?"

"Less than ten dollars."

"You're rich. My landlady cleaned me. Is it the practice of beneficent monarchies to provide
transportation for their departing guests?"

"Undoubtedly."

Branch coughed dismally. "It 'll be all right if they just buy me a ticket to the first fog.
One more hemorrhage and I'll wing my way aloft. God! I'd hate to be buried at sea."

"Cheer up!" O'Reilly reassured him, irritably. "There may be ice aboard."

"ICE!" Leslie gasped. "Oh, bullets!"

In marked contrast to the difficulties of entering Cuba was the ease of leaving it. A ship
was sailing from Neuvitas on the very afternoon when the two Americans arrived, and they were
hurried aboard. Not until the anchor was up did their military escort depart from them.

With angry, brooding eyes O'Reilly watched the white houses along the water-front dwindle away,
the mangrove swamps slip past, and the hills rise out of their purple haze. When the salt breath
of the trades came to his nostrils he turned into his state-room, and, taking the crate of
cocoanuts with which General Antuna had thoughtfully provided him, he bore it to the rail and
dropped it overboard.

"Rheumatism was a fool disease, anyhow," he muttered.

"Great news!" Esteban Varona announced one day as he dismounted after a foraging trip into
the Yumuri, "We met some of Lacret's men and they told us that Spain has recalled Captain-General
Campos. He acknowledges himself powerless to stem the flood of Cuban revolution. What do you
say to that?"

"Does that mean the end of the war?" Rosa eagerly inquired.

"Oh no. They have sent a new man--he's in Havana now--a dark little, old fellow who never smiles.
He has a long nose and a big chin; he dresses all in black--a very 'jew-bird' in appearance,
from what I hear. His name is Weyler--Valeriano Weyler, Marquis of Teneriffe." Esteban laughed
tolerantly, for as yet the name of Weyler meant nothing to him.

"No wonder we knew nothing about it," said the girl. "We hide like animals and we see no one
for weeks at a time. I sometimes wonder how O'Reilly will manage to find us."

"Oh, he'll manage it somehow," Esteban declared, cheerfully. Then he ran an approving eye over
the new bohio and the new garden plot which Evangelina had courageously begun. "We're not so
badly fixed, are we? At least Colonel Cobo won't find us so readily this time."

"Cobo!" shuddered the girl. "I dream about him."

Esteban scowled. "I've seen him at a distance several times, but he takes pains to guard himself
well when he comes into the Yumuri. They say he's trying to destroy the whole valley."

"He will never forget."

Esteban covertly appraised his sister's charms, but respecting her terror of Cobo he did not
speak his thoughts. He was certain, however, that Rosa knew, as well as he, what motive lay
behind the fellow's tireless persecutions of the valley dwellers; for in spite of their isolation
stories of Cobo had reached the refugees- -stories that had rendered both the boy and the girl
sick with apprehension. The colonel, it seemed, had nearly died of his machete wound, and on
recovering he had sworn to exterminate the wasps that had stung him. He had sworn other oaths,
too, oaths that robbed Esteban of his sleep.

Esteban idolized his sister; her loyalty to him was the most precious thing of his life, Therefore,
the thought of that swarthy ruffian hunting her down as a hound hangs to the trail of a doe
awoke in him a terrible anger. Second only to his hatred for the guerrilla chief was his bitterness
against the traitor, Pancho Cueto, who had capped his villainy by setting this new peril upon
them; and since Rosa's safety and his own honor called for the death of both men, he had sworn
that somehow he would effect it. It was, of course, a difficult matter to get at the Colonel
of Volunteers, but Cueto still lived in the midst of his blackened fields, and it was against
him that the boy was now planning to launch his first blow.

The mention of Cobo's name had momentarily distracted Esteban's thoughts. Now he collected
them and said:

"Wait! I am forgetting something. See what Lacret's men handed me; they are posted from one
end of the island to the other." He displayed a printed bando, or proclamation, signed by the
new captain-general, and read as follows:

  "All inhabitants of the country districts, or those who reside
outside the lines of fortifications of the towns, shall, within a
period of eight days, enter the towns which are occupied by   the
troops. Any individual found outside the lines in the   country at
the expiration of this period shall be considered a   rebel and
shall be dealt with as such."

It was that inhuman order of concentration, the result of which proved to be without parallel
in military history--an order which gave its savage author the name of being the arch-fiend
of a nation reputed peculiarly cruel. Neither Esteban nor Rosa, however, grasped the full significance
of the proclamation; no one could have done so. No eye could have foreseen the merciless butchery
of non-combatants, the starvation and death by disease of hordes of helpless men, women, and
children herded into the cities. Four hundred thousand Cubans driven from their homes into
shelterless prison camps; more than two hundred thousand dead from hunger and disease; a fruitful
land laid bare of all that could serve as food, and changed to an ash-gray desolation; gaunt
famine from Oriente to Pinar del Rio--that was the sequel to those printed words of "Weyler
the Butcher" which Esteban read.

"Eight days! When is the time up?" Rosa inquired.

"Bless you, this is already two weeks old!" her brother told her.

"Why, then, it means that we'll be shot if we're caught."

"Exactly! But we sha'n't be caught, eh? Let the timid ones take fright at the squeaks of this
old black-bird. Let them go into the cities: we shall have the more to eat!" Esteban crumpled
the paper in his hand and dropped it. "Meanwhile I shall proceed toward my settlement with
Pancho Cueto." His very careless confidence gave Rosa courage.

XII

WHEN THE WORLD RAN BACKWARD

Esteban went about his plan of destroying Pancho Cueto with youthful energy and zest. First
he secured, at some pains, a half- stick of dynamite, a cap and fuse, and a gallon or more
of kerosene; then he assembled his followers and led them once again into the San Juan.

This time the ride to La Joya was longer than before, and since every member of the little
band was proscribed, Esteban insisted upon the greatest caution. But there was little need
of especial care, for the country was already depopulated, as a result of Weyler's proclamation.
Fields were empty, houses silent; no living creatures stirred, except in the tree-tops, and
the very birds seemed frightened, subdued. It struck young Varona queerly. It was as if the
whole land was in mourning; he saw nothing but blackbirds, somber-hued vultures, dismal Judea-birds
with their ebony plumage and yellow beaks. Far up the valley a funeral pall of smoke hung in
the sky itself; that was where the Spaniards were burning the houses of those too slow in obeying
the order of concentration.

La Joya, however, was still tenanted when early in the evening its rightful owner arrived;
the house and some of its outbuildings showed lights. Esteban concealed his men. While the
horses cropped and the negroes rested he fitted fuse and cap to his precious piece of dynamite.
It was likely, he thought, that Cueto had provided himself with a body-guard, and knowing the
plantation house as he did, he had no intention of battering weakly at its stout ironwood door
while his quarry took fright and slipped away.

Now while Esteban was thus busied, Pancho Cueto was entertaining an unwelcome guest. In the
late afternoon he had been surprised by the visit of a dozen or more Volunteers, and inasmuch
as his relations with their colonel had been none of the friendliest since that ill-starred
expedition into the Yumuri, he had felt a chill of apprehension on seeing the redoubtable Cobo
himself at their head.

The colonel had explained that he was returning from a trip up the San Juan, taken for the
purpose of rounding up those inhabitants who had been dilatory in obeying the new orders from
Havana. That smoke to the southward was from fires of his kindling: he had burned a good many
crops and houses and punished a good many people, and since this was exactly the sort of task
he liked he was in no unpleasant mood. He had demanded of Cueto lodging for himself and his
troop, announcing that a part of his command was somewhere behind and would rejoin him later
in the night.

Cueto had welcomed his visitor in all humility; he put up the soldiers in the bate of the sugar-mill,
and then installed Cobo in his best room, after which he ransacked the house for food and drink
and tobacco.

Later he and the colonel sat long over their supper, for the latter's exultant humor continued.
Cobo, it transpired, was delighted with the new captain-general, a man of blood and iron, a
man after his own heart. This Weyler, he predicted, would put an end to the insurrection; there
would be no more of Campos's weak, merciful methods, which were, in reality, nothing less than
encouragement to revolt. Cueto, of course, agreed.

"We're sweeping the country as with a broom, and already Matanzas is bulging with refugees,"
the officer told him. "They call themselves pacificos, but they carry information and aid our
enemies. We'll have no more of that."

"Will it not be a great expense to feed so many people?" Cueto ventured.

"Let them feed themselves. Is it our fault that they make such measures necessary? By no means.
Once we have them safe, we shall exterminate all whom we encounter in the country." The speaker
drank deeply of Cueto's good wine and smacked his lips. "It's the kind of work I like. Extermination!
They have had their warning. From now on we shall spare neither man, woman, nor child. The
men are traitors, the women breed, and the children grow up."

Cueto nodded his complete approval of this program. "Oh, decidedly," said he. "This spirit
of violence must be stamped out or none of us will be safe. Let me tell you I myself live in
constant dread of that young villain, Varona. I--hope you haven't forgotten him."

"Forgotten him?" Colonel Cobo fingered a lately healed scar which further disfigured his ugly
face, then he cursed frightfully. "It's by God's mercy alone that I'm alive to-night. And I
haven't forgotten the girl, either. She'll have to come in, along with the others. The boy
may stay out, but she can't." He licked his lips. "Wait until I have finished with this valley.
I'll drive the Yumuri next, as a hunter drives a thicket for his game, and nothing will slip
through."

His thoughts once turned upon Rosa, the colonel could talk of little else, and Cueto realized
that the girl had indeed made a deep impression upon him. The overseer was well pleased, and
when Cobo finally took himself off to bed he followed in better spirits than he had enjoyed
for some time. For one thing, it was agreeable to look forward to a night of undisturbed repose.
Pancho's apprehensions had fattened upon themselves, and he had been living of late in a nightmare
of terror.

But it seemed to him that he had barely closed his eyes when he was awakened by a tremendous
vibration and found himself in the center of the floor, undecided whether he had been hurled
from his bed or whether he had leaped thither. Still in a daze, he heard a shout from the direction
of Cobo's room, then a din of other voices, followed by a rush of feet; the next instant his
door was flung back and he saw, by the light of high-held torches, Esteban Varona and a ragged
rabble of black men. Cueto knew that he faced death. He uttered a shrill scream of terror,
and, seizing the revolver which was always close at his hand, he fired blindly. Then his foes
were upon him. What happened thereafter took but an instant. He dodged a blow from Esteban's
clubbed rifle only to behold the flash of a machete. Crying out again, he tried to guard himself
from the descending blade, but too late; the sound of his hoarse terror died in his throat,
half born.

"Quick! Soak the bed with oil and fire it," Esteban directed; then he ran out into the hall
to investigate that other shouting. He found the chamber whence it issued and tried to smash
the door; but at the second blow he heard a gun-shot from within and the wood splintered outward
almost into his face. Simultaneously, from somewhere outside the house, arose the notes of
a Spanish bugle- call.

Young Varona waited to hear no more. Nor did his men; realizing the peril into which they had
been led, they bolted from the house as fast as they could go. There was no need for questions;
from the direction of the sugar-mill came bellowed orders and the sound of men shouting to
their horses. Evidently those were troops--and trained troops, too, for they took no time to
saddle; they were up and mounted almost before the marauders had gained the backs of their
own animals. There was no opportunity to choose a retreat across the fields; Esteban spurred
down the driveway toward the main calzada, yelling to his men to follow him.

The approach to La Joya was by way of a notable avenue, perhaps a half-mile in length, and
bordered by tall, even rows of royal palms. These stately trees shaded the avenue by day and
lent it a cavern-like gloom by night. Near the public causeway the road was cut through a bit
of rising ground, and was walled by steep banks overgrown with vines.

Into the black tunnel formed by the palms the fugitives plunged, with the clatter of hoofs
close behind them. Those of the Volunteers who pressed them hardest began to shoot wildly,
for this typically Cuban refusal to stand ground enraged them beyond measure.

Esteban's party would doubtless have made good their escape had it not been for that other
guerrillero returning from its raid; but, as it happened, the two forces met in the sunken
road. Nothing but the darkness and the head-long approach of the fleeing men saved them from
immediate destruction, for the collision occurred between banks too steep for a horse to climb,
and with that yelling pack too close behind to permit of retreat.

Instantly there began a blind battle in these desperately cramped quarters. After the first
moment or two friend and foe were indistinguishable and the men of both parties began firing
or thrusting at whatever loomed nearest out of the gloom. The narrow ravine quickly became
a place of utter confusion, a volcano of blasphemies, a press of jostling, plunging, struggling
bodies. Horses reared and bit at one another. Riders fought stirrup to stirrup with clubbed
rifles and machetes; saddles were emptied and the terrified horses bolted. Some of them lunged
up the banks, only to tumble down again, their threshing limbs and sharp-shod hoofs working
more havoc than blows from old-time battle-hammers. Meanwhile those of Cobo's men who had ridden
out from the sugar- mill naturally attributed this new uproar to a stand of their enemies,
and began to rake the road with rifle fire; then, in obedience to the commands of their half-clad
colonel, they charged. A moment and they were fighting hand to hand with their returning comrades.
Spaniard clashed with Spaniard, and somewhere in the melee the six marauders battled for their
lives.

Of course, after the first moment of conflict, Esteban had not been able to exert the least
control over his men; in fact, he could not make himself heard. Nor could he spare the breath
to shout; he was too desperately engaged. When the full truth of the situation dawned upon
him he gave up hope for his life and at first merely strove to wreak such havoc as he could.
Yet while some of his faculties were completely numbed in the stress of that white-hot moment,
others remained singularly clear. The shock of his surprise, the imminence of his peril, rendered
him dead to any emotion save dismay, and yet, strangely enough, he remembered Rosa's pressing
need for him and, more for her sake than for his own, fought to extricate himself from the
confusion. His rifle was empty, he had its hot barrel in his hands; he dimly distinguished
Asensio wielding his machete. Then he found himself down and half stunned. He was running here
and there to avoid lunging horses; he was tripping and falling, but meanwhile, as opportunity
offered, he continued to use his clubbed weapon. Something smote him heavily, at last--whether
a hoof or a gun-stock he could not tell- -and next he was on all-fours, trying to drag himself
out of this rat-pit. But his limbs were queerly rebellious, and he was sick; he had never experienced
anything quite like this and he thought he must be wounded. It greatly surprised him to find
that he could struggle upward through the brambles, even though it was hard work. Men were
fighting all around and below him, meanwhile, and he wondered vaguely what made them kill one
another when he and his negroes were all dead or dying. It seemed very strange--of a piece
with the general unreality of things--and it troubled him not a little.

At last he gained the top of the bank and managed to assume an upright position, clinging to
the bole of a palm-tree. One of his arms was useless, he discovered, and he realized with a
curious shock that it was broken. He was bleeding, too, from more than one wound, but he could
walk, after a fashion.

He was inclined to stay and finish the fight, but he recollected that Rosa would be waiting
for him and that he must go to her, and so he set out across the fields, staggering through
the charred cane stubble. The night was not so black as it had been, and this puzzled him until
he saw that the plantation house was ablaze. Flames were belching from its windows, casting
abroad a lurid radiance; and remembering Pancho Cueto, Esteban laughed.

By and by, after he was well away, his numbness passed and he began to suffer excruciating
pain. The pain had been there all the time, so it seemed; he was simply gaining the capacity
to feel it. He was ready to die now, he was so ill; moreover, his left arm dangled and got
in his way. Only that subconscious realization of the necessity to keep going for Rosa's sake
sustained him.

After a while he found himself on a forest trail; then he came to other fields and labored
across them. Fortune finally led his feet down into a creek-bed, and he drank greedily, sitting
upon a stone and scooping the water up in his one useful hand. He was a long time in quenching
his thirst, and a longer time in getting up, but he finally managed this, and he succeeded
thereafter in keeping on his feet. Daylight came at last to show him his way. More than once
he paused, alarmed, at voices in the woods, only to find that the sounds issued from his own
throat.

It had grown very hot now, so hot that heat-waves obscured his vision and caused the most absurd
forms to take shape. He began to hunt aimlessly for water, but there was none. Evidently this
heat had parched the land, dried up the streams, and set the stones afire. It was incredible,
but true.

Esteban reasoned that he must be near home by this time, for he had been traveling for days--for
years. The country, indeed, was altogether unfamiliar; he could not recall ever having seen
the path he trod, but for that matter everything was strange. In the first place he knew that
he was going west, and yet the morning sun persisted in beating hotly into his face! That alone
convinced him that things had gone awry with the world. He could remember a great convulsion
of some sort, but just what it was he had no clear idea! Evidently, though, it had been sufficient
to change the rotation of the earth. Yes, that was it; the earth was running backward upon
its axis; he could actually feel it whirling under his feet. No wonder his journey seemed so
long. He was laboring over a gigantic treadmill, balancing like an equilibrist upon a revolving
sphere. Well, it was a simple matter to stop walking, sit down, and allow himself to be spun
backward around to the place where Rosa was waiting. He pondered this idea for some time, until
its absurdity became apparent. Undoubtedly he must be going out of his head; he saw that it
was necessary to keep walking until the back-spin of that treadmill brought Rosa to him.

But the time came when he could walk no farther. He tried repeatedly and failed, and meanwhile
the earth spun even more rapidly, threatening to whirl him off into space. It was a terrible
sensation; he lay down and hugged the ground, clinging to roots and sobbing weakly. Rosa, he
knew, was just around the next bend in the trail; he called to her, but she did not answer,
and he dared not attempt to creep forward because his grip was failing. He could feel his fingers
slipping--slipping. It was agony. He summoned his last atom of determination, but to no avail.
He gave up finally, and felt himself propelled dizzily outward into immeasurable voids. His
last thought, as he went whirling end over end through space, was of his sister. She would
never know how hard he had tried to reach her.

XIII

CAPITULATION

Late on the second day after the battle Asensio returned to his bohio. Rosa and Evangelina,
already frantic at the delay, heard him crying to them while he was still hidden in the woods,
and knew that the worst had happened. There was little need for him to tell his story, for
he was weaponless, stained, and bloody. He had crossed the hills on foot after a miraculous
escape from that ravine of death. Of his companions he knew nothing whatever; the mention of
Esteban's name caused him to beat his breast and cry aloud. He was weak and feverish, and his
incoherent story of the midnight encounter was so highly colored that Rosa nearly swooned with
horror.

The girl stood swaying while he told how the night had betrayed them, how he had wrought incredible
feats of valor before the shifting tide of battle had spewed him out the end of the sunken
road and left him half dead in the grass. Asensio had lain there until, finding himself growing
stronger, he had burrowed into a tangle of vines at the foot of a wall, where he had remained
until the fighting ceased. When the Spaniards had finally discovered their mistake and had
ceased riding one another down, when lights came and he heard Colonel Cobo cursing them like
one insane, he had wriggled away, crossed the calzada, and hidden in the woods until dawn.
He had been walking ever since; he had come home to die.

Rosa heard only parts of the story, for her mind was numbed, her heart frozen. Her emotion
was too deep for tears, it paralyzed her for the time being; she merely stood staring, her
dark eyes glazed, her ashen lips apart. Finally something snapped, and she knew nothing more
until hours afterward, when she found herself upon her comfortless bed with Evangelina bending
over her. All night she had lain inert, in a merciful stupor; it was not until the next morning
that she gradually came out of her coma.

Then it was that the negress was really alarmed, fearing that if the girl did rally her mind
would be affected. But Rosa was young and, despite her fragility of form, she was strong--too
strong, it seemed to her, and possessed of too deep a capacity for suffering. How she ever
survived those next few days, days when she prayed hourly to die, was a mystery. And when she
found that she could at last shed tears, what agony! The bond between her and Esteban had been
stronger than usually exists between sister and brother; he had been her other self; in him
she had centered her love, her pride, her ambition. The two had never quarreled; no angry word
had ever passed between them: their mutual understanding, moreover, had been almost more than
human, and where the one was concerned the other had been utterly unselfish. To lose Esteban,
therefore, split the girl's soul and heart asunder; she felt that she could not stand without
him. Born into the world at the same hour, welded into unity by their mother's supreme pain,
the boy and girl were of the same flesh and spirit; they were animated by the same life-current.
Never had the one been ill but that the other had suffered corresponding symptoms; never had
the one been sad or gay but that the other had felt a like reaction. Personalities so closely
knit together are not uncommon, and to sever them is often dangerous.

Into Rosa's life, however, there had come one interest which she could not share with her twin--that
was her love for O'Reilly. Spanish-reared women, as a rule, do not play with love; when it
comes they welcome it, even though it be that first infatuation so often scorned by older,
colder people. So it was with Rosa Varona. Whatever might have been the true nature of her
first feeling for the Irish-American, suffering and meditation had deepened and strengthened
it into a mature and genuine passion. As the wise men of old found wisdom in cave or desert,
so Rosa in her solitude had learned the truth about herself. Now, in the hour of her extremity,
thoughts of O'Reilly acted as a potent medicine. Her hungry yearning for him and her faith
in his coming stimulated her desire to live, and so aided her recovery.

The day arrived when her brain was normal and when she could creep about the hut. But she was
only the ghost of the girl she had been; she seldom spoke, and she never smiled. She sat for
hours staring out into the sunshine, and when she found tears upon her cheeks she was surprised,
for it seemed to her that she must long ago have shed the very last.

Asensio, likewise recovered, but he, too, was sadly changed. There was no longer any martial
spirit in him; he feared the Spaniards, and tales of their atrocities cowed him.

Then Cobo came into the Yumuri. The valley, already well-nigh deserted, was filled to the brim
with smoke from burning fields and houses, and through it the sun showed like a copper shield.
Refugees passed the bohio, bound farther into the hills, and Asensio told the two women that
he and they must also go. So the three gathered up what few things they could carry on their
backs and fled.

They did not stop until they had gained the fastnesses of the Pan de Matanzas. Here they built
a shelter and again took up the problem of living, which was now more difficult than ever.

Asensio would not have been greatly inconvenienced by the change had he been alone, for certain
fruits grew wild in the forests, and the earth, where the Spaniards had not trod, was full
of roots upon which a creature of his primitive habits could have managed to live. But hampered
as he was by two women, one of whom was as delicate as a flower, Asensio found his task extremely
difficult. And it grew daily more difficult; for there were other people here in the woods,
and, moreover, the country round about was being steadily scoured by the enemy, who had orders
to destroy every living, growing thing that was capable of sustaining human life. Stock was
butchered and left to rot, trees were cut down, root- fields burned. Weyler's policy of frightfulness
was in full sway, and starvation was driving its reluctant victims into his net. Meanwhile
roving bands of guerrillas searched out and killed the stronger and the more tenacious families.

The Pan de Matanzas, so called because of its resemblance to a mighty loaf of bread, became
a mockery to the hungry people cowering in its shelter. Bread! Rosa Varona could not remember
when she had last tasted such a luxury. Raw cane, cocoanuts, the tasteless fruita bomba, roots,
the pith from palm tops, these were her articles of diet, and she did not thrive upon them.
She was always more or less hungry. She was ragged, too, and she shivered miserably through
the long, chill nights. Rosa could measure the change in her appearance only by studying her
reflection from the surface of the spring where she drew water, but she could see that she
had become very thin, and she judged that the color had entirely gone from her cheeks. It saddened
her, for O'Reilly's sake.

Time came when Asensio spoke of giving up the struggle and going in. They were gradually starving,
he said, and Rosa was ill; the risk of discovery was ever present. It was better to go while
they had the strength than slowly but surely to perish here. He had heard that there were twenty
thousand reconcentrados in Matanzas; in such a crowd they could easily manage to hide themselves;
they would at least be fed along with the others.

No one had told Asensio that the Government was leaving its prisoners to shift for themselves,
supplying them with not a pound of food nor a square inch of shelter.

Evangelina at first demurred to this idea, declaring that Rosa would never be allowed to reach
the city, since the roads were patrolled by lawless bands of troops. Nevertheless her husband
continued to argue. Rosa herself took no part in the discussion, for it did not greatly matter
to her whether she stayed or went.

Misery bred desperation at last; Evangelina's courage failed her, and she allowed herself to
be won over. She began her preparations by disguising Rosa. Gathering herbs and berries, she
made a stain with which she colored the girl's face and body, then she sewed a bundle of leaves
into the back of Rosa's waist so that when the latter stooped her shoulders and walked with
a stick her appearance of deformity was complete.

On the night before their departure Rosa Varona prayed long and earnestly, asking little for
herself, but much for the two black people who had suffered so much for her. She prayed also
that O'Reilly would come before it was too late.

XIV

A WOMAN WITH A MISSION

Within a few hours after O'Reilly's return to New York he telephoned to Felipe Alvarado, explaining
briefly the disastrous failure of his Cuban trip.

"I feared as much," the doctor told him. "You were lucky to escape with your life."

"Well, I'm going back."

"Of course; but have you made any plans?"

"Not yet. I dare say I'll have to join some filibustering outfit. Won't you intercede for me
with the Junta? They're constantly sending parties."

"Um-m! not quite so often as that." Alvarado was silent for a moment; then he said: "Dine with
me to-night and we'll talk it over. I'm eager for news of my brothers and--there is some one
I wish you to meet. She is interested in our cause."

"'She'? A woman?"

"Yes, and an unusual woman. She has contributed liberally to our cause. I would like you to
meet her."

"Very well; but I've only one suit of clothes, and it looks as if I'd slept in it."

"Oh, bother the clothes!" laughed the physician. "I've given most of mine to my destitute countrymen.
Don't expect too much to eat, either; every extra dollar, you know, goes the same way as my
extra trousers. It will be a sort of patriotic 'poverty party.' Come at seven, please."

"Dining out, eh? Lucky devil!" said Leslie Branch when he had learned of his companion's invitation.
"And to meet a philanthropic old lady! Gee! Maybe she'll offer to adopt you. Who knows?"

"I wish you'd offer to lend me a clean shirt."

"I'll do it," readily agreed the other. "I'll stake you to my last one. But keep it clean!
Have a care for the cuffs--a little inadvertency with the soup may ruin my prospects for a
job. You understand, don't you, that our next meal after this one may depend upon this shirt's
prosperous appearance?" Branch dove into his bag and emerged with a stiffly laundered shirt
done up in a Cuban newspaper. He unwrapped the garment and gazed fondly upon it, murmuring,
"'Tis a pretty thing, is it not?" His exertions had brought on a violent coughing-spell, which
left him weak and gasping; but when he had regained his breath he went on in the same key:
"Again I solemnly warn you that this spotless bosom is our bulwark against poverty. One stain
may cut down my space rates; editors are an infernally fastidious lot. Fortunately they want
facts about the war in Cuba, and I'm full of 'em: I've fought in the trenches and heard the
song of grape and canister--"

"Grape-fruit and canned goods, you mean," O'Reilly grinned.

"Well, I shall write with both in mind. The hope of one will stir memories of the other. And
who is there to dispute me? At least I know what a battle should be like, and I shall thrill
my readers with imaginary combats."

O'Reilly eyed the speaker with appreciation. On the way north he had learned to know Leslie
Branch and to like him, for he had discovered that the man possessed a rare and pleasing peculiarity
of disposition. Ordinarily Branch was bitter, irritable, pessimistic; but when his luck was
worst and his fortunes lowest he brightened up. It seemed that he reacted naturally, automatically,
against misfortune. Certainly his and O'Reilly's plight upon leaving Cuba had been sufficiently
unpleasant, for they were almost penniless, and the invalid, moreover, knew that he was facing
a probably fatal climate; nevertheless, once they were at sea, he had ceased his grumbling,
and had surprised his traveling-companion by assuming a genuinely cheerful mien. Even yet O'Reilly
was not over his amazement; he could not make up his mind whether the man was animated by desperate
courage or merely by hopeless resignation. But whatever the truth, the effect of this typical
perversity had been most agreeable. And when Leslie cheerfully volunteered to share the proceeds
of his newspaper work during their stay in New York, thus enabling his friend to seize the
first chance of returning to Cuba, Johnnie's affection for him was cemented. But Branch's very
cheerfulness worried him; it seemed to betoken that the fellow was sicker than he would confess.

That evening O'Reilly anticipated his dinner engagement by a few moments in order to have a
word alone with Alvarado.

"I've seen Enriquez," he told the doctor, "but he won't promise to send me through. He says
the Junta is besieged by fellows who want to fight for Cuba--and of course I don't. When I
appealed in Rosa's name he told me, truthfully enough, I dare say, that there are thousands
of Cuban women as badly in need of succor as she. He says this is no time for private considerations."

"Quite so!" the doctor agreed. "We hear frightful stories about this new concentration policy.
I--can't believe them."

"Oh, I guess they are true; it is the more reason why I must get back at once," O'Reilly said,
earnestly.

"This lady who is coming here to-night has influence with Enriquez. You remember I told you
that she has contributed liberally. She might help you."

"I'll implore her to put in a word for me. Who is she?"

"Well, she's my pet nurse--"

"A nurse!" O'Reilly's eyes opened wide. "A nurse, with MONEY! I didn't know there was such
a thing."

"Neither did I. They're rarer even than rich doctors," Alvarado acknowledged. "But, you see,
nursing is merely Miss Evans's avocation. She's one of the few wealthy women I know who have
real ideals, and live up to them."

"Oh, she has a 'mission'!" Johnnie's interest in Doctor Alvarado's other guest suddenly fell
away, and his tone indicated as much. As the doctor was about to reply the ringing of the door-bell
summoned him away.

O'Reilly had met women with ideals, with purposes, with avocations, and his opinion of them
was low. Women who had "missions" were always tiresome, he had discovered. This one, it appeared,
was unusual only in that she had adopted a particularly exacting form of charitable work. Nursing,
even as a rich woman's diversion, must be anything but agreeable. O'Reilly pictured this Evans
person in his mind--a large, plain, elderly creature, obsessed with impractical ideas of uplifting
the masses! She would undoubtedly bore him stiff with stories of her work: she would reproach
him with neglect of his duties to the suffering. Johnnie was too poor to be charitable and
too deeply engrossed at the moment with his own troubles to care anything whatever about the
"masses."

And she was a "miss." That meant that she wore thick glasses and probably kept cats.

A ringing laugh from the cramped hallway interrupted these reflections; then a moment later
Doctor Alvarado was introducing O'Reilly to a young woman so completely out of the picture,
so utterly the opposite of his preconceived notions, that he was momentarily at a loss. Johnnie
found himself looking into a pair of frank gray eyes, and felt his hand seized by a firm, almost
masculine grasp. Miss Evans, according to his first dazzling impression, was about the most
fetching creature he had ever seen and about the last person by whom any young man could be
bored. If she kept cats they must be pedigreed Persian cats, and well worth keeping, Johnnie
decided. The girl--and she was a girl--had brought into the room an electric vitality, a breeziness
hard to describe. Her eyes were humorous and intelligent; her teeth, which she seemed always
ready to show in a friendly, generous smile, were strong and white and sparkling. Altogether
she was such a vision of healthy, unaffected, and smartly gotten-up young womanhood that O'Reilly
could only stammer his acknowledgment of the introduction, inwardly berating himself for his
awkwardness. He was aware of Alvarado's amusement, and this added to his embarrassment.

"The doctor has told me all about you." Miss Evans addressed Johnnie over her shoulder as she
laid off her furs and a stylish little turban hat. "I'm dying to hear what happened on your trip."

"So am I," confessed Alvarado. "You know, Mr. O'Reilly has seen my brothers."

"You men must go right ahead and talk as if I weren't here. I won't interrupt, except with
a few vivas or carambas or--What are some other lady-like Spanish exclamations?"

"There aren't very many," Johnnie acknowledged. "I always try to swear in English."

Alvarado placed an affectionate hand upon Miss Evans's shoulder. "O'Reilly, this girl has done
more for Cuba than any of us. She has spent a small fortune for medical supplies," said he.

"Those poor men must live on quinine," the girl exclaimed. "Any one who can bear to take the
stuff ought to have all he wants. I've a perfect passion for giving pills."

"Oh, you may joke about it. All the same, if others would make the same sacrifice--"

Miss Evans interrupted breezily: "It wasn't any sacrifice at all. That's the worst of it. The
salve I bought was really for my conscience, if you must know. I squander altogether too much
on myself." Then, turning to O'Reilly, "I love extravagance, don't you?"

"Dearly! It's my one unconquerable vice," he told her. He thought grimly of the four dollars
in his pocket which represented his and Leslie Branch's total wealth, but it seemed to him
that he was called upon to agree with anything Miss Evans might choose to say.

O'Reilly liked this girl. He had liked her the instant she favored him with her friendly smile,
and so, trusting fatuously to his masculine powers of observation, he tried to analyze her.
He could not guess her age, for an expensive ladies' tailor can baffle the most discriminating
eye. Certainly, however, she was not too old-- he had an idea that she would tell him her exact
age if he asked her. While he could not call her beautiful, she was something immensely better--she
was alive, human, interesting, and interested. The fact that she did not take her "mission"
over- seriously proved that she was also sensible beyond most women. Yes, that was it, Norine
Evans was a perfectly sensible, unspoiled young person, who showed the admirable effects of
clean living and clean thinking coupled with a normal, sturdy constitution. O'Reilly told himself
that here was a girl who could pour tea, nurse a sick man, or throw a baseball.

And she was as good as her promise. She did not interrupt when, during dinner, Alvarado led
Johnnie to talk about his latest experience in Cuba, but, on the contrary, her unflagging interest
induced O'Reilly to address his talk more often to her than to the doctor. He soon discovered
that she understood the Cuban situation as well as or better than he, and that her sympathies
were keen. When she did speak it was to ask intelligent questions, some of which, by the way,
it taxed O'Reilly's wits to answer satisfactorily. Heretofore, Johnnie had looked upon the
war primarily as an unfortunate condition of affairs which had played the mischief with his
own personal fortunes; he had not allowed himself to be very deeply affected by the rights
or the wrongs of either party. But Norine Evans took a much deeper and broader view of the
matter. She was genuinely moved by the gallant struggle of the Cuban people, and when the dinner
was over she exploded a surprise which left both men speechless.

"This settles it with me," she announced. "I'm going down there."

Alvarado stared at her for a moment. "My dear--" he began.

But she warned him: "Don't argue with me. You know I detest arguments. I've been thinking about
it for some time, and--"

"It is quite impossible," the doctor declared, firmly; and O'Reilly agreed.

"Of course you could go to Havana," said the latter, "but you wouldn't be allowed to see anything."

"I'm going right to the Insurrectos with you."

"WITH ME!" O'Reilly could not conceal his lack of enthusiasm. "I don't know that the Junta
will take me."

"They will if I ask them."

Alvarado inquired, "What ever put such a ridiculous idea into your head?"

The girl laughed. "It's the only kind of ideas I have. But there are ten thousand reasons why
I want to go. In the first place, I fairly itch to give pills. You say the rebels have no hospitals,
no nurses--"

"We do the best we can, with our equipment."

"Well, I'll supply better equipment, and I'll handle it myself. I'm in earnest. You sha'n't
stop me."

O'Reilly was uncomfortably aware of the speaker's determination; protests had no effect upon
her; her clear cheeks had flushed, her eyes were dancing. Evidently here was a girl who did
very much as she chose.

"You don't realize what you are saying," he told her, gravely. "You'd have to go as a filibuster,
on some decrepit, unseaworthy freighter loaded to the guards and crowded with men of all sorts.
It's dangerous business, running the Spanish blockade. If captured you would be treated just
like the rest of us."

"Lovely! We'd land in small boats some dark night. Maybe we'd have a fight!"

"And if you got through, what then? Life in a bark hut, with nothing to eat. Bugs! Snakes!
Hardships!"

"That decides me. I eat too much--Doctor Alvarado tells me I do. I adore huts, and I don't
seriously object to insects."

The physician stirred uneasily. "It's utterly absurd," he expostulated. "Some women might do
it, but you're not the sort. You are--pardon me--a most attractive young person. You'd be thrown
among rough men."

"Mr. O'Reilly will look out for me. But for that matter I can take care of myself. Oh, it's
of no use trying to discourage me. I always have my own way; I'm completely spoiled."

"Your family will never consent," O'Reilly ventured; whereupon Miss Evans laughed.

"I haven't such a thing. I'm alone and unencumbered. No girl was ever so fortunate. But wait--I'll
settle this whole thing in a minute." She quitted the table, ran to Alvarado's telephone, and
called a number.

"She's after Enriquez," groaned the physician. "He's weak; he can't refuse her anything."

"I don't want a woman on my hands," O'Reilly whispered, fiercely. "Suppose she got sick? Good
Lord! I'd have to NURSE her." He wiped a sudden moisture from his brow.

"Oh, she won't get sick. She'll probably nurse you--and--and all the other men. You'll like
it, too, and you will all fall in love with her--everybody does--and start fighting among yourselves.
There! She has Enriquez. Listen."

Johnnie shivered apprehensively at the directness with which Miss Evans put her request. "You
understand, I want to go and see for myself," she was saying. "If you need medicines I'll give
them-- bushels of the nastiest stuff I can buy. I'll organize a field hospital. ... Oh, very
well, call it a bribe, if you like. Anyhow, I've fully determined to go, and Mr. O'Reilly has
volunteered to take care of me. He's charmed with the idea." Miss Evans giggled. "That means
you'll have to take him along, too."

There followed a pause during which the two men exchanged dismayed glances.

"She doesn't seem to care what she says," O'Reilly murmured. "But- -I'll put a flea in Enriquez's
ear."

"Put it in writing, please." There was another wait. "Now read it to me. ... Good!" Miss Evans
fairly purred over the telephone. "Send it to me by messenger right away; that's a dear. I'm
at Doctor Alvarado's house, and he's beside himself with joy. Thanks, awfully. You're so nice."
A moment, and she was back in the dining-room facing her two friends--a picture of triumph.
"You have nothing more to say about it," she gloated. "'The Provisional Government of Cuba,
through its New York representatives, extends to Miss Norine Evans an invitation to visit its
temporary headquarters in the Sierra de--something-or-other, and deems it an honor to have
her as its guest so long as she wishes to remain there. It requests that all military and civil
officers afford her every safety and convenience within their power.' That's practically what
Mr. Enriquez read to me. In fifteen minutes it will be here in black and white. Now then, let's
celebrate."

She executed a dance step, pirouetted around the room, then plumped herself down into her chair.
She rattled her cup and saucer noisily, crying, "Fill them up, Doctor Gloom. Let's drink to
Cuba Libre."

Johnnie managed to smile as he raised his demi-tasse. "Here's to my success as a chaperon,"
said he. "I'm disliked by the Spaniards, and now the Cubans will hate me. I can see happy days
ahead."

XV

FILIBUSTERS

Leslie Branch was asleep when O'Reilly returned to their room, but he awoke sufficiently to
listen to the latter's breathless account of the dinner-party.

"I'm rattled," Johnnie confessed. "Why, that girl just bounced right into the middle of everything,
and--and I can't bounce her out again."

"You say she's young, and PRETTY, and--RICH?" Leslie was incredulous.

"Y-yes! All of that."

"Um-m! Doctor Alvarado must mix a good cocktail."

"Why?"

"Because you're drunk and delirious. They don't come that way, my boy. When they're rich they're
old and ugly."

"I tell you this girl is young and--stunning."

"Of course she is," Branch agreed, soothingly. "Now go to sleep and don't think any more about
her, there's a good boy! Everything will be all right in the morning. Perhaps it never happened;
perhaps you didn't meet any woman at all." The speaker yawned and turned over.

"Don't be an ass," Johnnie cried, impatiently. "What are we going to do with a woman on our hands?"

"WE? Don't divide her with me. What are YOU going to do? The truth is plain, this Miss Evans
is in love with you and you don't know it. She sees in you her soul mate. Well, if you don't
want her, I want her. I'll eat her medicine. I'll even--marry the poor old soul, if she's rich."

O'Reilly arose early the next morning and hurried down to the office of the Junta, hoping that
he could convince Mr. Enriquez of the folly of allowing Norine Evans to have her way. By the
light of day Miss Evans's project seemed more hare-brained than ever, and he suspected that
Enriquez had acquiesced in it only because of a natural inability to refuse anything to a pretty
woman--that was typically Cuban. But his respect for Miss Evans's energy and initiative deepened
when, on arriving at 56 New Street, he discovered that she had forestalled him and was even
then closeted with the man he had come to see. Johnnie waited uneasily; he was dismayed when
the girl finally appeared, with Enriquez in tow, for the man's face was radiant.

"It's all settled," she announced, at sight of O'Reilly. "I've speeded them up."

"You're an early riser," the latter remarked. "I hardly expected-- "

Enriquez broke in. "Such enthusiasm! Such ardor! She whirls a person off his feet."

"It seems that the Junta lacks money for another expedition, so I've made up the deficit. We'll
be off in a week."

"Really? Then you're actually--going?"

"Of course."

"It was like a gift from Heaven," Enriquez cried. "Our last embarrassment is removed, and--"

But Johnnie interrupted him. "You're crazy, both of you," he declared, irritably. "Cuba is
no place for an American girl. I'm not thinking so much about the danger of capture on the
way down as the hardship after she gets there and the fact that she will be thrown among all
sorts of men."

The elder man lifted his head. "Every Cuban will know who Miss Evans is, and what she has done
for our cause. You do not seem to have a high regard for our chivalry, sir."

"There!" Norine was triumphant.

"There is bound to be some danger, of course," Enriquez continued, "for the coast is well patrolled;
but once the expedition is landed, Miss Evans will be among friends. She will be as safe in
our camps as if she were in her own home."

"Don't be hateful, and argumentative, or I'll begin to think you're a born chaperon," Miss
Evans exclaimed. "Come! Make up your mind to endure me. And now you're going to help me buy
my tropical outfit."

With a smile and a nod at Enriquez she took O'Reilly's arm and bore him away.

In spite of his panic-struck protestations that he knew less than nothing about woman's requirements,
she led him up-town. And she kept him at her side all that morning while she made her purchases;
then when she had loaded him down with parcels she invited him to take her to lunch. The girl
was so keenly alive and so delighted with the prospect of adventure that Johnnie could not
long remain displeased with her. She had an irresistible way about her, and he soon found himself
sharing her good spirits. She had a healthy appetite, too; when O'Reilly set out for his lodgings
after escorting her home he walked in order to save car fare. Clams, consomme, chicken salad,
French pastry, and other extravagances had reduced his capital to zero.

The days of idle waiting that followed were trying, even to one of O'Reilly's philosophic habit
of mind. He could learn nothing about the Junta's plans, and, owing to his complete uncertainty,
he was unable to get work. Leslie Branch, too, failed to find steady employment, though he
managed, by the sale of an occasional column, to keep them both from actual suffering. His
cough, meanwhile, grew worse day by day, for the spring was late and raw. As a result his spirits
rose, and he became the best of all possible good companions. Johnnie, who was becoming constantly
more fond of him, felt his anxiety increase in proportion to this improvement in mood; it seemed
to him that Branch was on the very verge of a collapse.

At last there came a message which brought them great joy. Enriquez directed them to be in
readiness to leave Jersey City at seven o'clock the following morning. Neither man slept much
that night.

As they waited in the huge, barn-like station Enriquez appeared with Norine Evans upon his
arm. The girl's color was high; she was tremulous with excitement. Leslie Branch, who saw her
for the first time, emitted a low whistle of surprise.

"Glory be! That goddess!" he cried. "And I called her a 'poor old soul'!"

When Norine took his bony, bloodless hand in her warm grasp and flashed him her frank, friendly
smile, he capitulated instantly. In hyperbolical terms he strove to voice his pleasure at the
meeting; but he lost the thread of his thought and floundered so hopelessly among his words
that Norine said, laughingly:

"Now, Mr. Branch, bold buccaneers don't make pretty speeches. Hitch up your belt and say, 'Hello,
Norine!' I'll call you Leslie."

"Don't call me 'Leslie,'" he begged. "Call me often."

Then he beamed upon the others, as if this medieval pun were both startling and original. It
was plain that he wholly and inanely approved of Norine Evans.

Enriquez was introducing a new-comer now, one Major Ramos, a square-jawed, forceful Cuban,
who, it seemed, was to be in command of the expedition.

"My duties end here," Enriquez explained. "Major Ramos will take charge of you, and you must
do exactly as he directs. Ask no questions, for he won't answer them. Do you think you can
follow instructions?"

"Certainly not. I sha'n't even try," Norine told him. "I'm fairly bursting with curiosity at
this moment."

"Remember, Ramos, not a word."

"I promise," smiled the major.

"Good-by and good luck." Enriquez shook hands all around; then he bowed and kissed Miss Evans's
fingers. "I shall pray that you escape all danger, senorita, and I shall see that Cuba remembers
her debt to you."

When he had gone the three Americans followed their new guide through the iron gates.

Major Ramos proved that he knew how to obey orders even though the other members of his party
did not. He remained utterly deaf to Miss Evans's entreaties that he let her know something
about the plans of the expedition; he would not even tell her where he was taking her, where
the other filibusters had assembled, or from what port their ship would sail. He did go so
far, however, as to explain that an inkling of the Junta's plans had leaked out, and that determined
efforts to upset them were being made, efforts which necessitated the greatest care on his
part. This, of course, whetted the girl's curiosity; but to her most artful queries he opposed
a baffling silence. When Philadelphia, Washington, then Baltimore, and finally Richmond were
left behind, Miss Evans was, in truth, ready to explode, and her two companions were in a similar
frame of mind.

Major Ramos was not naturally a silent man; he had all the loquacity of the Latin, and all
the Latin's appreciation of a pretty woman; he made no secret of the fact that his orders irked
him. Despite his official reserve he proved himself a pleasant traveling-companion, and he
talked freely on all but one subject. He played a good game of cards, too, and he devoted himself
with admirable courtesy to Norine's comfort. It was not until the train was approaching Charleston
that he finally announced:

"Now then, my first command. This is the end of our journey; the other members of the expedition
are here. But I must ask you not to talk with them or with any strangers, for our friends are
being watched by detectives in the employ of the Spanish minister at Washington and by United
States deputy-marshals. One little indiscretion might ruin everything."

"Spies! Oh, goody!" cried Miss Evans.

"The local authorities intend to seize any vessel we try to sail on. We must be careful."

The hotel to which Major Ramos led his guests appeared to be well filled; there were many Cubans
in the lobby, and the air was heavy with the aroma of their strong, black cigarettes. As the
major entered they turned interested and expectant faces toward him and they eyed his companions
with frank curiosity. Miss Evans became the target for more than one warmly admiring glance.

As for O'Reilly, the familiar odor of those Cuban cigarettes, the snatches of Spanish conversation
which he overheard, awoke in him a great excitement; he realized with an odd thrill that these
eager, dark-visaged men were now his friends and comrades, and that those Americans loitering
watchfully among them were his enemies--the spies of whom Ramos had spoken. There were at least
a score of the latter, and all were plainly stamped with the distinctive marks of their calling.
That they, too, were interested in the latest arrivals was soon made evident by their efforts
to get acquainted.

To Norine Evans it was all immensely exciting. The attention she evoked delighted her vastly,
and she was almost offended when O'Reilly threatened one particularly forward sleuth with a
thrashing, thereby ending her fun.

It was a strangely restless gathering. The Cubans sat in groups or in pairs with their heads
together, smoking furiously and whispering, pausing now and then to glare balefully at some
detective who drew within ear-shot. Every hour increased the strain.

On the street it became known that a party of filibusters was in the city and curious townspeople
came to investigate, while others journeyed to the water-front to stare at the big ocean-going
tug which had slipped into the harbor on the evening previous. When they learned that she was
none other than the Dauntless, that most famous of Cuban blockade-runners, and that "Dynamite
Johnny" O'Brien himself was in command, interest grew. The exploits of that redoubtable mariner
were familiar to the citizens of Charleston, and their sympathies were quite naturally with
the cause he served; therefore they were disappointed to behold a revenue cutter at anchor
close alongside the Dauntless. Her steam was up; she was ready for instant action; it seemed
impossible for "Dynamite Johnny" to get his cargo and his passengers aboard under her very
nose. Some imaginative person claimed to have a tip that the Dauntless intended to ram the
revenue cutter, and a warning to that effect appeared in the evening paper, together with the
rumor that a Spanish cruiser was waiting just outside the three-mile limit.

Charleston awoke with a start, and the Cuban patriots who found themselves the object of this
sudden interest buzzed like flies. They muttered and whispered more mysteriously than ever,
and consumed even greater quantities of tobacco. The detectives became painfully alert.

To O'Reilly and his two companions it seemed that the expedition had already failed. Through
some blunder its plans had evidently become known, and all was ruined. That was the worst of
these Cubans; they couldn't keep a secret. Branch stalked the hotel lobby like a restless wraith.
O'Reilly was furious. Of the entire party Ramos alone maintained an unruffled pleasantry; he
spent the evening in Miss Evans's company, quite oblivious to the general feeling of dismay.

On the next afternoon word was quietly passed to get ready, and the filibusters, carrying their
scant hand-baggage, began to leave the hotel in groups, followed, of course, by the watchful spies.

As the three Americans prepared for departure Norine whispered: "Listen! Everything is all
right. We're not going aboard the Dauntless at all; she's here as a blind."

"Are you sure?" O'Reilly shot her a quick glance.

"Major Ramos himself gave that story to the news-papers; it's all a part of his plan. I promised
not to tell, but--I just can't help myself. Gee! I'm having a good time."

Leslie Branch shook his head mournfully. "You may enjoy it, but I don't," he grumbled. "We'll
end by being pinched, and that will finish me. One week in a damp cell, with my lungs--"

O'Reilly, whose spirits had risen magically, clapped him heartily on the back, crying: "Congratulations!
You're feeling better."

"I never felt worse!" the other complained.

"Nonsense! That's the first kick you've made since we hit cold weather. By the time we reach
Cuba you'll be nice and melancholy and your cough will be all gone."

Ramos led his three charges to the railroad station and into the rear coach of a south-bound
train, where the other members of the expedition had already found seats. As they climbed aboard,
a Secret Service agent essayed to follow them, but he was stopped by a brakeman, who said:

"You can't ride in here; this is a special car. Some sort of a picnic party. They're 'wops'
or Greeks or something."

Other detectives who attempted to invade the privacy of that rear coach after the train had
gotten under way were also denied. Meanwhile, the filibusters cast restraint aside, and for
the first time intermingled freely.

Evening came, then night, and still the party was jerked along at the tail of the train without
a hint as to its destination. About midnight those who were not dozing noted that they had
stopped at an obscure pine-woods junction, and that when the train got under way once more
their own car did not move. The ruse was now apparent; owing to the lateness of the hour, it
was doubtful if any one in the forward coaches was aware that the train was lighter by one car.

There was a brief delay; then a locomotive crept out from a siding, coupled up to the standing
car, and drew it off upon another track. Soon the "excursion party" was being rushed swiftly
toward the coast, some twenty miles away.

Major Ramos came down the aisle, laughing, and spoke to his American protege's.

"Well, what do you think of that, eh? Imagine the feelings of those good deputy-marshals when
they wake up. I bet they'll rub their eyes."

Miss Evans bounced excitedly in her seat; she clapped her hands,

"You must have friends in high places," O'Reilly grinned, and the Cuban agreed.

"Yes, I purposely drew attention to us in Charleston, while our ship was loading. She's ready
and waiting for us now; and by daylight we ought to be safely out to sea. Meanwhile the Dauntless
has weighed anchor and is steaming north, followed, I hope, by all the revenue cutters hereabouts."

It was the darkest time of the night when the special train came to a stop at a bridge spanning
one of the deep Southern rivers. In the stream below, dimly outlined in the gloom, lay the
Fair Play, a small tramp steamer; her crew were up and awake. The new arrivals were hurried
aboard, and within a half-hour she was feeling her way seaward.

With daylight, caution gave way to haste, and the rusty little tramp began to drive forward
for all she was worth. She cleared the three-mile limit safely and then turned south. Not a
craft was in sight; not a smudge of smoke discolored the sky-line.

It had been a trying night for the filibusters, and when the low coast-line was dropped astern
they began to think of sleep. Breakfast of a sort was served on deck, after which those favored
ones who had berths sought them, while their less fortunate companions stretched out wherever
they could find a place.

Johnnie O'Reilly was not one of those who slept; he was too much elated. Already he could see
the hills of Cuba dozing behind their purple veils; in fancy he felt the fierce white heat
from close- walled streets, and scented the odors of "mangly" swamps. He heard the ceaseless
sighing of royal palms. How he had hungered for it all; how he had raged at his delays! CONTENTS

CHAPTER
PAGE

I. THE MEDIEVAL PERIOD 3

II. THE TRANSLATION OF THE BIBLE 49

III.

THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY 81

IV. FROM COWLEY TO POPE 135

INDEX 181

I. THE MEDIEVAL PERIOD

EARLY THEORIES OF TRANSLATION

I

THE MEDIEVAL PERIOD

From the comment of Anglo-Saxon writers one may derive a not inadequate
idea of the attitude generally prevailing in the medieval period with
regard to the treatment of material from foreign sources.

Suggestive statements appear in the prefaces to the works associated with the name of Alfred.
One method of translation is employed in producing an English version
of Pope Gregory's Pastoral Care.

"King Alfred was the interpreter of this book, and turned it from
book Latin into English, as it is now done.

Now he set forth word by word, now sense from sense, as clearly and
intelligently as he was able."[2] The preface to St. Augustine's Soliloquies,
the beginning of which, unfortunately, seems to be lacking, suggests
another possible treatment of borrowed material.

"I gathered for myself," writes the author, "cudgels, and stud-shafts, and horizontal shafts,
and helves for each of the tools that I could work with, and bow-timbers
and bolt-timbers for every work that I could perform, the comeliest
trees, as many as I could carry.

Neither came I with a burden home, for it did not please me to bring
all the wood back, even if I could bear it.

In each tree I saw something that I needed at home; therefore I advise each one who can, and
has many wains, that he direct his steps to the same wood where I cut the stud-shafts. Let him
fetch more for himself, and load his wains with fair beams, that
he may wind many a neat wall, and erect many a rare house, and build
a fair town, and therein may dwell merrily and softly both winter
and summer, as I have not yet done."[3]

Aelfric, writing a century
later, develops his theories in greater detail.

Except in the Preface to Genesis, they are expressed in Latin, the
language of the lettered, a fact which suggests that, unlike the translations
themselves, the prefaces were addressed to readers who were, for the
most part, opposed to translation into the vernacular and who, in
addition to this, were in all probability especially suspicious of
the methods employed by Aelfric.

These methods were strongly in the direction of popularization. Aelfric's general practice is
like that of Alfred. He declares repeatedly[4] that he translates
sense for sense, not always word for word.

Furthermore, he desires rather to be clear and simple than to adorn
his style with rhetorical ornament.[5] Instead of unfamiliar terms,
he uses "the pure and open words of the language of this people."[6]
In connection with the translation of the Bible he lays down the principle
that Latin must give way to English idiom.[7] For all these things
Aelfric has definite reasons.

Keeping always in mind a clear conception of the nature of his audience, he does whatever seems
to him necessary to make his work attractive and, consequently, profitable.

Preparing his Grammar for "tender youths," though he knows that words
may be interpreted in many ways, he follows a simple method of interpretation
in order that the book may not become tiresome.[8] The Homilies, intended
for simple people, are put into simple English, that they may more
easily reach the hearts of those who read or hear.[9] This popularization
is extended even farther.

Aelfric explains[10] that he has abbreviated both the Homilies[11] and the Lives of the Saints,[12]
again of deliberate purpose, as appears in his preface to the latter: "Hoc sciendum etiam quod
prolixiores passiones breuiamus verbis non adeo sensu, ne fastidiosis ingeratur tedium si tanta
prolixitas erit in propria lingua quanta est in latina."

Incidentally, however, Aelfric makes it evident that his were not the only theories of translation
which the period afforded.

In the preface to the first collection of Homilies he anticipates the disapproval of those
who demand greater closeness in following originals. He recognizes the fact that his translation
may displease some critics "quod non semper verbum ex verbo, aut
quod breviorem explicationem quam tractatus auctorum habent, sive
non quod per ordinem ecclesiastici ritus omnia Evangelia percurrimus."

The Preface to Genesis suggests that the writer was familiar with Jerome's insistence on the
necessity for unusual faithfulness in translating the Bible.[13] Such comment implies a mind
surprisingly awake to the problems of translation.

The translator who left the narrow path of word for word reproduction
might, in this early period, easily be led into greater deviations
from source, especially if his own creative ability came into play.

The preface to St. Augustine's Soliloquies quoted above carries with
it a stimulus, not only to translation or compilation, but to work
like that of Caedmon or Cynewulf, essentially original in many respects,
though based, in the main, on material already given literary shape
in other languages.

Both characteristics are recognized in Anglo-Saxon comment. Caedmon, according to the famous
passage in Bede, "all that he could learn by hearing meditated with himself, and, as a clean
animal ruminating, turned into the sweetest verse."[14] Cynewulf in his Elene, gives us a remarkable
piece of author's comment[15] which describes the action of his own mind upon material already
committed to writing by others. On the other hand, it may be noted that the Andreas, based
like the Elene on a single written source, contains no hint that the author owes anything
to a version of the story in another language.[16]

In the English literature which developed in course of time after
the Conquest the methods of handling borrowed material were similar
in their variety to those we have observed in Anglo-Saxon times.

Translation, faithful except for the omission or addition of certain passages, compilation, epitome,
all the gradations between the close rendering and such an individual creation as Chaucer's
Troilus and Criseyde, are exemplified in the works appearing from
the thirteenth century on.

When Lydgate, as late as the fifteenth century, describes one of the processes by which literature
is produced, we are reminded of Anglo-Saxon comment. "Laurence,"[17] the poet's predecessor
in translating Boccaccio's Falls of Princes, is represented as

In his Prologue affirming of reason, That artificers having exercise,
May chaunge & turne by good discretion Shapes & formes, & newly them
devise: As Potters whiche to that craft entende Breake & renue their
vessels to amende.

...

And semblably these clerkes in writing Thing that was made of auctours
them beforn They may of newe finde & fantasye: Out of olde chaffe
trye out full fayre corne, Make it more freshe & lusty to the eye,
Their subtile witte their labour apply, With their colours agreable
of hue, To make olde thinges for to seme newe.[18]

The great majority
of these Middle English works contain within themselves no clear statement
as to which of the many possible methods have been employed in their
production.

As in the case of the Anglo-Saxon Andreas, a retelling in English
of a story already existing in another language often presents itself
as if it were an original composition.

The author who puts into the vernacular of his country a French romance may call it "my tale."
At the end of Launfal, a version of one of the lays of Marie de France, appears the declaration,
"Thomas Chestre made this tale."[19] The terms used to characterize
literary productions and literary processes often have not their modern
connotation.

"Translate" and "translation" are applied very loosely even as late as the sixteenth century. The
Legend of Good Women names Troilus and Criseyde beside The Romance of the Rose as "translated" work.[20]
Osbern Bokenam, writing in the next century, explains that he obtained the material for his
legend of St. Margaret "the last time I was in Italy, both by scripture and eke by mouth," but
he still calls the work a "translation."[21] Henry Bradshaw, purposing
in 1513 to "translate" into English the life of St. Werburge of Chester,
declares,

Unto this rude werke myne auctours these shalbe: Fyrst
the true legende and the venerable Bede, Mayster Alfrydus and Wyllyam
Malusburye, Gyrarde, Polychronicon, and other mo in deed.[22]

Lydgate
is requested to translate the legend of St. Giles "after the tenor
only"; he presents his work as a kind of "brief compilation," but
he takes no exception to the word "translate."[23] That he should
designate his St. Margaret, a fairly close following of one source,
a "compilation,"[24] merely strengthens the belief that the terms
"translate" and "translation" were used synonymously with various
other words.

Osbern Bokenam speaks of the "translator" who "compiled" the legend of St. Christiana in English;[25]
Chaucer, one remembers, "translated" Boethius and "made" the life of St. Cecilia.[26]

To select from this large body of literature, "made," "compiled," "translated," only such works as
can claim to be called, in the modern sense of the word, "translations" would be a difficult and
unprofitable task.

Rather one must accept the situation as it stands and consider the whole mass of such writings
as appear, either from the claims of their authors or on the authority of modern scholarship,
to be of secondary origin. "Translations" of this sort are numerous. Chaucer in his own time was
reckoned "grant translateur."[27] Of the books which Caxton a century later issued from his printing
press a large proportion were English versions of Latin or French
works.

Our concern, indeed, is with the larger and by no means the least valuable part of the literature
produced during the Middle English period.

The theory which accompanies this nondescript collection of translations is scattered throughout
various works, and is somewhat liable to misinterpretation if taken
out of its immediate context.

Before proceeding to consider it, however, it is necessary to notice certain phases of the general
literary situation which created peculiar difficulties for the translator or which are likely
to be confusing to the present-day reader.

As regards the translator, existing circumstances were not encouraging. In the early part of
the period he occupied a very lowly place. As compared with Latin, or even with French, the
English language, undeveloped and unstandardized, could make its appeal only to the unlearned.
It had, in the words of a thirteenth-century translator of Bishop Grosseteste's Castle of Love,
"no savor before a clerk."[28] Sometimes, it is true, the English writer had the stimulus
of patriotism.

The translator of Richard Coeur de Lion feels that Englishmen ought to be able to read in their
own tongue the exploits of the English hero. The Cursor Mundi is translated

In to Inglis tong to rede For the love of Inglis lede, Inglis lede of Ingland.[29]

But beyond this there was little to encourage the translator. His audience, as compared with the
learned and the refined, who read Latin and French, was ignorant
and undiscriminating; his crude medium was entirely unequal to reproducing
what had been written in more highly developed languages.

It is little wonder that in these early days his English should be termed "dim and dark." Even
after Chaucer had showed that the despised language was capable of
grace and charm, the writer of less genius must often have felt that
beside the more sophisticated Latin or French, English could boast
but scanty resources.

There were difficulties and limitations also in the choice of material to be translated. Throughout
most of the period literature existed only in manuscript; there were
few large collections in any one place; travel was not easy.

Priests, according to the prologue to Mirk's Festial, written in the early fifteenth century,
complained of "default of books."

To aspire, as did Chaucer's Clerk, to the possession of "twenty books" was to aspire high. Translators
occasionally give interesting details regarding the circumstances under which they read and translated.
The author of the life of St. Etheldred of Ely refers twice, with a certain pride, to a manuscript
preserved in the abbey of Godstow which he himself has seen and from which he has drawn some
of the facts which he presents. The translator of the alliterative romance of Alexander "borrowed"
various books when he undertook his English rendering.[30] Earl Rivers, returning from the Continent,
brought back a manuscript which had been lent him by a French gentleman,
and set about the translation of his Dictes and Sayings of the Old
Philosophers.[31] It is not improbable that there was a good deal
of borrowing, with its attendant inconveniences.

Even in the sixteenth century Sir Thomas Elyot, if we may believe his story, was hampered
by the laws of property. He became interested in the acts and wisdom of Alexander Severus, "which
book," he says, "was first written in the Greek tongue by his secretary Eucolpius and by good
chance was lent unto me by a gentleman of Naples called Padericus.

In reading whereof I was marvelously ravished, and as it hath ever been mine appetite, I wished
that it had been published in such a tongue as more men might understand it. Wherefore with
all diligence I endeavored myself whiles I had leisure to translate it into English: albeit
I could not so exactly perform mine enterprise as I might have done, if the owner had not importunately
called for his book, whereby I was constrained to leave some part of the work untranslated."[32]
William Paris--to return to the earlier period--has left on record
a situation which stirs the imagination.

He translated the legend of St. Cristine while a prisoner in the Isle of Man, the only retainer
of his unfortunate lord, the Earl of Warwick, whose captivity he chose to share.

He made this lyfe in ynglishe soo, As he satte in prison of stone,
Ever as he myghte tent therto Whane he had his lordes service done.[33]

One
is tempted to let the fancy play on the combination of circumstances
that provided him with the particular manuscript from which he worked.

It is easy, of course, to emphasize overmuch the scarcity and the
inaccessibility of texts, but it is obvious that the translator's
choice of subject was largely conditioned by opportunity.

He did not select from the whole range of literature the work which most appealed to his genius.
It is a far cry from the Middle Ages to the seventeenth century,
with its stress on individual choice.

Roscommon's advice,

Examine how your humour is inclined, And what the ruling passion of
your mind; Then seek a poet who your way does bend, And choose an
author as you choose a friend,

seems absurd in connection with the
translator who had to choose what was within his reach, and who, in
many cases, could not sit down in undisturbed possession of his source.

The

element of individual choice was also diminished by the intervention of friends and patrons. In
the fifteenth century, when translators were becoming communicative
about their affairs, there is frequent reference to suggestion from
without.

Allowing for interest in the new craft of printing, there is still
so much mention in Caxton's prefaces of commissions for translation
as to make one feel that "ordering" an English version of some foreign
book had become no uncommon thing for those who owned manuscripts
and could afford such commodities as translations.

Caxton's list ranges from The Fayttes of Armes, translated at the request of Henry VII from a manuscript
lent by the king himself, to The Mirrour of the World, "translated
... at the request, desire, cost, and dispense of the honorable and
worshipful man, Hugh Bryce, alderman and citizen of London."[34]

One
wonders also how the source, thus chosen, presented itself to the
translator's conception.

His references to it are generally vague or confused, often positively
misleading.

Yet to designate with any definiteness a French or Latin text was
no easy matter.

When one considers the labor that, of later years, has gone to the
classification and identification of old manuscripts, the awkward
elaboration of nomenclature necessary to distinguish them, the complications
resulting from missing pages and from the undue liberties of copyists,
one realizes something of the position of the medieval translator.

Even categories were not forthcoming for his convenience. The religious legend of St. Katherine
of Alexandria is derived from "chronicles";[35] the moral tale of The Incestuous Daughter has
its source in "romance";[36] Grosseteste's allegory, The Castle of Love, is presented as "a romance
of English ... out of a romance that Sir Robert, Bishop of Lincoln, made."[37] The translator who
explained "I found it written in old hand" was probably giving as adequate an account of his
source as truth would permit.

Moreover, part of the confusion had often arisen before the manuscript came into the hands of the
English translator. Often he was engaged in translating something
that was already a translation.

Most frequently it was a French version of a Latin original, but sometimes its ancestry was complicated
by the existence or the tradition of Greek or Hebrew sources. The medieval Troy story, with its
list of authorities, Dictys, Dares, Guido delle Colonne--to cite the favorite names--shows
the situation in an aggravated form.

In such cases the earlier translator's blunders and omissions in describing his source were likely
to be perpetuated in the new rendering.

Such, roughly speaking, were the circumstances under which the translator did his work. Some
of his peculiar difficulties are, approached from another angle, the difficulties of the present-day
reader. The presence of one or more intermediary versions, a complication especially noticeable in
England as a result of the French occupation after the Conquest,
may easily mislead us.

The originals of many of our texts are either non-extant or not yet discovered, but in cases where
we do possess the actual source which the English writer used, a disconcerting situation often becomes
evident.

What at first seemed to be the English translator's comment on his own treatment of source is
frequently only a literal rendering of a comment already present in his original. It is more
convenient to discuss the details of such cases in another context, but any general approach
to the theory of translation in Middle English literature must include
this consideration.

If we are not in possession of the exact original of a translation,
our conclusions must nearly always be discounted by the possibility
that not only the subject matter but the comment on that subject matter
came from the French or Latin source.

The pronoun of the first person must be regarded with a slight suspicion. "I" may refer to the
Englishman, but it may also refer to his predecessor who made a translation or a compilation
in French or Latin. "Compilation" suggests another difficulty. Sometimes an apparent reference
to source is only an appeal to authority for the confirmation of
a single detail, an appeal which, again, may be the work of the English
translator, but may, on the other hand, be the contribution of his
predecessor.

A fairly common situation, for example, appears in John Capgrave's Life of St. Augustine, produced,
as its author says, in answer to the request of a gentlewoman that he should "translate her truly
out of Latin the life of St. Augustine, great doctor of the church."

Of the work, its editor, Mr. Munro, says, "It looks at first sight
as though Capgrave had merely translated an older Latin text, as he
did in the Life of St. Gilbert; but no Latin life corresponding to
our text has been discovered, and as Capgrave never refers to 'myn
auctour,' and always alludes to himself as handling the material,
I incline to conclude that he is himself the original composer, and
that his reference to translation signifies his use of Augustine's
books, from which he translates whole passages."[38] In a case like
this it is evidently impossible to draw dogmatic conclusions.

It may be that Capgrave is using the word "translate" with medieval looseness, but it is also
possible that some of the comment expressed in the first person is
translated comment, and the editor adds that, though the balance of
probability is against it, "it is still possible that a Latin life
may have been used."

Occasionally, it is true, comment is stamped unmistakably as belonging to the English translator.
The translator of a Canticum de Creatione declares that there were

--fro the incarnacioun of Jhesu Til this rym y telle yow Were turned
in to englisch, A thousand thre hondred & seventy And fyve yere witterly.

Thus in bok founden it is.[39]

Such unquestionably English additions are, unfortunately, rare and
the situation remains confused.

But this is not the only difficulty which confronts the reader. He searches with disappointing
results for such general and comprehensive statements of the medieval translator's theory as
may aid in the interpretation of detail.

Such statements are few, generally late in date, and, even when not
directly translated from a predecessor, are obviously repetitions
of the conventional rule associated with the name of Jerome and adopted
in Anglo-Saxon times by Alfred and Aelfric.

An early fifteenth-century translator of the Secreta Secretorum,
for example, carries over into English the preface of the Latin translator:
"I have translated with great travail into open understanding of Latin
out of the language of Araby ... sometimes expounding letter by letter,
and sometimes understanding of understanding, for other manner of
speaking is with Arabs and other with Latin."[40] Lydgate makes a
similar statement:

I wyl translate hyt sothly as I kan, After the
lettre, in ordre effectuelly.



All that afternoon Norine was an object of the tenderest solicitude on the part of her three
Cuban guides. They momentarily expected to see her stricken. Then when she gave no sign of
distress they marveled, and expressed great admiration at her fortitude in enduring pain.

That night was spent at another farm-house. When on the next morning Norine not only was seen
to be alive and well, but insisted upon making her breakfast of mangoes and milk, the fellow
in the derby hat flung his hands on high and told O'Reilly:

"It is no less than a miracle, but now she courts the wrath of God, senor! As for me, I shall
never again associate with eccentric persons who delight to fly in the face of Providence.
It is my opinion that all Americans are crazy."

The party had penetrated to the foot-hills of the Sierra de Cubitas now, and as they ascended,
the scenery changed. Rarely is the Cuban landscape anything but pleasing. For the most part
green pastures sown with stately palm-trees and laid out as if for a picnic alternate with
low rolling hills, and in but few places are the altitudes at all impressive. It is a smiling
island. It has been said, too, that everything in it is friendly to man: the people are amiable,
warm-hearted; the very animals and insects are harmless. Cuban cattle are shy, but trusting;
Cuban horses are patient and affectionate; the serpents have no poison, and although the spiders
and the scorpions grow large and forbidding, their sting is ineffective. But here in the Cubitas
range all was different. The land was stern and forbidding: canons deep and damp raised dripping
walls to the sky; bridle-paths skirted ledges that were bold and fearsome, or lost themselves
in gloomy jungles as noisome as Spanish dungeons. Hidden away in these fastnesses, the rebel
Government had established its capital. Here, safe from surprise, the soldiers of Gomez and
Maceo and Garcia rested between attacks, nursing their wounded and recruiting their strength
for further sallies.

It was a strange seat of government--no nation ever had a stranger--for the state buildings
were huts of bark and leaves, the army was uniformed in rags. Cook-fires smoldered in the open
glades; cavalry horses grazed in the grassy streets, and wood- smoke drifted over them.

The second evening brought O'Reilly and Miss Evans safely through, and at news of the expedition's
success a pack-train was made ready to go to its assistance. Norine's letter from the New York
Junta was read, and the young woman was warmly welcomed. One of the better huts was vacated
for her use, and the officers of the provisional Government called to pay their respects.

XVII

THE CITY OF BEGGARS

There were other Americans in Cubitas, as O'Reilly soon discovered. During his first inspection
of the village he heard himself hailed in his own language, and a young man in dirty white
trousers and jacket strode toward him.

"Welcome to our city!" the stranger cried. "I'm Judson, Captain of Artillery, Departmento del
Oriente; and you're the fellow who came with that quinine lady, aren't you?"

O'Reilly acknowledged his identity, and Judson grinned:

"The whole camp is talking about her and those mangoes. Jove! It's a wonder she didn't die
of fright. Something tells me you're Irish. Anyhow, you look as if you'd enjoy a scrap. Know
anything about artillery?"

"Nothing whatever."

"I'm sorry. We need gunners. Still, you know as much as the rest of us did when we came."

"I'm not a fighter," Johnnie told him. "I'm here on--other business."

Captain Judson was plainly disappointed. Nevertheless, he volunteered to assist his countryman
in any way possible. "Have you met the old man," he inquired--"General Gomez?"

"No, I'd like to meet him."

"Come along, then; I'll introduce you. This is about the right time of day for it; he'll probably
be in good humor. He has dyspepsia, you know, and he's not always pleasant."

It was nearly sundown; the eastern slopes were in shadow, and supper was cooking. As the two
men passed down the wide street between its rows of bohios the fragrance of burning fagots
was heavy in the air--that odor which is sweet in the nostrils of every man who knows and loves
the out-of-doors. To O'Reilly it was like the scents of Araby, for his hopes were high, his
feet were light, and he believed his goal was in sight.

Gen. Maximo Gomez, father of patriots, bulwark of the Cuban cause, was seated in a hammock,
reading some letters; O'Reilly recognized him instantly from the many pictures he had seen.
Gomez was a keen, wiry old man; the color of his swarthy, sun-bitten cheeks was thrown into
deeper relief by his snow-white mustache and goatee. He looked up at Judson's salute and then
turned a pail of brilliant eyes, as hard as glass, upon O'Reilly. His was an irascible, brooding
face; it had in it something of the sternness, the exalted detachment, of the eagle, and O'Reilly
gained a hint of the personality behind it. Maximo Gomez was counted one of the world's ablest
guerrilla leaders; and indeed it had required the quenchless enthusiasm of a real military
genius to fuse into a homogeneous fighting force the ill-assorted rabble of nondescripts whom
Gomez led, to school them to privation and to render them sufficiently mobile to defy successfully
ten times their number of trained troops. This, however, was precisely what the old Porto-
Rican had done, and in doing it he had won the admiration of military students. He it was,
more than any other, who bore the burden of Cuba's unequal struggle; it was Gomez's cunning
and Gomez's indomitable will which had already subjugated half the island of Cuba; it was Gomez's
stubborn, unflagging resistance which was destined to shatter for all time the hopes of Spain
in the New World.

With a bluntness not unkind he asked O'Reilly what had brought him to Cuba, Then before the
young man could answer he gestured with a letter in his hand, saying:

"Major Ramos gives you splendid credit for helping him to land his expedition, but he says
you didn't come to fight with us. What does he mean?"

When O'Reilly explained the reason for his presence the old fighter nodded.

"So? You wish to go west, eh?"

"Yes, sir. I want to find Colonel Lopez."

"Lopez? Miguel Lopez?" the general inquired, quickly.

"I believe that's his name--at any rate the Colonel Lopez who has been operating in Matanzas
Province, You see, he knows the whereabouts of my--friends."

"Well, you won't have to look far for him." General Gomez's leathery countenance lightened
into a smile. "He happens to be right here in Cubitas." Calling Judson to him, he said: "Amigo,
take Mr. O'Reilly to Colonel Lopez; you will find him somewhere about. I am sorry we are not
to have this young fellow for a soldier; he looks like a real man and--quite equal to five
quintos, eh?"

It was the habit of the Cubans to refer to their enemies as quintos--the fifth part of a man!
With a wave of his hand Gomez returned to his reading.

As Judson led his companion away he said: "When you have finished with Lopez come to my shack
and we'll have supper and I'll introduce you to the rest of our gang. You won't get much to
eat, for we're short of grub; but it's worse where Lopez comes from."

Col. Miguel Lopez, a handsome, animated fellow, took O'Reilly's hand in a hearty clasp when
they were introduced; but a moment later his smile gave way to a frown and his brow darkened.

"So! You are that O'Reilly from Matanzas," said he. "I know you now, but--I never expected
we would meet."

"Esteban Varona told you about me, did he not?"

The colonel inclined his head.

"I'm here at last, after the devil's own time. I've been trying every way to get through. The
Spaniards stopped me at Puerto Principe--they sent me back home, you know. I've been half crazy.
I--You--" O'Reilly swallowed hard. "You know where Esteban is? Tell me-"

"Have you heard nothing?"

"Nothing whatever. That is, nothing since Rosa, his sister--You understand, she and I are--engaged-"

"Yes, yes; Esteban told me all about you."

Something in the Cuban's gravity of manner gave O'Reilly warning. A sudden fear assailed him.
His voice shook as he asked:

"What is it? My God! Not bad news?"

There was no need for the officer to answer. In his averted gaze O'Reilly read confirmation
of his sickest apprehensions. The men faced each other for a long moment, while the color slowly
drove out of the American's cheeks, leaving him pallid, stricken. He wet his lips to speak,
but his voice was no more than a dry, throaty rustle.

"Tell me! Which one?" he whispered.

"Both!"

O'Reilly recoiled; a spasm distorted his chalky face. He began to shake weakly, and his fingers
plucked aimlessly at each other.

Lopez took him by the arm. "Try to control yourself," said he. "Sit here while I try to tell
you what little I know. Or, would it not be better to wait awhile, until you are calmer?" As
the young man made no answer, except to stare at him in a white agony of suspense, he sighed:
"Very well, then, as you wish. But you must be a man, like the rest of us. I, too, have suffered.
My father"-- Lopez's mustached lip drew back, and his teeth showed through-- "died in the Laurel
Ditch at Cabanas. On the very day after my first victory they shot him--an old man, Christ!
It is because of such things that we Cubans fight while we starve--that we shall continue to
fight until no Spaniard is left upon this island. We have all faced something like that which
you are facing now--our parents murdered, our sisters and our sweethearts wronged. ..."

O'Reilly, huddled where he had sunk upon the bench, uttered a gasping, inarticulate cry, and
covered his face as if from a lash.

"I will tell you all I know--which isn't much. Esteban Varona came to me soon after he and
his sister had fled from their home; he wanted to join my forces, but we were harassed on every
side, and I didn't dare take the girl--no woman could have endured the hardships we suffered.
So I convinced him that his first duty was to her, rather than to his country, and he agreed.
He was a fine boy! He had spirit. He bought some stolen rifles and armed a band of his own--which
wasn't a bad idea. I used to hear about him. Nobody cared to molest him, I can tell you, until
finally he killed some of the regular troops. Then of course they went after him. Meanwhile,
he managed to destroy his own plantations, which Cueto had robbed him of. You knew Cueto?"

"Yes."

"Well, Esteban put an end to him after a while; rode right up to La Joya one night, broke in
the door, and macheted the scoundrel in his bed. But there was a mistake of some sort. It seems
that a body of Cobo's Volunteers were somewhere close by, and the two parties met. I have never
learned all the details of the affair, and the stories of that fight which came to me are too
preposterous for belief. Still, Esteban and his men must have fought like demons, for they
killed some incredible number. But they were human--they could not defeat a regiment. It seems
that only one or two of them escaped."

"Esteban? Did he--"

Colonel Lopez nodded; then he said, gravely: "Cobo takes no prisoners. I was in the Rubi hills
at the time, fighting hard, and it was six weeks before I got back into Matanzas. Naturally,
when I heard what had happened, I tried to find the girl, but Weyler was concentrating the
pacificos by that time, and there was nobody left in the Yumuri; it was a desert."

"Then you don't know positively that she ... that she--"

"Wait. There is no doubt that the boy was killed, but of Rosa's fate I can only form my own
opinion. However, one of Esteban's men joined my troops later, and I not only learned something
about the girl, but also why Esteban had been so relentlessly pursued. It was all Cobo's doings.
You have heard of the fellow? No? Well, you will." The speaker's tone was eloquent of hatred.
"He is worse than the worst of them--a monster! He had seen Miss Varona. She was a beautiful
girl. ..."

"Go on!" whispered the lover.

"I discovered that she didn't at first obey Weyler's edict. She and the two negroes--they were
former slaves of her father, I believe--took refuge in the Pan de Matanzas. Later on, Cobo's
men made a raid and--killed a great many. Some few escaped into the high ravines, but Miss
Varona was not one of them. Out of regard for Esteban I made careful search, but I could find
no trace of her."

"And yet, you don't know what happened?" O'Reilly ventured. "You're not sure?"

"No, but I tell you again Cobo's men take no prisoners. When I heard about that raid I gave
up looking for her."

"This--Cobo"--the American's voice shook in spite of his effort to hold it steady--"I shall
hope to meet him some time."

The sudden fury that filled Colonel Lopez's face was almost hidden by the gloom. "Yes. Oh yes!"
he cried, quickly, "and you are but one of a hundred; I am another. In my command there is
a standing order to spare neither Cobo nor any of his assassins; they neither expect nor receive
quarter from us. Now, companero"--the Cuban dropped a hand on O'Reilly's bowed head--"I am
sorry that I had to bring you such evil tidings, but, we are men--and this is war."

"No, no! It isn't war--it's merciless savagery! To murder children and to outrage women--why,
that violates all the ethics of warfare."

"Ethics!" the colonel cried, harshly. "Ethics? Hell is without ethics. Why look for ethics
in war? Violence--injustice--insanity- -chaos--THAT is war. It is man's agony--woman's despair.
It is a defiance of God. War is without mercy, without law; it is--well, it is the absence
of all law, all good."

There was a considerable silence. Then Lopez went on in another key.

"We Cubans carry heavy hearts, but our wrongs have made us mighty, and our sufferings have
made us brave. Here in the orient we do well enough; but, believe me, you cannot imagine the
desolation and the suffering farther west--whole provinces made barren and their inhabitants
either dead or dying. The world has never seen anything like Weyler's slaughter of the innocents.
If there is indeed a God--and sometimes I doubt it--he will not permit this horror to continue;
from every pool of Cuban blood another patriot will spring up, until we drive that archfiend
and his armies into the sea. Go back to your own country now, and if your grief has made you
one of us in sympathy, tell the world what that black butcher in Havana is doing, and beg your
Government to recognize our belligerency, so that we may have arms. ARMS!"

It was some time before O'Reilly spoke; then he said, quietly: "I am not going back. I am going
to stay here and look for Rosa."

"So!" exclaimed the colonel. "Well, why not? So long as we do not know precisely what has happened
to her, we can at least hope. But, if I were you, I would rather think of her as dead than
as a prisoner in some concentration camp. You don't know what those camps are like, my friend,
but I do. Now I shall leave you. One needs to be alone at such an hour--eh?" With a pressure
of his hand, Colonel Lopez walked away into the darkness.

Judson and his adventurous countryman did not see O'Reilly that night, nor, in fact, did any
one. But the next morning he appeared before General Gomez. He was haggard, sick, listless.
The old Porto-Rican had heard from Lopez in the mean time; he was sympathetic.

"I am sorry you came all the way to hear such bad news," he said. "War is a sad, hopeless business."

"But I haven't given up hope," O'Reilly said. "I want to stay here and--and fight."

"I inferred as much from what Lopez told me." The general nodded his white head. "Well, you'll
make a good soldier, and we shall be glad to have you." He extended his hand, and O'Reilly
took it gratefully.

The city of Matanzas was "pacified." So ran the boastful bando of the captain-general. And
this was no exaggeration, as any one could see from the number of beggars there. Of all his
military operations, this "pacification" of the western towns and provinces was the most conspicuously
successful and the one which gave Valeriano Weyler the keenest satisfaction; for nowhere did
rebellion lift its head--except, perhaps, among the ranks of those disaffected men who hid
in the hills, with nothing above them but the open sky. As for the population at large, it
was cured of treason; it no longer resisted, even weakly, the law of Spain. The reason was
that it lay dying. Weyler's cure was simple, efficacious--it consisted of extermination, swift
and pitiless.

Poverty had been common in Matanzas, even before the war, but now there were so many beggars
in the city that nobody undertook to count them. When the refugees began to pour in by the
thousands, and when it became apparent that the Government intended to let them starve, the
better citizens undertook an effort at relief; but times were hard, food was scarce, and prices
high. Moreover, it soon transpired that the military frowned upon everything like organized
charity, and in consequence the new-comers were, perforce, abandoned to their own devices.
These country people were dumb and terrified at the misfortunes which had overtaken them; they
wandered the streets in aimless bewilderment, fearful of what blow might next befall. They
were not used to begging, and therefore they did not often implore alms; but all day long they
asked for work, for bread, that their little ones might live. Work, however, was even scarcer
than food, and the time soon came when they crouched upon curbs and door-steps, hopeless, beaten,
silently reproachful of those more fortunate than they. Their eyes grew big and hollow; their
outstretched hands grew gaunt and skinny. The sound of weeping women and fretting babies became
a common thing to hear.

In the suburbs, just within the ring of guardian forts, an "area of cultivation" was set aside,
and here the prisoners put up huts of yagua--comfortless bark shelters, which were well enough,
perhaps, in fair weather, but sadly ineffective against wind and rain. Here, housed with hunger
and crowded together in indescribable squalor, they dwelt, seeking comfort in their common
wretchedness. Since they had no farm implements, no seeds, no means whatever of cultivating
this ground apportioned to their use, it remained untilled while they grew hungrier day by
day. Outside the lines there were yams, potatoes, edible roots and such, for the Spaniards'
work of desolation had not been quite complete, and no hand can rob the Cuban soil of all its
riches; but the pacificos were not allowed to leave the city.

Fish were plentiful in the harbor, too, but to catch them was forbidden. Sentries were on guard
with ready rifles and bared machetes; every morning through the filthy reconcentrado quarter
guerrillas drove pack-mules bearing the mutilated bodies of those who had dared during the
night to seek food surreptitiously. Sometimes they dragged these ghastly reminders at the ends
of ropes; this, indeed, was a favorite way with them.

Dogs and cats became choice articles of diet, until they disappeared. The Government did supply
one quality of food, however; at intervals, it distributed yucca roots. But these were starchy
and almost indigestible. From eating them the children grew pinched in limb and face, while
their abdomens bloated hugely. Matanzas became peopled with a race of grotesquely misshapen
little folks, gnomes with young bodies, but with faces old and sick.

Of course disease became epidemic, for in the leaky hovels, dirt- floored and destitute of
any convenience, there could be no effort at sanitation. Conditions became unspeakable. The
children died first, then the aged and infirm. Deaths in the street were not uncommon; nearly
every morning bodies were found beneath the portales. Starving creatures crept to the market
in the hope of begging a stray bit of food, and some of them died there, between the empty
stalls. The death-wagons, heavy with their daily freight, rumbled ceaselessly through the streets,
adding to the giant piles of unburied corpses outside the city.

Typhoid, smallpox, yellow fever, raged unchecked. The hospitals were crowded, and even in them
the commonest necessities were lacking. It is believed that men have returned from the grave,
but no one, either Spaniard or Cuban, had ever been known to return from one of these pest-houses,
and, in consequence, those who were stricken preferred to remain and to die among their dear ones.

Yes, Matanzas was pacified. Weyler's boast was true. Nowhere in the entire province was a field
in cultivation; nowhere, outside the garrisoned towns, was a house left standing. Nor was the
city of Matanzas the only concentration camp; there were others dotted through Santa Clara,
Habana, and Pinar del Rio. In them half a million people cried for food. Truly no rebellious
land was ever more completely pacified than this, no people's spirits ever more completely
crushed. Voices no longer preached resistance; they prayed to "Our Lady of Pity" for a merciful
conclusion of this misery. Hands were upraised, but only to implore. In leaky huts from Jucaro
to Cape San Antonio the dead lay huddled thickly.

Into Matanzas, city of beggary and death, came Rosa Varona and her two negro companions, looking
for relief. They made the journey without mishap, for they were too destitute to warrant plundering,
and Rosa's disguise concealed what charms remained to her. But once they had entered the city,
what an awakening! What suffering, what poverty, what rags they saw! The three of them grew
weak with dismay at the horror of it all; but there was no retreat.

Asensio built a makeshift shelter close under La Cumbre--from it the ruins of the Quinta de
Esteban were visible--and there they settled down to live. They had hoped to lose themselves
among the other prisoners, and in this they were successful, for none of their miserable neighbors
were in any condition to notice them, and there was nothing sufficiently conspicuous about
two tattered blacks and their hunchbacked daughter to draw attention from the soldiers.

Asensio foraged zealously, and at first he managed somehow to secure enough food for his little
family. He developed a real talent for discovering vegetables and fruits. He stole, he begged,
and he found food where there was none. One day the soldiers seized him and put him to work
on the fortifications along with a gang of other men who appeared strong enough to stand hard
labor. Asensio was not paid for this, but he was allowed one meal a day, and he succeeded in
bringing home each night a share of his allotment.

It is surprising how little nourishment will sustain life. Rosa and her two friends had long
felt the pinch of hunger, but now they plumbed new depths of privation, for there were days
when Asensio and his fellow-conscripts received nothing at all. After a time Evangelina began
making baskets and weaving palm-leaf hats, which she sold at six cents each. She taught Rosa
the craft, and they worked from dawn until dark, striving with nimble, tireless fingers to
supplement Asensio's rations and postpone starvation. But it was a hopeless task. Other nimble
fingers worked as tirelessly as theirs, and the demand for hats was limited.

Their hut overlooked the road to San Severino, that via dolorosa on which condemned prisoners
were marched out to execution, and in time the women learned to recognize the peculiar blaring
notes of a certain cornet, which signified that another "Cuban cock was about to crow." When
in the damp of dewy mornings they heard that bugle they ceased their weaving long enough to
cross themselves and whisper a prayer for the souls of those who were on their way to die.
But this was the only respite they allowed themselves.

Rosa meditated much upon the contrast between her present and her former condition. Matanzas
was the city of her birth, and time was when she had trod its streets in arrogance and pride,
when she had possessed friends by the score among its residents. But of all these there was
not one to whom she dared appeal in this, her hour of need. These were harsh times; Spanish
hatred of the revolutionists was bitter, and of the Cuban sympathizers none were left. Moreover,
Esteban's denouncement as a traitor had estranged all who remained loyal to the crown, and
so far as Rosa herself was concerned, she knew that it would not matter to them that she had
cleaved to him merely from sisterly devotion: by that act she had made herself a common enemy
and they would scarcely sympathize with her plight. The girl had learned only too well what
spirit was abroad. But even had she felt assured of meeting sympathy, her pride was pure Castilian,
and it would never down. She, a Varona, whose name was one to conjure with, whose lineage was
of the highest! She to beg? The thing was quite impossible. One crumb, so taken, would have
choked her. Rosa preferred to suffer proudly and await the hour when hunger or disease would
at last blot out her memories of happy days and end this nightmare misery.

Then, too, she dreaded any risk of discovery by old Mario de Castano, who was a hard, vindictive
man. His parting words had shown her that he would never forgive the slight she had put upon
him; and she did not wish to put his threats to the test. Once Rosa saw him, on her way to
buy a few centavos' worth of sweet- potatoes; he was huddled in his victoria, a huge bladder
of flesh, and he rode the streets deaf to the plaints of starving children, blind to the misery
of beseeching mothers. Rosa shrank into a doorway and drew her tattered shawl closer over her
face for fear Don Mario might recognize in this misshapen body and in these pinched, discolored
features the beauteous blossom he had craved.

Nor did she forget Colonel Cobo. The man's memory haunted her, asleep and awake; of him she
was most desperately afraid. When for the first time she saw him riding at the head of his
cutthroats she was like to swoon in her tracks, and for a whole day thereafter she cowered
in the hut, trembling at every sound.

In these dark hours she recalled the stories of the old Varona treasure and Esteban's interesting
theory of its whereabouts, but she could not bring herself to put much faith in either. At
the time of her brother's recital she had been swayed by his conviction, but now on cooler
thought a dozen explanations of Dona Isabel's possession of that doubloon offered themselves,
no one of which seemed less probable than Esteban's. Of course it was barely possible that
there was indeed a treasure, and even that Esteban's surmise had been correct. But it was little
more than a remote possibility. Distance lends a rosy color of reality to our most absurd imaginings,
but, like the haze that tints a far-off landscape, it dissolves upon approach. Now that Rosa
was here, in sight of the ruined quinta itself, her hopes and half-beliefs faded.

She wanted, oh, so desperately, to believe in it, but the grinding misery of her situation
made it hard to do so. Wonders like that came true only in fairy stories, she told herself;
and certainly she had no cause to consider herself a favorite of fortune.

More than once she was tempted to confide in Evangelina and Asensio, but she thought better
of it. Although she put implicit faith in Evangelina's discretion, she knew that Asensio was
not the sort of fellow to be trusted with a secret of great magnitude- -he was boastful, talkative,
excitable; he was just the sort, to bring destruction upon all of them. Rosa had sufficient
intelligence to realize that even if she found her father's riches they would only constitute
another and a greater menace to the lives of all of them. Nevertheless, she wished to set her
mind at rest once and for all. Taking Evangelina with her, she climbed La Cumbre one day in
search of roots and vegetables.

It turned out to be a sad experience for both women. The negress wept noisily at the destruction
wrought by Pancho Cueto, and Rosa was overcome by painful memories. Little that was familiar
remained; evidence of Cueto's all-devouring greed spoke from the sprouting furrows his men
had dug, from the naked trees they had felled and piled in orderly heaps, from the stones and
mortar of the house itself. Tears blinded Rosa. After a time she left the black woman mourning
among the ruins and stole away to the sunken garden. Here the marks of vandalism were less
noticeable. Nevertheless, few signs of beauty remained. Neglected vines drooped spiritlessly
from the ledges: such fruit-trees as had been spared were sickly and untended; time and the
elements had all but completed the disheartening work.

The well remained, although it had been planked over, but it was partially filled up with rubbish,
as Rosa discovered when she peered into it. Only a tiny pool of scum was in the bottom. After
a long scrutiny the girl arose, convinced at last of her brother's delusion, and vaguely ashamed
of her own credulity. This was about the last repository that such a man as Don Esteban, her
father, would have been likely to select; for, after all, the most valuable part of his fortune
had consisted of the deeds of title to the plantations. No, if ever there had been a treasure,
it was hidden elsewhere; all of value that this well contained for Rosa was her memory of a
happiness departed. Of such memories, the well, the whole place, was brimful. Here, as a child,
she had romped with Esteban. Here, as a girl, she had dreamed her first dreams, and here O'Reilly,
her smiling knight, had found her. Yonder was the very spot where he had held her in his arms
and begged her to await the day of his return. Well, she had waited.

But was that Rosa Varona who had promised so freely and so confidently this pitiful Rosa whose
bones protruded through her rags? It could not be. Happiness, contentment, hope--these were
fictions; only misery, despair, and pain were real. But it had been a glorious dream, at any
rate--a dream which Rosa vowed to cherish always.

Evangelina found the girl sitting in the sun, her thin face radiant, her great eyes wet but
smiling.

"Come, little dove," said the negress, "there is nothing here to eat; we must get back to our
weaving."

XVIII

SPEAKING OF FOOD

It was part of the strategy practised by the Cuban leaders to divide their forces into separate
columns for the purpose of raiding the smaller Spanish garrisons and harassing the troops sent
to their relief, reassembling these bands only when and where some telling blow was to be struck.
Not only had the military value of this practice been amply demonstrated, but it had been proved
a necessity, owing to the fact that the Insurrectos were compelled to live off the country.

When O'Reilly and Branch enlisted in the Army of the Orient they were assigned to the command
of Colonel Miguel Lopez, and it was under his leadership that they made their first acquaintance
with the peculiar methods of Cuban warfare.

Active service for the two Americans began at once; scarcely a week had passed before Leslie
Branch gained his opportunity of tasting the "salt of life" in its full flavor, for the young
Matanzas colonel was one of the few Cuban commanders who really enjoyed a fight.

There had been, at first, some doubt of Branch's fitness to take the field at all--he had suffered
a severe hemorrhage shortly after his arrival at Cubitas--and it was only after a hysterical
demonstration on his part that he had been accepted as a soldier. He simply would not be left
behind. At first the Cubans regarded him with mingled contempt and pity, for certainly no less
promising volunteer had ever taken service with them. Nevertheless, he would doubtless have
made many friends among them had he not begun his service by refusing to abide by discipline
of any sort and by scorning all instruction in the use of arms, declaring this to be, in his
case, a silly waste of effort. Such an attitude very naturally aroused resentment among the
other men; it was not long before they began to grumble at the liberty allowed this headstrong
weakling. But upon the occasion of the very first fight this ill-will disappeared as if by
magic, for, although Branch deliberately disobeyed orders, he nevertheless displayed such amazing
audacity in the face of the enemy, such a theatrical contempt for bullets, as to stupefy every
one. Moreover, he lived up to his reputation; he continued to be insanely daring, varying his
exploits to correspond with his moods, with the result that he attained a popularity which
was unique, nay, sensational.

His conduct in the face of this general admiration was no less unexpected than his behavior
under fire: Branch gruffly refused to accept any tribute whatever; he snarled, he fairly barked
at those of his comrades who tried to express their appreciation of his conduct--a demeanor
which of course awakened even greater admiration among the Cubans. He was uniformly surly and
sour; he sneered, he scoffed, he found fault. He had the tongue of a common scold, and he used
it with malevolent abandon.

It was fortunate indeed that he knew no Spanish and that most of his companions were equally
ignorant of English, for mere admiration, even of the fervent Latin quality, would scarcely
have been proof against his spleen. As it was, his camp-mates endured his vituperations blandly,
putting him down as a pleasing eccentric in whom there blazed a curious but inspiring spirit
of patriotism.

O'Reilly alone understood the reason for the fellow's morbid irritability, his suicidal recklessness;
but when he privately remonstrated he was gruffly told to mind his own business. Branch flatly
refused to modify his conduct; he seemed really bent upon cheating the disease that made his
life a misery.

But, as usual, Fate was perverse; she refused to humor the sick man's hope. When, after blindly
inviting death, Leslie had emerged from several engagements unscathed, his surprise--and perhaps
a natural relief at finding himself whole--became tinged with a certain apprehension lest he
survive those deliberately courted dangers, only to succumb to the ills and privations of camp
life. Cuban equipment was of the scantiest. Cuban dews are heavy; Cuban nights are cool--these
were perils indeed for a weak-lunged invalid. Branch began to fret. Rain filled him with more
terror than fixed bayonets, a chill caused him keener consternation than did a thousand Spaniards;
he began to have agonizing visions of himself lying in some leaky hovel of a hospital. It was
typical of his peculiar irritability that he held O'Reilly in some way responsible, and vented
upon him his bitterness of spirit.

The fellow's tongue grew ever sharper; his society became intolerable, his gloom oppressive
and irresistibly contagious. When, after several weeks of campaigning, the column went into
camp for a short rest, O'Reilly decided that he would try to throw off the burden of Leslie's
overwhelming dejection, and, if possible, shift a portion of it upon the shoulders of Captain
Judson.

On the day after their arrival O'Reilly and the big artilleryman took advantage of a pleasant
stream to bathe and wash their clothes; then, while they lay in their hammocks, enjoying the
luxury of a tattered oil-cloth shelter and waiting for the sun to dry their garments, O'Reilly
spoke what was in his mind.

"I'm getting about fed up on Leslie," he declared. "He's the world's champion crepe-hanger,
and he's painted the whole world such a deep, despondent blue that I'm completely dismal. You've
got to take him off my hands."

Judson grunted. "What ails him?"

"Well, he wears a wreath of immortelles day and night. Haven't you guessed why he runs such
desperate chances? He's sick--thinks he's going to die, anyhow, and wants to finish the job
quick. I'm the one who has to endure him."

"Suicide?"

"It amounts to that."

"The devil!" Judson pondered for a moment. "Can't you cheer him up?"

"I?" O'Reilly lifted his hands in a gesture of helplessness. "When I try he gets sore at my
heartless indifference; when I sympathize he declares I'm nudging him closer to his grave--says
I'm kicking the crutches out from under him. He's just plain vitriol. I--I'd rather live with
an adder!"

O'Reilly's youthful asistente, who at the moment was painstakingly manufacturing a huge, black
cigar for himself out of some purloined tobacco, pricked up his ears at the mention of Branch's
name and now edged closer, exclaiming:

"Carumba! There's a hero for you. Meester Branch is the bravest man I ever seen. Our people
call him 'El Demonio'!"

O'Reilly jerked his head toward the Cuban. "You see? He's made the hit of his life, and yet
he resents it. The Cubans are beginning to think he carries a rabbit's foot."

"No rabbit's foot about it," the captain asserted. "He's just so blamed thin the Spaniards
can't hit him; it's like shooting at the edge of a playing-card. Annie Oakley is the only one
who can do that."

"Well, my nerves are frayed out. I've argued myself hoarse, but he misconstrues everything
I say. I wish you'd convince him that he has a chance to get well; it might alter his disposition.
If SOMETHING doesn't alter it I'll be court-martialed for shooting a man in his sleep--and
I'll hit him, right in the middle, no matter how slim he is." O'Reilly compressed his lips firmly.

The asistente, who had finished rolling his cigar, now lighted it and repeated: "Yes, sir,
Meester Branch is the bravest man I ever seen. You remember that first battle, eh? Those Spaniards
seen him comin' and threw down their guns and beat it. Jesus Cristo! I laugh to skill myself
that day."

"Jacket" was at once the youngest and the most profane member of Colonel Lopez's entire command.
The most shocking oaths fell from his beardless lips whenever he opened them to speak English,
and O'Reilly's efforts to break the boy of the habit proved quite unavailing.

"Colonel Miguel," continued Jacket, "he say if he's got a hunnerd sick men like El Demonio
he'll march to Habana. By God! What you think of that?"

Judson rolled in his hammock until his eyes rested upon the youth. Then he said, "You're quite
a man of arms yourself, for a half- portion."

"Eh?" The object of this remark was not quite sure that he understood.

"I mean you're a pretty good fighter, for a little fellow."

"Hell, yes!" agreed the youth. "I can fight."

"Better look out that some big Spaniard doesn't carry you off in his pocket and eat you," O'Reilly
warned; at which the boy grinned and shook his head. He was just becoming accustomed to the
American habit of banter, and was beginning to like it.

"Jacket would make a bitter mouthful," Judson ventured.

The lad smiled gently and drew on his huge cigar. "You betcher life. That----Spaniard would
spit me out quick enough."

This Camagueyan boy was a character. He was perhaps sixteen, and small for his age--a mere
child, in fact. Nevertheless, he was a seasoned veteran, and his American camp-mates had grown
exceedingly fond of him. He was a pretty, graceful youngster; his eyes were large and soft
and dark; his face was as sensitive and mobile as that of a girl; and yet, despite his youth,
he had won a reputation for daring and ferocity quite as notable in its way as was the renown
of Leslie Branch.

There were many of these immature soldiers among the Insurrectos, and most of them were in
some way distinguished for valor. War, it seems, fattens upon the tenderest of foods, and every
army has its boys--its wondrous, well-beloved infants, whom their older comrades tease, torment,
and idolize. Impetuous, drunk with youth, and keeping no company with care, they form the very
aristocracy of fighting forces. They gaily undertake the maddest of adventures; and by their
examples they fire the courage of their maturer comrades. All history is spiced with their
exploits.

Jacket was one of these, and he was perhaps the truest patriot of any soldier in Miguel Lopez's
band; for liberty, to him, was not a mere abstraction or a principle, but something real, tangible,
alive--something worthy of the highest sacrifice. In his person all the wrongs of Cuba burned
perpetually. It mattered not that he himself had never suffered--his spirit was the spirit
of his country, pure, exalted, undefiled. He stood for what the others fought for.

In order to expand his knowledge of English--of which, by the way, he was inordinately proud--Jacket
had volunteered to serve as O'Reilly's striker, and the result had been a fast friendship.
It was O'Reilly who had given the boy his nickname--a name prompted by a marked eccentricity,
for although Jacket possessed the two garments which constituted the ordinary Insurrecto uniform,
he made a practice of wearing only one. On chilly nights, or on formal occasions, he wore both
waistcoat and trousers, but at other times he dispensed entirely with the latter, and his legs
went naked. They were naked now, as, with the modesty of complete unconsciousness, he squatted
in the shade, puffing thoughtfully at his giant cheroot.

Once Jacket's mind was fastened upon any subject, it remained there, and after a time he continued:

"Yes, I bet I don't taste good to no Spaniard. Did I told you about that battle of Pino Bravo?
Eh?" He turned his big brown eyes upward to O'Reilly. "Cristo! I skill more'n a dozen men that
day!"

"Oh, Jacket!" the Americans cried. "You monstrous little liar!" commented O'Reilly.

"Si, senors," the boy went on, complacently. "That day I skill more'n six men. It was this
way; we came on them from behind and they don't see us. Phui! We skill plenty, all right!"

"It was a hot scrimmage," Judson attested. "Some of Luque's niggers, those tall, lean, hungry
fellows from Santiago, managed to hack their way through a wire fence and get behind a detachment
of the enemy who had made a stand under a hill. They charged, and for a wonder they got close
enough to use their machetes. It was bloody work--the kind you read about--no quarter. Somehow
Jacket managed to be right in the middle of the butchery. He's a bravo kid, all right. Muy malo!"

There was a moment's silence, then Judson continued: "Funny thing happened afterward, though.
Jacket had to do his turn at picket duty that night, and he got scared of the dark. We heard
him squalling and screaming--"

Jacket started to his feet. "That's a dam' lie." he exclaimed, resentfully. "I'm not scared
of no dark."

"Didn't you holler till you woke the whole camp?"

"I ain't scared of no dark," the boy repeated; but his pride, his complacency, had suddenly
vanished. He dug his toes into the dirt; in his eyes were tears of mortification. His cigar
had evidently become tasteless, for he removed it from his lips and gazed at it indifferently.

"Did you cry?" O'Reilly smiled; and the lad nodded reluctantly.

"Did he cry?" Judson echoed. "Why, we thought we were attacked. He put the whole camp in an
uproar."

"What was the trouble, Jacket?"

"I--I was--" The boy's smooth brown cheeks paled, and his moist eyes dilated at the memory.
"I ain't scared of any-------Spaniard when he's ALIVE, but--it's different when he's dead.
I could see dead ones everywhere!" He shuddered involuntarily. "They fetched me to General
Gomez and--Caramba! he's mad. But after I tell him what I seen in the dark he say I don't have
to go back there no more. He let me go to sleep 'longside of his hammock, and bimeby I quit
cryin'. I ain't never stood no picket duty since that night. I won't do it."

It was plain that discussion of this unhappy subject was deeply distasteful to the youthful
hero of Pino Bravo, for he edged away, and a moment later disappeared. "Queer little youngster,"
Captain Judson said, meditatively. "He idolizes you."

O'Reilly nodded. "Yes, poor little kid. I wonder what will become of him after the war? After
the war!" he mused. "I wonder if it will ever end."

"Humph! If we had more generals like Gomez and Garcia and Maceo--"

"We've got three better generals than they."

"You mean---"

"Generals June, July, and August."

"Oh yes!" The artilleryman nodded his understanding. "There's no end of yellow-jack among the
Spaniards. Speaking of that, what do you think of Miss Evans's work in the field hospitals?"

Judson shifted his weight so that his eyes could rest upon a white tent which showed through
the greenery at a distance; it was the one tent in all the encampment, and it had been erected
that very morning to shelter Norine Evans, but just arrived from headquarters in the Cubitas
hills. The captain's lids were half closed; his heavy, homely face was softened by a peculiar
rapt expression. He did not seem to expect an answer to his question.

"I don't think much of it," O'Reilly confessed.

"You don't!" Judson brought himself back to earth with a start. "Humph! Well, I think it's
perfectly wonderful. I think she's the most wonderful woman, and--" His voice died out; he
turned once more in the direction of the tent.

O'Reilly smiled, understanding now the reason for his companion's reckless, almost frenzied
use of soap and water that morning, and his cheerful stoicism in the hands of a volunteer barber
more accustomed to the uses of a machete than a razor.

Evidently Judson had fallen, too--along with Major Ramos, and Colonel Lopez, and Leslie Branch,
and all the rest. Well, it was to be expected. Before he had been a week in Cuba O'Reilly had
noticed that Miss Evans was a mystery and a delight to nearly every man she met.

"So YOU'VE got it, eh?" he inquired.

"Got what?" Judson did not turn his eyes.

"It."

"It? If you can't talk English, talk Spanish."

O'Reilly was not perturbed by this gruffness. "I think her presence here is the silliest, the
most scandalous thing I ever heard of," said he. "The idea of a girl of her accomplishments,
her means, alone in Cuba! Why, it's criminal!"

Judson's gunny-sacking hammock bulged beneath him. It threatened to give way as he sat up with
a jerk and swung his bare legs over the side. His face was dark; he was scowling; his chin
was pugnaciously outthrust and his voice rumbled as he exclaimed:

"The deuce it is! Say! I don't like the way you talk about that girl."

"You don't, eh?" O'Reilly eyed him quizzically. "Would you care to have your sister do what
she's doing?"

"That's not the point. You can't compare her with ordinary women."

"Well, this isn't an ordinary environment for a woman, no matter who she is. These Cubans are
bound to talk about her."

"Are they?" Judson glared at the speaker. "I'd like to hear 'em. I'd like to see somebody get
fresh. Why, SAY!"--he clenched his powerful hands--"I'd fill their hospitals until they bulged."
After a moment he continued: "I s'pose it's natural for you to worry, since you're responsible
for her being here, in a way, but- -" His tone changed, he relaxed and lay back in his hammock.
"Oh, well, you're about the only man I can't hate."

"Jealous, are you? I didn't know you were in so deep."

The other shook his head. "Oh, I'm daffy. D'you think she'd have me?"

"Not a chance."

"Hey? Why not? I'm a good big husky--I'll get a Government job when the war is over and---"

"That's just the trouble. She'll fall for some poor, sickly unfortunate, with one leg. She's
the sort that always does. She's the sort that has to have something to 'mother.' Lord, I'd
give a good deal to see her safely back in New York!"

Judson, it seemed, had a better understanding of artillery than of women; he pondered O'Reilly's
statement seriously, and his face clouded.

"Some sickly fellow. Some fellow like Branch, eh?" After a moment he continued, more hopefully:
"Well, it won't be HIM; he'll soon be dead. There's some consolation in that. I could almost--"

O'Reilly motioned for silence, for at that moment Branch himself approached, his long face
set in lines of discontent, even deeper than usual. He had been wandering about the camp in
one of his restless fits, and now he began:

"Say, what do you think I've been doing?"

"I dun'no'," Captain Judson answered, morosely. "Cheering the sick and wounded; shedding smiles
and sunshine as usual, I suppose?"

"Hunh! You're a funny guy, aren't you?--about as comical as a chloroform cone. You make me
laugh, you do--just like a broken leg. Well, I've been looking up some grub for Miss Evans,
and I can't find any."

"Can't find any?"

"Nothing fit for her to eat. You don't expect her to live on this infernal, eternal, and internal
beef stew." Branch shuddered and gagged slightly. "I've eaten parts of animals that were never
intended to be eaten. This rebel grub is killing ME. What'll it do to her?"

"Didn't Major Ramos bring anything along?" O'Reilly asked.

"He says there's a famine at Cubitas."

"We'd better look into this," Judson exclaimed, and, finding that his clothes were dry, he
hurriedly began to dress himself.

Together, the three men made an investigation of the camp's resources, only to discover that
Branch was right. There was, indeed, but little food of any kind, and that little was of the
coarsest. Ordinarily, such a condition of affairs would have occasioned them no surprise, for
the men were becoming accustomed to a more or less chronic scarcity of provisions; but the
presence of Norine Evans put quite a different complexion upon the matter. They were still
discussing the situation when Miss Evans, having finished her afternoon nap, threw open the
flaps of her tent and stepped out.

When she had listened to the account apologetically submitted by her three friends, she drew
her brows together, saying, plaintively: "Oh dear! We've been going short for a week, and Major
Ramos told me we'd fare better when we got here. I had my mouth all set for a banquet. Couldn't
you even find the poor dog a bone?"

Norine was thinner and browner than when she had come to Cuba, but she in no way showed the
effect of any serious or continued lack of nourishment. In fact, a simple diet and an outdoor
life had agreed with her amazingly.

"I'm afraid the cupboard is bare," O'Reilly acknowledged.

"They're getting ready to slaughter another guttapercha ox," Branch said, gloomily. "He's a
veteran of the Ten Years' War. That means STEW again! STEW! One puncture-proof, rubber ox and
a bushel of sweet-potatoes for four hundred men!"

"Do you know what I want for dinner?" Norine inquired. "Lamb chops with green peas, some nice
white bread, a salad, and coffee."

The three men looked at her anxiously. Judson stirred uneasily.

"That's what I want. I don't expect to get it."

With a sigh of relief the captain exclaimed, "I thought you were giving your order."

"Goodness, no!" With a laugh the girl seated herself upon her one camp-chair, inviting her
callers to dispose themselves on the ground about her. "If you can stand the food, I dare say
I can. Now then, tell me what you've been doing since you left Cubitas. I've been frightened
to death that some of you would be hurt. That's one reason why I've been working night and
day helping to get the hospitals in shape. I can't bear to think of our boys being wounded."

"Not much chance of OUR getting shot," O'Reilly told her. "But Leslie--he needs a good talking
to. He has gone into the hero business."

Branch uttered a disdainful grunt. "Nothing of the sort. I'm a sick man; if I'd rather get
shot than suffer a slow death from neglect, it's my own business, isn't it? Imagine feeding
an invalid on boiled bicycle tires! Gee! I'd like to have a meal of nice nourishing ptomaines
for a change. Hero? Humph!"

Norine eyed the complainant critically, then said: "The diet agrees with you. You look better
than you did."

Branch turned a somber glance upon her and gave vent to a bitter, sneering laugh. It was plain
that he believed she, too, was attempting to pull the wool over his eyes. "I wish I could find
some poisonous toadstools. I'd eat 'em raw."

"Listen," Norine went on. "Let's play a game. We'll imagine this is Delmonico's and we'll all
take turns ordering the best things to eat that we can think of. The one who orders best, wins.
We'll call the game--" She frowned thoughtfully.

"Call it 'Vittles,'" O'Reilly suggested.

"'Vittles' it is. Maybe it will give us an appetite for supper. Leslie, you begin. Come now,
hand your hat to the hat-boy, then follow the head waiter. This way, sir. Table for one? Very
good, sir. Here's a cool one, in front of the electric fan. We have an exceptional selection
of cold dishes to-day, sir. Perhaps you would like a nice halibut salad--"

"No halibut salad," Branch answered, striving valiantly to enter into the spirit of Norine's
pretending. "I had it for breakfast. And say, turn off that fan; I'm just back from Cuba. Now
then, you may bring me some oysters--"

"Oysters are out of season," O'Reilly murmured, politely, "but our clams are very fine."

"Some oysters," Branch insisted, stubbornly. "After that, a cup of chicken broth, a grilled
sweetbread, and toast Melba."

Joe Judson put an abrupt end to the invalid's meal by hurling a clod at him, crying: "You're
in Delmonico's, not in Battle Creek. Let somebody order who knows how. We'll have steak and
onions all around."

"I want strawberries!" Norine cried. "They're ripe now. Strawberries and cream--Oh-h! Think of it!"

There was a tense silence, which O'Reilly broke by saying, "I guess 'Vittles' isn't a very
good game, after all."

"It doesn't seem to fill MY wants," the girl acknowledged. "Let's talk about something else."

Miss Evans did seem truly concerned for the welfare of her "boys," as she termed the little
group of Americans whom she had met, and she showed, by asking numerous questions, that her
interest was keen.

The men were glad to talk and she soon gained an insight into the peculiar, aimless, unsatisfactory,
and yet effective method of warfare practised by the Insurrecto armies; they told her of the
endless marches and counter-marches, the occasional skirmishes, the feints, the inconclusive
engagements which were all a part of the general strategy--operations which served to keep
the enemy constantly on guard, like a blind swordsman, and would, it was hoped, eventually
wear down his patience and endurance. In her turn, Norine related something of what she was
doing and how her labor of mercy progressed.

"I'm nearly discouraged," she confessed, finally. "Everything is so different to what I thought
it would be, and I'm so weak and ineffective. The medical supplies I brought are nearly all
gone, and I've learned what hard work it is fitting up hospitals when there's nothing to fit
them up with. I can't teach these people to take care of themselves--they seem to consider
precautions against disease as a confession of cowardice. Summer, the yellow-fever season,
is here and--well, I'm getting disheartened. Disheartened and hungry! They're new sensations
to me." She sighed. "I imagined I was going to work wonders--I thought I was going to be a
Florence Nightingale, and the men were going to idolize me."

"Don't they?" Judson demanded.

"No. That is--not in exactly the way I expected."

"They all want to marry her," O'Reilly explained.

"Insolent bunch!" growled the captain. Then he swallowed hard and said, "But for that matter,
so do I."

"Why, Joe!" Norine cast a startled glance at the big fellow.

"It's a fact," he asserted, doggedly. "I might as well declare myself here and now. There's
always a gang of eavesdroppers hanging around you."

"He means you, Leslie," O'Reilly said. "Hadn't you better take a walk?"

Branch rolled a hostile eye at the artilleryman, and his lip curled. "I'll not move. When he
gets through, I'll propose."

"How silly you boys can be!" Norine laughed. "I dare say the others are joking too, but--"

"Joking?" O'Reilly grinned. "Not at all. I'm the only single man in camp who isn't in love
with you. When you arrived this morning there was a general stampede for the river. I'll bet
the fish in this stream will taste of soap for years to come."

As if to point O'Reilly's words at the moment appeared Colonel Lopez, shaved blood-raw and
clad in a recently laundered uniform which was still damp. The three Americans rose to salute
him, but discipline was lax and he waved them back to their seats. Other eyes than his, too,
had noted Miss Evans's reappearance after her siesta, for Major Ramos, Norine's escort from
headquarters, soon joined the group, and he was followed by two Camagueyan lieutenants.

These latter were youths of some family standing. Before the war they had been dandies, and
they still had an excellent opinion of their physical charms, but, unfortunately, they spoke
no English and hence their attentions to Norine had been somewhat vague and pointless. They
possessed eloquent eyes, however, and now they languished melting glances upon her, the meaning
of which she had no difficulty in translating.

"We've been talking about food," Leslie Branch advised his commanding officer. "Miss Evans
isn't a burning patriot like the rest of us, and so of course she can't share our ravenous
appetite for beef cooked and eaten on the hoof."

"So?" Lopez's handsome face clouded. "You are hungry, then?"

Norine confessed that she was. "I'm starving!" said she. "I haven't had a decent meal for a week."

"God be praised! I know where there is a goat, not two leagues away!" said the colonel.

"But I don't want a goat," Norine complained. "I want--well, pickles, and jam, and sardines,
and--candy, and--tooth-powder! Real boarding-school luxuries. I'd just like to rob a general
store."

Lopez furrowed his brows and lost himself in thought. Later, while the others were talking,
he drew Ramos aside and for a while they kept their heads together; then they invited Judson
to join their council.

It was not until perhaps an hour later that O'Reilly had a chance for a confidential talk with
Norine, for in the mean time other officers came to pay their respects. But when the last one
had reluctantly departed he said:

"I've been talking to Joe about you, and I don't think it's right for you to be running around
alone this way."

"You know how mad that sort of talk makes me," she warned him.

"Yes. Just the same, I'll never feel easy until you're safe home again. And I'll never stop
bothering you until--"

"In the first place, I'm not alone. I take a woman with me everywhere, a Mrs. Ruiz."

"Bah! She's no more of a chaperon than I am."

Norine uttered an impatient exclamation. "Is this a time to consider such things?"

"Oh, I dare say the nature of your work is unconventional and excuses a good deal, but you
don't understand the Latin mind as I do. These Cubans have different standards than ours. They're
very apt to think--"

"I don't care what they think," the girl declared, "so long as I think I'm doing right. That's
final."

There was a brief pause. Then O'Reilly admitted: "I'm not seriously concerned over that part
of it, either, for you are the best judge of what is right and proper. What does concern me,
however, is the effect all this may have upon you, yourself. You're impractical, romantic"--Norine
laughed shortly, but he went on, stubbornly--"and just the sort of girl to be carried away
by some extravagant impulse."

"What makes you think I'm impractical and romantic?"

"You wouldn't be here, otherwise."

"Very well. What are you trying to get at? What do you mean by 'some extravagant impulse'?"

"I'm afraid"--O'Reilly hesitated, then voiced a fear which had troubled him more than he cared
to acknowledge--"I'm afraid of some silly entanglement, some love affair--"

Norine's laughter rang out, spontaneous, unaffected. It served to relieve the momentary tension
which had sprung up between them.

"All these men are attracted to you, as it is quite natural they should be," O'Reilly hurried
on. "I'm worried to death for fear you'll forget that you're too blamed good for any of them."

"What a conscientious duenna you are!" she told him, "but rest easy; I'm thoroughly homesick,
and ready to flunk it all at the first good excuse. I'll make you a promise, Johnnie. If I
decide to fall in love with any of these ragged heroes I'll choose you. Most of them think
there is something between us, anyhow."

"I don't quite understand how I manage to resist you," O'Reilly told her, "for I think you're
perfectly splendid. Probably that's why I'd hate to see you married to some one-legged veteran
of this amateur war."

"Women don't marry legs," she told him, lightly. Then, more seriously, she asked, "What are
you doing about Rosa?"

"I'm waiting to hear from Matanzas Province. When I joined the army I had to go where I was
sent, of course, but General Gomez has started inquiries, and as soon as I learn something
definite I shall follow it up. I shall go where the trail leads."

"You still have hope?"

He nodded. "I refuse to let myself doubt."

When O'Reilly joined Judson for supper the latter met him with a broad grin on his face. "Well,"
said he, "it seems you started something with your game of 'Vittles.' You can get ready to
saddle up when the moon rises."

"What do you mean?"

"The colonel took Miss Evans at her word. We're going to raid San Antonio de los Banos--two
hundred of us--to get her some pickles, and jam, and candy, and tooth-powder."

XIX

THAT SICK MAN FROM SAN ANTONIO

Certain histories of the Cuban War for Independence speak of "The Battle of San Antonio de
los Banos." They relate how one thousand patriots captured the village after a gallant and
sanguinary resistance by its Spanish garrison; how they released the prisoners in the local
jail, replenished their own supplies, and then retired in the face of enemy reinforcements.
It is quite a stirring story to read and it has but one fault, a fault, by the way, not uncommon
in histories--it is mainly untrue.

In the first place, the engagement was in no sense a battle, but merely a raid. The number
of troops engaged was, perhaps, one- fifth of the generous total ascribed by the historians,
and as a military manoeuver it served no purpose whatsoever. That the Cubans delivered a spirited
attack there is no denying. As a matter of fact, the engagement was characterized by an abandon,
by a lack of caution, truly sensational, the reason being that the Insurrectos were half starved
and stormed the town much as hungry hoboes attack a lunch-counter. Nevertheless, since the
affair had a direct bearing upon the fortunes of several people connected with this story,
it is, perhaps, worth relating.

The Baths of St. Anthony consisted of a sulphur spring which for many years had been held in
high regard by gouty and rheumatic Camagueyans; around this spring a village had arisen which
boasted rather better shops than the ordinary country town. It was this fact which had induced
the gallant and obliging Colonel Lopez to attack it, for, as he explained to his American friends,
if any place outside of Habana was likely to contain pickles, jam, sardines, candy, tooth-powder,
and such other delicacies as appeared necessary to the contentment of a visiting American lady,
San Antonio de los Banos was the one. Colonel Lopez did not believe in half measures: once
he had determined to prove his devotion to Norine Evans, he would have sacrificed himself and
the flower of his command; he would have wasted his last precious three-pound shell in breaching
the walls of San Antonio de los Banos rather than fail. But as a matter of fact the village
had no walls and it was defended only by a couple of blockhouses. Therefore the colonel left
his artillery behind.

Perhaps its name was the most impressive thing about San Antonio de los Banos. Its streets
were narrow and steep and stony, and its flinty little plaza was flanked by stores of the customary
sort, the fronts of which were open so that mounted customers from the country might ride in
to make their purchases. Crowning two commanding eminences just outside the village limits
were the loopholed fortinas, where for months past the Spanish garrison had been dozing.

Lopez and his troop approached the town in the early morning. As they deployed for the attack
the colonel issued private instructions to certain members of his command.

"O'Reilly, you and Senor Branch will enter one grocery-store after another. You will purchase
that jam, those sardines, and whatever else you think Miss Evans would like. Captain Judson,
you and Major Ramos will go to the apothecary-shop--I understand there is a very good one--and
look for tooth-powder and candy and the like, I shall see that the streets are cleared, then
I shall endeavor to discover some pickles; but as God is my judge, I doubt if there is such
a thing this side of Habana."

Leslie Branch, whose temper had not improved with the long night ride, inquired, caustically:
"Do you expect us to buy the groceries? Well, I'm broke, and so is O'Reilly."

"Have you no money?" asked the colonel, vastly surprised.

"I haven't tipped my hat to a dollar since I quit newspaper work. What's more, I want to do
a little shopping for myself."

O'Reilly agreed: "If you don't give us some change, Colonel, we'll have to open a charge account
in your name."

"Carmaba!" muttered Lopez. "I intended to borrow from you gentlemen. Well, never mind--we'll
commandeer what we wish in the name of the Republic."

Lopez's attack proved a complete surprise, both to the citizens and to the garrison of the
town. The rebel bugle gave the first warning of what was afoot, and before the Castilian troops
who were loitering off duty could regain their quarters, before the citizens could take cover
or the shopkeepers close and bar their heavy wooden shutters, two hundred ragged horsemen were
yelling down the streets.

There followed a typical Cuban engagement--ten shouts to one shot. There was a mad charge on
the heels of the scurrying populace, a scattering pop-pop of rifles, cheers, cries, shrieks
of defiance and far-flung insults directed at the fortinas.

Bugles blew on the hilltops; the defenders armed themselves and began to fire into the village.
But since the Insurrectos were now well sheltered by the houses and only a portion of certain
streets could be raked from the forts, the Spanish bullets did no harm. Obedient to orders,
a number of Lopez's men dismounted and took positions whence they could guard against a sally,
thus leaving the rest of the command free to raid the stores. In the outskirts of the town
Mausers spoke, the dust leaped, and leaden messengers whined through the air.

As locusts settle upon a standing crop, so did the army of liberators descend upon the shops
of San Antonio de los Banos. It was great fun, great excitement, while it lasted, for the town
was distracted and its citizens had neither time nor inclination to resist. Some of the shop-keepers,
indeed, to prove their loyalty, openly welcomed the invaders. Others, however, lacking time
to close up, fled incontinently, leaving their goods unguarded.

O'Reilly, with Branch and Jacket close at his heels, whirled his horse into the first bodega
he came to. The store was stocked with general merchandise, but its owner, evidently a Spaniard,
did not tarry to set a price upon any of it. As the three horsemen came clattering in at the
front he went flying out at the rear, and, although O'Reilly called reassuringly after him,
his only answer was the slamming of a back door, followed by swiftly diminishing cries of fright.
Plainly, that rush of ragged men, those shots, those ferocious shouts from the plaza, were
too much for the peaceful shopkeeper and his family, and they had taken refuge in some neighbor's
garden.

There was no time to waste. Johnnie dismounted and, walking to the shelves where some imported
canned goods were displayed, he began to select those delicacies for which he had been sent.
The devoted Jacket was at his side. The little Cuban exercised no restraint; he seized whatever
was most handy, meanwhile cursing ferociously, as befitted a bloodthirsty bandit. Boys are
natural robbers, and at this opportunity for loot Jacket's soul flamed savagely and he swept
the shelves bare as he went.

"Hey, Leslie! Get something to carry this stuff in," O'Reilly directed over his shoulder. Receiving
only a muttered reply, he turned to find that his fellow-countryman had cut down a string of
perhaps two dozen large straw sombreros and was attempting to select one that fitted his head.

"Oh, look!" Branch murmured. "Forty dollars' worth of lids, but-- all too small. They must
have been made on the head of a cane."

"Take the whole string, but get us something to wrap up this grub in. Hurry!"

Spurred by O'Reilly's tone and by a lively rattle of rifle-shots outside, Leslie disappeared
into the living-quarters at the back of the store. A moment later he emerged with a huge armful
of bedclothes, evidently snatched at random. Trailing behind him, like a bridal veil, was a
mosquito-net, which in his haste he had torn from its fastenings.

"I guess this is poor!" he exulted. "Bedding! Pillows! Mosquito- net! I'll sleep comfortable
after this."

From somewhere came the faint smothered wailing of a baby-- eloquent testimony of the precipitate
haste with which the terrified storekeeper and his wife had fled. Dumping his burden of sheets,
blankets, and brilliantly colored cotton quilts upon the floor, Branch selected two of the
stoutest and began to knot the corners together.

He had scarcely finished when Judson reined in at the door and called to O'Reilly: "We've cleaned
out the drugstore. Better get a move on you, for we may have to run any minute. I've just heard
about some Cuban prisoners in the calaboose. Gimme a hand and we'll let 'em out."

"Sure!" O'Reilly quickly remounted, meanwhile directing Jacket to load the canned goods upon
his horse and ride for the open country. He looked back a few moments later, to see his asistente
emerge from the bodega perched between two queer-looking improvised saddlebags bulging with
plunder. The pony was overloaded, but in obedience to the frantic urgings of its barelegged
rider it managed to break into a shambling trot. Branch reappeared, too, looping the eight-foot
string of straw hats to his saddle-horn, and balancing before him the remainder of the bedding,
done up in a gaudy quilt.

Sharing in the general consternation at the attack, the jail guards had disappeared, leaving
Lopez's men free to break into the prison. When O'Reilly joined them the work was well under
way. The municipal building of San Antonio was a thick-walled structure with iron-barred windows
and stout doors; but the latter soon gave way, and the attackers poured in. Seizing whatever
implements they could find, Judson and O'Reilly went from cell to cell, battering, prying,
smashing, leaving their comrades to rescue the inmates. This jail was a poor affair. It could
scarcely be dignified by the name of a prison; nevertheless, true prison conditions prevailed
in it and it was evidently conducted in typically Spanish fashion. The corridors were dark
and odorous, the cells unspeakably foul; O'Reilly and Judson saw, heard, smelled enough to
convince them that no matter how guilty the prisoners might be they had been amply punished
for their crimes.

This, too, was swift work. The building echoed to rushing, yelling men, while outside a fitful
accompaniment of gun-shots urged the rescuers to greater haste. While the Americans smashed
lock after lock, their comrades dragged the astonished inmates from their kennels, hustled
them into the street, and took them up behind their saddles.

The raid was over, "retreat" was sounding, when Judson and O'Reilly ran out of the prison,
remounted, and joined their comrades, who were streaming back toward the plaza.

"Whew!" Judson wiped the sweat out of his eyes. "No chance to ask these fellows what they were
in for."

"No need to ask them," said Johnnie. "A month in there would be too much for a murderer."

"The druggist said most of 'em are just patriots, and every holiday the Spaniards shoot one
or two. There's no cock-fighting, so it's the only Sunday amusement they have. Did you notice
that sick guy?"

"Yes."

"He looked to me like he was plain starved. Our fellows had to carry him."

Colonel Lopez galloped up to inquire, anxiously, "Did you find those eatables, eh?"

"Yes, sir, and a lot more."

"Good! But I failed. Pickles? Caramba! Nobody here ever heard of one!"

"Did we lose any men?" Judson asked.

"Not one. But Ramos was badly cut."

"So? Then he got to close quarters with some Spaniard?"

"Oh no!" The colonel grinned. "He was in too great a hurry and broke open a show-case with
his fist."

The retreating Cubans still maintained their uproar, discharging their rifles into the air,
shrieking defiance at their invisible foes, and voicing insulting invitations to combat. This
ferocity, however, served only to terrify further the civil population and to close the shutters
of San Antonio the tighter. Meanwhile, the loyal troops remained safely in their blockhouses,
pouring a steady fire into the town. And despite this admirable display of courage the visitors
showed a deep respect for their enemies' markmanship, taking advantage of whatever shelter
there was.

Leslie Branch, of course, proved the solitary exception; as usual, he exposed himself recklessly
and rode the middle of the streets, regardless of those sudden explosions of dust beneath his
horse's feet or those unexpected showers of plaster from above.

He had spent his time assiduously ransacking the deserted shops, and in addition to his huge
bundle of bedding and his long string of straw hats he now possessed a miscellaneous assortment
of plunder, in which were a bolt of calico, a pair of shoes, a collection of cooking-utensils,
an umbrella, and--strangest of all--a large gilt-framed mirror. The safety of these articles
seemed to concern him far more than his own. Spying O'Reilly, he shouted:

"Say! What's the Spanish word for 'clothing-store'? I need a new suit."

"Don't be an idiot!" Johnnie yelled at him. "Keep under cover."

But Branch only shook his head. "They couldn't hit anything," he cried.

The next instant, as if to punctuate his remark, a spent bullet smashed the mirror and sprinkled
the speaker with particles of glass. It was only by a miracle that he escaped injury. Branch
reined in his horse, examined the wreck, then with a petulant exclamation cast the useless
frame away.

"Come on, Johnnie," Judson growled. "The damn fool wants to get shot."

The sick man's bravado roused in O'Reilly a feeling of mingled resentment and apprehension,
but further warning would obviously be a waste of breath. Nevertheless, being a little too
tender- hearted to follow Judson's nonchalant example and ride on, O'Reilly held in his horse,
meanwhile keeping an anxious eye upon his friend.

The latter was in no hurry; he jogged along leisurely, evidently on the lookout for an opportunity
to replenish his wardrobe. Truth to say, this needed replenishing--Leslie resembled a scarecrow
clad in a suit of soiled pajamas. But by this time most of the shops had their shutters up.
When the last one had been left behind O'Reilly spurred his horse into a gallop, relieved to
know that the worst was over.

The raiders had approached San Antonio de los Banos across the fields at the rear, but Colonel
Lopez led their retreat by way of the camino real which followed the riverbank. This road for
a short distance was exposed to the fire from one fort; then it was sheltered by a bit of rising
ground.

O'Reilly, among the last to cross the zone of fire, was just congratulating himself upon the
fortunate outcome of the skirmish when he saw Colonel Lopez ride to the crest of a knoll, rise
in his stirrups and, lifting his cupped hands to his lips, direct a loud shout back toward
the town. Lopez was followed by several of his men, who likewise began to yell and to wave
their arms excitedly.

Johnnie turned to discover that Leslie Branch had lagged far behind, and now, as if to cap
his fantastic performances, had dismounted and was descending the river-bank to a place where
a large washing had been spread upon the stones to dry. He was quite exposed, and a spiteful
crackle from the nearest blockhouse showed that the Spaniards were determined to bring him
down. Mauser bullets ricocheted among the rocks--even from this distance their sharp explosions
were audible--others broke the surface of the stream into little geysers, as if a school of
fish were leaping.

While Johnnie looked on in breathless apprehension Branch appropriated several suits that promised
to fit him; then he climbed up the bank, remounted his horse, and ambled slowly out of range.

Now this was precisely the sort of harebrained exploit which delights a Cuban audience. When
Leslie rejoined his comrades, therefore, he was greeted with shouts and cheers.

"Caramba! He would risk his life for a clean shirt. ... There's a fellow for you! He enjoys
the hum of these Spanish bees! ... Bravo! Tell us what the bullets said to you," they cried,
crowding around him in an admiring circle.

O'Reilly, unable to contain himself, burst forth in a rage: "You infernal fool! Do you want
to be shot robbing a clothes-line?" 

We have written 2,000 books. We edit and conduct 200 periodicals and
magazines.

In forty years we have contributed, as levies for school purposes, $45,000,000. With a membership
of 4,000,000 we have 35,000 churches, valued at $56,000,000, and
contribute annually $7,500,000 to their support.

We contribute annually $6,000,000 to secret and benevolent societies. We have about 40,000 teachers,
1,500 lawyers, 2,500 doctors, 20,000 preachers, and 80,000 business
men--Marvellous!--Marvellous!

A race that can produce in fifty years, beginning with nothing, such
a report as this, whose minutest detail is supported by official statistics,
needs no pity, Mr. Chairman.

A race that can produce a Douglass, a Langston, a Hood, a Scott, a Turner, a Harvey Johnson,
a Bruce, a Payne, an Arnett, a Revells, a Price, an Elliott, a Montgomery,
a Bowen, a Mason, a Dunbar, a Du Bois, and last but not least, a Booker
T. Washington--the foremost genius of our vocational and industrial
training--asks not for pity.

It only asks for an equal opportunity in the race of life; it asks not for special legislation
to accommodate any necessity; it simply asks for a just application of existing laws to all
citizens alike, without any reference to race or color or previous condition of servitude.
The representatives of this race, in this year of Our Lord, 1913, ask the American people to judge
them upon the record of their great and useful men and women which
the race has produced in less than a half century--and upon the average
merit of the mass of the race since the Emancipation Proclamation
was issued by the immortal Lincoln.

In concluding this brief summary--for at best it can only be regarded as a brief summary of the
doings of the race--and standing on the threshold of a new era in
politics, in commerce, in religion and in ethics--a new era in the
feeling and temper of the white American towards the Afro-American,
I ask you, ladies and gentlemen, what shall be our conduct in the
future?

Watchman, what shall be the forecast?

Mr. Chairman, the forecast is bright--brighter than it has ever been in any previous period of
the race's history in this nation--and I make this statement in the fullest appreciation of the
efforts which are being made all over this land, by adverse legislation, to weed us out of
politics and other public preferments; to push us into a corner to ourselves, in both Church
and State--a propaganda which has brought gloom to many of our leaders, producing a pessimism inimical
to progress.

But why a pessimistic outlook, Mr. Chairman? Is it possible to deprive ten million native-born
American citizens from the enjoyment of their rights and privileges, guaranteed alike to all
by the Constitution of the United States? I think not. Such a condition, Mr. Chairman, would
be like an established government with no diplomatic representative at court. No matter what
methods are adopted, some of the representative men of our race,
unexpectedly or otherwise, in the final analysis, will slip in; if
not in the Congress of the United States, then in the legislatures
and in the municipal governments of the State--such, for example,
as Lawyer Bass in Philadelphia, Pa.; Councilman Cummings in Baltimore;
Smith in the legislature of Ohio; Fitzgerald in New Jersey, and Jackson
in Illinois.

No arrangement, no matter how planned, can ultimately defeat this
logical result which patience alone will produce.

God and Time, ladies and gentlemen, are important factors in the solution of these questions.
Fifty years are not sufficient to determine the possibilities of a race. No seer who knew the
ancestors of the Anglo-Saxons as Cæsar knew them, would have foretold
such a future as they now enjoy.

This Anglo-Saxon race, whose ancestors worshipped the mistletoe, offered human sacrifices, and drank
wine out of human skulls, have now become the conquerors and the
dominant race on the earth.

Their literature is the cream of the human intellect, and their tongue
promises to become the official lingua of the earth.

God and Time have wrought these things for them, and what God and Time have wrought for one
race, God and Time can accomplish for another race--if that race
remain true to itself and to God.

If you ask me for the ground of my optimism, I reply it is based upon two things, namely, the ability
of the race itself to overcome difficulties and obstacles, and the over-ruling Providence of God,
based upon His justice and His righteousness.

It is hardly possible for this Negro race to experience any greater difficulties and obstacles
in the future than it has already experienced in the past. It has overcome every obstacle with
heroic courage--from slavery to the present period of its marvellous success. Without discounting
the human efforts of the race, it has accomplished all of this by
an heroic faith in God and in the justice and righteousness of His
character as practised by our ancestors in the days of their bitterest
afflictions--when weakness characterized the arm of flesh.

Personally, I believe in God and in His justice and righteousness,
and I have never lost faith in the benevolent brotherhood of mankind.

I believe that "Right, like God is eternal and unchangeable; and
since Right is Right and God is God, Right must ultimately prevail;
though its final triumph may be retarded by the operation of wicked
devices--nevertheless--it must prevail."

THE FUTURE OF THE NEGRO CHURCH[51]

BY HON. JOHN C. DANCY, LL.D.

Secretary Church Extension Society, A. M. E. Church

[Note 51: Delivered at the Celebration of the Emancipation Proclamation, Philadelphia, September,
1913.]

There is only one safe way to judge the future of the Negro Church,
and that is by its past.

And the past of this Church, despite its shortcomings, is safe.

To the curious it would seem strange that the Negro Church as such should exist at all. But
in the light of its history, covering almost the entire history of
this Government, its existence has been proved a necessity, as its
records abundantly testify.

Until we had the Negro Church we had nothing of which the race could boast. We early discovered
that it was religious rights which first opened our eyes to all our
rights, but until we were secure in the enjoyment of our religious
liberty, we were not fully aroused to the importance and value of
civil liberty.

We had not learned that they were twin blessings often dearly bought, but of inestimable value.

The
Negro Church, therefore, became the basis upon which would be reared
the superstructure of all our subsequent achievements.

The men who laid the foundation for the Negro Church, whether of Methodist, or Baptist, or Episcopalian,
or Presbyterian, or of Congregational predilection, were wise in their day and generation, and
paved the way for the best work of Negro development ever undertaken in this country. Until we
had the Negro Church, we had not the Negro school, and the one was the natural forerunner and concomitant
of the other, opening up avenues for the preacher, the teacher, the
lawyer, the physician, the editor, the orator, and the spokesman of
and for the race.

* * * * *

The Negro Church has passed the experimental stage. It is no longer in a stage of incubation.
It is an actuality,--an active, aggressive, and progressive reality. It has thoroughly established
its rights to existence and its indispensability as a religious force
and influence.

Our religious fervor may at times appear to be unduly emotional and
lacking in solemnity, but even this is pardonable, and we are reminded
that this is an emotional age, and we must not forget that the great
Penticostal awakening, in the early days of Christianity, provoked
a similar criticism from the unaroused and unaffected unbelievers.

The Negro Church of the future may be less emotional, but if the
Church is to survive and throw off a cold formality which threatens
to sap its very life-blood, it must not get away from its time-honored,
deep spirituality, for without the Spirit the seemingly religious
body is dead.

Our Church of the future as well as our Church of the present will take care that no new dogmas
of exotic growth will deprive it of those eternal verities which
constitute the fundamentals of our Christian faith.

These verities of our religion have their foundation in the teachings of our Great Redeemer himself,
who is the very embodiment of all Truth.

The Negro Church of the future will address itself to the correction
of present-day evils in both Church and State.

It will emphasize the teaching that the highest form of virtue is the purest form of love.
It will demand that men and women, and Christian professors especially, exemplify in their own
lives and habits the religion they make bold to proclaim.

It will insist upon the remedying of great wrongs from which countless numbers suffer,--whether
these wrongs be unfair and unjust discriminations in public places, on the common thoroughfares,
in the courts and halls of justice, in the Congress, the legislature
or the municipal councils,--everywhere the Church will condemn and
protest and fulminate against these injustices, until they melt away
with the certainty of April snow.

The Church of the future will more fully realize that where great principles are involved, concessions
are dangerous and compromises disastrous.

The future will disclose a Negro Church with men in all its pulpits equal to the great task which
the responsibilities thereof impose. They will be qualified men from every viewpoint--deeply
spiritual, well trained, pious, influential, impressive, strong. They will lead their people,
and be a part of their life, their indomitable spirit, their ambitions,
their achievements.

They will be absolutely trusted and trustworthy. They will be an inspiration to our youth, to
our manhood and our womanhood. They will speak as one having authority and they will boldly assert
their authority to speak.

They will take up where the fathers left off, and they in their possession of so great an inheritance
of religious fervor and unshrinking faith, will arouse Christianity from its lethargy, and start
as a nation of believers, arousing, as it were, from its spell of
years.

They will be as bold as lions, wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. They will win their way
because the things for which they stand and the gospel which they
preach, will deserve to win.

They will not seek so much to impress their own personality, but their cause, and they will
lose themselves in the cause by magnifying the cause.

* * * * *

The Negro Church of the future will take greater interest in the young
people, will give greater attention to the Sunday-school work, to
the young people's societies, to the Young Men's Christian Association,
to the full development of all the departments of all the churches
of whatever denomination, to the end that the churches will be thoroughly
organized for work, and such work as will lead eventually to the thorough
evangelization of the world.

The redemption of Africa, one of the forward movements of the world to-day, must come largely
through the efforts, the service, and the personal sacrifices of our own churches, our own
ministers and teachers, our own men and women.

Once fully aroused to the importance of the obligation we owe to the land of our forefathers,
we will enter upon the task with all the zest and spirit of David Livingstone, whose one hundredth
anniversary we are celebrating this year, as we are also celebrating
the first half century of our emancipation from human slavery.

Livingstone sacrificed himself in the heart of Africa in order to
give life and light to the aborigines of the Dark Continent.

Our Church of the future must take up the task so grandly undertaken
by him, and cease not until the work he so nobly began finds its full
fruitage in Africa's redemption from heathendom, superstition, and
ignorance, that she may take her place among the civilized and enlightened
people of the world.

* * * * *

The Church of the future will have to do with the life of its membership. It will take heed
to its health, and will teach hygiene and the laws which safeguard one's health in the home,
in the Church, in the public schools and public places, in the open air and where not. It will impress
the lesson of a sound mind in a sound body, and the great need of a sound body in order to have
a sound mind. It will not fear to declare in favor of pure athletics as a means of developing
the physical system, which is so essential to sound health and a
strong manhood.

The boys and young men will be urged to identify themselves with Young Men's Christian Associations
so as to have advantage of the reading-rooms, the swimming-pools, the gymnasiums, and other young men's
society, thus eschewing the dens of vice and haunts of infamy which might otherwise attract
them and blight their precious young lives for all time, it may be. It will take knowledge of
human life and its means of existence everywhere. It will seek to know what the man and woman in the
alley as well as those on the broad thoroughfare are doing,--whether
they are oppressed or distressed in body or in mind, and to go to
their relief.

It will discover that man is his brother's keeper, and is largely responsible for him and
must seek to take care of him. The Church, yea, will come to itself and be shorn of a great part
of its pride, when it fully realizes that its real growth and prosperity are dependent upon
the attention it pays to God's poor and God's neglected.

Our churches will re-echo with the sentiment of that song, "God Will Take Care of You," but
there must be a refreshing application of it, knowing that caretaking reaches further than ourselves
and extends to our neglected brother, whom we, so oftentimes, have
forgotten.

If the Church is no stronger than it is to-day it is due chiefly
to the neglect of the unfortunate many who have been unreached and
need to be reached.

The Church of the future must humble its pride, buckle on its armor, and cease not in its labors
until this great army of unreached is reached and helped, and impressed
and convinced and saved.

"Go ye into all the world and preach my Gospel," does not mean to distant people merely, but
to people at home as well, many of whom know as little of the Gospel as many others in distant
Africa. There must be, there will be, a religious awakening along this line, so that if the people
do not go to the Church, then the Church must go to the people, and
there will be thousands, in the next few years in answer to the question,
"Who will go?" who will answer in language which cannot be misunderstood,
"Here am I, send me."

The Church of the future will have to do with the greater problems
of every day life.

It will have to aid in teaching the people life and duty and how best to meet and battle with
these. It will have to impress the importance of home-getting,--whether in city or on farm,--and
the possessing of these in fee simple, by actual purchase, and we will become more valuable as
citizens as we acquire more in our individual right in real and personal
property.



Leslie had begun by this time to realize that there existed a general conspiracy against him;
he met it with sullen resentment. He deeply regretted his ignorance of the Spanish language,
however, for a thousand epithets and insults clamored for translation.

Now there are cows which an amateur can milk, and there are other kinds. This particular cow
was shy, apprehensive, peevish; Branch's unpractised fumbling irritated her. Being herself
a nomad of the savannas, she was accustomed to firm, masterful men, therefore when Leslie attempted
courteously, apologetically, to separate her from her milk she turned and hooked him.

El Demonio's audience, who had been looking on with rapt attention, applauded this show of
spirit. Branch was unwontedly meek. He acknowledged his total inexperience, and begged his
friends, almost politely, to call for a substitute.

Judson explained, gravely, "These Cubans don't know any more about cows than you do."

O'Reilly agreed, "They're good bull-fighters, but they can't milk."

Leslie eyed the speakers, white with rage; he was trembling. "You think you're damned funny,
don't you? You're having a jubilee with me. Well, I'm game. I'll go through with it. If you'll
hold her, I'll milk her. I'll milk her till she hollers."

Obligingly, O'Reilly took the animal by the horns and Judson laid hold of her tail.

"Stretch her tight," Leslie commanded. "Don't give her an inch of slack, or I'll quit." When
his friends had braced themselves he moved toward the cow once more, but this time from the
opposite quarter. Noting the direction of his approach, the onlookers gave vent to a low murmur
of expectancy. They drew closer. Strangely enough, the animal stood quiet for a time--lost
in amazement, perhaps--and Leslie managed to cover the bottom of his big tin cup with milk.
But at last the outrage proved too much for her; she slowly lifted one hind foot and poised
it jerkily. She seemed to consider the next move for a moment; then she kicked forward and
sent Branch flying.

"Can you beat that?" O'Reilly exclaimed in apparent wonderment. "Why, she walloped you with
the back of her hand."

Judson, too, affected great amazement. "Most cows are left- handed," he declared. "Try her
on the other side."

Branch dried the milk from his face, then in a shaking voice cried: "Have a good time with
me. It's your last chance."

It seemed for a while that the enterprise was doomed to failure; but at last a pint or more
of milk was secured, and this Leslie proceeded to dilute with warm water from a near-by camp-fire.
Even then, however, his difficulties were not over. He had supposed that any baby knew enough
to drink. It took him half an hour to discover his mistake. Having long since given up the
hope of any active assistance from his audience, he doggedly set to work to fashion a nursing-bottle.
He succeeded in due time, after making use of a flask, the stem of an unused cigarette-holder,
and a handkerchief.

When he finally took seat and began awkwardly coaxing the fretful child to drink, the Cubans
voiced their appreciation of the picture. They were courteous, they did not laugh; nevertheless,
the sight of their eccentric, irascible, rebellious El Demonio tamely nursing a child in the
fire-light filled them with luxurious, soul-satisfying enjoyment.

O'Reilly was up at daylight to offer his services in caring for Esteban Varona, but Norine
declined them.

"His fever is down a little and he has taken some nourishment," she reported. "That food you
boys risked your silly lives for may come in handy, after all."

"I dare say he won't be able to talk to me to-day?" O'Reilly ventured.

"Not to-day, nor for many days, I'm afraid."

"If you don't mind, then, I'll hang around and listen to what he says," he told her, wistfully.
"He might drop a word about Rosa."

"To be sure. So far he's scarcely mentioned her. I can't understand much that he says, of course,
but Mrs. Ruiz tells me it's all jumbled and quite unintelligible. How is Leslie's baby this
morning?"

"Oh, it passed a good night. It was awake and had ordered breakfast when I got up. Leslie was
making a fire to scald out its bottle. He says he didn't close his eyes all night."

"Poor fellow! I'm going to help him," Norine declared.

"Please don't. Lopez wants to teach him a lesson, and this is the best thing that could possibly
have happened. We have told him that there's no chance of returning the baby, and he thinks
he's elected to keep it indefinitely. As a matter of fact, Jacket is going to take a letter
to the comandante at San Antonio this morning, advising him that the child is safe, and asking
him to send for it at once."

"Isn't that risky?" Norine inquired. "Won't the comandante attack us if he learns where we are?"

"Lopez doesn't think so. Those Spaniards are usually pretty scrupulous on points of honor.
There was some difficulty in getting a messenger, but Jacket volunteered. He volunteers for
anything, that boy. They wouldn't be likely to hurt a kid like him. If they should, why, we
have the baby, you see."

Although Norine had pretended to wash her hands of all responsibility for Branch's little charge,
she was by no means so inhuman as she appeared. During the day she kept a jealous eye upon
it, and especially upon its diet.

Fortunately for all concerned, it was a good-natured child; so long as its stomach was full
it was contented. It slept a good deal, and what time it was awake it sucked its fist and suffered
itself to be variously entertained by the men. There were, of course, a number of fellows who
could see no humor at all in El Demonio's plight, nor any reason for adding to his embarrassments.
These came to his aid in numerous ways.

It was an idle day; there was nothing to do except play with the baby; before night came the
child had established itself as a general favorite. Even Branch himself had become interested
in it.

"Say, I've learned a lot about kids from this one," he confided to O'Reilly at dinner-time.
"I always thought young babies were just damp, sour-smelling little animals, but this one has
character. She knows me already, and I'm getting so I can pick her up without feeling that
I'm going to puncture her. She's full of dimples, too. Got 'em everywhere. What do you think
we'd better name her?"

"She probably has a name. Do you expect to keep her permanently?"

Branch considered. "I wouldn't have thought of such a thing yesterday, but how are we going
to get rid of her? That's the question. We can't just leave her with the first family we come
to. These country people have more kids than they know what to do with."

"Thinking about taking her on the march with us?" O'Reilly looked up, much amused.

"I don't see why it couldn't be done. The men wouldn't mind and she'd make a dandy mascot."

O'Reilly shook his head. "This isn't a baseball team. What about the baby's mother?"

"Bullets! Fine mother SHE was, to desert her child. I'll bet she's glad to get rid of it. People
like that don't have any more affection than--cattle. They don't deserve to have children.
What's more, they don't know how to care for them. I'd like to raise this kid according to
my own ideas." Branch's face lightened suddenly. "Say! I've just thought of a name for her!"

"What?"

"Bullets!"

"Are you swearing or naming her?"

"Wouldn't that be a good name? It's new, and it means something. Raid, battle, rain of bullets!
See? Bullets Branch--that doesn't sound bad."

With deliberate malice O'Reilly said, gravely: "Of course, if you adopt her, you can name her
what you choose--but she's a mighty brown baby! I have my suspicions that--she's a mulatto."
Branch was shocked, indignant. "That child's as white as you are," he sputtered. Then noting
the twinkle in O'Reilly's eyes he turned away, muttering angrily.

Strangely enough, Leslie's fantastic suggestion found echo in more than one quarter, and many
of his camp-mates began to argue that El Demonio's baby would certainly bring the troop good
luck, if it could keep her. Adoption of some sort was gravely discussed that evening around
more than one camp-fire.

After breakfast on the following morning the baby was bathed. This was an event, and it had
been advertised as such. An interested and admiring group of swarthy cigarette-smokers looked
on while Branch officiated, Norine's offer to perform the service less publicly having been
refused. Leslie was just drying off the chubby form when he was unexpectedly interrupted.

Jacket had made his round trip in safety, but instead of bringing a squad of the enemy's soldiers
with him he had brought the child's parents, which was a much more sensible thing to do.

The storekeeper and his wife arrived unheralded; they gave no warning of their coming, and
they exchanged no amenities with the ravagers of their home. Hearing the shrill, petulant voice
of their beloved, they made directly for it, as eagles swoop from the sky at threat to their nest.

Branch looked up at the sound of some swift approach. He beheld an entirely strange woman bearing
down upon him. Her face was white, frantic, terrible; her arms were outstretched; she gave
utterance to a peculiar, distressing cry. Snatching the baby from his lap without so much as
"by your leave," she clutched it to a billowing brown bosom.

Leslie rose, protesting, just in time to receive the full onslaught of the child's distracted
father. He went down in a swirl of arms and legs; he felt himself kicked, pounded, trampled,
beaten, scratched, until his friends came to the rescue and dragged him to his feet. He rose
to behold a small, fat, disheveled Spaniard who had turned from assaulting him and now appeared
to be engaged in biting mouthfuls from such portions of the baby's anatomy as were not hidden
in its mother's embrace.

A clamor of voices breaking the Sabbath calm of the morning brought Norine Evans running from
her tent. One look, and its cause was plain. Fifty men were talking loudly; fifty pairs of
arms were waving. In consequence of the torrent of words that beat upon their ears it was some
time before the merchant and his wife could be made to fully understand the peculiar circumstances
of the kidnapping, and that no harm had been intended to their darling. Slowly, bit by bit,
they learned the truth, but even then the mother could not look upon Leslie Branch without
a menacing dilation of the eyes and a peculiar expression of restrained ferocity.

The father was more reasonable, however; once he was assured of his daughter's safety, his
thankfulness sought outlet. He began by embracing every one within his reach. He kissed Norine,
he kissed O'Reilly, he kissed Judson, he made a rush at Leslie himself; but the latter, suspicious
of his intent, fled. Unmindful of the fact that these were the men who had relieved him of
a considerable stock of goods and profaned his holy of holies, he recklessly distributed among
them what money he had upon his person and then gave away the remaining contents of his pockets.
He swore his undying love for them all. Smiting his breast excitedly, he urged them as a personal
favor and a mark of his overflowing gratitude to return to San Antonio de los Banos, make themselves
masters of all his worldly possessions, and then burn his store.

While this was going on, Jacket was proudly advertising his share of the enterprise, not failing
to give himself full credit.

"By----! I made a big hit with that comandante," he told his American friends. "Those people
in San Antonio say I'm the bravest boy they ever seen, and they give me more'n a thousand cigars.
When I rode away I saluted the comandante; then I yelled, 'Vive Cuba Libre!' and everybody
laughed like hell. I guess those people never seen nobody like me before."

That afternoon, when it came time for the merchant and his little family to set out for home,
a crowd of regretful Insurrectos assembled to bid them farewell and to look for the last time
upon the baby. By now the mother's apprehensions had given way to pride and she could bring
herself to smile at the compliments showered upon her offspring and to answer in kind those
which were aimed at herself. She even permitted El Demonio to kiss the child good-by. Her husband,
since his arrival in camp, had heard much about the eccentric American, and now, after apologizing
abjectly for his unwarranted attack, he invited Branch to visit his store when this hideous
war was over and Cuba was free. Finally, in spite of Leslie's frantic struggles, he embraced
him and planted a moist kiss upon either cheek.

Amid loud and repeated good wishes and a cheer for the baby the visitors rode away.

Lopez linked his arm within O'Reilly's as they turned back into the palm-grove. With a smile
he said:

"Well, I hope this has taught your friend to steal no more babies."

"I'm afraid he'll steal the very next one he sees. He fell in love with that one and wanted
to keep it."

"Oh, he wasn't alone in that. It's queer how sentimental soldiers become. I've often noticed
it. When I was in the Rubi Hills some of my fellows adopted a goat. We had to eat it finally,
but those men wouldn't touch a piece of the flesh--and they were starving. By the way, how
is Varona doing?"

"About the same."

Lopez frowned. "I shall have to send him to Cubitas to-morrow, for we must be under way."

"If he has to be moved, let me do it. I'd like to be with him when he comes out of his fever,
and learn what he knows about his sister." O'Reilly's appeal was earnest.

The colonel readily yielded. "Go, by all means. Report to General Gomez, and he no doubt will
let you stay until the boy can talk. He may have news from Matanzas by that time."

O'Reilly pressed his colonel's hand gratefully. "You're mighty good," said he. "There's one
thing more. Will you look out for Branch while I'm gone, and--hold him down?"

Lopez laughed lightly. "Oh, he'll soon get over his recklessness. This life agrees with him.
Why, he's a different man already! When he gets well and has something to live for he will
want to live. You'll see."

XXI

TREASURE

It was a balmy, languid morning about two weeks after O'Reilly's return to the City among the
Leaves. The Cubitas Mountains were green and sparkling from a recent shower; wood fires smoldered
in front of the bark huts, sending up their wavering streamers of blue; a pack-train from the
lower country was unloading fresh vegetables in the main street, and a group of ragged men
were disputing over them. Some children were playing baseball near by.

In a hammock swung between two trees Esteban Varona lay, listening to the admonitions of his nurse.

Johnnie O'Reilly had just bade them both a hearty good morning and now Norine was saying: "One
hour, no more. You had a temperature again last night, and it came from talking too much."

"Oh, I'm better this morning," Esteban declared. "I'm getting so that I want to talk. I was
too tired at first, but now--"

"NOW, you will do exactly as you are told. Remember, it takes me just one hour to make my rounds,
and if you are not through with your tales of blood and battle when I get back you'll have
to finish them to-morrow." With a nod and a smile she left.

As Esteban looked after her his white teeth gleamed and his hollow face lit up.

"She brings me new life," he told O'Reilly. "She is so strong, so healthy, so full of life
herself. She is wonderful! When I first saw her bending over me I thought I was dreaming. Sometimes,
even yet, I think she cannot be real. But she is, eh?"

"She is quite substantial," O'Reilly smiled.

"I can tell when she is anywhere near, for my illness leaves me. It's a fact! And her hands--Well,
she lays them on my head, and it no longer hurts; the fever disappears. There is some cool,
delicious magic in her touch; it makes a fellow want to live. You have perhaps noticed it?"

"N-no! You see, she never lays her hands on my head. However, I dare say you're right. All
the sick fellows talk as you do."

Esteban looked up quickly; his face darkened. "She--er--nurses OTHERS, eh? I'm not the only one?"

"Well, hardly."

There was a brief pause; then Esteban shifted his position and his tone changed. "Tell me,
have you heard any news?"

"Not yet, but we will hear some before long I'm sure."

"Your faith does as much for me as this lady's care. But when you go away, when I'm alone,
when I begin to think--"

"Don't think too much; don't permit yourself to doubt," O'Reilly said, quickly. "Take my word
for it, Rosa is alive and we'll find her somewhere, somehow. You heard that she had fallen
into Cobo's hands when he sacked the Yumuri, but now we know that she and the negroes were
living in the Pan de Matanzas long after that. In the same way Lopez assured me positively
that you were dead. Well, look at you! It shows how little faith we can put in any story. No,
Rosa is safe, and General Gomez will soon have word of her. That's what I've been waiting for--that
and what you might have to tell me."

"You know all that I know now and everything that has happened to me."

"I don't know how you came to be in a cell in San Antonio de los Banos, two hundred miles from
the place you were killed. That is still a mystery."

"It is very simple, amigo. Let me see: I had finished telling you about the fight at La Joya.
I was telling you how I fainted."

"Exactly. Norine bound and gagged you at that point in the story."

"Some good people found me a few hours after I lost consciousness. They supposed I had been
attacked by guerrillas and left for dead. Finding that I still had life in me, they took me
home with them. They were old friends from Matanzas by the name of Valdes-- cultured people
who had fled the city and were hiding in the manigua like the rest of us."

"Not Valdes, the notary?"

"The very same. Alberto Valdes and his four daughters. Heaven guided them to me. Alberto was
an old man; he had hard work to provide food for his girls. Nevertheless, he refused to abandon
me. The girls had become brown and ragged and as shy as deer. They nursed me for weeks, for
my wounds became infected. God! It seems to me that I lay there sick and helpless for years.
When my brain would clear I would think of Rosa, and then the fever would rise again and I
would go out of my head. Oh, they were faithful, patient people! You see, I had walked east
instead of west, and now I was miles away from home, and the country between was swarming with
Spaniards who were burning, destroying, killing. You wouldn't know Matanzas, O'Reilly. It is
a desert.

"I finally became able to drag myself around the hut. But I had no means of sending word to
Rosa, and the uncertainty nearly made me crazy. My clothes had rotted from me; my bones were
just under the skin. I must have been a shocking sight. Then one day there came a fellow traveling
east with messages for Gomez. He was one of Lopez's men, and he told me that Lopez had gone
to the Rubi Hills with Maceo, and that there were none of our men left in the province. He
told me other things, too. It was from him that I learned--" Estban Varona's thin hands clutched
the edges of his hammock and he rolled his head weakly from side to side. "It was he who told
me about Rosa. He said that Cobo had ravaged the Yumuri and that my sister--was gone. Christ!"

"There, there! We know better now," O'Reilly said, soothingly.

"It was a hideous story, a story of rape, murder. I wonder that I didn't go mad. It never occurred
to me to doubt, and as a matter of fact the fellow was honest enough; he really believed what
he told me. Well, I was sorry I hadn't died that night in the sunken road. All the hope, all
the desire to live, went out of me. You see, I had been more than half expecting something
of the kind. Every time I had left Rosa it had been with the sickening fear that I might never
see here again. After the man had finished I felt the desire to get away from all I had known
and loved, to leave Matanzas for new fields and give what was left of me to the cause.

"I presume Alberto and the girls were relieved to get rid of me, for it meant more food for
them. Anyhow, between us we prevailed upon the messenger to take me along. I was free to enlist,
since I couldn't reach Lopez, and I came to join our forces in the Orient.

"That is how you found me in this province. Lopez's man never delivered those despatches, for
we were taken crossing the trocha- -at least I was taken, for Pablo was killed. They'd have
made an end of me, too, I dare say, only I was so weak. It seems a century since that night.
My memory doesn't serve me very well from that point, for they jailed me, and I grew worse.
I was out of my head a good deal. I seem to remember a stockade somewhere and other prisoners,
some of whom nursed me. You say you found me in a cell in San Antonio de los Banos. Well, I
don't know how I got there, and I never heard of the place."

"It will probably all come back to you in time," said O'Reilly.

"No doubt."

The two men fell silent for a while. Esteban lay with closed eyes, exhausted. O'Reilly gave
himself up to frowning thought. His thoughts were not pleasant; he could not, for the life
of him, believe in Rosa's safety so implicitly as he had led Esteban to suppose; his efforts
to cheer the other had sapped his own supply of hope, leaving him a prey to black misgivings.
He was glad when Norine Evans's return put an end to his speculations.

Esteban was right; the girl did have an unusual ability to banish shadows, a splendid power
to rout devils both of the spirit and of the flesh; she was a sort of antibody, destroying
every noxious or unhealthy thing mental or physical with which she came in contact. This blessed
capability was quite distinct from her skill with medicines--it was a gift, and as much a part
of her as the healing magic which dwells in the sunshine.

Certainly her knack of lending health and strength from her own abundant store had never been
better shown than in Esteban's case, for with almost no medical assistance she had brought
him back from the very voids. It was quite natural, therefore, that she should take a pride
in her work and regard him with a certain jealous proprietary interest; it was equally natural
that he should claim the greater share of her attention.

"Have you harrowed this poor man's feelings sufficiently for once?" she inquired of O'Reilly.

"I have. I'll agree to talk about nothing unpleasant hereafter."

Esteban turned to his nurse, inquiring, abruptly, "Do you think Rosa is alive?"

"Why, of course I do! Aren't you alive and--almost well?"

Now, as an argument, there was no particular force in this suggestion; nevertheless, both men
felt reassured. Esteban heaved a grateful sigh. After a moment he said,

"There is something I want to tell you both."

"Wait until to-morrow," Norine advised.

But he persisted: "No! I must tell it now. First, however, did either of you discover an old
coin in any of my pockets--an old Spanish doubloon?"

"That doubloon again!" Norine lifted her hands protestingly, and cast a meaning look at O'Reilly.
"You talked about nothing else for a whole week. Let me feel your pulse."

Esteban surrendered his hand with suspicious readiness.

"You were flat broke when we got you," O'Reilly declared.

"Probably. I seem to remember that somebody stole it."

"Doubloons! Pieces of eight! Golden guineas!" exclaimed Norine. "Why those are pirate coins!
They remind me of Treasure Island; of Long John Silver and his wooden leg; of Ben Gunn and
all the rest."

Esteban smiled uncomprehendingly. "Yes? Well, this has to do with treasure. That doubloon was
a part of the lost treasure of the Varonas."

"Lost treasure!" Norine's gray eyes widened. "What are you talking about?"

"There is a mysterious fortune in our family. My father buried it. He was very rich, you know,
and he was afraid of the Spaniards. O'Reilly knows the story."

Johnnie assented with a grunt. "Sure! I know all about it."

Esteban raised himself to his elbow. "You think it's a myth, a joke. Well, it's not. I know
where it is. I found it!"

Norine gasped; Johnnie spoke soothingly:

"Don't get excited, old man; you've talked too much to-day."

"Ha!" Esteban fell back upon his pillow. "I haven't any fever. I'm as sane as ever I was. That
treasure exists, and that doubloon gave me the clue to its whereabouts. Pancho Cueto knew my
father, and HE believed the story. He believed in it so strongly that-- well--that's why he
denounced my sister and me as traitors. He dug up our entire premises, but he didn't find it."
Esteban chuckled. "Don Esteban, my father, was cunning: he could hide things better than a
magpie. It remained for me to discover his trick."

Norine Evans spoke breathlessly. "Oh, glory! Treasure! REAL treasure! How perfectly exciting!
Tell me how you found it, quick! Johnnie, you remember he raved about a doubloon--"

"He is raving now," O'Reilly declared, with a sharp stare at his friend.

The girl turned loyally to her patient. "I'll believe you, Mr. Varona. I always believe everything
about buried treasure. The bigger the treasure the more implicitly I believe in it. I simply
adore pirates and such things; if I were a man I'd be one. Do you know, I've always been tempted
to bury my money and then go look for it."

"You're making fun of me. What?" Esteban eyed the pair doubtfully.

"No, no!" Norine was indignant. "Johnnie doesn't believe in pirates or treasure, or--anything.
He doesn't even believe in fairies, and he's Irish, too. But I do. I revel in such things.
If you don't go on, I'll blow up."

"There is no doubt that my father had a great deal of money at one time," Esteban began; "he
was the richest man in the richest city of Cuba and ..."

O'Reilly shook his head dubiously and braced his back against a tree-trunk; there was a look
of mild disapprobation on his face as he listened to the familiar story of Don Esteban and
the slave, Sebastian.

Young Esteban told the tale well. His own faith in it lent a certain convincingness to his
words and Norine Evans hung upon them entranced. She was horrified at the account of Don Esteban's
death; her eyes grew dark as Esteban told of his and Rosa's childhood with their avaricious
stepmother. That part of the narrative which had to do with the death of Dona Isabel and the
finding of the gold coin was new to O'Reilly and he found himself considerably impressed by
it. When Esteban had finished, Norine drew a deep breath.

"Oh! That lays over any story I ever heard. To think that the deeds and the jewels and everything
are in the well AT THIS MINUTE! How COULD you go away and leave them?"

"I didn't think it out at the time. I didn't evolve my theory until after I had fled. Naturally,
I wasn't able to get back."

"But suppose somebody finds it?" Norine was aghast at the thought.

"Not much chance of that. The treasure has lain there for a generation, and the story itself
is almost forgotten." Esteban turned triumphantly to O'Reilly, saying, "Now then, do you think
I'm so crazy?"

O'Reilly didn't have it in his heart to say exactly what he really thought. The circumstances
of the discovery of the coin were odd enough, certainly, but it seemed to him that they were
capable of several explanations. If, indeed, there had ever been a doubloon and if Esteban
had found it in the dead hand of his stepmother, that, in O'Reilly's opinion, by no means proved
the existence of the mythical Varona hoard, nor did it solve the secret of its whereabouts.
What he more than half suspected was that some favored fancy had formed lodgment in Esteban's
brain.

"It's an interesting theory," he admitted. "Anyhow, there is no danger of the treasure being
uncovered very soon. Cueto had a good look and made himself ridiculous. You'll have ample chance
to do likewise when the war is over."

"You must help me find it," said Esteban. "We shall all share the fortune equally, you two,
Rosa and I."

"WE? Why should WE share in it?" Norine asked.

"I owe it to you. Didn't O'Reilly rescue me from a dungeon? Haven't you nursed me back to health?
Don't I owe my life to you both?"

"Nonsense! I, for one, sha'n't take a dollar of it," the girl declared. "All I want to do is
help dig. If you'll just promise to let me do that--"

"I promise. And you shall have one-fourth of everything."

"No! No!"

"Oh, but you MUST. I insist. Nursing is a poorly paid profession. Wouldn't you like to be rich?"

"Profession! Poorly paid?" Norine sputtered, angrily. "As if I'd take pay!"

"As if I would accept a great service and forget it, like some miserable beggar!" Esteban replied,
stiffly.

O'Reilly laughed out. "Don't let's quarrel over the spoil until we get it," said he. "That's
the way with all treasure-hunters. They invariably fall out and go to fighting. To avoid bloodshed,
I'll agree to sell my interest cheap, for cash. Come! What will you bid? Start it low. Do I
hear a dollar bid? A dollar! A dollar! A dollar! My share of the famous Varona fortune going
for a dollar!"

"There! He doesn't believe a word of it," Esteban said.

Norine gave an impatient shrug. "Some people wouldn't believe they were alive unless they saw
their breath on a looking-glass. Goodness! How I hate a sneering skeptic, a wet blanket."

O'Reilly rose with one arm shielding his face. "In the interest of friendship, I withdraw.
A curse on these buried treasures, anyhow. We shall yet come to blows."

As he walked away he heard Norine say: "Don't pay any attention to him. We'll go and dig it
up ourselves, and we won't wait until the war is over."

An hour later Esteban and his nurse still had their heads together. They were still talking
of golden ingots and pearls from the Caribbean the size of plums when they looked up to see
O'Reilly running toward them. He was visibly excited; he waved and shouted at them. He was
panting when he arrived.

"News! From Matanzas!" he cried. "Gomez's man has arrived."

Esteban struggled to rise, but Norine restrained him. "Rosa? What does he say? Quick!"

"Good news! She left the Pan de Matanzas with the two negroes. She went into the city before
Cobo's raid."

Esteban collapsed limply. He closed his eyes, his face was very white. He crossed himself weakly.

"The letter is definite. It seems they were starving. They obeyed Weyler's bando. They're in
Matanzas now."

"Do you hear, Esteban?" Norine shook her patient by the shoulder. "She's alive. Oh, can't you
see that it always pays to believe the best?"

"Alive! Safe!" Esteban whispered. His eyes, when he opened them, were swimming; he clutched
Norine's hand tightly; his other hand he extended to O'Reilly. The latter was choking; his
cheeks, too, were wet. "A reconcentrado! In Matanzas! Well, that's good. We have friends there--they'll
not let her starve. This makes a new man of me. See! I'm strong again. I'll go to her."

"YOU'LL go?" quickly cried Miss Evans. "YOU'LL go! You're not strong enough. It would be suicide.
You, with a price upon your head! Everybody knows you there. Matanzas is virtually a walled
city. There's sickness, too--yellow fever, typhus--"

"Exactly. And hunger, also. Suppose no one has taken Rosa in? Those concentration camps aren't
nice places for a girl."

"But wait! I have friends in Washington. They're influential. They will cable the American
consul to look after her. Anyhow, you mustn't think of returning to Matanzas," Norine faltered;
her voice caught unexpectedly and she turned her face away.

O'Reilly nodded shortly. "You're a sick man," he agreed. "There's no need for both of us to go."

Esteban looked up. "Then you--"

"I leave at once. The Old Man has given me a commission to General Betancourt, and I'll be
on my way in an hour. The moon is young; I must cross the trocha before--"

"That trocha!" Esteban was up on his elbow again. "Be careful there, O'Reilly. They keep a
sharp lookout, and it's guarded with barbed wire. Be sure you cut every strand. Yes, and muffle
your horse's hoofs, too, in crossing the railroad track. That's how we were detected. Pablo's
horse struck a rail, and they fired at the sound. He fell at the first volley, riddled. Oh,
I know that trocha!"

"Damn the trocha!" O'Reilly exclaimed. "At last I've got a chance to DO something. GOD! How
long I've waited."

Esteban drew O'Reilly's tense form down and embraced his friend, after the fashion of his people.
"She has been waiting, too," he said, huskily. "We Varonas are good waiters, O'Reilly. Rosa
will never cease waiting until you come. Tell her, for me--"

Norine withdrew softly out of earshot. There were a lump in her throat and a pain in her breast.
She had acquired a peculiar and affectionate interest in this unhappy girl whom she had never
seen, and she had learned to respect O'Reilly's love. The yearning that had pulsed in his voice
a moment before had stirred her deeply; it awoke a throb in her own bosom, for O'Reilly was
dear to her. She wanted him to go, yet she knew the hazards that lay in his way. If, indeed,
the girl were in Matanzas, how, Norine asked herself, was it possible for him to reach her?
That O'Reilly had some mad design was evident; that he would utterly disregard his own safety
she felt sure. But that he would meet with failure, perhaps worse, seemed equally certain.
Matanzas was a beleagured city, and strangers could not enter or leave it at will. If Rosa
had not put herself behind prison walls, if she were still in hiding somewhere on the island,
it would be a simple matter to seek her out. But Matanzas, of all places!

Then, too, the pacificos, according to all reports, were dying like flies in the prison camps.
Norine wondered if there might not be a terrible heartache at the end of O'Reilly's quest?
Her face was grave and worried when, hearing him speak to her, she turned to take his outstretched
hand.

"You will be careful, won't you?" she implored. "And you'll be stout of heart, no matter what
occurs?"

He nodded. "It's a long way back here to Cubitas. You may not see or hear from me again."

"I understand." She choked miserably. "You mean you may not come back. Oh, Johnnie!"

"Tut, tut! We O'Reillys have more lives than a litter of cats. I mean I may not see you until
the war is over and we meet in New York. Well, we've been good pals, and--I'm glad you came
to Cuba." His grasp upon her two hands was painful.

"You must go, I know, and I wouldn't try to keep you, but--" Norine faltered, then impulsively
she drew him down and kissed him full upon the lips. "For Rosa!" she whispered. Her eyes were
shining as she watched him pass swiftly out of sight.

XXII

THE TROCHA

Of all the military measures employed by the Spaniards in their wars against Cuban independence,
perhaps the most unique was the trocha--trench or traverse. Martinez Campos during the Ten
Years' War built the first trocha just west of the Cubitas Mountains where the waist of the
island is narrowest. It was Campos's hope, by means of this artificial barrier, to confine
the operations of the insurgents to the eastern end of Cuba, but in that he failed, as likewise
he failed in the results gained by his efforts to concentrate the rural population in the cities.
Not until Weyler's time were these two methods of pacification, the trocha and the concentration
camp, developed to their fullest extent. Under the rule of the Butcher several trochas were
constructed at selected points, and he carried to its logical conclusion the policy of concentration,
with results sufficiently frightful to shock the world and to satisfy even Weyler's monstrous
appetite for cruelty. Although his trochas hindered the free movement of Cuban troops and his
prison camps decimated the peaceful population of several provinces, the Spanish cause gained
little. Both trenches and prison camps became Spanish graveyards.

Weyler's intrenchments cost millions and were elaborately constructed, belted with barbed wire,
bristling with blockhouses and forts. In both the digging and the manning, however, they cost
uncounted lives. Spanish spades turned up fevers with the soil, and, so long as raw Spanish
troops were compelled to toil in the steaming morasses or to lie inactive under the sun and
the rain, those traitor generals--June, July, and August--continued to pile up the bodies in
rotting heaps and to timber the trenches with their bones. So long as the cities were overcrowded
with pacificos and their streets were putrid with disease, so long did the Spanish garrisons
sicken and die, as flies perish upon poisoned carrion.

Out on the cool, clean hills and the windy savannas where the Insurrectos dwelt there was health.
Poorly armed, ragged, gaunt, these Insurrectos were kept moving by hunger, always moving like
cattle on a barren range. But they were healthy, for disease, which is soft-footed and tender-bellied,
could not keep up.

At the time Johnnie O'Reilly set out for Matanzas the war--a war without battle, without victory,
without defeat--had settled into a grim contest of endurance. In the east, where the Insurrectos
were practically supreme, there was food of a sort, but beyond the Jucaro-Moron trocha--the
old one of Campos's building--the country was sick. Immediately west of it, in that district
which the Cubans called Las Villas, the land lay dying, while the entire provinces of Matanzas,
Habana, and Pinar del Rio were practically dead. These three were skeletons, picked bare of
flesh by Weyler's beak.

The Jucaro-Moron trocha had been greatly strengthened since Campos's day. It followed the line
of the transinsular railway. Dotted at every quarter of a mile along the grade were little
forts connected by telephone and telegraph lines. Between these fortinas were sentry stations
of logs or railroad ties. The jungle on either side of the right-of-way had been cleared, and
from the remaining stumps and posts and fallen tree-trunks hung a maze of barbed wire through
which a man could scarcely crawl, even in daylight. Eyes were keen, rifles were ready, challenges
were sharp, and countersigns were quickly given on the Jucaro-Moron trocha.

In O'Reilly's party there were three men besides himself--the ever-faithful Jacket, a wrinkled
old Camagueyan who knew the bridle trails of his province as a fox knows the tracks to its
lair, and a silent guajiro from farther west, detailed to accompany the expedition because
of his wide acquaintance with the devastated districts. Both guides, having crossed the trocha
more than once, affected to scorn its terrors, and their easy confidence reassured O'Reilly
in spite of Esteban's parting admonition.

The American had not dreamed of taking Jacket along, but when he came to announce his departure
the boy had flatly refused to be left behind. Jacket, in fact, had taken the matter entirely
into his own hands and had appealed directly to General Gomez. To his general the boy had explained
tearfully that patriotism was a rare and an admirable quality, but that his love of country
was not half so strong or so sacred as his affection for Johnnie O'Reilly. Having attached
himself to the American for better or for worse, no human power could serve to detach him,
so he asserted. He threatened, moreover, that if he were compelled to suffer his benefactor
to go alone into the west he would lay down his arms and permit General Gomez to free Cuba
as best he could. Cuba could go to Hades, so far as Jacket was concerned--he would not lift
a finger to save it. Strangely enough, Jacket's threat of defection had not appalled General
Gomez. In fact, with a dyspeptic gruffness characteristic of him Gomez had ordered the boy
off, under penalty of a sound spanking. But Jacket had a will of his own, likewise a temper.
He greeted this unfeeling refusal with a noisy outburst of mingled rage, grief, and defiance.
Stamping his bare feet, sobbing, and screaming, the boy finally flung himself upon the ground
and smote it with his fists, while tears streamed from his eyes. Nor could he be silenced.
He maintained such a hideous and surprising uproar, answering Gomez's stern commands to be
silent with such maniacal howls, that the old soldier was finally glad to yield his consent,
incidentally consigning the rebellious youth to that perdition with which he had threatened Cuba.

Having won his point, Jacket regained his composure with suspicious suddenness and raced away
to triumph over his beloved O'Reilly.

Fifty miles of hard riding brought the party to the trocha; they neared it on the second morning
after leaving Cubitas, and sought a secluded camping-spot. Later in the day Hilario, the old
Camagueyan, slipped away to reconnoiter. He returned at twilight, but volunteered no report
of what he had discovered. After an insistent cross-examination O'Reilly wrung from him the
reluctant admission that everything seemed favorable for a crossing some time that night, and
that he had selected a promising point. Beyond that the old man would say nothing. Johnnie
asked himself uneasily if this reticence was not really due to apprehension rather than to
sullenness. Whatever the cause, it was not particularly reassuring, and as evening came on
Johnnie found himself growing decidedly nervous.

Supper, a simple meal, was quickly disposed of. Then followed a long, dispiriting wait, for
a gibbous moon rode high in the sky and the guides refused to stir so long as it remained there.
It was a still night; in the jungle no air was stirring, and darkness brought forth a torment
of mosquitoes. As day died, the woods awoke to sounds of bird and insect life; strange, raucous
calls pealed forth, some familiar, others strange and unaccustomed. There were thin whistlings,
hoarse grunts and harsh cacklings, high-pitched elfin laughter. Moving bodies disturbed the
leaves overhead; from all sides came the rustle and stir of unseen creatures; sudden disputations
were followed by startled silences. Sitting there in the dark, bedeviled by a pest of insects,
mocked at by these mysterious voices, and looking forward to a hazardous enterprise, O'Reilly
began to curse his vivid imagination and to envy the impassiveness of his companions. Even
Jacket, he noted, endured the strain better; the boy was cheerful, philosophical, quite unimpressed
by his surroundings. When the mosquitoes became unbearable he put on his trousers, with some
reluctance and much ceremony.

It seemed to O'Reilly that the moon floated motionless in the sky, and more than once he was
upon the point of ordering a start, but he reflected that its radiance out in the open must
be far greater than it seemed here under the dense tropical foliage. After a time he began
to wonder if his guides were as loyal as they should be, if Hilario's strange reticence was
caused by sullenness, by apprehension, or by something altogether different. Both of the men
were strangers to him; of their fidelity he had no guarantee. Now that his mind had become
engaged with thoughts of treachery, a determined effort was necessary to keep himself in hand
and O'Reilly fell back finally upon his elemental trust in the Cuban character--scant consolation
under the circumstances.

Midnight brought a moist, warm breeze and a few formless clouds which served at times to dimly
obscure the moon. Watching the clouds, O'Reilly hoped that they might prove to be the heralds
of a storm. None came. When the moon had finally crept down into the tree-tops old Hilario
stepped upon his cigarette, then began silently to saddle up. The others followed with alacrity,
and fell in behind him as he led the way into the forest. They no longer ventured to speak
aloud; nothing but the occasional sound of a hoof striking upon root or stone, the creak of
leather, or the rustle of branches against passing bodies gave evidence that mounted men were
en route.

When they had covered a couple of miles Hilario reined in and the others crowded close. Ahead,
dimly discernible against the night sky, there appeared to be a thinning of the woods. After
listening for a moment or two, Hilario dismounted and slipped away; the three riders sat their
saddles with ears strained. Once more the myriad voices of the night became audible--the chirping
of crickets, the strident call of tree-toads, the whining undertone of the mosquitoes.

Hilario returned with word that all was well, and each man dismounted to muffle the feet of
his horse with rags and strips of gunny-sack provided for the purpose. Then, one by one, they
moved forward to the edge of the clearing. The trocha lay before them.

After the cavernous obscurity of the jungle the night seemed suddenly to lighten and O'Reilly
found himself looking out over a level waste of stumps and tree-trunks perhaps a quarter of
a mile wide, extending right and left as far as he could see. Against the luminous western
horizon opposite the inky forest stood like a wall. Midway of the clearing there was a railroad
grade with a telephone-pole or two limned against the sky. The clearing was silent and to all
appearances deserted; nothing stirred, no sign of life appeared anywhere. And yet, as the American
studied the place, he had a queer, uncomfortable sensation that it was thickly peopled and
that eyes were peering out at him from the gloom. Blurred forms took shape, phantom figures
moved along the embankment, stumps stirred.

O'Reilly felt a pair of reins thrust into his hand and found Hilario examining a large pair
of tinner's shears.

"Do you wish me to go with you?" he inquired of the guide.

The latter shook his head. "Antonio will go; he will keep watch while I clear a path. If you
hear or see anything--"

Jacket interrupted with a sibilant: "Psst! Look! Yonder!"

A lantern-like illumination had leaped out of the blackness and now approached swiftly down
the railroad grade.

O'Reilly laid a heavy hand upon the old Camagueyan and inquired in sharp suspicion, "What does
that mean--an alarm?"

There was a breathless moment during which the four men followed the erratic course of the
spark. Then Antonio chuckled. "Alabaos! A light-bug," said he. "Don't you know a cucullo when
you see one?" He cautiously tested the ejector of his carbine and tightened the cord that served
as his belt.

O'Reilly drew a deep breath of relief. He had never become wholly accustomed to the giant light-beetles
of the tropics, although he had carried one often on sentry duty to see the face of his watch,
and not infrequently had seen Cuban women wearing them in their hair as ornaments.

"Jove!" he muttered. "It gave me a fright."

Hilario resumed his instructions: "If anything goes wrong, wait here. Don't ride away until
we have time--"

"Never fear. I won't desert you," the American reassured him.

The two white-clad figures slipped away, became indistinct, and then disappeared. The night
was hot, the mosquitoes hummed dismally and settled in clouds upon the waiting pair, maddening
them with their poison. After a time a horse snorted and Jacket cursed nervously.

"I'd like to see where we are," the boy muttered.

"Do you know these men?" O'Reilly asked him.

"No. God deliver me from such unpleasant fellows."

"I hope they're honest."

"Humph! I trust nobody." There was a pause. "Never mind," Jacket assured his companion. "I
will make short work of them if they prove to be traitors."

A half-hour passed, then the two ghostly figures materialized once more.

"Dios!" grumbled Hilario. "There are many strings to this Spanish guitar. What a row when they
discover that I have played a Cuban danzon upon it." The old man seemed less surly than before,
and O'Reilly felt ashamed of his recent suspicions.

"Is the way clear?" he inquired.

"As far as the railroad, yes. We heard voices there, and came back. We will have to cut our
way forward after we cross the track. Now then, follow me without a sound."

Leading his horse by the bit ring, Hilario moved out into the clearing, followed once more
by his three companions. Concealment was out of the question now, for their only covering was
the darkness. O'Reilly had the uncomfortable feeling that the cavalcade bulked monstrous big
and must be visible at a great distance; he experienced much the sensations of a man crossing
a sheet of thin ice with nerves painfully strained, awaiting the first menacing crack. In spite
of all precautions the animals made a tremendous racket, or so it seemed, and, despite Hilario's
twistings and turnings, it was impossible to avoid an occasional loop of barbed wire, therefore
flesh and clothing suffered grievously. But at length the party brought up under the railroad
embankment and paused. Out of the voids to their right came a faint murmur of voices. As carefully
as might be the four men ascended the slope, crossed the rails, and descended into the ditch
on the other side. Another moment and they encountered a taut strand of barbed wire. The metallic
snip of Hilario's shears sounded like a pistol-shot to O'Reilly. Into the maze of strands they
penetrated, yard by yard, clipping and carefully laying back the wire as they went. Progress
was slow; they had to feel their way; the sharp barbs brought blood and muttered profanity
at every step.

None of the four ever knew what gave the alarm. Their first intimation of discovery came with
a startling "Quien vive?" hurled at them from somewhere at their backs.

An instant and the challenge was followed by a Mauser shot. Other reports rang out as the sentry
emptied his rifle in their direction.

"So! They are shooting-bats," Hilario grunted.

Antonio swung about and cocked his Remington, but the other spoke sharply. "Fool! If you shoot
they will see the fire and riddle us. A curse on the spider that spun this web!"

It was a test of courage to crouch among the charred stumps, enmeshed in that cruel tangle
of wire, while the night was stabbed by daggers of fire and while the trocha awoke to the wild
alarm. From somewhere in the distance came a shouted command and the sound of running feet,
suddenly putting an end to further inaction. Antonio began to hack viciously with his machete,
in an effort to aid Hilario's labors. The sound of his sturdy blows betrayed the party's whereabouts
so clearly that finally the older man could restrain himself no longer.

"Give it to them, compadres; it is a game that we can play."

O'Reilly had been gripping his rifle tensely, his heart in his throat, his pulses pounding.
As near a panic as he had ever been, he found, oddly enough, that the mere act of throwing
his weapon to his shoulder and firing it calmed him. The kick of the gun subdued his excitement
and cleared his brain. He surprised himself by directing Jacket in a cool, authoritative voice,
to shoot low. When he had emptied the magazine he led two of the horses forward. Then, grasping
his own machete, he joined in clearing a pathway.

It seemed an interminable time ere they extricated themselves from the trap, but finally they
succeeded and gained the welcome shelter of the woods, pausing inside its shelter to cut the
muffles from their horses' feet. By this time the defenders of the trocha were pouring volley
after volley at random into the night.

Hilario sucked the cuts in his horny palms and spat forth the blood.

"If Gomez had the ammunition these fools are wasting he would free Cuba in no time."

Now that the skirmish was over, Jacket began to boast of his part in it.

"Ha! Perhaps they'll know better than to show themselves the next time I come this way," said
he. "You saw me, didn't you? Well, I made a few Spanish widows to-night."

"Not many, I'm afraid," O'Reilly laughed.

"Oh, believe me, I'm an old hand at this sort of thing. I shoot just as well at night as I
do in the daytime." This was literally true, and when no one disputed his assertion Jacket
proceeded further in praise of himself, only to break off with a wordless cry of dismay.

"What's the matter?" Johnnie inquired.

"Look! Behold me!" wailed the hero. "I have left the half of my beautiful trousers on that
barbed wire!"

Antonio swung a leg over his saddle, saying: "Come along, amigos; we have fifty leagues ahead
of us. The war will be over while we stand here gossiping."

XXIII

INTO THE CITY OF DEATH

O'Reilly's adventures on his swift ride through Las Villas have no part in this story. It is
only necessary to say that they were numerous and varied, that O'Reilly experienced excitement
aplenty, and that upon more than one occasion he was forced to think and to act quickly in
order to avoid a clash with some roving guerrilla band. He had found it imperative at all times
to avoid the larger towns, for they, and in fact most of the hamlets, were unsafe; hence the
little party was forced to follow back roads and obscure bridle trails. But the two guides
were never at a loss; they were resourceful, courageous, and at no time did the American have
reason to doubt their faithfulness.

Evidences of the war increased as the journey lengthened. The potreros were lush with grass,
but no herds grazed upon them; villages were deserted and guano huts were falling into decay,
charred fields growing up to weeds and the ruins of vast centrales showing where the Insurrectos
had been at work. This was the sugar country, the heart of Cuba, whence Spain had long drawn
her life blood, and from the first it had been the policy of the rebel leaders to destroy the
large estates, leaving undamaged only the holdings of those little farmers whose loyalty to
the cause of freedom was unquestioned.

Food became a problem immediately after the travelers had crossed the trocha. Such apprehensive
families as still lurked in the woods were liberal enough--Antonio, by the way, knew all of
them-- but they had little to give and, in consequence, O'Reilly's party learned the taste
of wild fruits, berries, and palmetto hearts. Once they managed to kill a small pig, the sole
survivor of some obscure country tragedy, but the rest of the time their meat, when there was
any, consisted of iguanas--those big, repulsive lizards- -and jutias, the Cuban field-rats.

Neither the lizards nor the rats were quite as bad as they looked or sounded; the meat of the
former was tender and white, while the latter, although strong, was not unpalatable. To hungry
men both were muy sabrosa, as Jacket put it. This was not the boy's first experience with such
a diet; having campaigned before in the west, he was accustomed to the taste of juita, and
he told O'Reilly how his troop had once lived so long upon these rats that it became impossible
to surprise a Spanish enemy, except by approaching up the wind, as a hunter stalks his game.
Jacket gravely assured his friend that the Spaniards could smell him and his brother patriots
from a distance of five kilometers--a statement, by the way, which the American by this time
was ready to believe.

Fortunately there was no shortage of food for the horses, and so, despite the necessity of
numerous detours, the party made good time. They crossed into Matanzas, pushed on over rolling
hills, through sweeping savannas, past empty clearings and deserted villages, to their journey's
end. A fortunate encounter with a rebel partida from General Betancourt's army enabled them
to reach headquarters without loss of time, and one afternoon, worn, ragged and hungry, they
dismounted in front of that gallant officer's hut.

General Betancourt read the letter which O'Reilly handed him, then looked up with a smile.

"So! You are one of Gomez's Americans, eh? Well, I would never have known it, to look at you;
the sun and the wind have made you into a very good Cuban. And your clothes--One might almost
mistake you for a Cuban cabinet officer."

O'Reilly joined in the laughter evoked by this remark. He was quite as tattered as the poorest
of Betancourt's common soldiers; his shoes were broken and disreputable; his cotton trousers,
snagged by barbed wire and brambles, and soiled by days in the saddle and nights in the grass,
were in desperate need of attention. His beard had grown, too, and his skin, where it was exposed,
was burnt to a mahogany brown. Certainly there was nothing about his appearance to bespeak
his nationality.

The general continued: "I am directed in this letter to help you in some enterprise. Command
me, sir."

As briefly as possible Johnnie made known the object of his journey. The officer nodded his
comprehension, but as he did so a puzzled expression crossed his face.

"Yes, I reported that Miss Varona had gone into the city--I took some pains to find out. Do
you have reason to doubt--"

"Not the least, sir."

"Then--why have you come all this way?"

"I came to find her and to fetch her to her brother."

"But--you don't understand. She is actually inside the lines, in Matanzas--a prisoner."

"Exactly. I intend to go into Matanzas and bring her out."

General Betancourt drew back, astonished. "My dear man!" he exclaimed. "Are you mad?"

O'Reilly smiled faintly. "Quite probably. All lovers are mildly mad, I believe."

"Ah! Lovers! I begin to see. But--how do you mean to go about this--this--impossible undertaking?"

"You told me just now that I could pass for a Cuban. Well, I am going to put it to the test.
If I once get into the city I shall manage somehow to get out again, and bring her with me."

"Um-m!" The general appraised O'Reilly speculatively. "No doubt you can get in--it is not so
difficult to enter, I believe, and especially to one who speaks the language like a native.
But the return--I fear you will find that another matter. Matanzas is a place of pestilence,
hunger, despair. No one goes there from choice any more, and no one ever comes out."

"So I should imagine." The speaker's careless tone added to General Betancourt's astonishment.
"Bless me!" he exclaimed. "What an extraordinary young man! Is it possible that you do not
comprehend the terrible conditions?" A sudden thought struck him and he inquired, quickly:
"Tell me, you are not by any chance that hero they call El Demonio? I have heard that he is
indeed a demon. No? Very well! You say you wish to visit Matanzas, and I am instructed to help
you. How can I do so?"

O'Reilly hesitated an instant. "For one thing, I need money. I--I haven't a single peseta."

"You are welcome to the few dollars I possess."

Johnnie expressed his gratitude for this ready assistance. "One thing more," said he. "Will
you give my boy, Jacket, a new pair of trousers and send him back to the Orient at the first
opportunity?"

"Of course. It is done." The general laid a friendly hand upon O'Reilly's shoulder, saying,
gravely: "It would relieve me intensely to send you back with him, for I have fears for the
success of your venture. Matanzas is a hell; it has swallowed up thousands of our good countrymen;
thousands have died there. I'm afraid you do not realize what risks you are taking." 

The warm demonstrations of popular regard with which he had been welcomed upon his arrival in London,
were followed by a luncheon given on the next day (Saturday, May 25th) in his honour by Mr. Chamberlain,
his official chief. The speech elicited by this notable occasion is one in which a graceful
humour is characteristically blended with deep emotion.

Those who have had the good fortune to hear many of Lord Milner's speeches--speeches sometimes
turning a page of history, sometimes mere incidents of official or administrative routine--know
that they are all alike distinguished by the high quality of sincerity.[290] But this was an
occasion upon which even adroitness of intellect and integrity of purpose might well have sought
the shelter of conventional expressions. Lord Milner dispenses with any such protection. "In a
rational world," he said, it would have seemed better to everybody that he, "with a big unfinished
job awaiting him," and many of his fellow workmen unable to take
the rest which they both deserved and needed, "should have arrived,
and stayed, and returned in the quietest possible manner."

But it was an age in which it "seemed impossible for many people to put a simple and natural
interpretation on anything; and his arrival in this quiet manner
would have been misconstrued to a degree, which would have been injurious
to the public interests."

If his "hard-begged holiday" could have been represented as a "veiled recall," then of course
it was obvious that, having taken the proverbial hansom from Waterloo to his own chambers, this
very harmless action would have been "trumpeted over two continents as evidence of his disgrace."

[Footnote
290: It was, in its essence, the "high seriousness of absolute sincerity" that Arnold, after
Aristotle, makes the central attribute of poetic thought. In commenting upon a speech delivered
at Germiston on March 15th, 1905, the Johannesburg Star wrote on the day following: "Did ever a
High Commissioner for South Africa speak in this wise before?

But beneath the light words and unstudied diction there is the weight
and sureness of the 'inevitable' thought.

A man who has pursued a single task for eight years with unremitting
effort and unswerving devotion can afford to put his mind into his
words.

And in all that Lord Milner says there is an absolute sincerity,
born of high integrity of purpose and an assurance of knowledge, that
compels conviction.

Or, rather, should we say, that makes the need of conviction as unnecessary
as a lamp in daylight."]

"It is hard, it is ludicrous," he continued,
"that some of the busiest men in the world should be obliged to occupy
their time, and that so many of my friends and well wishers should
be put to inconvenience--and on a day, too, when it would be so nice
to be in the country--merely in order to prove to persons with an
ingrained habit of self-delusion that the British Government will
not give up its agents in the face of the enemy, or that the people
of this country will not allow themselves to be bored into abandoning
what they have spent millions of treasure and so many precious lives
to obtain.

All I can say is, that if it was necessary (I apologise for it: I
am sorry to be the centre of a commotion from which no man could be
constitutionally more averse than myself), I can only thank you heartily
for the kindness and the cordiality with which the thing has been
done.

I feel indeed that the praises which have been bestowed, the honours which have been heaped on
me, are beyond my deserts.

But the simplest thing to do under these circumstances is to try
to deserve them in the future.

In any case I am under endless obligations.

It is difficult to say these things in the face of the persons principally concerned, but
I feel bound to take this opportunity, especially in view of the remarks which have been made in
certain quarters, to express my deep sense of gratitude for the manner in which His Majesty's
Government, and especially my immediate chief, have shown me great
forbearance, and given me support most prompt at the moment when it
was most needed, without which I should have been helpless indeed.

And I have also to thank many friends, not a few of them here present, and some not present,
for messages of encouragement, for kindly words of suggestion and advice received at critical moments,
some of which have been of invaluable assistance to me, and have
made an indelible impression on my heart.

I am afraid, if I were to refer to all my benefactors, it would be like the bidding prayer--and
you would all lose your trains.

[Sidenote: Hint from the bidding prayer.]

"But there is one hint I may take from the bidding prayer. Not only in this place, but at all times
and in all places, I am specially bound to remember the devotion of the loyalists--the Dutch
loyalists, if you please, and not only the British--the loyalists of South Africa. They responded to all my
appeals to act, and, harder still, to wait. They never lost their cheery confidence in the darkest
days of our misfortunes, they never faltered in their fidelity to a man of whose errors and
failings they were necessarily more conscious than anybody else, but of whose honesty of purpose
they were long ago, and once for all, convinced. If there is anything most gratifying to me
on this memorable occasion it is the encouragement which I know the events of yesterday and
of to-day will give to thousands of our South African fellow-countrymen, like minded with us, in
the homes and in the camps of South Africa.

"Your Royal Highness,[291] Mr. Chamberlain, ladies, and gentlemen--I
am sure you will not desire me to enter into any political questions
to-day.

More than that, I really have nothing to add to what I have already said and written, I fear
with wearisome reiteration. It seems to me we are slowly progressing towards the predestined end; latterly
it has appeared as if the pace was somewhat quickening, but I do not wish to make too much of
that or to speak with any too great confidence.

However long the road, it seems to me the only one to the object
which we were bound to pursue, and which seems now fairly in sight.

What has sustained me personally--if your kindness will allow me to make a personal reference--what
has sustained me personally on the weary road is my absolute, unshakable conviction that it
was the only one which we could travel.

[Footnote 291: The Duke of Cambridge.]

"Peace we could have had by self-effacement. We could have had it easily and comfortably on
those terms. But we could not have held our own by any other methods than those which we have
been obliged to adopt. I do not know whether I feel more inclined to laugh or to cry when I have
to listen for the hundredth time to these dear delusions, this Utopian dogmatising that it only
required a little more time, a little more patience, a little more
tact, a little more meekness, a little more of all those gentle virtues
of which I know I am so conspicuously devoid, in order to conciliate--to
conciliate what?

Panoplied hatred, insensate ambition, invincible ignorance.

I fully believe that the time is coming--Heaven knows how we desire
it to come quickly--when all the qualities of the most gentle and
forbearing statesmanship which are possessed by any of our people
will be called for, and ought to be applied, in South Africa.

I do not say for a moment there is not great scope for them even to-day, but always provided
they do not mar what is essential for success in the future--the conclusiveness of the final scenes
of the present drama."

[Sidenote: Merriman and Sauer mission.]

[Sidenote: Liberals and Afrikanders.]

As a declaration to the British world that Lord Milner "possessed the unabated confidence of
his sovereign and of his fellow countrymen," Mr. Chamberlain's luncheon was amply justified.
The protraction of the war was beginning to try the endurance of the nation. Mr. Sauer and
Mr. Merriman were in England for the express purpose of discrediting Lord Milner, and behind
these fierce political freelances was the astute brain of the Bond Master, Hofmeyr. They had been
commissioned early in the year by the Afrikander nationalists to
give effect to the resolutions of the Worcester Congress by co-operating
with their friends in England in an agitation for the recall of the
High Commissioner.

It was said that these two ex-ministers of the Crown were authorised to offer an undertaking
that the Bond would use its influence with ex-President Krüger and Mr. Fischer[292] to terminate
the war, in exchange for the promise of "autonomy" for the Boers and a general armistice for
the Cape rebels.

However this may be, the delegates of the Worcester Congress made it their chief business to represent
to the members of the Liberal party who favoured their cause, that the recall of Lord Milner would
remove the chief obstacle to peace. This attempt never came within a measurable distance of success;
but its failure was not due to any want of effort on the part of that section of the Liberal
opposition which had been opposed to the annexation of the Republics, and now denounced the British
Government and the Imperial troops for their "methods of barbarism."

The completeness with which Lord Courtney, Mr. Bryce, Mr. Lloyd-George, Lord Loreburn (Sir
Robert Reid), Mr. Burns, and other prominent members of the Liberal party identified themselves
with the policy and action of the Afrikander Bond, is disclosed by the proceedings which marked
the banquet given on June 5th in honour of Mr. Merriman and Mr. Sauer. Mr. Bryce, in a letter
expressing his approbation of the object of the banquet and his regret at his inability to attend
it, wrote: "Mr. Merriman and Mr. Sauer have not only distinguished
public records, but did excellent service, for which the Government
ought to have been grateful, in allaying passion and averting disturbances
in Cape Colony."[293] Lord (then Mr.) Courtney, in proposing a vote
of thanks to the guests of the evening, declared that the annexation
of the Republics was "a wrong and a blunder"; adding that the Liberal
policy would some day be "to temper annexation, if not to abrogate
it."

Both Mr. Merriman and Mr. Sauer revealed the aims of their mission with perfect frankness. The
former, after alluding to Mr. Chamberlain's luncheon as a display of the "Imperial spirit of the
servile senate who decreed ovations and triumphs to Caligula and Domitian, when they had received
rebuffs from the ancestors both of ourselves and the heroic Dutch now struggling in South Africa,"
and characterising Lord Milner's High Commissionership as "a career of unmitigated and hopeless
failure," proceeded to demand his immediate recall. To employ Lord Milner in the settlement
of the new colonies, said Mr. Merriman, would be "a suicidal and
ruinous policy.

He was a violent partizan; his predictions never came true; the bursts
of fustian and the frivolous utterances of his despatches showed an
ill-balanced and ill-regulated mind, which was utterly unable to cope
with the problem."

While, as for the prospect of a British army ever conquering the
South African Dutch, he reasserted the opinion which he held before
the war--"Our friends they might be, but our subjects never."[294]
Mr. Sauer, who "felt honoured by seeing such a gathering, and seeing
in it a Gladstone[295] and a Leonard Courtney," was no less explicit:

[Footnote
292: These two ex-officials, representing the respective Governments
of the late Republics, were living in Holland at this time.]

[Footnote
293: It is only fair to assume that Mr. Bryce was not acquainted with
the details of the Dordrecht and Hargrove affairs, to which reference
has been made respectively at p. 287 and p. 375.

And, still more that he was unaware of the utterly discreditable Basuto incident, with respect to which
General Gordon's biographer writes: "The consequence was that Mr. Sauer deliberately resolved
to destroy Gordon's reputation as a statesman, and to ensure the
triumph of his own policy by an act of treachery which has never been
surpassed."--The Life of Gordon, vol. ii., p. 83.

(Fisher Unwin.)]

[Footnote 294: Compare the different and infinitely more instructive treatment of the question
of Dutch allegiance by Lord Milner in his Johannesburg speech, quoted
at p. 145.]

[Footnote 295: I.e., the Rev. Stephen Gladstone.]

"I
stand here," he said, "as a representative of the Dutch people, and
declare that they never mean to be a subject race.

If they cannot get their rights by justice they will get them by
other means.... I am glad to go back and tell my own people how many
there are in this country who appreciate their devotion to an ideal,
and are prepared to befriend them in the hour of trial."[296]

[Footnote
296: Apart from those mentioned in the text, the following attended
the Merriman and Sauer banquet: Mr. E. Robertson, M.P. (chairman),
Lord Farrer, Mr. T. Shaw, M.P., Mr. Burt, M.P., Mr. Channing, M.P.,
Mr. John Ellis, M.P., Mr. H. J. Wilson, M.P., Sir Wilfred Lawson,
Mr. Frederic Harrison, and others.

And among those who sent letters of regret for their absence were the Marquis of Ripon, Lord
Hobhouse, Dr. Spence Watson, Mr. Seale-Hayne, M.P., and Lord Loreburn.]

A
fortnight later a meeting of those who sympathised with the Boer cause
was held in the Queen's Hall, Langham Place.

The spirit of this notorious gathering, presided over by Mr. Labouchere,
M.P., and attended by Mr. Merriman.

Mr. Sauer, Mr. Lloyd-George, M.P., and other Radical members of Parliament, is sufficiently revealed
by certain characteristic incidents which marked the proceedings. The agents of the meeting wore
the Transvaal colours; a member of the audience who uncovered at the mention of King Edward
was ejected; the Union Jack was hissed and hooted; and, while a printed form was handed round inviting
the signatures of persons prepared to pay eight and-a-half guineas for a tour in Holland and the
privilege of seeing ex-President Krüger, the name of the British sovereign was received by
the audience with marks of evident disapprobation.
 The hand of Spain had closed over them.

XXIV

ROSA

"Look!" Jacket clutched at O'Reilly and pointed a shaking finger. "More beggars! Cristo! And
those little children!" The boy tried to laugh, but his voice cracked nervously. "Are they
children, or gourds with legs under them?"

O'Reilly looked, then turned his eyes away. He and Jacket had reached the heart of Matanzas
and were facing the public square, the Plaza de la Libertad it was called. O'Reilly knew the
place well; every building that flanked it was familiar to him, from the vast, rambling Governor's
Palace to the ornate Casino Espanol and the Grand Hotel, and time was when he had been a welcome
visitor at all of them. But things were different now. Gone were the customary crowds of well-dressed,
well-fed citizens; gone the rows of carriages which at this hour of the day were wont to circle
the Plaza laden with the aristocracy of the city; gone was that air of cheerfulness and substance
which had lent distinction to the place. Matanzas appeared poor and squalid, depressingly wretched;
its streets were foul and the Plaza de la Libertad--grim mockery of a name--was crowded with
a throng such as it had never held in O'Reilly's time, a throng of people who were, without
exception, gaunt, listless, ragged. There was no afternoon parade of finery, no laughter, no
noise; the benches were full, but their occupants were silent, too sick or too weak to move.
Nor were there any romping children. There were, to be sure, vast numbers of undersized figures
in the square, but one needed to look twice to realize that they were not pygmies or wizened
little old folks. It was not strange that Jacket had compared them to gourds with legs, for
all were naked, and most of them had bodies swollen into the likeness of pods or calabashes.
They looked peculiarly grotesque with their spidery legs and thin faces.

O'Reilly passed a damp hand across his eyes. "God!" he breathed. "She--she's one of these!"

He had not penetrated even thus far into the city without receiving a hint of what conditions
must be, for in the outlying streets he had seen sights and smelled odors that had sickened
him; but now that he was face to face with the worst, now that he breathed the very breath
of misery, he could scarcely credit what he saw. A stench, indescribably nauseating, assailed
him and Jacket as they mingled with the crowd, for as yet their nostrils were unused to poverty
and filth. It was the rancid odor that arises from unwashed, unhealthy bodies, and it testified
eloquently to the living-conditions of the prisoners. Hollow eyes and hopeless faces followed
the two new-comers as they picked their way slowly along.

The reconcentrados overran Matanzas in an unclean swarm; streets and plazas were congested
with them, for no attempt was made to confine them to their quarters. Morning brought them
streaming down from the suburban slopes where they lived, evening sent them winding back; their
days were spent in an aimless search for food. They snatched at crumbs and combed the gutters
for crusts. How they managed to exist, whence came the food that kept life in their miserable
bodies, was a mystery, even to the citizens of the city; no organized effort had been made
to care for them and there was insufficient surplus food for half their number. Yet somehow
they lived and lingered on.

Of course the city was not entirely peopled by the starving--as a matter of fact they formed
scarcely one-fifth of the normal civil population--and the life of the city was going on a
good deal as usual. Stores were open, at least there was a daily train from Habana, and the
barracks were full of Spanish troops. It was from off the wastage of this normal population
that these fifteen thousand prisoners were forced to live. Even this wastage was woefully inadequate,
merely serving to prolong suffering by making starvation slower.

At the time of O'Reilly's arrival the sight presented by these innocent victims of war was
appalling; it roused in him a dull red rage at the power which had wrought this crime and at
the men who permitted it to continue. Spain was a Christian nation, he reflected; she had set
up more crosses than any other, and yet beneath them she had butchered more people than all
the nations of the earth combined. This monstrous, coldly calculating effort to destroy the
entire Cuban people seemed to him the blackest infamy of all, and he wondered if it would be
allowed to succeed.

Fortunately for the two friends, General Betancourt's generosity served to relieve them from
any immediate danger of starvation. After making a few purchases and eating with the utmost
frugality, they began their search. Later, they stretched themselves out to sleep on the stones
beneath the portales of the railroad station.

They spent a horrid, harrowing night, for now the general distress was brought home to them
more poignantly than ever. At dawn they learned that these people were actually dying of neglect.
The faint light betrayed the presence of new corpses lying upon the station flagstones. From
those still living, groans, sighs, sick mutterings rose until O'Reilly finally dragged his
youthful companion out of the place.

"I can't stand that," he confessed. "I can't sleep when people are starving to death alongside
of me. This money burns my pocket. I-- I--"

Jacket read his purpose and laid a detaining hand upon his arm.

"It will save OUR lives, too," he said, simply.

"Bah! We are men. There are women and children yonder--"

But Jacket's sensibilities were calloused, it seemed. "Of what use would your few pesetas be
among so many?" he inquired. "God has willed this, and He knows what He is doing. Besides,
your 'pretty one' is probably as hungry as are these people. No doubt we shall find that she,
too, is starving."

O'Reilly slowly withdrew his hand from his pocket. "Yes! It's Rosa's money. But--come; I can't
endure this."

He led the way back to the Plaza of Liberty and there on an iron bench they waited for the
full day. They were very tired, but further sleep was impossible, for the death-wagons rumbled
by on their way to collect the bodies of those who had died during the night.

Neither the man nor the boy ever wholly lost the nightmare memory of the next few days, for
their search took them into every part of the reconcentrado districts. What they beheld aged
them. Day after day, from dawn till dark, they wandered, peering into huts, staring into faces,
asking questions until they were faint from fatigue and sick with disappointment.

As time passed and they failed to find Rosa Varona a terrible apprehension began to weigh O'Reilly
down; his face grew old and drawn, his shoulders sagged, his limbs began to drag. It was all
that Jacket could do to keep him going. The boy, now that there was actual need of him, proved
a perfect jewel; his optimism never failed, his faith never faltered, and O'Reilly began to
feel a dumb gratitude at having the youngster by his side.

Jacket, too, became thin and gray about the lips. But he complained not at all and he laughed
a great deal. To him the morrow was always another day of brilliant promise toward which he
looked with never-failing eagerness; and not for a single moment did he question the ultimate
success of their endeavor. Such an example did much for the older man. Together they practised
the strictest, harshest economy, living on a few cents a day, while they methodically searched
the city from limit to limit.

At first O'Reilly concerned himself more than a little with the problem of escape, but as time
wore on he thought less and less about that. Nor did he have occasion to waste further concern
regarding his disguise. That it was perfect he proved when several of his former acquaintances
passed him by and when, upon one occasion, he came face to face with old Don Mario de Castano.
Don Mario had changed; he was older, his flesh had softened, and it hung loosely upon his form.
He appeared worried, harassed, and O'Reilly recalled rumors that the war had ruined him. The
man's air of dejection seemed to bear out the story.

They had been enemies, nevertheless O'Reilly felt a sudden impulse to make himself known to
the Spaniard and to appeal directly for news of Rosa's fate. But Don Mario, he remembered in
time, had a reputation for vindictiveness, so he smothered the desire. One other encounter
O'Reilly had reason to remember.

It so chanced that one day he and Jacket found themselves in the miserable rabble which assembled
at the railroad station to implore alms from the incoming passengers of the Habana train. Few
people were traveling these days, and they were, for the most part, Spanish officers to whom
the sight of starving country people was no novelty. Now and then, however, there did arrive
visitors from whom the spectacle of so much wretchedness wrung a contribution, hence there
was always an expectant throng at the depot. On this occasion O'Reilly was surprised to hear
the piteous whines for charity in the name of God turn suddenly into a subdued but vicious
mutter of rage. Hisses were intermingled with vituperations, then the crowd fell strangely
silent, parting to allow the passage of a great, thick-set man in the uniform of a Colonel
of Volunteers. The fellow was unusually swarthy and he wore a black scowl upon his face, while
a long puckering scar the full length of one cheek lifted his mouth into a crooked sneer and
left exposed a glimpse of wolfish teeth.

O'Reilly was at a loss to fathom this sudden alteration of attitude, the whistle of indrawn
breaths and the whispered curses, until he heard some one mutter the name, "Cobo." Then indeed
he started and stiffened in his tracks. He fixed a fascinated stare upon the fellow.

Colonel Cobo seemed no little pleased by the reception he created. With his chest arched and
his black eyes gleaming malevolently he swaggered through the press, clicking his heels noisily
upon the stone flags. When he had gone Jacket voiced a vicious oath.

"So that is the butcher of babies!" exclaimed the boy. "Well, now, I should enjoy cutting his
heart out."

O'Reilly's emotions were not entirely unlike those of his small companion. His lips became
dry and white as he tried to speak.

"What a brute! That face--Ugh!"

He found himself shaking weakly, and discovered that a new and wholly unaccountable feeling
of discouragement had settled upon him. He tried manfully to shake it off, but somehow failed,
for the sight of Rosa's arch-enemy and the man's overbearing personality had affected him queerly.
Cobo's air of confidence and authority seemed to emphasize O'Reilly's impotence and bring it
forcibly home to him. To think of his lustful persecution of Rosa Varona, moreover, terrified
him. The next day he resumed his hut- to-hut search, but with a listlessness that came from
a firm conviction that once again he was too late.

That afternoon found the two friends among the miserable hovels which encircled the foot of
La Cumbre, about the only quarter they had not explored. Below lay San Severino, the execution-place;
above was the site of the old Verona home. More than once on his way about the city O'Reilly
had lifted his eyes in the direction of the latter, feeling a great hunger to revisit the scene
of his last farewell to Rosa, but through fear of the melancholy effect it would have upon
him he had thus far resisted the impulse. To- day, however, he could no longer fight the morbid
desire and so, in spite of Jacket's protest at the useless expenditure of effort, he set out
to climb the hill. Of course the boy would not let him go alone.

Little was said during the ascent. The La Cumbre road seemed very long and very steep. How
different the last time O'Reilly had swung up it! The climb had never before tired him as it
did now, and he reasoned that hunger must have weakened him even more than he realized. Jacket
felt the exertion, too; he was short of breath and he rested frequently. O'Reilly saw that
the boy's bare, brown legs had grown bony since he had last noticed them, and he felt a sudden
pang at having brought the little fellow into such a plight as this.

"Well, hombre," he said when they paused to rest, "I'm afraid we came too late. I'm afraid
we're licked."

Jacket nodded listlessly; his optimism, too, was gone. "They must all be dead or we would have
found them before this," said he. When O'Reilly made no answer he continued, "It is time we
thought of getting away from here, eh?"

Johnnie was sitting with his face in his hands. Without lifting his head he inquired: "How
are we going to get away? It is easy enough to get into Matanzas, but--" He shrugged hopelessly.

From where the two sat they could see on the opposite hillside a section of the ditch and the
high barbed-wire fence which girdled the city and made of it a huge corral. Spaced at regular
intervals along the intrenchments were slow-moving, diminutive figures, sentries on their well-worn
paths.

Jacket brightened at the thought of escape. "Ho! I'll bet we can find a hole somewhere," said
he. "We're not like these others. They haven't the spirit to try." There was a moment of silence,
and then: "Caramba! You remember those jutias we ate? They were strong, but I would enjoy the
smell of one now. Eh? Another week of this and we shall be living on garbage like the rest
of these poor people."

Leaving Jacket to take his time, Johnnie completed the climb alone, meditating upon the boy's
words. "The spirit to try!" Where had his spirit gone, he wondered. Perhaps it had been crushed
beneath the weight of misery he had beheld; surely he had seen enough. Hourly contact with
sickness and misfortune on such a gigantic scale was enough to chill any one's hopes, and although
his sensibilities had been dulled, his apprehensions had been quickened hour by hour. Now that
he looked the matter squarely in the face, it seemed absurd to believe that a tender girl like
Rosa Varona could long have withstood the hardships of this hideous place; stronger people
than she had succumbed, by the hundreds. Even now the hospitals were full, the sick lay untended
in their hovels. No one, so far as O'Reilly knew, had undertaken to estimate how fast they
were dying or the number of dead which had already ridden out of Matanzas in those rumbling
wagons, but there were many. What chance was there that Rosa had not been among the latter?
Better by far had she remained among the empty fields and the barren slopes of the Pan de Matanzas,
for there at least the soil held roots and the trees bore fruits or berries, while here was
nothing but gaunt famine and grinning disease.

As he breasted the summit of La Cumbre, O'Reilly beheld at some distance a bent figure of want.
It was a negro woman, grubbing in the earth with a sharpened stick. After a suspicious scrutiny
of him she resumed her digging.

Nothing but a heap of stones and plaster remained of the Varona home. The grounds, once beautiful
even when neglected as in Dona Isabel's time, were now a scene of total desolation. A few orange-
trees, to be sure, remained standing, and although they were cool and green to look at, they
carried no fruit and the odor of their blooms was a trial and a mockery to the hungry visitor.
The evidences of Cueto's vandalism affected O'Reilly deeply; they brought him memories more
painful than he had anticipated. Although the place was well-nigh unrecognizable, nevertheless
it cried aloud of Rosa, and the unhappy lover could barely control the emotions it awakened.
It was indeed a morbid impulse which had brought him thither, but now that he was here he could
not leave. Unconsciously his feet turned toward the ancient quarry which had formed the sunken
garden--his and Rosa's trysting-place.

O'Reilly desired above all things to be alone at this moment, and so he was annoyed to discover
that another person was before him-- a woman, evidently some miserable pacifico like himself.
She, too, appeared to be looking for roots, and he almost stumbled over her as he brushed through
the guava-bushes fringing the depression.

His sudden appearance alarmed the creature and she struggled, panic-stricken, out of his path.
Her rags could not conceal the fact that she was deformed, that her back was crooked, so he
muttered a reassuring word to her.

This place was more as he had left it--there was the stone bench where he had said good-by
to Rosa; yonder was the well--

"Senor!" Johnnie heard himself addressed by the hunch-backed woman. Her voice was thin, tremulous,
eager, but his thoughts were busy and he paid no heed. "Senor! Do you look for something--some
one--"

"N-no. Yes--" he answered, abstractedly. "Yes, I am looking for something--some one."

"Something you have lost?"

"Something I have lost!" The question came to him faintly, but it was so in tune with his unhappy
mood that it affected him strangely. He found that his eyes were blurring and that an aching
lump had risen into his throat. This was the breaking-point.

O'Reilly's hearing, too, was going wrong, for he imagined that some one whispered his name.
God! This place was not dead--it was alive--terribly alive with memories, voices, a presence
unseen yet real. He laid hold of the nearest bush to steady himself, he closed his eyes, only
to hear his name spoken louder:

"O'Rail-ye!"

Johnnie brushed the tears from his lashes. He turned, he listened, but there was no one to
be seen, no one, that is, except the dusky cripple who had straightened herself and was facing
him, poised uncertainly. He looked at her a second time, then the world began to spin dizzily
and he groped his way toward her. He peered again, closer, for everything before his eyes was
swimming.

The woman was thin--little more than a skeleton--and so frail that the wind appeared to sway
her, but her face, uplifted to the sun, was glorified. O'Reilly stood rooted, staring at her
until she opened her eyes, then he voiced a great cry:

"ROSA!" What more he said he never knew ...

He took the misshapen figure into his arms, he rained kisses upon the pinched, discolored face.
But Rosa did not respond; her puny strength had flown and she lay inert in his embrace, scarcely
breathing. Tears stole down her cheeks and very faintly her fingers fluttered over his bearded
cheeks.

Dazed, doubting, astounded, it was some time before Johnnie could convince himself of the reality
of this moment, and even then words did not come to him, for his mind was in turmoil. Joy,
thanksgiving, compassion--a thousand emotions--mingled in a sort of delirium, too wild for
coherent thought or speech.

Fear finally brought him to his senses, for he became aware that Rosa had collapsed and that
his endearments left her unthrilled. Quickly he bore her to the bench and laid her upon it.
After a time she smiled up into his eyes and her words were scarcely more than a murmur:

"God heard my prayers and sent you to me."

"Rosa! You are ill, you are weak--"

Her eyelids fluttered. "I am dying, O'Rail-ye. I only waited to see you."

"No, no!" In agony he gathered her once more into his arms.

"Oh yes!" Her bloodless fingers touched his face again, then his thin, worn rags. "You, too,
have suffered. How came you to be so poor and hungry, O'Rail-ye?"

"I'm not poor, I'm rich. See!" He jingled the coins in his pocket. "That's money; money for
you, sweet-heart. It will buy you food and medicine, it will make you well and strong again.
Rosa, dear, I have looked for you so long, so long--" His voice broke wretchedly and he bowed
his head. "I--I was afraid--"

"I waited as long as I had strength to wait," she told him. "It is too bad you came so late."

Once again she lapsed into the lethargy of utter weakness, whereupon he fell to stroking her
hands, calling upon her to come back to him. He was beside himself now; a terrible feeling
of impotence and despair overcame him.

Hearing some one speak, he raised his eyes and discovered at his side that figure of want which
he had seen digging on the slope below. It was Evangelina. The negress was little more than
skin and bones, her eyes were bleared and yellow and sunken, her face had grown ape-like, but
he recognized her and she him.

"You are the American," she declared. "You are Rosa's man."

"Yes. But what is wrong with her? Look! She is ill--"

"She is often like that. It is the hunger. We have nothing to eat, senor. I, too, am ill--dying;
and Asensio--Oh, you don't know how they have made us suffer."

"We must get Rosa home. Where do you live?"

Evangelina turned her death's head toward the city. "Down yonder. But what's the use? There
is no food in our house and Rosa is afraid of those wagons. You know--the ones with the corpses.
She made me bring her here to die."

The girl was not wholly unconscious, it seemed, for she stirred and murmured, faintly: "Those
wagons! Don't let them put me in there with the other dead. They pile the bodies high--" A
weak shudder convulsed her.

O'Reilly bent lower, and in a strong, determined voice cried: "You are not going to die. I
have money for food. Rouse yourself, Rosa, rouse yourself."

"She prayed for you every night," the negress volunteered. "Such faith! Such trust! She never
doubted that you would come and find her. Sometimes she cried, but that was because of her
brother. Esteban, you know, is dead. Yes, dead, like all the rest."

"Esteban is NOT dead," O'Reilly asserted. "He is alive. Rosa, do you hear that? Esteban is
alive and well. I left him with Gomez in the Orient. I have come to take you to him."

"Esteban alive? Ha! You are fooling us." Evangelina wagged her head wisely. "We know better
than that."

"I tell you he IS alive," O'Reilly insisted. He heard. Jacket calling to him at that moment,
so he hallooed to the boy; then when the latter had arrived he explained briefly, without allowing
Jacket time in which to express his amazement:

"Our search is over; we have found them. But they won't believe that Esteban is alive. Tell
them the truth."

"Yes, he is alive. We found him rotting in a prison and we rescued him," Jacket corroborated.
He stared curiously at the recumbent figure on the bench, then at O'Reilly. He puckered his
lips and gave vent to a low whistle of amazement. "So. This is your pretty one, eh? I--She--Well,
I don't think much of her. But then, you are not so handsome yourself, are you?"

Evangelina seemed to be stupid, a trifle touched, perhaps, from suffering, for she laid a skinny
claw upon O'Reilly's shoulder and warned him earnestly: "Look out for Cobo. You have heard
about him, eh? Well, he is the cause of all our misery. He hunted us from place to place, and
it was for him that I put that hump on her back. Understand me, she is straight--straight and
pretty enough for any American. Her skin is like milk, too, and her hair- -she used to put
flowers in it for you, and then we would play games. But you never came. You will make allowances
for her looks, will you not?"

"Poor Rosa! You two poor creatures!" O'Reilly choked; he hid his face upon his sweetheart's breast.

Rosa responded; her fingers caressed him and she sighed contentedly.

O'Reilly's ascent of the hill had been slow, but his descent was infinitely slower, for Rosa
was so feeble that she could help herself but little and he lacked the strength to carry her
far at a time. Finally, however, they reached the wretched hovel where Asensio lay, then leaving
her there, Johnnie sped on alone into the city. He returned soon with several small bundles
concealed about his person, and with Evangelina's help he set about preparing food.

Neither Rosa nor the two negroes had any appetite--their hunger had long since passed the point
at which they were conscious of it--and O'Reilly was compelled to force them to eat. When he
had given them all that he dared he offered what food was left to Jacket.

The boy moistened his lips and his fingers twitched, but he shook his head.

"Oh, I'm not so hungry," he declared, indifferently. "I have a friend in the market-place;
I will go down there and steal a fish from him."

O'Reilly patted him on the shoulder, saying: "You are a good kid, and you understand, don't
you? These sick people will need more food than we can buy for them, so we will have to draw
our belts tight."

"Of course. Eating is a habit, anyhow, and we men know how to get along without it. I will
manage to find something for you and me, for I'm a prodigious thief. I can steal the hair from
a man's head when I try." With a nod he set off to find his benefactor's supper.

Jacket whistled heroically until he was out of O'Reilly's hearing, then his bearing changed.
His mouth drew down, and moisture came into his eyes. He rubbed a grimy hand over his stomach,
murmuring, faintly: "Cristo! It is hard to be a man when you smell things cooking!"

XXV

THE HAUNTED GARDEN

Rosa Varona did not die. On the contrary, under her lover's care she made so amazingly swift
a recovery that improvement was visible from hour to hour; she rallied like a wilted flower
under a refreshing rain. It was O'Reilly's presence as much as the nourishing diet provided
by his money which effected this marvel, although the certainty that Esteban was alive and
safe put added force into her determination to live. Rosa found hope springing up in her breast,
and one day she caught herself laughing. The marvel of it was unbelievable. O'Reilly was sitting
beside her bed of leaves at the time; impulsively she pressed his hand to her lips, repeating
a question she had asked him many times:

"Do you love me?"

For answer he bent and kissed her. What he said was of no consequence.

Rosa held his hand against her cheek, at a loss for words with which to voice her gladness.

"Such happiness as mine belongs in heaven," she managed to tell him. "Sometimes it frightens
me. With you by my side this prison is a paradise and I want for nothing. War, suffering, distress--I
can't imagine they longer exist."

"Nevertheless, they do, and Matanzas is anything but a paradise," said he. "It is--hell, and
we must set about quickly to get out of it."

"Escape, do you mean? But that is impossible. Asensio can tell you all about that. The Spaniards
used to issue passes for the men to go outside the lines in search of food. It was just a trick.
They never came back--all of them were killed. Every one knows better than to try, now."

"Nevertheless, we can't stay here much longer." In answer to the girl's puzzled inquiry he
explained: "My money is gone--all but a few cents. This is the last of our food and there is
no chance of getting more. Jacket has some mysterious source of supply and he manages to bring
in something every now and then, but there are five of us to feed, and he can't furnish more
than enough for himself. No, we must make a move at once, while we have the strength."

Rosa had not asked the source whence came the blessed food which was bringing the life blood
back into her body, and although that food was not much--a little meal, a plantain, an occasional
scrap of meat or fish--it had never occurred to her that the supply might be limited. She met
the problem bravely, however.

"I have been close to death so long that it means little to me," she confessed. "I have you,
and--well, with you at my side I can face the worst."

"Oh, we won't give up until we have to," he assured her. "If I had money it would be a simple
proposition to bribe some guard to pass us through the lines, but I have spent all that General
Betancourt gave me." He smoothed back Rosa's dark hair and smiled reassuringly at her. "Well,
I'll manage somehow; so don't worry your pretty head. I'll find the price, if I have to waylay
old Don Mario and rob him. Don't you think I look like a bandit? The very sight of me would
terrify that fat rascal."

"To me you are beautiful," breathed the girl. Then she lowered her eyes. "La, la! How I spoil
you! I have quite forgotten how to be ladylike. Isabel was right when she called me a bold
and forward hussy. Now, then, please turn your face aside, for I wish to think, and so long
as you look at me I cannot--I make love to you brazenly. See! Now, then, that is much better.
I shall hold your hand, so. When I kiss it you may look at me again, for a moment." Drawing
herself closer to O'Reilly, Rosa began thoughtfully: "Before you came I more than once was
on the point of appealing to some of my former friends, but they are all Spaniards and we are
no longer--simpatico, you understand?"

Rosa paused for his answer.

"Perfectly; I'm in the same fix. Of all the people I used to know there isn't one but would
denounce me if I made myself known. Now that I've been fighting with the Insurrectos, I daren't
even go to the American consul for help--if there is an American consul."

Rosa nodded, then continued, hesitatingly: "I had a vivid dream last night. Perhaps it was
a portent. Who knows? It was about that stepmother of mine. You remember how she met her death?
I wrote you--"

"Yes, and Esteban also told me."

"It was he who recovered her body from the well. One day, while we were in hiding, away up
yonder in the Yumuri, he showed me an old coin--"

"I know," O'Reilly said, quickly. "He told me the whole story. He thinks that doubloon is a
clue to your father's fortune, but--I can't put much faith in it. In fact, I didn't believe
until this moment that there was a doubloon at all."

"Oh, indeed there was! I saw it."

"Then it wasn't merely a sick fancy of your brother's?"

"Indeed no, it--" Rosa broke off to exclaim, "O'Reilly, you are looking at me!"

"But you gave me the signal to look," he protested.

"Nothing of the sort; you placed your fingers upon my lips." There was a moment of silence
during which the lovers were oblivious to all but each other, then Rosa murmured: "How strange!
Sometimes your eyes are blue and sometimes gray. Does that mean that your love, too, can change?"

"Certainly not. But come, what about Esteban and that doubloon?"

With an effort the girl brought herself back to earth. "Well, it occurred to me, in the light
of that dream last night, that Esteban may have been right. Of course nobody outside of our
family credits the old story, and yet my father was considered a very rich man at one time.
Pancho Cueto believed in the existence of the treasure, and he was in a position to know."

"True! Perhaps, after all--" O'Reilly frowned meditatively.

Rosa lifted herself upon her elbow, her eyes sparkling. "Wouldn't it be wonderful if it were
true? Just think, O'Reilly, cases of Spanish gold, silver coins in casks, packages of gems.
Oh, I've heard Isabel talk about it often enough!"

"Don't forget those pearls from the Caribbean, as large as plums," Johnny smiled. "I could
never quite swallow that. A pearl the size of a currant would buy our freedom right now." After
a moment he went on, more seriously: "I've a notion to look into that old well this very afternoon.
I--I dare say I'm foolish, but--somehow the story doesn't sound so improbable as it did. Perhaps
it is worth investigating--" He made up his mind swiftly. "I--I'm off this very instant."

When O'Reilly emerged from the hut he found Jacket industriously at work over a fragment of
grindstone which he had somewhere unearthed. The boy looked up at his friend's approach and
held out for inspection a long, thin file, which he was slowly shaping into a knife-blade.

"What do you think of that?" he queried, proudly. "It may come in handy when we are ready to
clear out of this pesthole."

"Where did you get it?"

"Oh, I stole it. I steal everything I can lay my hands on nowadays. One can never tell when
he may have a throat to cut, and a file has good steel in it."

"Since you are such an accomplished thief, do you think you could steal something for me?"
O'Reilly inquired. "A piece of rope?"

"Rope?" Jacket was puzzled. "Rope is only good for hanging Spaniards. My friend in the fish-market
has a volandra, and-- perhaps I can rob him of a halyard." Laying aside his task, Jacket arose
and made off in the direction of the water-front. He was back within an hour, and under his
shirt he carried a coil of worn, but serviceable, rope. Without waiting to explain his need
for this unusual article, O'Reilly linked arms with the boy and set out to climb La Cumbre.
When at last they stood in the unused quarry and Johnnie made known his intention to explore
the old well Jacket regarded him with undisguised amazement.

"What do you expect to find down there?" the latter inquired.

"To tell you the truth, I don't really expect to find anything," the man confessed. "Now that
I'm here, I'm beginning to feel silly; nevertheless, I'm going to have a look for the hidden
treasure of the Varonas."

"Hidden treasure!" From Jacket's expression it was plain that he feared his friend was mildly
mad. Even after O'Reilly had told him something about old Don Esteban's missing riches, he
scouted the story. He peeped inquisitively into the dark opening of the well, then he shook
his head. "Caramba! What an idea! Was this old man crazy, to throw his money away?"

"He--he had more than he knew what to do with, and he wished to save it from the Spaniards,
"O'Reilly explained, lamely.

"Humph! Nobody ever had more money than he wanted." The boy's disgust at such credulity was
plain. "This well looks just like any other, only deeper; you'd better look out that you don't
break your neck like that foolish old woman, that Dona What's-Her-Name."

O'Reilly did indeed feel that he was making himself ridiculous, nevertheless he made the rope
fast and swung himself down out of the sunlight, leaving Jacket to stand guard over him. Perhaps
fifteen minutes later he reappeared, panting from his exertions. He was wet, slimy; his clothes
were streaked and stained with mud. Jacket began to laugh shrilly at his appearance.

"Ha! What a big lizard is this? Your beautiful garments are spoiled. And the treasure? Where
is it?" The lad was delighted. He bent double with mirth; he slapped his bare legs and stamped
his feet in glee.

O'Reilly grinned good-naturedly, and replaced the planks which had covered the orifice, then
hid the rope in some near-by bushes. On their way back he endured his young friend's banter
absent- mindedly, but as they neared Asensio's house he startled Jacket by saying, "Can you
manage to find a pick-ax or a crowbar?"

Jacket's eyes opened; he stopped in the middle of the dusty road. "What did you see down there,
compadre? Tell me."

"Nothing much. Just enough to make me want to see more. Do you think you can steal some sort
of a tool for me?"

"I can try."

"Please do. And remember, say nothing before Asensio or his wife."

Rosa met O'Reilly just inside the door, and at sight of her he uttered an exclamation of surprise,
for during his absence she had removed the stain from her face and discarded that disfigurement
which Evangelina had fitted to her back prior to their departure from the Pan de Matanzas.
She stood before him now, straight and slim and graceful--the Rosa of his dreams, only very
thin, very fragile. Her poor tatters only enhanced her prettiness, so he thought.

"Rosa dear! Do you think this is quite safe?" he ventured, doubtfully.

Evangelina, who was bending over her husband, straightened herself and came forward with a
smile upon her black face.

"She is beautiful, eh? Too beautiful to look at? What did I tell you?"

Rosa was in delightful confusion at O'Reilly's evident surprise and admiration. "Then I'm not
so altogether changed?" she asked.

"Why, you haven't changed at all, except to grow more beautiful. Evangelina is right; you are
too beautiful to look at. But wait!" He drew her aside and whispered, "I've been down in the
well." Some tremor in his voice, some glint in his eyes, caused the girl to seize him eagerly,
fiercely. "I may be wrong," he said, hurriedly; "there may be nothing in it--and yet I saw
something."

"What?"

"Wooden beams, timbers of some sort, behind the stone curbing." It was plain Rosa did not comprehend,
so he hurried on. "At first I noticed nothing unusual, except that the bottom of the well is
nearly dry--filled up, you know, with debris and stuff that has fallen in from the curbing
above, then I saw that although the well is dug through rock, nevertheless it is entirely curbed
up with stones laid in mortar. That struck me as queer."

"Yes?"

"I noticed, too, in one place that there was wood behind--as if timbers had been placed there
to cover the entrance to a cave. You know this Cuban rock is full of caverns."

Rosa clasped her hands, she began to tremble. "You have found it, O'Reilly. You HAVE!" she
whispered.

"No, no, I've found nothing yet. But I've sent Jacket for a pick or a bar and to-night I'm
going to pull down those stones and see what is behind them."

"To-night? You must let me go, too. I want to help."

"Very well. But meanwhile you mustn't let your hopes rise too high, for there is every chance
that you will be disappointed. And don't mention it to Evangelina. Now then, I've a few pennies
left and I'm going to buy some candles."

Rosa embraced her lover impulsively. "Something tells me it is true! Something tells me you
are going to save us all."

Evangelina in the far corner of the hut muttered to her husband: "Such love-birds! They are
like parrakeets, forever kissing and cooing!"

Jacket returned at dusk and with him he brought a rusty three-foot iron bar, evidently part
of a window grating. The boy was tired, disgusted, and in a vile temper. "A pick-ax! A crowbar!"
He cursed eloquently. "One might as well try to steal a cannon out of San Severino. I'm ready
to do anything within reason, but--"

"Why, this will do nicely; it is just what I want," O'Reilly told him.

"Humph! I'm glad to hear it, for that rod was nearly the death of me. I broke my back wrenching
at it and the villain who owned the house--may a bad lightning split him!--he ran after me
until I nearly expired. If my new knife had been sharp I would have turned and sent him home
with it between his ribs. To-morrow I shall put an edge on it. Believe me, I ran until my lungs
burst."

Little food remained in the hut, barely enough for Asensio and the women, and inasmuch as O'Reilly
had spent his last centavo for candles he and Jacket were forced to go hungry again. Late that
evening, after the wretched prison quarters had grown quiet, the three treasure-hunters stole
out of their hovel and wound up the hill. In spite of their excitement they went slowly, for
none of them had the strength to hurry. Fortunately, there were few prowlers within the lines,
hunger having robbed the reconcentrados of the spirit to venture forth, and in consequence
Spanish vigilance had relaxed; it was now confined to the far-flung girdle of intrenchments
which encircled the city. The trio encountered no one.

Leaving Jacket on guard at the crest of the hill, O'Reilly stationed Rosa at the mouth of the
well, then lowered himself once more into it. Lighting his candle, he made a careful examination
of the place, with the result that Esteban's theory of the missing riches seemed even less
improbable than it had earlier in the day. The masonry-work, he discovered, had been done with
a painstaking thoroughness which spoke of the abundance of slave labor, and time had barely
begun to affect it. Here and there a piece of the mortar had loosened and come away, but for
the most part it stood as solid as the stones between which it was laid. Shoulder-high to O'Reilly
there appeared to be a section of the curbing less smoothly fitted than the rest, and through
an interstice in this he detected what seemed to be a damp wooden beam. At this point he brought
his iron bar into play.

It was not long before he discovered that his work was cut out for him. The cement was like
flint and his blunt makeshift implement was almost useless against it. Ankle-deep in the muddy
water, he patiently pecked and pounded and chipped, endeavoring to enlarge the crevice so as
to use his bar as a lever. The sweat streamed from him and he became dismayed at his own weakness.
He was forced to rest frequently.

Rosa hung over the orifice above, encouraging him, inquiring eagerly as to his progress. During
his frequent breathing-spells he could discern her white face dimly illumined by the candle-
light from below.

After he had worked for an hour or two, he made a report: "It begins to look as if there really
was a bulkhead or a door in there."

The girl clapped her hands and laughed with delight. "Do hurry, dear; I'm dying of suspense."

O'Reilly groaned: "That fellow, Sebastian, knew his business. This cement is like steel, and
I'm afraid of breaking my crowbar."

Rosa found a leaf, folded a kiss into it, and dropped it to him. "That will give you strength,"
she declared.

O'Reilly lost all count of time after a while and he was incredulous when Jacket came to warn
him that daylight was less than an hour away. "Why, I haven't started!" he protested. He discovered,
much to his surprise, that he was ready to drop from fatigue and that his hands were torn and
blistered; when he had climbed the rope to the upper air he fell exhausted in the deep grass.
"I--I'm not myself at all," he apologized; "nothing to eat, you know. But the work will go
faster now, for I've made a beginning."

"Do you still think--" Rosa hesitated to voice the question which trembled on her lips.

"I'll know for sure to-night." He directed Jacket to replace the planks over the well; then
the three of them stole away.

O'Reilly spent most of that day in a profound stupor of exhaustion, while Rosa watched anxiously
over him. Jacket, it seemed, had peacefully slumbered on picket duty, so he occupied himself
by grinding away at his knife. The last scraps of food disappeared that evening.

When night fell and it came time to return to the top of La Cumbre, O'Reilly asked himself
if his strength would prove sufficient for the task in hand. He was spiritless, sore, weak;
he ached in every bone and muscle, and it required all his determination to propel himself
up the hill. He wondered if he were wise thus to sacrifice his waning energies on a hope so
forlorn as this, but by now he had begun to more than half believe in the existence of the
Varona treasure and he felt an almost irresistible curiosity to learn what secret, if any,
was concealed behind those water-soaked timbers at the bottom of the well. He realized, of
course, that every hour he remained here, now that food and money were gone, lessened the chances
of escape; but, on the other hand, he reasoned, with equal force, that if he had indeed stumbled
upon the missing hoard salvation for all of them was assured. The stake, it seemed to him,
was worth the hazard.

Given tempered tools to work with, it would have been no great undertaking to tear down that
cemented wall of stones, but, armed with nothing except his bare hands and that soft iron bar,
O'Reilly spent nearly the whole night at his task. Long before the last rock had yielded, however,
he beheld that which caused him to turn a strained face upward to Rosa.

"There's a little door, as sure as you live," he told her.

The girl was beside herself with excitement. "Yes? What else? What more do you see?"

"Nothing. It appears to be made of solid timbers, and has two huge hand-wrought locks."

"Locks! Then we HAVE found it." Rosa closed her eyes; she swayed momentarily. "Esteban was
right. Locks, indeed! That means something to hide. Oh, if I could only help you."

"God! If I only had something--ANYTHING to work with!" muttered the American as he fell to
with redoubled energy. He no longer tried to conserve his strength, for the treasure-seeker's
lust beset him. Rosa looked on, wringing her hands and urging him to greater haste.

But the low, thick door was built of some hard, native wood: it was wet and tough and slippery.
O'Reilly's blows made no impression upon it, nor upon the heavy hasps and staples with which
it was secured in place. The latter were deeply rusted, to be sure, but they withstood his
efforts, and he was finally forced to rest, baffled, enraged, half hysterical from weakness
and fatigue.

Daylight was at hand once more, but he refused to give up, and worked on stubbornly, furiously,
until Rosa, in an agony, besought him to desist.

Johnnie again collapsed on the grass and lay panting while the other two replaced the planks.

"Another hour and I'd have been into it," he declared, huskily.

"You will skill yourself," Jacket told him.

Rosa bent over him with shining eyes and parted lips. "Yes," said she. "Be patient. We will
come back, O'Reilly, and to-night we shall be rich."

 Colonel Cobo lit a black cigarette, leaned back in his chair, and
exhaled two fierce jets of smoke through his nostrils. For a full
moment he scowled forbiddingly at the sergeant who had asked to
see him.

"What's this you are telling me?" he inquired, finally.

The sergeant, a mean-faced, low-browed man, stirred uneasily.

"It is God's truth. There are spirits on La Cumbre, and I wish to see the priest about it."

"Spirits? What kind of spirits?"

The fellow shrugged. "Evil spirits--spirits from hell. The men are buying charms."

"Bah! I took you to be a sensible person."

"You don't believe me? Well, I didn't believe them, when they told me about it. But I saw with
my own eyes."

Cobo leaned forward, mildly astonished. Of all his villainous troop, this man was the last
one he had credited with imagination of this sort. "What did you see?"

"A ghost, my Colonel, nothing else. La Cumbre is no place for an honest Christian."

The colonel burst into a mocking laugh. "An honest Christian! YOU! Of all my vile ruffians,
you are the vilest. Why, you're a thief, a liar, and an assassin! You are lying to me now.
Come--the truth for once, before I give you the componte."

"As God is my judge, I'm telling you the truth," protested the soldier. "Flog me if you will--rather
the componte than another night in those trenches. You know that old quinta?"

"Where Pancho Cueto made a goat of himself? Perfectly. Do you mean to say that you saw old
Esteban Varona walking with his head in his hands?"

"No, but I saw that she-devil who fell in the well and broke her neck."

"Eh? When did you behold this--this marvel?"

"Two nights ago. She was there beside the well and her face shone through the night like a
lantern. Christ! There was fire upon it. She came and went, like a moth in the lamplight. I
tell you I repented of my sins. Some of the men laughed at me when I told them, as they had
laughed at the others. But last night two of the doubters went up there."

"Exactly. And they saw nothing."

"Your pardon, my Colonel. They came back in a cold sweat, and they spent the night on their
knees. The woman was there again. You have seen the salt sea at night? Well, her face was aglow,
like that, so they said. They heard the clanking of chains, too, and the sound of hammers,
coming from the very bowels of the earth. It is all plain enough, when you know the story.
But it is terrifying."

"This is indeed amazing," Cobo acknowledged, "but of course there is some simple explanation.
Spirits, if indeed there are such things, are made of nothing--they are like thin air. How,
then, could they rattle chains? You probably saw some wretched pacificos in search of food
and imagined the rest."

"Indeed! Then what did I hear with these very ears? Whispers, murmurs, groans, and the clinkety-clink
of old Sebastian's chisel. For his sins that old slave is chained in some cavern of the mountain.
Soundless! I'm no baby! It's awful. One has no time. Yesterday when I wanted to write the room had to
be cleaned and D. was in the arbour.

Before that I had not written a single word and in the front veranda all my pages blew away.
We write on loose pages. Hella thinks it's better because then one does not have to tear anything
out. But we have promised one another to throw nothing away and not to tear anything up. Why
should we? One can tell a friend everything. A pretty friend if one couldn't. Yesterday when
I wanted to go into the arbour Dora glared at me savagely, saying What do you want? As if
the arbour belonged to her, just as she wanted to bag the front veranda all for herself. She's
too sickening.

Yesterday afternoon we were on the Kolber-Kogel. It was lovely. Father was awfully jolly and we
pelted one another with pine-cones. It was jolly. I threw one at Dora and it hit her on her padded
bust. She let out such a yell and I said out loud You couldn't feel
it there.

As she went by she said Pig! It doesn't matter, for I know she understood me and that what
I said was true.

I should like to know what she writes about every day to Erika and what she writes in her diary.
Mother was out of sorts and stayed at home.

July 24th. To-day is Sunday.

I do love Sundays. Father says: You children have Sundays every day. That's quite true in the
holidays, but not at other times. The peasants and their wives and children are all very gay,
wearing Tyrolese dresses, just like those I have seen in the theatre. We are wearing our white
dresses to-day, and I have made a great cherrystain upon mine, not on purpose, but because
I sat down upon some fallen cherries. So this afternoon when we go out walking I must wear
my pink dress. All the better, for I don't care to be dressed exactly the same as Dora. I don't
see why everyone should know that we are sisters. Let people think
we are cousins. She does not like it either; I wish I knew why.

Oswald
is coming in a week, and I am awfully pleased. He tried more than once during the afternoon to sleep,
but he could not, for the moment he closed his eyes he found himself back there in that pit
upon the ridge's crest, straining at those stubborn rocks and slippery timbers. This inaction
was maddening, his fatigue rendered him feverish and irritable.

Jacket, too, felt the strain, and after several fruitless attempts to sleep he rose and went
out into the sunshine, where he fell to whetting his knife. He finished putting a double edge
upon the blade, fitted a handle to it, and then a cord with which to suspend it round his neck.
He showed it to O'Reilly, and after receiving a word of praise he crept out-doors again and
tried to forget how sick he was. Black spots were dancing before Jacket's eyes; he experienced
spells of dizziness and nausea during which he dared not attempt to walk. He knew this must
be the result of starvation, and yet, strangely enough, the thought of food was distasteful
to him. He devoutly wished it were not necessary to climb that hill again, for he feared he
would not have the strength to descend it.

Luckily for the sake of the secret, Evangelina spent most of the day searching for food, while
Asensio lay babbling upon his bed, too ill to notice the peculiar actions of his companions.

It was with a strange, nightmare feeling of unreality that the trio dragged themselves upward
to the ruined quinta when darkness finally came. They no longer talked, for conversation was
a drain upon their powers, and the reaction from the day's excitement had set in. O'Reilly
lurched as he walked, his limbs were heavy, and his liveliest sensation was one of dread at
the hard work in store for him. The forcing of that door assumed the proportions of a Herculean
task.

But once he was at the bottom of the well and beheld the handiwork of Sebastian, the slave,
just as he had left it, his sense of reality returned and with it a certain measure of determination.
Inasmuch as he had made no visible impression upon the bulkhead by his direct attack, he changed
his tactics now and undertook to loosen one of the jambs where it was wedged into the rock
at top and bottom. After a desperate struggle he succeeded in loosening the entire structure
so that he could pry it out far enough to squeeze his body through.

"I have it!" he cried to Rosa. Seizing the candle, he thrust it into the opening. He beheld
what he had expected to find, a small cavern or grotto which had evidently been pierced during
the digging of the well. He could appreciate now how simple had been the task of sealing it
up so as to baffle discovery. Rosa, poised above him, scarcely breathed until he straightened
himself and turned his face upward once more.

He tried to speak, but voiced nothing more than a hoarse croak; the candle in his hand described
erratic figures.

"What do you see?" the girl cried in an agony of suspense.

"I--It's here! B-boxes, chests, casks--everything!"

"God be praised! My father's fortune at last!"

Rosa forgot her surroundings; she beat her hands together, calling upon O'Reilly to make haste
and determine beyond all question that the missing hoard was indeed theirs. She drew perilously
close to the well and knelt over it like some priestess at her devotions; her eyes were brimming
with tears and there was a roaring in her ears. "That is Mount Ossa nearest us," the Atlantean's
voice came as though from a long distance. Victor Nelson was too staggered, too unspeakably
amazed to register the fact of the Hero's proximity.

"Below are Pelion and Jilboa, which, with Jabor, the greatest of all the flames, illuminate and
warm the valley."

Nelson's eye, trained to be all observant, ranged far and wide, noting
the presence of many lacy, frothing geysers which spouted at varying
intervals.

There were, also, many steaming ponds and waterfalls which sprang in smoky confusion from the rock
palisades to either side.
* * * * *

Nearer at hand he could distinguish a number of huge stone
structures, evidently forts and public buildings. At the farther end were ranged several small wooden chests bound with iron and fitted
with hasps and staples, along one side was a row of diminutive casks, the sort used to contain
choice wines or liquors; over all was a thick covering of slime and mold. The iron was deeply
rusted and the place itself smelled abominably stale.

O'Reilly surveyed this Aladdin's cave in a daze. He set his candle down, for his fingers were
numb and unsteady. Cautiously, as if fearful of breaking some spell, he stooped and tried to
move one of the casks, but found that it resisted him as if cemented to the rock. He noted
that its head was bulged upward, as if by the dampness, so he took his iron bar and aimed a
sharp blow at the chine. A hoop gave way; another blow enabled him to pry out the head of the
cask. He stood blinking at the sight exposed, for the little barrel was full of coins--yellow
coins, large and small. O'Reilly seized a handful and held them close to the candle-flame;
among the number he noted a Spanish doubloon, such as young Esteban had found.

He tested the weight of the other casks and found them equally heavy. Knowing little about
gold, he did not attempt to estimate the value of their contents, but he judged they must represent
a fortune. With throbbing pulses he next lifted the lid of the nearest chest. Within, he discovered
several compartments, each stored with neatly wrapped and labeled packages of varying shapes
and sizes. The writing upon the tags was almost illegible, but the first article which O'Reilly
unwrapped proved to be a goblet of most beautiful workmanship. Time had long since blackened
it to the appearance of pewter or some base metal, but he saw that it was of solid silver.
Evidently he had uncovered a store of old Spanish plate.

In one corner of the chest he saw a metal box of the sort in which valuable papers are kept,
and after some effort he managed to break it open. Turning back the lid, he found first a bundle
of documents bearing imposing scrolls and heavy seals. Despite the dampness, they were in fairly
good condition, and there was enough left of the writing to identify them beyond all question
as the missing deeds of patent to the Varona lands--those crown grants for which Dona Isabel
had searched so fruitlessly. But this was not all that the smaller box contained. Beneath the
papers there were numerous leather bags. These had rotted; they came apart easily in O'Reilly's
fingers, displaying a miscellaneous assortment of unset gems--some of them at first sight looked
like drops of blood, others like drops of purest water. They were the rubies and the diamonds
which had brought Isabel to her death.

O'Reilly waited to see no more. Candle in hand, he crept out into the well to apprise Rosa
of the truth.

"We've got it! There's gold by the barrel and the deeds to your land. Yes, and the jewels,
too--a quart of them, I guess. I--I can't believe my eyes." He showed her a handful of coins.
"Look at that! Doubloons, eagles! There appear to be thousands of them. Why, you're the richest
girl in Cuba. Rubies, diamonds--yes, and pearls, too, I dare say--" He choked and began to
laugh weakly, hysterically.

"I've heard about those pearls," Rosa cried, shrilly. "Pearls from the Caribbean, as large
as plums. Isabel used to babble about them in her sleep."

"I found those deeds the first thing. The plantations are yours now, beyond any question."

Rosa drew back from her precarious position, for she had grown limp from weakness and her head
was whirling. As she rose to her feet she brushed something, somebody, some flesh-and-blood
form which was standing almost over her. Involuntarily she recoiled, toppling upon the very
brink of the pit, whereupon a heavy hand reached forth and seized her. She found herself staring
upward into a face she had grown to know in her nightmares, a face the mere memory of which
was enough to freeze her blood. It was a hideous visage, thick-lipped, fiat-featured, black;
it was disfigured by a scar from lip to temple and out of it gleamed a pair of eyes distended
and ringed with white, like the eyes of a man insane.

For an instant Rosa made no sound and no effort to escape. The apparition robbed her of breath,
it paralyzed her in both mind and body. Her first thought was that she had gone stark mad,
but she had felt Cobo's hands upon her once before and after her first frozen moment of amazement
she realized that she was in her fullest senses. A shriek sprang to her lips, she tried to
fight the man off, but her weak struggle was like the fluttering of a bird. Cobo crushed her
down, strangling the half-uttered cry.

Terror may be so intense, so appalling as to be unendurable. In Rosa's case a merciful oblivion
overtook her. She felt the world grow black, fall away; felt herself swing dizzily through space.

O'Reilly looked upward, inquiring, sharply, "What's the matter?" He heard a scuffling of feet
above him, but received no answer. "Rosa! What frightened you? ROSA?" There was a moment of
sickening suspense, then he put his shoulder to the timbers he had displaced and, with a violent
shove, succeeded in swinging them back into place. Laying hold of the rope, he began to hoist
himself upward. He had gone but a little way, however, when, without warning, his support gave
way and he fell backward; the rope came pouring down upon him. "ROSA!" he called again in a
voice thick from fright. Followed an instant of silence; then he flattened himself against
the side of the well and the breath stuck in his throat.

Into the dim circle of radiance above a head was thrust--a head, a pair of wide shoulders,
and then two arms. The figure bent closer, and O'Reilly recognized the swarthy features of
that man he had seen at the Matanzas railroad station. There could be no doubt of it--it was Cobo.

The men stared at each other silently, and of the two Cobo appeared to be the more intensely
agitated. After a moment his gaze fixed itself upon the opening into the treasure-chamber and
remained there. As if to make entirely sure of what he had overheard, he stretched his body
farther, supporting it by his out-flung arms, then moved his head from side to side for a better
view. He seemed to rock over the mouth of the well like a huge, fat, black spider. He was the
first to speak.

"Am I dreaming? Or--have you really discovered that treasure?" he queried.

O'Reilly's upturned face was ghastly. He wet his lips. He managed to whisper Rosa's name.

"The riches of the Varonas! Christ! What a find!" Cobo's teeth shone white in the grin of avarice.
"Yes, I see now--a cavern in the rock. Well, well! And you are the spirit of Sebastian, chained
in the bowels of La Cumbre. Ha! These are the ghosts--" The king's deliberate tentacle again
began its slow weaving. It was choosing another victim.

And this time it darted straight out at Keith Wells and gripped him
with a mighty clutch about the waist.

The commander did not cry out.

As he was brought close to the staring eyes, and felt their sinister gaze run over him, it flashed
through him for some obscure reason that the monster knew him for what he was, the leader, from
the tiny bars on each shoulder of his sea-suit.... He waited for the tentacles to rip it open.

But
they did not.

Instead, the creature turned and swiftly swam with him out through
the entrance hole.

* * * * *

They went to the left in the corridor, further into the heart of the
building.

The bluish light became stronger. As Keith twisted in the giant monarch's grip he glimpsed the
other octopus following with the two dead men. He saved his strength knowing it was hopeless
just then to try and struggle free.

Quick as was his passage, he noticed that the walls of the corridor
were covered with intricate designs, in bas-relief, and colored.

He passed row after row of mural paintings of octopi in various activities, and guessed that they
represented the race's history. One was obviously a scene of battle, with a tentacled army locked
in combat with another strange horde of fishlike creatures; a second showed the construction of
the queer mound-buildings on the sea-floor, with scores of monsters hauling great chunks of
material into place, and another pictured the huge audience chamber, with a gold-banded king
motionless on his throne.

As the king drew him rapidly along, he had a glimpse through a circular doorway of a large room, inside
which were clustered the black shapes of thousands of baby octopi, tended by what were evidently
nurses. Other such rooms were passed, and the young commander's brain whirled as he tried to
measure the size and progress of this undersea civilization. Perhaps the race of octopi was
growing, reaching out; needed new room to colonize.

That would explain why their submarine had been sent through the tunnel....

A voice sounded in his ears:

"Keith? Are you all right?" It was Graham, calling from the cell behind.

"So far," Wells assured him. "I'll keep in touch, and let you know
what happens."

At that moment, his captor carried him into a large
chamber at the end of the corridor. He looked around, and decided
it was a laboratory. He beheld strange instruments, anatomical charts
of octopi on the walls and, in one corner, a small jar of glass, in
which a dull flame was burning. Many-shaped keen-bladed knives lay
on various low tables, and thin, wicked-looking prongs and pincers.

"I'm
in their experimental laboratory, Graham," Wells spoke into the mouthpiece
of his tiny radio. And then his roving eyes saw something that made
him audibly gasp.

"What's the matter, Keith?" came the first officer's
anxious voice.

After a moment the commander answered. "It's--it's
a pile of human bodies. The bodies of those fishermen. They--they've
been experimenting on them...."

* * * * *

Was he, too, Wells wondered,
to be experimented on? The sight of that stacked pile of bodies chilled
him with horror. But manifestly that was not the cause
of his hesitation, for his face became convulsed and an expression of blank and utter astonishment
was stamped upon it. The men stared fixedly at each other, O'Reilly with his head thrown back,
Cobo with his body propped rigidly upon wooden arms and that peculiar shocked inquiry in his
glaring eyes. But slowly this expression changed; the colonel bent as if beneath a great weight,
his head rose and turned back upon his neck, he filled his lungs with another wheezing sigh.
"Christ! O Christ--" he whispered.

His teeth ground together, his head began to wag upon his shoulders; it dropped lower and lower;
one hand slipped from its hold and he lurched forward. An instant he hung suspended from the
waist; then he appeared to let go limply as all resistance went out of his big body. There
came a warning rattle of dirt and mortar and pebbles; the next instant he slipped into the
well and plunged headlong down upon O'Reilly, an avalanche of lifeless flesh.

Johnnie shielded himself with his up-flung arms, but he was driven to his knees, and when he
scrambled to his feet, half stunned, it was to find himself in utter darkness. There was a
heavy weight against his legs. With a strength born of horror and revulsion he freed himself;
then hearing no sound and feeling no movement, he fumbled for the candle and with clumsy fingers
managed to relight it. Even after the flame had leaped out and he saw what shared the pit with
him he could barely credit his senses. The nature of his deliverance was uncanny, supernatural--it
left him dazed. He had beheld death stamped upon Cobo's writhing face even while the fellow
braced himself to keep from falling, but what force had effected the phenomenon, what unseen
hand had stricken him, Johnnie was at a loss to comprehend. It seemed a miracle, indeed, until
he looked closer. Then he understood. Cobo lay in a formless, boneless heap; he seemed to be
all arms and legs; his face was hidden, but between his shoulders there protruded the crude
wooden handle of a home-made knife to which a loop of cord was tied.

O'Reilly stared stupidly at the weapon; then he raised his eyes. Peering down at him out of
the night was another face, an impertinent, beardless, youthful face.

He uttered Jacket's name, and the boy answered with a smile. "Bring my knife with you when
you come," the latter directed.

"YOU!" The American's voice was weak and shaky. "I thought--" He set the candle down and covered
his eyes momentarily.

"That's a good knife, all right, and sharp, too. The fellow died in a hurry, eh? Who does he
happen to be?"

"Don't you know? It--it's Cobo."

"COBO! Coby, the baby-killer!" Jacket breathed an oath. "Oh, that blessed knife!" The boy craned
his small body forward until he was in danger of following his victim. "Now this IS good luck
indeed! And to think that he died just like any other man."

"Rosa! Where is she?" O'Reilly inquired in a new agony of apprehension.

"Oh, she is here," Jacket assured him, carelessly. "I think she has fainted. Caramba! Isn't
that like a woman--to miss all the fun? But, compadre--that was a blow for Cuba Libre; what?
People will talk about me when I'm as dead as that pig. 'Narciso Villar, the slayer of Cobo'--that's
what they'll call me." Jacket giggled hysterically. "I--I thought he would jump up and run
after me, so I fled, but he tried to bury himself, didn't he? His flesh was like butter, O'Reilly."

"Help me out, quick! Here, catch this rope." Johnnie managed to fling the coil within reach
of his little friend and a moment later he had hoisted himself from that pit of tragedy.

XXVII

MORIN, THE FISHERMAN

When Rosa Varona regained consciousness sufficiently to understand what had happened she proved
herself a person of no little self- control. She went to pieces for a moment, as was only natural,
but O'Reilly soon succeeded in calming her. Nor did he have to remind her twice that this was
no time for weakness or hysteria; it was she, in fact, who first voiced the fear that Cobo
dead was scarcely less of a menace than Cobo alive.

"What are we going to do with him?" she inquired.

Jacket, too, appreciated the dangers of the situation. "We must get rid of him quickly," said
he, "for his men are close by; he will be missed and there will be a search." "I don't intend
to make him a present of that treasure," O'Reilly said, grimly. "It is our only salvation."

"But how are we going to hide him?" Jacket inquired. "One might as well try to conceal a church;
oxen couldn't hoist him out of that hole."

"Precisely! He has made our work easy for us. We can't take more than a small part of the money
with us, anyhow; the rest will have to lie here until the war is over. Well! We shall leave
Cobo on guard over what remains!"

Jacket was immensely pleased with this idea, once he had grasped it. "What could be better?"
he cried. "The man's spirit is evil enough to frighten people away and we will drop stones
upon him, so that he can learn the taste of his own medicine. It suits me exactly to think
of Colonel Cobo standing on his head in a hole in the ground for the rest of eternity!"

O'Reilly was by this time suffering the full reaction from the events of the past half-hour
and he was nearer exhaustion than he dreamed, but, conquering his repugnance for his unescapable
task, he lowered himself once more into the well. His arms were weak, however, and his fingers
numb, so he fell rather than slid the length of the rope. He managed to open the door of the
treasure- chamber, then entered and loaded his pockets with gold. He sent up the jewel-box
at the end of the rope, dragged the body of Cobo into the cave, then wedged the barricade back
into place. It required the combined strength of Rosa and Jacket to help him the last few feet
of his climb.

"Now fetch stones, rubbish, anything--and throw it in there," he gasped.

The boy and the girl fell to with a will, and after a time Johnnie joined them. Slowly, laboriously,
the three of them carried debris from the edge of the quarry and bricks from the ruined house;
they scraped up armfuls of leaves and trash--anything, in fact, which would serve to raise
the bottom of the shaft and conceal the entrance to their enemy's resting-place. It was slavish
work, but O'Reilly kept them at it until they were ready to drop. Daylight overtook them at
their task.

They were weak, sick, deadly tired; they could barely shuffle a few yards at a time when they
finally reached Asensio's hut; nevertheless there was hope in their hearts, for O'Reilly's
ragged clothes sagged with the weight of gold pieces and the little metal box he carried was
heavy. Nor were they greatly concerned about the safety of the treasure they had left behind,
for the entrance to the cavern lay deeply buried, and Cobo, the guerrilla, stood guard over
the chests of plate and the casks of coin.

Evangelina, vastly bewildered at the sight of the coin which was forced into her palm, went
for food and spent most of the day in cooking it. The treasure-hunters alternately slept and
ate. It was not until well along toward evening that Rosa and O'Reilly felt any desire to take
stock of the contents of that jewel-box, but finally, with heads together and with backs to
the door of the bohio, they made a furtive examination. It was a task that held them spellbound,
for there were loose gems of many varieties, some well, some badly cut; there were pieces of
antique Spanish jewelry, valuable mainly by virtue of their antiquity, clumsy settings of silver
and gold containing dead, uninteresting stones; others of the finest and most delicate workmanship.
Some of the pieces were like glittering cobwebs enmeshing sparks of fire and drops of blood.
They found emeralds and sapphires the value of which they did not attempt to estimate; and,
besides these, a miscellaneous assortment of semiprecious stones. There was a fine collection
of opals of every size and color, among which were a number of huge flat black ones, indescribably
gorgeous with their ever-changing peacock hues. But finest of all the lot were the pearls.
Where old Don Esteban had secured these latter was a mystery, for he had not been a widely
traveled man. They were splendid, unrivaled in size and luster. Some had the iridescence of
soap-bubbles, others ranged from pink to deepest chocolate in color. To touch them was like
sacrilege.

O'Reilly realized vaguely that he held in his lap a fortune greater than his wildest dreams
had ever compassed. These were the jewels of a rajah. It seemed incredible that this ragged
girl beside him was a regal heiress, the possessor of a treasure such as kings might envy.
After a time he realized that the mere possession of these gems constituted a new and overwhelming
menace.

All that evening he and Rosa cowered in the darkness, whispering furtively, their nerves on
edge, their senses strained. It seemed to them that new and unsuspected perils stalked abroad
through the night.

Morning found all hands more nearly rational and feeling the first gnawings of a healthy hunger.
Even Asensio confessed to a quite miraculous improvement. While Evangelina prepared breakfast
the lovers agreed upon a story to explain the origin of that mysterious gold piece, and later
Johnnie warned Jacket for a second time to keep his tongue between his teeth.

"We will have to be doubly careful now," he told the boy. "An unguarded word or an incautious
move would be the end of us."

Jacket nodded his complete comprehension. "Sure! All Spaniards are robbers and they'd kill
us for a peso. Yes, and the pacificos are no better. I tell you we need to get out of this place."

"I intend to arrange it at once, but--the sight of those jewels has frightened me. If we are
searched--if we are even suspected--"

"Oh, Rosa wouldn't have any more use for her pretty trinkets. She'd be in heaven before you
could scratch your nose."

O'Reilly frowned. "She isn't at all strong yet. I'm wondering if she can endure the hardships
we'll encounter when, or if, we get away."

"Exactly what I was thinking. I've been considering another plan."

"Indeed?" O'Reilly scanned the face of his young friend with interest. He was beginning to
have a high regard for Jacket's capabilities, and the boy's exploit of the night before certainly
entitled him to be heard upon any subject.

"I told you about my friend at the market," the latter continued. "Well, he is a miserable
Spaniard, but he has a son in the manigua."

"One of us?" Johnnie was surprised.

"Yes. The old fellow owns a volandra in which he brings charcoal from the eastward twice a month."

There was a moment of silence; then O'Reilly said, slowly, as if hesitating even to voice such
a suggestion, "You mean--he might take us out of here--on his schooner?"

"Who knows? He's not a bad old fellow and he likes me. But there would be no place for women."

"How well does he like you?"

"Oh, we are like two thieves."

After another period of thought O'Reilly said, "Take me to him, and remember I'm your brother
Juan."

The Matanzas market did not present a scene of great activity when the two friends slunk into
it. It was midday, and what food had earlier been offered for sale had for the most part long
since disappeared. All but a few of the stalls were empty, and a number of emaciated reconcentrados
were searching listlessly among them for neglected scraps, or imploring aid from such marketmen
as still lingered about. Like most Spanish markets, the building was far from clean and housed
odors unpleasant even to starving people. In the smelliest section, at one of the fish-stalls,
Jacket accosted a villainous old brigand in a rough Gallego cap, baggy blouse and trousers,
and straw sandals.

"Good day, my Captain," he cried, cheerily.

The Spaniard raised his head, scowled ferociously, then waved a long, thin-bladed knife in
menacing fashion.

"Aha! So there you are, robber! Be off now before I slit your greedy little belly!" He spoke
in an angry, husky voice. When Jacket stood his ground he reached for him with a hand upon
which blood and fish-scales had dried. "Didn't I promise to give you to the soldiers if you
came back to bother me?"

Jacket was unabashed by this hostile reception. He grinned broadly and with an impudent eye
he scanned the empty premises. "Where is my little fish?" he demanded. "As I live, I believe
you have sold it! God! What a miser! For the sake of another centavo you would see me starve?
There's a heart for you!"

"YOUR little fish!" roared the brigand, clashing his blade on the filthy counter. "No shark
ever stole so many fish as you. Come, I shall make an end of you, and have some peace. Starve?
YOU? Bah! Your body is like a gourd."

"Yes, and quite as hollow. I starve because you possess a heart of stone. One little fish,
no longer than your finger. Just one?"

"Not so much as a fin!" cried the man. "Can I feed all the rebels in Matanzas?"

"One little fish," Jacket wheedled, "for the sake of Miguelito, who is bravely fighting in
the manigua, to the shame of his miserly old father, fattening on the groans of good patriots
like me! Must I remind you again that Miguelito was my brother? That I have robbed my own belly
in order to give him food?"

"Liar!"

"It is true." 

It is no simple task that I am setting you, Carnes, but I know that
you and Bolton will see it through if anyone can."

"Thanks, Doctor, we'll do our best.

If I am not speaking out of turn, what are you planning to do in the mean time?"

* * * * *

"I am going to start Taylor off on an ultra-short wave generator and try a few experiments along
that line.

Breslau is at Walter Reed and they are doing all they can for him, but until I can get some
definite information as to the underlying cause of his condition, they are more or less shooting
in the dark."

"How are they treating him?"

"By electric stimulations and vibratory treatments and by keeping him in a darkened room. By the
way, Carnes, if I am correct in my line of thought, it would be well
to have an extra guard put over Karuska.

He was the only real expert in ordnance that the Young Labor party
had, and if they have Breslau's model they'll need him to supervise
the construction of a gun."

"I'll attend to that at once, Doctor.

Is there anything else?"

"Not that I know of. I am going out to Takoma Park this afternoon and have another look at Breslau,
but it is too soon to hope for any change in his condition. Aside from the time I will be out
there, you can find me either here or at my home, in case anything
develops."

"I'll get on the job at once, Doctor."

"Thanks, old dear. Remember that speed must be the keynote of your
work."

* * * * *

The telephone bell at the head of Dr. Bird's bed
woke into noisy activity. The doctor roused himself and took down
the instrument sleepily. A glance at the clock showed him that it
was four in the morning and he muttered a malediction on the one who
had called him.

"Hello," he said into the receiver. "Dr. Bird speaking."

"Doctor,"
came a crisp voice over the wire, "wake up! This is Carnes talking.
Something has broken loose!"

All trace of sleep vanished from Dr.
Bird's face and his eyes glowed momentarily with a peculiar glitter
which Carnes would at once have recognized as indicative of the keenest
interest.

"What has happened, Carnes?" he demanded.

"I telephoned
Atlanta this morning and arranged to have an extra guard put over
Karuska as you suggested. Tse! What a pity!"

"But he is sick--dying--"

"Of course. They're all dying--the poor people! It is terrible."

"We--" O'Reilly faltered slightly, so much hung upon the manner in which Morin would take what
he was about to say. "We want to get him out of here--we MUST do so, or we'll lose him."

Sensing some hidden significance, some obscure purpose behind this confession, the Spaniard
looked sharply at the speaker. His leathery countenance darkened.

"Why are you telling me this?" he inquired. "What makes you think I won't betray you?"

"Something tells me you won't. You have a good heart, and you have kept Narciso from starving,
for the sake of your own boy."

"Well?"

"Will you help us?"

"I? In Heaven's name, how?"

"By taking us away in your charcoal-schooner."

"You're mad!" Morin cast another apprehensive look over his shoulder. "I'm a poor man. All
I have is my two boats, the vivero, which brings fish, and the volandra, which sails with charcoal.
Do you think I'd forfeit them and my life for strangers?"

"There wouldn't be much risk."

"Indeed? Perhaps I know something about that."

O'Reilly leaned closer. "You say you're a poor man, I will pay you well."

Morin eyed the ragged speaker scornfully; it was plain that he put no faith in such a promise,
and so O'Reilly took a piece of gold from his pocket, at sight of which the fisherman started.

"What kind of pacificos are you?" Morin queried. His mouth had fallen open, his eyes protruded.

"I, too, am a poor man, but I'm willing to buy freedom for my little brothers and myself."

"How many coins like that have you?"

"Um--m--more than one; enough to pay you for several cargoes of coal."

"And I have given you fish to eat!" Morin rolled his eyes at Jacket. He pondered the marvel
of what he had seen, he muttered something to himself.

"For the sake of Miguelito," Jacket urged. "CARAMBA! What a hard- hearted father begot that boy!"

"Hush!" The fisherman was scowling. To O'Reilly he said, "You do wrong to tempt a poor man."

"My brother Esteban is sick. He is a frail little lad with a crooked back. God will reward you."

"Perhaps! But how much will YOU pay?"

"Ten Spanish sovereigns like this--all that I have."

"No! It is not enough."

O'Reilly took Jacket's hand and turned away. "I'm sorry," said he. "I wish I might offer you
more." He had taken several steps before Morin hailed him.

"Come back to-morrow," the fisherman cried, crossly. "We will try to talk like sensible people."

The brothers Villar were back at Morin's fish-stand on the following afternoon and they returned
daily thereafter until they at last prevailed over the Spaniard's fears and won his promise
of assistance. That much accomplished, they made several cautious purchases, a coat here, a
shirt there, a pair of trousers in another place, until they had assembled a complete boy's
outfit of clothing.

At first Rosa refused absolutely to desert her two faithful negro friends, and O'Reilly won
her consent to consider his plan of escape only after he had put the matter squarely up to
Asensio and his wife and after both had refused to enter into it. Asensio declared that he
was too sick to be moved, and asserted that he would infinitely prefer to remain where he was,
provided he was supplied with sufficient money to cover his needs. Evangelina agreed with him.

Then, and not until then, did Rosa begin her preparations. First she made Evangelina cut her
hair, a sacrilege that wrung sighs and tears and loud lamentations from the black woman, after
which she altered the suit of boy's clothing to fit her figure, or rather to conceal it.

When at last she put it on for O'Reilly's approval she was very shy, very self-conscious, and
so altogether unboylike that he shook his head positively.

"My dear, you'll never do," he told her. "You are altogether too pretty."

"But wait until I put that hideous hump upon my back and stain my face, then you will see how
ugly I can look."

"Perhaps," he said, doubtfully. A moment, then his frown lightened. "You give me a thought,"
said he. "You shall wear the jewels."

"Wear them? How?"

"On your back, in that very hump. It will be the safest possible way to conceal them."

Rosa clapped her hands in delight. "Why, of course! It is the very thing. Wait until I show you."

Profiting by her first moment alone--Evangelina and her husband being still in ignorance of
the contents of the treasure-box--Rosa made a bundle out of the jewels and trinkets and fastened
it securely inside her coat. After a few experiments she adjusted it to her liking, then called
O'Reilly once more. This time he was better satisfied; he was, in truth, surprised at the effect
of the disfigurement, and, after putting Rosa through several rehearsals in masculine deportment,
he pronounced the disguise as nearly perfect as could be hoped for. An application of Evangelina's
stain to darken her face, a few tatters and a liberal application of dirt to the suit, and
he declared that Rosa would pass anywhere as a boy.

There came a night when the three of them bade good-by to their black companions and slipped
away across the city to that section known as Pueblo Nuevo, then followed the road along the
water- front until they found shelter within the shadows of a rickety structure which had once
served as a bath-house. The building stood partially upon piles and under it they crept, knee-deep
in the lapping waves. To their left was the illumination of Matanzas; to their right, the lights
of the Penas Alias fort; ahead of them, empty and dark save for the riding-lights of a few
small coasting- vessels, lay the harbor.

The refugees waited a long time; they were beginning 'to fear that old Morin's nerve had weakened
at the eleventh hour, when they beheld a skiff approaching the shore. It glided closer, entered
the shade of the bathhouse, then a voice cried:

"Pset! You are there?" It was Morin himself.

Hastily the three piled aboard. Morin bent to his oars and the skiff shot out. "You were not
observed?" he inquired.

"No."

Morin rowed in silence for a time, then confessed: "This business is not to my liking. There
is too much risk. Think of me putting my neck in peril--"

"Ho!" Jacket chuckled. "It is just the sort of thing that I enjoy. If Miguelito was captain
of his father's boat we'd been in Cardenas by daybreak."

"When do you sail?" O'Reilly asked.

"At dawn, God permitting. You will have to remain hidden and you mustn't even breathe. I have
told my men that you are members of my wife's family--good Spaniards, but I doubt if they will
believe it."

"Then you are to be my uncle?" Jacket inquired from his seat in the bow. "Caramba! That's more
than I can stand! To be considered a Spaniard is bad enough, but to be known as the nephew
of an old miser who smells of fish! It is too much!" 

Behind them, and corresponding to heavy infantry, were ranged some twenty thousand blue-plumed hoplites,
eagerly fingering the brazen hoses of their death dealing portable retortii.

* * * * *

Nelson had no time to further study the array, for he whirled about as from the Atlantean army
arose a deep, horrified shout.

He stood paralyzed, his jaw slack. For there, waddling slowly forward, came the most fantastic
huge creature imaginable. Unspeakably repellent and horrible, it stood on short legs thick
as mature trees, to tower at least thirty-five feet above the ground
at the fore-shoulders!

An immense reptilian neck some twenty-five feet long weaved continuously back and forth, while a
surprisingly small, bullet-shaped head emitted rumbling grunts.

"Great God!" gasped the horrified aviator, and felt the ground sway under him. "It must be ninety feet
long!"

Paralyzed by a dreadful fascination he watched the ungainly, hill-like reptile shuffle ponderously
forward and realized that, high on its back, was fixed a small fort, rather like those howdahs
or boxes which are fastened to the backs of elephants. Chilled with the nearness of death, Nelson
counted six mail-clad warriors in the howdah. Then the true import of the Jarmuthians evil jest
struck him with full force.

"Six men, they said. And six men there are--but the treacherous devils
mounted them on that walking hill-side!

Guess Altorius can kiss his six girls good-by right now. Poor Alden! Well, I did my best--a rotten
trick."

* * * * *

At that moment he felt as an ant must feel on beholding the approach of a human. It was terrifying,
the inexorable advance of that colossal, fantastic monster.

From behind he could hear the infuriated shouts of the Atlantean army. They knew even he could
not hope to withstand the murderous onslaught of the beast now entering the duelling space.
On came the diplodocus, its vast warty tail trailing over the ground
and raising a heavy column of dust, while its mud smeared sides bore
out Hero Giles' statement that here was one of those semi-aquatic
titans from the steaming swamps of Jarmuth.

"Hell! Poor Alden's as
good as finished now! What a fool I was to think I could save him!"

Obedient
to an overwhelming fear, Nelson whirled to flee, then stopped, as,
from the depths of his being, a stronger power forbade him to desert
his friend to certain death.

"Range two hundred and fifty yards,"
he estimated, and, whipping up the Winchester, sighted full at the
ponderous creature's slimy snakelike head. When the recoil jarred
his shoulder, Nelson dropped the barrel an inch or so to watch. Nothing
happened. Other sailing-craft
seemed to be getting under way, and a fishing-boat, loaded with the night's catch, came to
anchor alongside.

The three brothers Villar felt the schooner heel slightly and knew that she was stealing toward
the Spanish gunboat which was supposed to be on guard against precisely such undertakings as
this. A few moments, then there came a hail which brought their hearts into their throats.
Morin himself answered the call.

"Good morning, countryman! Have you caught any of those accursed filibusters since I saw you
last? So? Cayo Romano, eh? Well, they come in the night and they go in the night. If I were
the pilot of your ship I'd guarantee to put you where they'd fall into your arms, for I know
these waters. What have I aboard?" Morin laughed loudly. "You know very well--cannon and shot
for the rebels, of course. Will you look? ... No? ... Then a cup of coffee perhaps?"

O'Reilly peeped through a dirt-stained cabin window and saw that the volandra was slipping
past the stern of the ironclad, so he withdrew his head quickly.

In spite of his hospitable invitation, Captain Morin made no move to come about, but instead
held his schooner on its course, meanwhile exchanging shouts with the unseen speaker. It seemed
incredible that Spanish discipline could be so lax, that the schooner would be allowed to depart,
even for a coastwise run, without some formalities of clearance; but so it seemed. Evidently
the Spaniards had tired of examining these small craft. It was typical of their carelessness.

Of course this was but one danger past and there were many more ahead, for Morin's schooner
was liable to be stopped by any of the numerous patrol-boats on duty to the eastward. Nevertheless,
when an anxious hour had gone by and she was well out toward the harbor mouth, the refugees
told one another they were safe.

Morin shoved back the companionway hatch and thrust a grinning face into view. "Ho, there!
my lazy little cousins!" he cried. "Wake up, for I smell Pancho's coffee boiling."

XXVIII

THREE TRAVELERS COME HOME

Esteban Varona made slow progress toward recovery. In the weeks following O'Reilly's departure
from Cubitas his gain was steady, but beyond a certain point he seemed unable to go. Then he
began to lose strength. Norine was the first to realize the truth, but it was some time before
she would acknowledge it, even to herself. At last, however, she had to face the fact that
Esteban's months of prison fare, the abuse, the neglect he had suffered in Spanish hands, had
left him little more than a living corpse. It seemed as if fever had burned him out, or else
some dregs of disease still lingered in his system and had all but quenched that elusive spark
which for want of a better name we call vitality.

Esteban, too, awoke to the fact that he was losing ground, and his dismay was keen, for a wonderful
thing had come into his life and he spent much of his time in delicious contemplative day dreams
concerning it, waiting for the hour when he would dare translate those dreams into realities.
It seemed to him that he had always loved Norine; certainly she had enshrined herself in his
heart long before his mind had regained its clarity, for he had come out of his delirious wanderings
with his love full grown. There had been no conscious beginning to it; he had emerged from
darkness into dazzling glory, all in an instant. Not until he found himself slipping backward
did he attempt to set a guard upon himself, for up to that hour he had never questioned his
right to love. He found his new task heavy, almost too much for him to bear. That he attempted
it spoke well for the fellow's strength of character.

The time came finally when he could no longer permit the girl to deceive herself or him with
her brave assumption of cheerfulness. Norine had just told him that he was doing famously,
but he smiled and shook his weary head.

"Let's be honest," he said. "You know and I know that I can't get well."

Norine was engaged in straightening up the interior of the bark hut in which her patient was
installed; she ceased her labors to inquire with lifted brows:

"Tut! Tut! Pray what do you mean by that?"

"There's something desperately wrong with me and I realized it long ago. So did you, but your
good heart wouldn't let you--"

Norine crossed quickly to the hammock and laid her cool hand upon the sick man's forehead.

"You mustn't be discouraged," she told him, earnestly. "Remember this is a trying climate and
we have nothing to do with. Even the food is wretched."

Esteban's smile became wistful. "That isn't why my fever lasts. If there were any life, any
health left in me you would rekindle it. No, there's something desperately wrong, and--we're
wasting time."

"You simply MUSTN'T talk like this," she cried. Then at the look in his eyes she faltered for
the briefest instant. "You'll--undo all that we've done. Oh, if I had you where I could take
proper care of you! If we were anywhere but here you'd see."

"I--believe you. But unfortunately we are not elsewhere."

"I'm going to take you away," she exclaimed, forcefully.

Esteban stroked her hand softly. "You can't do that, Miss Evans. You have been wonderful to
me and I can't begin to express my gratitude--" Norine stirred, but he retained his grasp of
her fingers, gaining courage from the contact to proceed. "I have been trying for a long time
to tell you something. Will you listen?"

Norine possessed a dominant personality; she had a knack of tactfully controlling and directing
situations, but of a sudden she experienced a panic-stricken nutter and she lost her air of
easy confidence.

"Not now," she exclaimed, with a visible lessening of color. "Don't bother to tell me now."

"I've waited too long; I must speak."

Norine was amazed at her own confusion, which was nothing less than girlish; she had actually
gone to pieces at threat of something she had long expected to hear.

"I know how tired of this work you have become," the man was saying. "I know you're eager to
get back to your own work and your own life."

"Well?"

"You have stayed on here just to nurse me. Isn't that true?"

She nodded somewhat doubtfully.

"Now then, you must stop thinking about me and--make your arrangements to go home."

Norine eyed the speaker queerly. "Is THAT what you have been trying so long to tell me?" she
inquired.

"Yes."

"Is that--all?"

There was a moment of silence. "Yes. You see, I know how tired you are of this misery, this
poverty, this hopeless struggle. You're not a Cuban and our cause isn't yours. Expeditions
come from the United States every now and then and the Government will see that you are put
safely aboard the first ship that returns. I'll manage to get well somehow."

Norine's color had returned. She stood over the hammock, looking down mistily. "Don't you need
me, want me any more?" she inquired.

Esteban turned his tired eyes away, fearing to betray in them his utter wretchedness. "You
have done all there is to do. I want you to go back into your own world and forget--"

A sudden impulse seized the girl. She stopped and gathered the sick man into her young, strong
arms. "Don't be silly," she cried. "My world is your world, Esteban dear. I'll never, never
leave you."

"Miss Evans! NORINE!" Varona tried feebly to free himself. "You mustn't--"

Norine was laughing through her tears. "If you won't speak, I suppose I must, but it is very
embarrassing. Don't you suppose I know exactly how much you love me? "Why, you've told me a
thousand times--"

"Please! PLEASE!" he cried in a shaking voice. "This is wrong. I won't let you--you, a girl
with everything--"

"Hush!" She drew him closer. "You're going to tell me that you have nothing, can offer me nothing.
You're going to do the generous, noble thing. Well! I hate generous people. I'm selfish, utterly
selfish and spoiled, and I don't propose to be robbed of anything I want, least of all my happiness.
You do love me, don't you?"

Esteban's cry was eloquent; he clasped his arms about her and she held him fiercely to her breast.

"Well, then, why don't you tell me so? I--I can't keep on proposing. It isn't ladylike."

"We're quite mad, quite insane," he told her after a while. "This only makes it harder to give
you up."

"You're not going to give me up and you're not going to die. I sha'n't let you. Think what
you have to live for."

"I--did wrong to surrender."

"It was I who surrendered. Come! Must I say it all? Aren't you going to ask me--"

"What?"

"Why, to marry you, of course."

Esteban gasped; he looked deeply into Norine's eyes, then he closed his own. He shook his head.
"Not that," he whispered. "Oh, not that!"

"We're going to be married, and I'm going to take you out of this miserable place."

"What happiness!" he murmured. "If I were well--But I won't let you marry a dying man."

Norine rose, her face aglow with new strength, new determination. She dried her eyes and readjusted
her hair with deft, unconscious touch, smiling down, meanwhile, at the man. "I brought you
back when you were all but gone. I saved you after the others had given you up, and now you
are mine to do with as I please. You belong to me and I sha'n't consult you--" She turned,
for a figure had darkened the door; it was one of her English-speaking convalescents who was
acting as a sort of orderly.

"Senorita," the man said, with a flash of white teeth, "we have another sick man, and you'd
never guess who. It is that American, El Demonio--"

"Mr. Branch?"

"Si! The very same. He has just come from the front."

"Is he sick or wounded?" Esteban inquired.

"Shot, by a Spanish bullet. He asked at once for our senorita."

"Of course. I'll come in an instant." When the messenger had gone Norine bent and pressed her
lips to Esteban's. "Remember, you're mine to do with as I please," she said; then she fled
down the grassy street.

Branch was waiting at Norine's quarters, a soiled figure of dejection. His left arm lay in
a sling across his breast. He looked up at her approach, but she scarcely recognized him, so
greatly changed was he.

Leslie had filled out. There was a healthy color beneath his deep tan, his flesh was firm,
his eyes clear and bright.

"Hello, Norine!" he cried. "Well, they got me."

Norine paused in astonishment. "'Way, LESLIE! I was so frightened! But--you can't be badly hurt."

"Bad enough so that Lopez sent me in. A fellow gets flyblown if he stays in the field, so I
beat it."

"Has your arm been dressed?"

"No. I wouldn't let these rough-and-tumble doctors touch it. They'd amputate at the shoulder
for a hang-nail. I don't trust 'em."

"Then I'll look at it."

But Leslie shrugged. "Oh, it's feeling fine, right now! I'd rather leave it alone. I just wanted
to see you--"

"You mustn't neglect it; there's danger of--"

"Gee! You're looking great," he interrupted. "It's better than a banquet just to look at you."

"And YOU!" Norine scanned the invalid appraisingly. "Why, you're another man!"

"Sure! Listen to this." He thumped his chest. "Best pair of bellows in Cuba. The open air did it."

"What a pity you were hurt just at such a time. But you would take insane risks. Now then,
let's have a look at your wound." She pushed him, protesting, into her cabin.

"It doesn't hurt, really," he declared. "It's only a scratch."

"Of course you'd say so. Sit down."

"Please don't bother. If you don't mind--"

"But I do mind. If you won't trust me I'll run for a doctor."

"I tell you I can't stand 'em. They'll probe around and give a fellow gangrene."

"Then behave yourself." Norine forced the patient into a chair and withdrew his arm from the
sling. Then, despite his weak resistance, she deftly removed the bandage. From his expression
she felt sure that she must be hurting him, but when the injury was exposed she looked up in
wonderment.

"Leslie!" she exclaimed. "What in the world--"

"Well! You insisted on seeing it," he grumbled. "I told you it wasn't much." He tried to meet
her eyes, but failed.

There was a moment's pause, then Norine inquired, curiously: "What is the trouble? You'd better
'fess up."

Branch struggled with himself, he swallowed hard, then said: "I'm- -going to. You can see now
why I didn't go to a doctor: I did it--shot myself. You won't give me away?"

"Why--I don't understand."

"Oh, I'm in trouble. I simply had to get away, and this was all I could think of. I wanted
to blow a real hole through myself and I tried three times. But I missed myself."

"Missed yourself? How? Why?"

Branch wiped the sweat from his face. "I flinched--shut my eyes and pulled the trigger."

Norine seated herself weakly; she stared in bewilderment at the unhappy speaker. "Afraid? You,
El Demonio! Why, you aren't afraid of anything!"

"Say! You don't believe all that stuff, do you? I'm afraid of my shadow and always have been.
I'm not brave and never was. They told me I was going to die and it scared me so that I tried
to end things quickly. I couldn't bear to die slowly, to KNOW that I was dying by inches. But,
Lord! It scared me even worse to go into battle. I was blind with fright all the time and I
never got over it. Why, the sight of a gun gives me a chill, and I jump every time one goes
off. God! how I've suffered! I went crazy at our first engagement--crazy with fear. I didn't
know where I was, or what happened, or anything. Afterward, when they hailed me as a hero,
I thought they were kidding, that everybody must know how frightened I was. After a time I
saw that I'd fooled them, and that shamed me. Then--I had to keep it up or become ridiculous.
But it nearly killed me."

"If you're speaking the truth, I'm not sure you're such a coward as you make out," Norine said.

"Oh yes, I am. Wait! Before I knew it I had a reputation. Then I had to live up to it." The
speaker groaned. "It wasn't so bad as long as I felt sure I was going to die, anyhow, but when
I discovered I was getting well--" Branch raised a pair of tragic eyes, his tone changed. "I'll
tell you what cured me. I SCARED myself well! Those bugs in my lungs died from suffocation,
for I never breathed as long as there was a Spaniard in the same county with me. One day I
found that I couldn't cough if I tried. I got strong. I slept well. And EAT? Huh! I gobbled
my share of food and whined for more. I stole what belonged to the others. I began to enjoy
myself--to have fun. Life opened up nice and rosy. I fell in love with my new self and the
joy of living. Then I didn't want to die--never had, you understand, except to cheat the bugs;
it gave me the horrors to think of the chances I'd taken. To be strong, to be healthy and free
from pain, to tear my food like a wild animal, and to enjoy hard work was all new and strange
and wonderful. I was drunk with it. To think of being cut down, crippled, reduced to the useless,
miserable thing I had been, was intolerable. I was twice as scared then as I'd ever been, for
I had more to lose. You understand? I forced myself to do the insane things expected of me,
when people were looking--natural pride, I suppose--but when they weren't looking, oh, how
I dogged it! I crawled on my belly and hid in holes like a snake."

"How--funny!" Norine exclaimed.

"You've got a blamed queer idea of humor," Branch flashed, with a show of his former irritability.

"And so you shot yourself?"

"Yep! I tried to select a good spot where it wouldn't hurt or prove too inconvenient, but--there
isn't a place to spare on a fellow's whole body. He needs every inch of himself every minute.
I was going to shoot myself in the foot, but my feet are full of bones and I saw myself on
crutches the rest of my life."

"Why didn't you resign from the service? You didn't regularly enlist and you've surely earned
your discharge."

Branch nodded. "I thought of that, but I've gained a reputation that I don't deserve and, strangely
enough, I'm madly jealous of it. I thought if I were really shot by a regular bullet I'd be
mourned as a hero and have a chance to walk out with colors flying. I want to tell my children,
if I ever have any, what a glorious man I was and how I helped to free Cuba. Oh, I'd lie like
a thief to my own children! Now you see why I don't want a doctor. There's only one thing I
want--and that's--HOME." Leslie heaved a deep sigh. "Gee! I'm homesick."

"So am I," Norine feelingly declared. "I think I understand how you feel and I can't blame
you for wanting to live, now that you've learned what a splendid thing life is."

"If O'Reilly had been with me I think I could have managed, somehow, for he would have understood,
too. I--I'll never go back to the front, alone--they can shoot me, if they want to. Have you
heard anything from him?"

"Not a word. Cuba swallowed him up. Oh, Leslie, it is a cruel country! It is taking the best
and the youngest. I--want to go away."

He smiled mirthlessly. "I'm fed up on it, too. I want to be where I can shave when I need to
and wear something besides canvas pajamas. I'm cured of war; I want a policeman to stop the
traffic and help me across the street. I want to put my feet under a breakfast-table, rustle
a morning paper, and slap an egg in the face. That's all the excitement I hunger for."

Norine filled a basin with clean water and, taking a fresh bandage, wrapped up the self-inflicted
hurt, Branch watching her anxiously. Now and again he flinched like a child when she touched
his wound. At last he inquired, apprehensively, "Is it infected?"

"No."

"Lord! I'm glad! Wouldn't it be just my luck to get blood poisoning?"

Norine surprised her patient by inquiring, irrelevantly, "Leslie, is there anybody here who
can marry people?"

"Eh? Why, of course!" Then suddenly his somber face lightened and he cried: "NORINE! DO YOU
MEAN IT?"

"Not you. I wouldn't marry you."

"Why not? I'm perfectly well--"

"Please answer me."

Leslie settled back in his chair. "I dare say some of the Cuban Cabinet officers could put
up a good bluff at a marriage ceremony."

"A bluff wouldn't do."

"Who's going to be married?"

"I am."

Branch started to his feet once more, his mouth fell open. "You? Nonsense!" When she nodded,
his face darkened. "Who is he? Some Cuban, I'll bet--one of these greasers."

"It is poor Esteban."

"'Poor Esteban'! Damn it, they're all poor. That's the very reason he asked you. He's after
your money."

"He didn't ask me. I asked him. He's--dying, Leslie." There was a pause. "I'm going to marry
him and take him home, where he can get well."

"What will O'Reilly say?"

"I'm afraid we'll never see O'Reilly again. Cuba frightens me. It has taken him, it will take
Esteban, and--that would break my heart."

"Do you love him as much as that?"

Norine raised her eyes and in their depths Branch read her answer. "Well, that ends the rest
of us," he sighed. The only alterations she has made have been such as were essential to conceal
the identity of the writer and of other persons mentioned in the
document.

Consequently, surnames, Christian names, and names of places, have been changed. These modifications
have enabled the original author of the diary to allow me to place it at the free disposal
of serious readers.

No attempt has been made to correct trifling faults in grammar and other inelegancies of style.
For the most part, these must not be regarded as the expression of a child's incapacity for
the control of language. Rather must they be looked upon as manifestations of affective trends,
as errors in functioning brought about by the influence of the Unconscious.

THE EDITOR. VIENNA, Autumn, 1919.

FIRST YEAR, AGE ELEVEN TO TWELVE

FIRST YEAR

July 12, 19 . . .

Hella and I are writing a diary. We both agreed that when we went to the high school we would
write a diary every day. Dora keeps a diary too, but she gets furious if I look at it. I call
Helene "Hella," and she calls me "Rita;"

Helene and Grete are so vulgar. Dora has taken to calling herself "Thea," but I go on calling
her "Dora."

She says that little children (she means me and Hella) ought not to keep a diary. She says
they will write such a lot of nonsense.

No more than in hers and Lizzi's.

July 13th. Really we were not to begin writing until after the holidays, but since we are both
going away, we are beginning now.

Then we shall know what we have been doing in the holidays.

The day before yesterday we had an entrance examination, it was very
easy, in dictation I made only 1 mistake--writing ihn without h. The
mistress said that didn't matter, I had only made a slip.

That is quite true, for I know well enough that ihn has an h in it. We were both dressed in
white with rose-coloured ribbons, and everyone believed we were sisters
or at least cousins.

It would be very nice to have a cousin. But it's still nicer to have a friend, for we can tell
one another everything.

July 14th. The mistress was very kind. Because of her Hella and I
are really sorry that we are not going to a middle school.

Then every day before lessons began we could have had a talk with
her in the class-room.

But we're awfully pleased because of the other girls.

One is more important when one goes to the high school instead of only to the middle school.
That is why the girls are in such a rage. "They are bursting with pride" (that's what my sister
says of me and Hella, but it is not true). "Our two students" said
the mistress when we came away.

She told us to write to her from the country. I shall.

July 15th.

Lizzi, Hella's sister, is not so horrid as Dora, she is always so nice! To-day she gave each
of us at least ten chocolate-creams.

It's true Hella often says to me: "You don't know her, what a beast she can be. Your sister
is generally very nice to me." Certainly it is very funny the way in which she always speaks
of us as "the little ones" or "the children," as if she had never
been a child herself, and indeed a much littler one than we are.

Besides we're just the same as she is now. She is in the fourth class
and we are in the first.

To-morrow we are going to Kaltenbach in Tyrol. I'm frightfully excited. Hella went away to-day
to Hungary to her uncle and aunt with her mother and Lizzi. Her father is at manoeuvres.

July 19th. It's awfully hard to write every day in the holidays. Everything
is so new and one has no time to write. We are living in a big house
in the forest. Dora bagged the front veranda straight off for her
own writing. At the back of the house there are such swarms of horrid
little flies; everything is black with flies. I do hate flies and
such things. I'm not going to put up with being driven out of the
front veranda. I won't have it. Besides, Father said: "Don't quarrel,
children!" (Children to her too!!) He's quite right. She puts on such
airs because she'll be fourteen in October. "The verandas are common
property," said Father. Father's always so just. He never lets Dora
lord it over me, but Mother often makes a favourite of Dora. I'm writing
to Hella to-day. She's not written to me yet.

July 21st. Hella has
written to me, 4 pages, and such a jolly letter. There were three figures in the
lead, a man and two boys, and they walked slowly, ploddingly, as if weary from a long march.

Norine decided that they were not villagers, but ragged pacificos, upon the verge of exhaustion.
She saw Branch break into a swifter run and heard him shout something, then through eyes suddenly
dimmed she watched him fall upon the tallest of the three strangers and embrace him. The crowd
grew thicker. It surrounded them.

"Esteban!" Norine cried in a voice she scarcely recognized. She retreated into the doorway
with one hand upon her leaping heart. "Esteban! Look! Some one has just arrived. Leslie has
gone--" She cleared her vision with a shake of her head and her tongue grew thick with excitement.
"They're coming--HERE! Yes! It's--it's O'REILLY!"

Young Varona struggled from his hammock. "ROSA!" he called, loudly, "ROSA!"

Norine ran and caught him or he would have fallen prone. He pawed and fumbled in a weak attempt
to free himself from her restraining arms; a wildness was upon him; he shook as if with palsy.
"Did he bring her with him? Is she here? Why don't you answer me? Rosa--" He began to mutter
unintelligibly, his vitality flared up, and it was with difficulty that Norine could hold him
down. His gaze, fixed upon the square of sunlight framed by the low doorway, was blazing with
excitement. To Norine it seemed as if his spirit, in the uncertainty of this moment, was straining
to leap forth in an effort to learn his sister's fate.

The crowd was near at hand now. There came the scuffling of feet and murmur of many voices.
Esteban fell silent, he closed his hot, bony hands upon Norine's wrists in a painful grip.
He bent forward, his soul centered in his tortured eyes.

There came a shadow, then in the doorway the figure of a man, a tattered scarecrow of a man
whose feet were bare and whose brown calves were exposed through flapping rags. His breast
was naked where thorns had tried to stay him; his beard, even his hair, were matted and unkempt,
and the mud of many trails lay caked upon his garments.

It was O'Reilly!

He peered, blinking, into the obscurity, then he turned and drew forward a frail hunchbacked
boy whose face was almost a mulatto hue. Hand in hand they stepped into the hut and once again
Esteban Varona's soul found outlet in his sister's name. He held out his shaking, hungry arms
and the misshapen lad ran into them.

Dumb with amazement, blind with tears, Norine found herself staring upward into O'Reilly's
face, and heard him saying:

"I told you I would bring her home."

The next instant she lay upon his breast and sobs of joy were tearing at her.

XXIX

WHAT HAPPENED AT SUNDOWN

The story of Rosa's rescue came slowly and in fragments, for the news of O'Reilly's return
caused a sensation. His recital was interrupted many times. So numerous and so noisy did these
diversions become that Norine, fearing for the welfare of her patient, banished O'Reilly's
visitors and bore him and Branch off to her own cabin, leaving the brother and sister alone.
In the privacy of Norine's quarters O'Reilly finished telling her the more important details
of his adventures. He was well-nigh worn out, but his two friends would not respect his weariness;
they were half hysterical with joy at his safety, treating him like one returned from the dead;
so he rambled disjointedly through his tale. He told them of his hazardous trip westward, of
his and Jacket's entrance into Matanzas and of the distressing scenes they witnessed there.
When he had finished the account of his dramatic meeting with Rosa his hearers' eyes were wet.
The recital of the escape held them breathless.

"As a matter of fact, our get-away was ridiculously easy," he said, "for we had luck at every
turn--regular Irish luck. I'm sure Captain Morin suspected that Rosa wasn't a boy, but he was
perfectly foolish about Jacket and tolerated us on his account. We owe everything to that kid;
he's wonderful. I made Morin independent for life, but it wasn't the money, it was Jacket who
induced him to bring us clear to Turiguano. He landed us one night, this side of the Moron
trocha. Since then we've waded swamps to our armpits, we've fought the jungle and chewed bark--
but we're here." Johnnie heaved a deep sigh of relief.

"Where did you get the money to hire schooners and corrupt captains?" Branch inquired. "You
were broke when I knew you."

O'Reilly hesitated; he lowered his voice to a whisper. "We found the Varona treasure."

Norine uttered a cry. "Not Don Esteban's treasure?"

"Exactly. It was in the well where young Esteban told us it was."

"Oh, Johnnie! You mean thing!" exclaimed the girl. "You promised-- "

"You'll have a chance to dig," he laughed. "We couldn't begin to bring all of it; we merely
took the jewels and the deeds and what money our clothes would hold. The rest--"

"Wait! WAIT!" Branch wailed, clapping his hand to his head. "'Merely the jewels and the deeds
and what money our clothes would hold?' Bullets! Why, one suit of clothes will hold all the
money in the world! Am I dreaming? 'Money!' I haven't seen a bona-fide dollar since I put on
long pants. What does money look like? Is it round or--?"

Johnnie produced from his pocket a handful of coins.

Branch's eyes bulged, he touched a gold piece respectfully, weighed it carefully, then pressed
it to his lips. He rubbed it against his cheeks and in his hair; he placed it between his teeth
and bit it.

"It's REAL!" he cried. "Now let me look at the jewels."

"Rosa has them. She's wearing them on her back. Hunched backs are lucky, you know; hers is
worth a fortune."

"Why, this beats the Arabian Nights!" Norine gasped.

"It beats--" Branch paused, then wagged his head warningly at the girl. "I don't believe a
word of it and you mustn't. Johnnie read this story on his yachting-trip. It couldn't happen.
In the first place there isn't any more money in the world; mints have quit coining it. Why,
if I wrote such a yarn--"

"It IS almost unbelievable," Johnnie acknowledged. "I found Aladdin's cave, but"--his face
paled and he stirred uneasily--"it was nearly the death of all of us. I'll have to tell you
the whole story now; I've only told you the half."

While his hearers listened, petrified with amazement and doubting their ears, he recited the
incidents of that unforgettable night on La Cumbre: how Cobo came, and of the trap he sprung;
how Jacket stole upon the assassin while he knelt, and of the blow he struck.

When Johnnie had finished there was a long moment of silence. Then Norine quavered, tremulously:
"That boy! That blessed boy!"

Branch murmured, feebly: "Dash water in my face, or you'll lose me. I--You--" He found no words
to express his feelings and finally voiced his favorite expletive.

"It's all too weirdly improbable," O'Reilly smiled, "but ask Rosa or Jacket--the boy is bursting
to tell some one. He nearly died because he couldn't brag about it to Captain Morin, and there
won't be any holding him now. I'm afraid he'll tip off the news about that treasure in spite
of all my warnings. Those jewels are a temptation; I won't rest easy until they're safely locked
up in some good vault. Now then, I've told you everything, but I'm dying for news. Tell me
about yourselves, about Esteban. I expected to find him well. What ails him?"

"Oh, Johnnie!" Norine began. "He's very ill. He isn't getting well." Something in her tone
caused O'Reilly to glance at her sharply. Branch nodded and winked significantly, and the girl
confessed with a blush: "Yes! You told me I'd surrender to some poor, broken fellow. I'm very
happy and--I'm very sad."

"Hunh! He's far from poor and broken," Leslie corrected; "with a half-interest in a humpful
of diamonds and a gold-plated well, according to Baron Munchausen, here. This is the Cuban
leap-year, Johnnie; Norine proposed to him and he was too far gone to refuse. You came just
in time to interrupt a drum-head marriage."

"Is it true?" When Norine acquiesced, O'Reilly pressed her two hands in his. "I'm glad--so
glad." Tears started to the girl's eyes; her voice broke wretchedly. "Help me, Johnnie! Help
me to get him home--"

He patted her reassuringly and she took comfort from his hearty promise.

"Of course I will. We'll take him and Rosa away where they can forget Cuba and all the misery
it has caused them. We'll make him well--don't worry. Meanwhile, at this moment Rosa needs
food and clothing, and so do I."

As the three friends walked up the street they discovered Jacket holding the center of an interested
crowd of his countrymen. It was the boy's moment and he was making the most of it. Swollen
with self-importance, he was puffing with relish at a gigantic gift cigar.

"I exaggerate nothing," he was saying, loudly. "O'Reilly will tell you that I killed Cobo,
alone and unassisted. The man is gone, he has disappeared, and all Matanzas is mystified. This
is the hand that did it; yonder is the weapon, with that butcher's blood still on it. That
knife will be preserved in the museum at Habana, along with my statue." Jacket spied his chief
witness and called to him. "Tell these good people who killed Cobo. Was it Narciso Villar?"

"It was," O'Reilly smiled. "The fellow is dead."

There was renewed murmuring. The crowd pressed Jacket closer; they passed the knife from hand
to hand. Doubters fell silent; the boy swelled visibly. Bantam-like he strutted before their
admiring glances, and when his benefactor had passed safely out of hearing he went on:

"God! What a fight we had! It was like those combats of the gladiators you hear about. The
man was brave enough; there's no denying his courage, which was like that of ten men--like
that of a fierce bull; but I--I was superb, magnificent! The man bellowed, he roared, he grunted;
he charged me, flinging the earth high with his heels, but I was banderillero, picador, and
matador in one. I was here, I was there, I was everywhere; so swiftly did I move that no eye
could follow me." Jacket illustrated his imaginary movements with agile leaps and bounds. "The
terror of his name frightened me, I'll admit, but it lent me a desperate courage, too. I thought
of the brave men, the good women, the innocent children he had slain, and I fell upon him from
this side, from that side, from the front, from the rear. I pricked him, shouting: 'That for
the people of Las Villas! This for the women of the San Juan. And once again for the babies
you have killed.'" Jacket carried out his pantomime by prodding with a rigid finger first one,
then another of his listeners. "Oh, he went mad, like a bull, indeed, but I was another Rafael
Guerra. He shed rivers of blood, the ground grew slippery and the grass became red. He stood
rocking in his tracks, finally; his breath was like a hurricane. He was exhausted, he was covered
with foam, his limbs were made of lead. It was my moment. 'For all your sins!' I cried, and
with that I drove yonder blade through his heart and out between his shoulders, thus! My brothers,
his flesh was rotten, and the steel clove it as if it were butter."

Jacket was more than gratified at the effect of his recital, for children screamed, women shuddered,
and men turned shocked eyes upon one another. Let us turn from the past; what of the present? In
spite of the dehumanizing and other efforts to destroy the fecundity of the race, the twenty
Africans of 1620, by the close of the Revolution, had increased to 650,000, and these 650,000, at
the close of the Civil War, had reached the alarming number of four and one-half millions;
and these four and a half millions, had, according to the last Federal Census, reached the astonishing
number of ten millions or more of native-born citizens--entitled,
though sometimes denied, to every right and privilege granted by the
Constitution of the United States and by the Fourteenth and Fifteenth
Amendments thereof; the making and sustaining of which our fathers
contributed much of their blood and sacrifice, in peace, as well as
in war.

For we have been present, not only as spectators, but as active participants in every trying
crisis in the history of this nation. In the beginning of the seventeenth century, when labor
troubles threatened the very life of the infant colony and continuing
to the founding of the Republic--when white men were held in peonage
or actual bondage for the uncanceled financial obligations due to
the nobility of Great Britain--who furnished the labor which solved
the vexed problem?

Who furnished the brawn and muscle which cleared the forests, leveled the hills, tunneled the mountains,
bridged the rivers, laid the tracks and cultivated the fields, until
this broad land had become as beautiful as the lily of the valley
and as fragrant as the rose of Sharon?

In 1776, when despotism was enthroned and liberty languished in the streets of Boston, was it not
the blood of a Negro--Crispus Attucks--which animated the sinking
spirit of the Goddess, who was almost ready to die under the oppression
of King George and the despotism of Cornwallis?

In the Sixties--when Lincoln, despairing of the outcome of the Civil
War, on account of the treachery in his own ranks and repeated reverses
on the battle-field, called for 75,000 volunteers to suppress the
Rebellion in the South--who came to the rescue of the Union?

In spite of the effort of McClellan and his company of 50,000 soldiers,
who went to Richmond to prevent "niggers," as they were called, from
enlisting, who came to the rescue of the Union?

Whose blood helped to render the testament of liberty valid? Ask Port Hudson and Milligan's Bend, and
Fort Wagner, and Fort Pillow, and Pittsburg Landing, how the nearly
200,000 Negro soldiers behaved themselves under the fire of the enemy
on these memorable battlefields--rendered sacred by their patriotic
blood.

Who saved the Rough Riders and Colonel Roosevelt in the late Spanish-American
War, when San Juan was illuminated with the fire of Spanish cannonading?

 "No! You came to find and to save your fiancee, and you volunteered
to serve with us while you were doing so. We have no desire to keep any man against his will.
Some one must escort Miss Evans, who is our guest. Why not you two? She has every confidence
in you, and if she chooses to risk this enterprise rather than wait until we can guarantee
her an easier trip we shall not restrain her. I shall see that you reach the coast safe and
sound; beyond that you must trust in God."

Branch was immensely relieved; he joined volubly in O'Reilly's thanks and became careless of
his arm, which no longer appeared to pain him. Peace with honor, it seemed, was all that he
desired.

"I was looking forward to an interesting ceremony this afternoon," Gomez went on. "Has your
arrival changed the plans?"

"Oh no, sir!" O'Reilly said, quickly. "I'd like to make it doubly interesting, if Miss Varona
will consent to such short notice."

"Bravo! You have a way of doing the unexpected. Twin births, a double wedding! Why not? The
sight of a little happiness will be good for all of us; we're apt to forget that life and the
big world are going on as usual. I don't think Miss Varona will have it in her heart to refuse
you anything."

The old soldier was right. Rosa did not gainsay her lover, and toward sundown the city among
the leaves witnessed an unaccustomed scene.

The women of the camp, delighted at an opportunity of serving Norine, had transformed Esteban's
poor quarters into a tiny bower of wild blossoms and green leaves; they likewise gathered flowers
for the two brides-to-be, then joined with nimble fingers in adorning their costumes. When
the girls came down the street, hand in hand, they received an ovation from men and women alike.
Norine was pleased; she smiled and blushed and ran the gantlet bravely enough. But Rosa, sadly
overwrought by the day's excitement, was upon the verge of a collapse. Nevertheless she was
happy; her eyes were shining, her face was transfigured, her hand, when she took O'Reilly's,
was cold and tremulous, but it warmed and grew steady under his grasp.

Many people--all Cubitas, in fact--had assembled to witness the romantic double wedding, but
few actually succeeded, for Esteban's hut was too small to accommodate more than the highest
officials of the Provisional Government, so the others were forced to wait outside in the gathering
dusk. And those Ministers, those secretaries of departments, those generals and colonels, what
a motley crowd they formed! There was scarcely a whole garment among them. They were sunburnt,
wind-browned, earnest men, the old ones grayed and grizzled from worry, the younger ones wasted
from hardships in the field. But out of their rags and poverty shone a stately courtesy and
consideration. They were gentlemen, men of culture and refinement, the best and oldest blood
of Cuba. Both Norine and Johnnie had learned their gratitude, and the story of the Varona twins
was typical of the island, nowadays, so they unbent and there were warm congratulaitons, well-turned
Latin pleasantries, elaborate compliments upon the beauty of the brides.

Then, afterward, there was a surprise--a genuine surprise--in the form of a banquet at the
big mess shelter, with an orchestra concealed behind a screen of fresh-cut palm-leaves stuck
into the soft earth. This was the men's part of the celebration, the official compliment to
Cuba's guest. It was a poorly furnished banquet, with a service of tin and granite ware and
chipped china, and there was little to eat, but the true spirit of festivity was present. The
Lone Star emblem of the new Republic was draped with the Stars and Stripes, and there were
many speeches.

Norine's protests at leaving Esteban went unheeded, and Leslie Branch escorted her in place
of the bridegroom, who lay blissfully dreaming in his hammock. Her amazement passed all bounds
when, from the hidden recess behind the palm-leaves, came not the music of mandolins and guitars,
but the strains of a balanced orchestra under the leadership of Cuba's most eminent bandmaster.
Whence the players had come, where they had found their instruments, was a mystery, but they
played well, divinely, so it seemed to the music-hungry diners. Such a banquet as that was!
Some one had contributed a demijohn of wine, and there was coffee, too, at the last, made from
the berries of some jungle plant. The chef, once famous at the Inglaterra, was forced to appear
and take homage for this final triumph.

Rosa, very dainty in her borrowed nurse's uniform, was round-eyed, timid; she evoked much admiration,
but when she was addressed as Senora O'Reilly she blushed to the roots of her hair and shrank
close to her husband's side. To feel herself secure, to see on all sides friendly faces, to
know that these fine men and women--there were numerous good Cuban matrons present--were her
own people and meant her well, was almost unbelievable. She had so long been hidden, she had
so long feared every stranger's glance, it was not strange that she felt ill at ease, and that
the banquet was a grave ordeal for her.

Branch proved to be a happy choice as Esteban's proxy, for he relieved Norine's anxiety and
smothered her apprehensions. When called upon to speak he made a hit by honestly expressing
his relief at escaping the further hazards of this war. Prompted by some freakish perversity,
and perhaps unduly stimulated by the wine he had drunk, he made open confession of his amazing
cowardice.

O'Reilly interpreted for him and well-nigh every sentence evoked laughter. El Demonio's heroic
reputation had preceded him, therefore his unsmiling effort to ridicule himself struck the
audience as a new and excruciatingly funny phase of his eccentricity. Encountering this blank
wall of disbelief, Branch waxed more earnest, more convincing; in melancholy detail he described
his arrant timidity, his cringing fear of pain, his abhorrence of blood and steel. His elongated
face was genuinely solemn, his voice trembled, his brow grew damp with unpleasant, memories;
he seemed bent upon clearing his conscience once for all. But he succeeded only in convulsing
his hearers. Women giggled, men wiped tears from their eyes and declared he was a consummate
actor and the rarest, the most fantastic humorist they had ever listened to. They swore that
Cuba had lost, in him, a peerless champion. When he had finished they cheered him loudly and
the orchestra broke into a rousing military march.

Leslie turned to voice his irritation and surprise to Norine, but she had slipped away, so
he glared at O'Reilly, wondering how the latter had so artfully managed to mistranslate his
remarks.

When Rosa and O'Reilly returned to Esteban's cabin they found Norine ahead of them. She was
kneeling beside the sick man's hammock, and through the doorway came the low, intimate murmur
of their voices. Rosa drew her husband away, whispering, happily:

"He will get well. God and that wonderful girl won't let him die."

XXX

THE OWL AND THE PUSSY-CAT

The journey to the coast was made by easy stages and Esteban stood it fairly well. The excitement
wore upon him, to be sure, and the jolting of his litter was trying, but Norine was always
at his side where he could see her, and Rosa joined in the tender care of him. Guides, horses,
and a tent for the sick man had been supplied, and over these O'Reilly exercised a jealous
watchfulness, ably seconded by Branch. For once, at least, the latter lent himself to useful
ends and shirked no duties. His wounded arm recovered miraculously and he exercised it freely;
he skirmished industriously for food and he enlivened the journey by a rare display of good
spirits. 

When we were slaves and had nothing except our muscles, there was no thought of separate-car laws.
When we were ignorant and powerless to think coherently, there were no efforts at our disfranchisement.
When we were poverty-stricken and satisfied if we might live in the alleys of our great American
cities, there was no thought of segregation, whether in the matter of our residences, or in
that of the employees of our much-heralded republican government.

With every increase in accomplishment, or worth, or demand for the better things of life, comes
the burden of wrongs, injustice, and rash discrimination. It would be idle here to attempt
to recount in detail the grievances we justly have against the government in city, state and
nation; to do so further than the purpose I have in view would be but to tell you what you
full well know. The Negro race needs a change of viewpoint; another leadership is an absolute
necessity, and I see no reason why men of our profession should not
attain it.

For years we have had in the ascendency the prophets of submission and silence, and we have been
taught to declare for peace when we knew there was no peace. No other element in our great
nation, except that of ourselves is content with things as they are, accepting without protest
every new injustice, in the vain hope that some day would bring about a change for the better.
We have lulled ourselves to sleep with this fatalism, and what is the result?
 This they skirted until the jungle became impassable and they were in danger of
losing themselves; they returned at dusk, having encountered no human being and having discovered
neither roads nor houses.

The other expedition reported slightly better successes; it had located a small plantation
some distance to the east, the owner of which had warned them against exploring farther, inasmuch
as a strong Spanish patrol, on the lookout for that American despatch- bearer from Nassau,
was operating in his neighborhood. It was these very troops, he announced, who had driven the
fisherman from his home; he was sure there were no boats anywhere within reach.

O'Reilly was in a quandary. He gravely doubted Esteban's ability to stand the rough return
journey, and when he spoke to Norine of turning back she was panic-stricken at the suggestion.

"No, no!" she cried, anxiously. "We MUST get him away. Oh, Johnnie, every day we lose by waiting
lessens his chances! His heart is set on going through and it would--kill him to go back."

"Then I guess we'll have to go through," he smiled.

For the first time in their acquaintance Norine lost control of herself.

"We simply MUST find a boat. All he needs is proper care, proper food, and medical attention.
Here we can get nothing. Why, the disappointment alone--" Her voice failed her, tears started
to her eyes, and she began to tremble wretchedly. "If he--If I--lose him I'll die, too," she
sobbed.

O'Reilly tried to comfort her and she bowed her head upon his shoulder.

"Promise that you won't go back," she implored him.

"Very well, if you'll consent to risk this miserable tub we found on the beach--"

"I'll risk anything--a raft, even."

"It is large enough to carry us if we can manage to make it hold water, but it won't be safe.
The weather is good at this season and it shouldn't take us long to run across to Andros if
we have luck. If we don't have luck--"

Norine dried her eyes. "What would you do if you were alone? Would you dare try it?"

He hesitated, then confessed, "I think I would, but--"

"Is there an even chance of our getting across?"

"Perhaps. It all depends upon the weather."

"Can't we--build a boat?"

He shook his head. "Even if we had lumber and tools it would take too long. Ten miles to the
east there are Spaniards. We must do one thing or the other quickly, before they learn we're here."

"Then let's go on. I'm sure Rosa will agree."

Rosa did agree. When her husband put the question fairly to her she showed by the pallor of
her cheeks and by the rekindling light of terror in her eyes how desperately she feared remaining
longer in this land of hate and persecution. "Don't turn back," she cried. "I'm not the girl
I was. I've endured so much here that-- I'm always in fear. Anything would be better than going
back."

When morning came O'Reilly made a closer examination of the abandoned boat. The result was
not encouraging, and when he told Leslie of his intention to make use of it the latter stared
at him in open amazement.

"Why, we'll all be drowned!" Branch declared.

"You can return to Cubitas if you wish."

"Yes, and fight some more! No, thank you! I've got a hunch that I'll be killed by the very
next gun I see."

"Then you'd better risk the sharks."

Jacket, who was conducting an independent examination of the craft, made an encouraging report.
"Ho! I'd go 'round the world in this boat," said he. "She's rotten, and you can stick your
finger through her, but fish have no fingers. When the water comes in we'll dip it out."

"Do you want to go with us?" Johnnie eyed the newspaper man curiously.

"I--Y--yes!" Branch gasped. "I'll go, but it's a shame to lose all of Rosa's diamonds."

O'Reilly and one of the guides rode away to the farmhouse discovered on the previous afternoon,
and returned in a few hours with all the tools they could find, together with a bucket of tar
and a coil of galvanized wire. Then work began.

The wire, cut into short pieces, served as nails and staples with which to draw together the
gaping seams. Old rags from the house and parts of the men's clothing supplied calking, upon
which the tar was smeared. While one man shaped mast and oars, another cut Esteban's shelter
tent into a sail, and fitted it. A stiff, sun- dried cowhide was wet, then stretched and nailed
to the gunwales at the bow, forming a sort of forward deck to shelter the sick man from the
sun and rain. Jacket climbed the near-by cocoa-palms and threw down a plentiful supply of nuts
for food and water on the voyage.

With so many hands the work went fast, and late that evening the crazy craft was launched.
It was necessary to handle her gingerly, and when she took the water she leaked abominably.
But during the night she swelled and in the morning it was possible to bail her out.

O'Reilly had to acknowledge himself but poorly pleased with the boat. Branch called her a coffin
and declared it was suicide to venture to sea in her, an opinion shared by the Cubans, but
the girls were enchanted. To them this fragile bark looked stout and worthy; they were in a
fever to be gone.

On the second afternoon the trade-wind died to a gentle zephyr, so the cocoanuts and other
food were quickly put aboard, a bed of bows was rigged beneath the rawhide forecastle and Esteban
was laid upon it. Then adieux were said and a start was made.

From the point of leaving it was perhaps five miles across the sound to the fringe of keys
which in this neighborhood bordered the old Bahama Channel with its unplumbed depths of blue
water. Here it was calm, so the run was soon made. The boat handled well enough, all things
considered; nevertheless, to O'Reilly, her navigator, it was an anxious hour. Not only was
he forced to keep a sharp lookout for blockading gunboats, but he feared he was doing wrong
in committing his precious freight to the uncertainties of the Atlantic. Even had he been alone,
with a crew of able sailors under him, this voyage would have daunted him, for it was without
doubt the wildest adventure in which he had ever participated. When he hinted at these fears
and put the matter before his companions for a final test, Branch refused to speak, but Esteban
and the girls were earnestly in favor of pushing on. Jacket, of course, loudly seconded them.

At sunset they entered a pass and ran between low mangrove banks. The tide was ebbing and it
hurried them through and out into the open sea, where they felt the lift of the mighty ocean
swell. Over these slow undulations the sailboat plowed, heading toward the empty northern horizon,
with the kindling Pole Star as a beacon. The sky was clear, the sea was gently roughened by
the night breeze, the constellations grew bright and appeared to hang low.

When the coast-line of Cuba had become a blur astern Rosa crept back and seated herself beside
her husband.

"I breathe freely for the first time since that day when Don Mario came to offer me marriage,"
she told him. "The past is beginning to seem like a bad, bad dream and I feel a great hope,
a great gladness. I am reborn, O'Rail-ye."

"A few hours more and we can all breathe easy." He smiled down at her. She laid her small palm
over his fingers which grasped the steering-oar, whereupon he cried with pretended sternness:
"Avast there! Don't distract the attention of the skipper or he'll sail his boat in circles.
Look out or he'll send you below."

Rosa persisted mutinously, so he punished her with a kiss planted fairly upon her pouting lips,
whereupon she nestled closer to him. "How much I love you," she whispered. "But I never can
tell you, for we are never alone. Was there ever such a courtship, such a marriage, and such
a wedding journey as ours?" Maybe we'll long for excitement."

"Not I," Rosa shivered. "To be safe, to have you all to myself where I can spoil you, that
will be excitement enough."

"We'll rent that little apartment I looked at, or one just like it."

"But, O'Rail-ye, we're rich."

"I--I'd forgotten that. Then let's pretend to be poor. Think how our neighbors would talk about
that pretty Mrs. O'Reilly on the fourth floor, and her magnificent jewels. They'd swear I was
a smuggler."

As the evening lengthened and the boat forged steadily ahead the two sat murmuring happily.
Forward, another bride and groom were similarly engaged. Branch and Jacket took turns bailing.

It proved to be a long, long night, for the boat, though roomy, was uncomfortable. O'Reilly
steered as straight a course as he could without compass, but toward morning he saw that the
sky was growing overcast and his apprehensions stirred anew. Daylight brought an increased
breeze which heeled the boat further. She made better speed, but she likewise took more water
through her seams and it became necessary to lend Leslie and Jacket a hand with the bailing.
The deep channel was far behind now, and they were on the shallow Bahama Banks; beneath them
they could glimpse beds of sponges, patches of coral, white bottom with occasional forests
of brilliant-hued sea fans. The horizon still remained vacant and the tip of Andros lay far
to the north.

Fortunately the haze was not thick enough to wholly obscure the sun and so O'Reilly was enabled
to hold his course. But he did not like the look of things.

By ten o'clock the sea was tumbling and the worm-eaten hulk was laboring. It became necessary
to shorten sail. Soon the bottom of the boat was awash and Esteban lay in a pool of brine.
Even when the girls helped to dip it out they could not lower its level. The wind freshened
steadily; all hands worked desperately, wet to the skin.

In time there came a spiteful drizzle which completely hid the sun and left no indication of
the course except the direction whence drove the rain.

No one spoke now. Even Esteban lay silent, shivering miserably upon his sodden bed. In obedience
to O'Reilly's command Jacket flung overboard all but a half-dozen of the remaining cocoanuts.
Rosa finally straightened her aching back and smiled at her husband. 

When I want to eat gooseberries and am not allowed to, the sacrifice
is mine not Mother's. I've written all this to Hella.

Fraulein Pruckl has written to me. The address on her letter to me was splendid, "Fraulein
Grete Lainer, Lyzealschulerin."

Of course Dora had to know better than anyone else, and said that in the higher classes from
the fourth upwards (because she is in the fourth) they write "Lyzeistin." She said: "Anyhow,
in the holidays, before a girl has attended the first class she's not a Lyzealschulerin at
all." Then Father chipped in, saying that we (I didn't begin it) really must stop this eternal
wrangling; he really could not stand it.

He's quite right, but what he said won't do any good, for Dora will go on just the same. Fraulein
Pruckl wrote that she was delighted that I had written. As soon as I have time she wants me
to write to her again. Great Scott, I've always time for her. I shall write to her again this
evening after supper, so as not to keep her waiting.

July 29th. I simply could not write yesterday. The Warths have arrived, and I had to spend
the whole day with Erna and Liesel, although it rained all day.

We had a ripping time. They know a lot of round games and we played for sweets. I won 47, and
I gave five of them to Dora. Robert is already more than a head taller
than we are, I mean than Liesel and me; I think he is fifteen.

He says Fraulein Grete and carried my cloak which Mother sent me because of the rain and he saw
me home after supper.
To-morrow is my birthday and everyone has been invited and Mother
has made strawberry cream and waffles. How spiffing.

July 30th. To-day
is my birthday.
O'Reilly's knees gave way, he clutched with strained and aching fingers at the rigging to support
himself, leaving Branch and Jacket to tell the surprising story of their presence here. Soon
there was hot food and coffee, dry beds and blankets for those who needed them.

Johnnie tucked his bride snugly into one of the hard berths, then stooped and kissed her. Rosa's
teeth were chattering, but she smiled happily.

"God's hand directed us," she said. "One only needs to pray long enough and strong enough and
He will hear."

 It was a month later. Quaint old Nassau lay dozing under an
afternoon sun. Its wide shell streets, its low houses, the beach
against which it crowded, were dazzling white, as if the town had
been washed clean, then spread out to bleach. Upon the horizon Jay
tumbled, foamy cloud masses, like froth blown thither from the
scene of the cleansing. A breeze caused the surface of the harbor
to dance and dimple merrily, the sound of laughter came from the
water-front where barefoot spongers and fishermen were busy with
their boats and gear. Robust negresses with deep bosoms and
rolling hips balanced baskets and trays upon their heads and stood
gossiping with one another or exchanging shouts with their men
across the water. There was noise here, but the town as a whole
was somnolent, peaceful. It sprawled beside the sea like a lazy
man lost in day dreams and lulled by the lapping surf and the hum
of insects.

Up from the beach came O'Reilly and his youthful alter ego, Jacket. They were clad in clean
white clothes; a month of rest had done them good. Jacket was no longer wizened; he was plump
and sleek and as full of mischief as a colt, while O'Reilly's leanness had disappeared and
he filled his garments as a man should. They had spent the day fishing on the reefs and now
bore home the choicest part of their catch.

They turned in through a picket gate and up a walk flanked by flower-beds and outlined between
rows of inverted glass bottles set side by side, the Bahama idea of neatness and beauty. At
the end of the walk stood a cottage with wide porches hidden beneath jasmine and honeysuckle
and morning-glory vines.

O'Reilly's eyes were shining with anticipation; he yodeled loudly. But there was no need for
him to advertise his return, for at the first click of the gate-latch a figure had started
from the fragrant bower and now came flying to meet him.

"Look, Rosa!" Jacket lifted the heavy string of fish. "We had stupendous luck." But Rosa was
in her husband's arms and neither she nor O'Reilly had eyes for anything but each other.

"You were gone for ages," pouted the bride.

"You missed me, eh?"

"See! I caught the biggest ones, as usual," Jacket boasted. "I'm a skilful fisherman and I
talk to my hook, but O'Reilly sits dreaming about somebody while the little crabs eat all his
bait." When this evoked no notice the boy shrugged in disgust and went on around the house,
muttering: "Caramba! You'd think they'd get sick of so much billing and cooing. But no! I have
to steal him away and take him swimming or fishing if I want a word alone with him. And the
others are just as bad--another pair of pigeons. It's like living in a dove-cote."

Rosa, too, had vastly changed. "Look!" Keith cried. "There's where she was lying!"

He pointed out on the floor of the square a deep groove, obviously
made by the hull of the NX-1.

Its length and jaggedness seemed to denote that the submarine had
tried to bore into the bed of the cavern itself.

Rosa danced upon her toes, and tugged at him. "But come quickly and see the surprise we have.
I've been wild for your return, so hurry." She led him swiftly up the steps, and there, standing
beside a chair, was Esteban Varona. "He dressed himself and walked out here alone. HE'S WELL!"

"Esteban! Really--"

The brother nodded decisively. "It's true. I rebelled at last. To- morrow I'll walk to the
gate and the next day we'll go fishing."

"Jove! How splendid!"

"Why, I'm as firm on my feet as a rock."

Norine emerged through one of the French windows and explained: "He took advantage of me while
I was gone for the mail, and now he's quite out of control. Here's a letter from Leslie, by
the way. He's home and has a position and hopes we'll follow soon. There's one bit of news;
he says the talk of intervention increases and he may have to return to Cuba as a war correspondent. At
the close of the Civil War we were without schools, without men of
letters, without men in the various professions and lucrative avocations
of life.

To-day, we have 200 universities, colleges, and schools of lower grade supported by the race.
 And then--we'll all go back to our rainbow's end and dig for
that pot of gold."

Esteban turned adoring eyes upon the speaker; he took her hand in his. "I've found my rainbow's
end," said he.

"And I've found mine," O'Reilly asserted. "I've gained your father's treasure, and more--I've
found the prize of all the Indies." With his arm about Rosa he drew her into the house.

Esteban lowered himself into his chair and Norine rested herself upon its arm. He lay back
with eyes closed. From the regions at the rear came the voice of Jacket. The boy was in a declamatory
mood. He had gathered an audience, as was his daily custom, and was addressing them in English:

"I skilled more'n a dozen Spaniards at Pino Bravo. It was my day. By rights I should have been
made a general, but--"

THE END

