This e-book has dialect and unusual spelling.             |
    |                                                           |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *

SOLDIER STORIES

SOLDIER STORIES

BY

RUDYARD KIPLING

AUTHOR OF "PLAIN TALES FROM THE HILLS," "UNDER THE DEODARS," "THE PHANTOM RICKSHAW," "WEE WILLIE
WINKIE," ETC., ETC.

WITH NUMEROUS ILLUSTRATIONS

NEW YORK THE MACMILLAN COMPANY LONDON: MACMILLAN & CO., LTD. 1896

All rights reserved

COPYRIGHT, 1896, BY THE MACMILLAN COMPANY.

Norwood Press J.S. Cushing & Co.--Berwick & Smith Norwood Mass. U.S.A.

CONTENTS

                                                             PAGE

WITH THE MAIN GUARD                                             1

THE DRUMS OF THE FORE AND AFT                                  25

THE MAN WHO WAS                                                78

THE COURTING OF DINAH SHADD                                   101

THE INCARNATION OF KRISHNA MULVANEY                           139

THE TAKING OF LUNGTUNGPEN                                     182

THE MADNESS OF PRIVATE ORTHERIS                               191

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

                                                     TO FACE PAGE

'PUT YER 'EAD BETWEEN YOUR LEGS. IT'LL GO ORF IN A MINUTE'                                
2

'HE RAN FORWARD WID THE HAYMAKERS' LIFT ON HIS BAY'NIT'                                   
12

HE PICKED HER UP IN THE GROWING LIGHT, AND SET HER ON HIS SHOULDER                        
23

'HEY! WHAT?

                 Hans Breitmann's Ballads.

'Mary, Mother av Mercy, fwhat the divil possist us to take an' kape this melancolious counthry?
Answer me that, Sorr.'

It was Mulvaney who was speaking. The time was one o'clock of a stifling June night, and the
place was the main gate of Fort Amara, most desolate and least desirable of all fortresses
in India. What I was doing there at that hour is a question which only concerns M'Grath the
Sergeant of the Guard, and the men on the gate.

'Slape,' said Mulvaney, 'is a shuparfluous necessity. This gyard'll shtay lively till relieved.'
He himself was stripped to the waist; Learoyd on the next bedstead was dripping from the skinful
of water which Ortheris, clad only in white trousers, had just sluiced over his shoulders;
and a fourth private was muttering uneasily as he dozed open-mouthed in the glare of the great
guard-lantern. The heat under the bricked archway was terrifying.

'The worrst night that iver I remimber. Eyah! Is all Hell loose this tide?' said Mulvaney.
A puff of burning wind lashed through the wicket-gate like a wave of the sea, and Ortheris swore.

'Are ye more heasy, Jock?' he said to Learoyd. 'Put yer 'ead between your legs. It'll go orf
in a minute.'

'Ah don't care. Ah would not care, but ma heart is plaayin' tivvy-tivvy on ma ribs. Let me
die! Oh, leave me die!' groaned the huge Yorkshireman, who was feeling the heat acutely, being
of fleshly build.

The sleeper under the lantern roused for a moment and raised himself on his elbow.--'Die and
be damned then!' he said. 'I'm damned and I can't die!'

'Who's that?' I whispered, for the voice was new to me.

'Gentleman born,' said Mulvaney; 'Corp'ril wan year, Sargint nex'. Red-hot on his C'mission,
but dhrinks like a fish. He'll be gone before the cowld weather's here. So!'

He slipped his boot, and with the naked toe just touched the trigger of his Martini. Ortheris
misunderstood the movement, and the next instant the Irishman's rifle was dashed aside, while
Ortheris stood before him, his eyes blazing with reproof.

'You!' said Ortheris. 'My Gawd, you! If it was you, wot would we do?'

'Kape quiet, little man,' said Mulvaney, putting him aside, but very gently; ''tis not me,
nor will ut be me whoile Dinah Shadd's here. I was but showin' something.'

Learoyd, bowed on his bedstead, groaned, and the gentleman-ranker sighed in his sleep. Ortheris
took Mulvaney's tendered pouch, and we three smoked gravely for a space while the dust-devils
danced on the glacis and scoured the red-hot plain.

'Pop?' said Ortheris, wiping his forehead.

'Don't tantalise wid talkin' av dhrink, or I'll shtuff you into your own breech-block an'--fire
you off!' grunted Mulvaney.

Ortheris chuckled, and from a niche in the veranda produced six bottles of gingerade.

'Where did ye get ut, ye Machiavel?' said Mulvaney. ''Tis no bazar pop.'

''Ow do Hi know wot the Orf'cers drink?' answered Ortheris. 'Arst the mess-man.'

'Ye'll have a Disthrict Coort-Martial settin' on ye yet, me son,' said Mulvaney, 'but'--he
opened a bottle--'I will not report ye this time. Fwhat's in the mess-kid is mint for the belly,
as they say, 'specially whin that mate is dhrink. Here's luck! A bloody war or a--no, we've
got the sickly season. War, thin!'--he waved the innocent 'pop' to the four quarters of heaven.
'Bloody war! North, East, South, an' West! Jock, ye quackin' hayrick, come an' dhrink.'

But Learoyd, half mad with the fear of death presaged in the swelling veins of his neck, was
begging his Maker to strike him dead, and fighting for more air between his prayers. A second
time Ortheris drenched the quivering body with water, and the giant revived.

'An' Ah divn't see thot a mon is i' fettle for gooin' on to live; an' Ah divn't see thot there
is owt for t' livin' for. Hear now, lads! Ah'm tired--tired. There's nobbut watter i' ma bones.
Let me die!'

The hollow of the arch gave back Learoyd's broken whisper in a bass boom. Mulvaney looked at
me hopelessly, but I remembered how the madness of despair had once fallen upon Ortheris, that
weary, weary afternoon in the banks of the Khemi River, and how it had been exorcised by the
skilful magician Mulvaney.

'Talk, Terence!' I said, 'or we shall have Learoyd slinging loose, and he'll be worse than
Ortheris was. Talk! He'll answer to your voice.'

Almost before Ortheris had deftly thrown all the rifles of the guard on Mulvaney's bedstead,
the Irishman's voice was uplifted as that of one in the middle of a story, and, turning to
me, he said:--

'In barricks or out of it, as you say, Sorr, an Oirish rig'mint is the divil an' more. 'Tis
only fit for a young man wid eddicated fisteses. Oh the crame av disruption is an Oirish rig'mint,
an' rippin', tearin', ragin' scattherers in the field av war! My first rig'mint was Oirish--Faynians
an' rebils to the heart av their marrow was they, an' so they fought for the Widdy betther
than most, bein' contrairy--Oirish. They was the Black Tyrone. You've heard av thim, Sorr?'

Heard of them! I knew the Black Tyrone for the choicest collection of unmitigated blackguards,
dog-stealers, robbers of hen-roosts, assaulters of innocent citizens, and recklessly daring
heroes in the Army List. Half Europe and half Asia has had cause to know the Black Tyrone--good
luck be with their tattered Colours as Glory has ever been!

'They was hot pickils an' ginger! I cut a man's head tu deep wid my belt in the days av my
youth, an', afther some circumstances which I will oblitherate, I came to the Ould Rig'mint,
bearin' the character av a man wid hands an' feet. But, as I was goin' to tell you, I fell
acrost the Black Tyrone agin wan day whin we wanted thim powerful bad. Orth'ris, me son, fwhat
was the name av that place where they sint wan comp'ny av us an' wan av the Tyrone roun' a
hill an' down again, all for to tache the Paythans something they'd niver learned before? Afther
Ghuzni 'twas.'

'Don't know what the bloomin' Paythans called it. We called it Silver's Theayter. You know
that, sure!'

'Silver's Theatre--so 'twas. A gut betune two hills, as black as a bucket, an' as thin as a
girl's waist. There was over-many Paythans for our convaynience in the gut, an' begad they
called thimselves a Reserve--bein' impident by natur'! Our Scotchies an' lashins av Gurkys
was poundin' into some Paythan rig'ments, I think 'twas. Scotchies and Gurkys are twins bekaze
they're so onlike, an' they get dhrunk together when God plazes. As I was sayin', they sint
wan comp'ny av the Ould an' wan av the Tyrone to double up the hill an' clane out the Paythan
Reserve. Orf'cers was scarce in thim days, fwhat wid dysintry an' not takin' care av thimselves,
an' we was sint out wid only wan orf'cer for the comp'ny; but he was a Man that had his feet
beneath him, an' all his teeth in their sockuts.'

'Who was he?' I asked.

'Captain O'Neil--Old Crook--Cruikna-bulleen--him that I tould ye that tale av whin he was in
Burma.[1] Hah! He was a Man. The Tyrone tuk a little orf'cer bhoy, but divil a bit was he in
command, as I'll dimonstrate presintly. We an' they came over the brow av the hill, wan on
each side av the gut, an' there was that ondacint Reserve waitin' down below like rats in a pit.

'"Howld on, men," sez Crook, who tuk a mother's care av us always. "Rowl some rocks on thim
by way av visitin'-kyards." We hadn't rowled more than twinty bowlders, an' the Paythans was
beginnin' to swear tremenjus, whin the little orf'cer bhoy av the Tyrone shqueaks out acrost
the valley:--"Fwhat the devil an' all are you doin', shpoilin' the fun for my men? Do ye not
see they'll stand?"

'"Faith, that's a rare pluckt wan!" sez Crook. "Niver mind the rocks, men. Come along down
an' tak tay wid thim!"

'"There's damned little sugar in ut!" sez my rear-rank man; but Crook heard.

'"Have ye not all got spoons?" he sez, laughin', an' down we wint as fast as we cud. Learoyd
bein' sick at the Base, he, av coorse, was not there.'

'Thot's a lie!' said Learoyd, dragging his bedstead nearer. 'Ah gotten thot theer, an' you
know it, Mulvaney.' He threw up his arms, and from the right arm-pit ran, diagonally through
the fell of his chest, a thin white line terminating near the fourth left rib.

'My mind's goin',' said Mulvaney, the unabashed. 'Ye were there. Fwhat was I thinkin' of? 'Twas
another man, av coorse. Well, you'll remimber thin, Jock, how we an' the Tyrone met wid a bang
at the bottom an' got jammed past all movin' among the Paythans?'

'Ow! It was a tight 'ole. I was squeezed till I thought I'd bloomin' well bust,' said Ortheris,
rubbing his stomach meditatively.

''Twas no place for a little man, but wan little man'--Mulvaney put his hand on Ortheris's
shoulder--'saved the life av me. There we shtuck, for divil a bit did the Paythans flinch,
an' divil a bit dare we; our business bein' to clear 'em out. An' the most exthryordinar' thing
av all was that we an' they just rushed into each other's arrums, an' there was no firing for
a long time. Nothin' but knife an' bay'nit when we cud get our hands free: an' that was not
often. We was breast-on to thim, an' the Tyrone was yelpin' behind av us in a way I didn't
see the lean av at first. But I knew later, an' so did the Paythans.

'"Knee to knee!" sings out Crook, wid a laugh whin the rush av our comin' into the gut shtopped,
an' he was huggin' a hairy great Paythan, neither bein' able to do anything to the other, tho'
both was wishful.

'"Breast to breast!" he sez, as the Tyrone was pushin' us forward closer an' closer.

'"An' hand over back!" sez a Sargint that was behin'. I saw a sword lick out past Crook's ear,
an' the Paythan was tuck in the apple av his throat like a pig at Dromeen Fair.

'"Thank ye, Brother Inner Guard," sez Crook, cool as a cucumber widout salt. "I wanted that
room." An' he wint forward by the thickness av a man's body, havin' turned the Paythan undher
him. The man bit the heel off Crook's boot in his death-bite.

'"Push, men!" sez Crook. "Push, ye paper-backed beggars!" he sez. "Am I to pull ye through?"
So we pushed, an' we kicked, an' we swung, an' we swore, an' the grass bein' slippery our heels
wouldn't bite, an' God help the front-rank man that wint down that day!'

''Ave you ever bin in the Pit hentrance o' the Vic. on a thick night?' interrupted Ortheris.
'It was worse nor that, for they was goin' one way, an' we wouldn't 'ave it. Leastaways, I
'adn't much to say.'

'Faith, me son, ye said ut, thin. I kep' the little man betune my knees as long as I cud, but
he was pokin' roun' wid his bay'nit, blindin' and stiffin' feroshus. The devil of a man is
Orth'ris in a ruction--aren't ye?' said Mulvaney.

'Don't make game!' said the Cockney. 'I knowed I wasn't no good then, but I guv 'em compot
from the lef' flank when we opened out. No!' he said, bringing down his hand with a thump on
the bedstead, 'a bay'nit ain't no good to a little man--might as well 'ave a bloomin' fishin'-rod!
I 'ate a clawin', maulin' mess, but gimme a breech that's wore out a bit, an' hamminition one
year in store, to let the powder kiss the bullet, an' put me somewheres where I ain't trod
on by 'ulkin swine like you, an' s'elp me Gawd, I could bowl you over five times outer seven
at height 'undred. Would yer try, you lumberin' Hirishman?'

'No, ye wasp. I've seen ye do ut. I say there's nothin' better than the bay'nit, wid a long
reach, a double twist av ye can, an' a slow recover.'

'Dom the bay'nit,' said Learoyd, who had been listening intently. 'Look a-here!' He picked
up a rifle an inch below the foresight with an underhanded action, and used it exactly as a
man would use a dagger.

'Sitha,' said he softly, 'thot's better than owt, for a mon can bash t' faace wi' thot, an',
if he divn't, he can breeak t' forearm o' t' gaard. 'Tis not i' t' books, though. Gie me t' butt.'

'Each does ut his own way, like makin' love,' said Mulvaney quietly; 'the butt or the bay'nit
or the bullet accordin' to the natur' av the man. Well, as I was sayin', we shtuck there breathin'
in each other's faces an' swearin' powerful; Orth'ris cursin' the mother that bore him bekaze
he was not three inches taller.

'Prisintly he sez:--"Duck, ye lump, an' I can get at a man over your shouldher!"

'"You'll blow me head off," I sez, throwin' my arm clear; "go through under my arm-pit, ye
blood-thirsty little scutt," sez I, "but don't shtick me or I'll wring your ears round."

'Fwhat was ut ye gave the Paythan man forninst me, him that cut at me whin I cudn't move hand
or foot? Hot or cowld was ut?'

'Cold,' said Ortheris, 'up an' under the rib-jint. 'E come down flat. Best for you 'e did.'

'Thrue, my son! This jam thing that I'm talkin' about lasted for five minutes good, an' thin
we got our arms clear an' wint in. I misremimber exactly fwhat I did, but I didn't want Dinah
to be a widdy at the Depot. Thin, after some promishkuous hackin' we shtuck again, an' the
Tyrone behin' was callin' us dogs an' cowards an' all manner av names; we barrin' their way.

'"Fwhat ails the Tyrone?" thinks I; "they've the makin's av a most convanient fight here."

'A man behind me sez beseechful an' in a whisper:--"Let me get at thim! For the love av Mary
give me room beside ye, ye tall man!"

'"An' who are you that's so anxious to be kilt?" sez I, widout turnin' my head, for the long
knives was dancin' in front like the sun on Donegal Bay when ut's rough.

'"We've seen our dead," he sez, squeezin' into me; "our dead that was men two days gone! An'
me that was his cousin by blood could not bring Tim Coulan off? Let me get on," he sez, "let
me get to thim or I'll run ye through the back!"

'"My troth," thinks I, "if the Tyrone have seen their dead, God help the Paythans this day!"
An' thin I knew why the Oirish was ragin' behind us as they was.

'I gave room to the man, an' he ran forward wid the Haymakers' Lift on his bay'nit an' swung
a Paythan clear off his feet by the belly-band av the brute, an' the iron bruk at the lockin'-ring.

'"Tim Coulan'll slape easy to-night," sez he wid a grin; an' the next minut his head was in
two halves and he wint down grinnin' by sections.

'The Tyrone was pushin' an' pushin' in, an' our men were swearin' at thim, an' Crook was workin'
away in front av us all, his sword-arm swingin' like a pump-handle; an' his revolver spittin'
like a cat. But the strange thing av ut was the quiet that lay upon. 'Twas like a fight in
a drame--except for thim that was dead.

'Whin I gave room to the Oirishman I was expinded an' forlorn in my inside. 'Tis a way I have,
savin' your presince, Sorr, in action. "Let me out, bhoys," sez I, backin' in among thim. "I'm
goin' to be onwell!" Faith they gave me room at the wurrd, though they would not ha' given
room for all Hell wid the chill off. When I got clear, I was, savin' your presince, Sorr, outragis
sick bekaze I had dhrunk heavy that day.

'Well an' far out av harm was a Sargint av the Tyrone sittin' on the little orf'cer bhoy who
had stopped Crook from rowlin' the rocks. Oh, he was a beautiful bhoy, an' the long black curses
was sliding out av his innocint mouth like morning-jew from a rose!

'"Fwhat have you got there?" sez I to the Sargint.

'"Wan av Her Majesty's bantams wid his spurs up," sez he. "He's goin' to Coort-Martial me."

'"Let me go!" sez the little orf'cer bhoy. "Let me go and command my men!" manin' thereby the
Black Tyrone which was beyond any command--ay, even av they had made the Divil a Field-Orf'cer.

'"His father howlds my mother's cow-feed in Clonmel," sez the man that was sittin' on him.
"Will I go back to his mother an' tell her that I've let him throw himself away? Lie still,
ye little pinch av dynamite, an' Coort-Martial me aftherwards."

'"Good," sez I; "'tis the likes av him makes the likes av the Commandher-in-Chief, but we must
presarve thim. Fwhat d'you want to do, Sorr?" sez I, very politeful.

'"Kill the beggars--kill the beggars!" he shqueaks, his big blue eyes brimmin' wid tears.

'"An' how'll ye do that?" sez I. "You've shquibbed off your revolver like a child wid a cracker;
you can make no play wid that fine large sword av yours; an' your hand's shakin' like an asp
on a leaf. Lie still and grow," sez I.

'"Get back to your comp'ny," sez he; "you're insolint!"

'"All in good time," sez I, "but I'll have a dhrink first."

'Just thin Crook comes up, blue an' white all over where he wasn't red.

'"Wather!" sez he; "I'm dead wid drouth! Oh, but it's a gran' day!"

'He dhrank half a skinful, and the rest he tilts into his chest, an' it fair hissed on the
hairy hide av him. He sees the little orf'cer bhoy undher the Sargint.

'"Fwhat's yonder?" sez he.

'"Mutiny, Sorr," sez the Sargint, an' the orf'cer bhoy begins pleadin' pitiful to Crook to
be let go, but divil a bit wud Crook budge.

'"Kape him there," he sez, "'tis no child's work this day. By the same token," sez he, "I'll
confishcate that iligant nickel-plated scent-sprinkler av yours, for my own has been vomitin'
dishgraceful!"

'The fork av his hand was black wid the back-spit av the machine. So he tuk the orf'cer bhoy's
revolver. Ye may look, Sorr, but, by my faith, there's a dale more done in the field than iver
gets into Field Ordhers!

'"Come on, Mulvaney," sez Crook; "is this a Coort-Martial?" The two av us wint back together
into the mess an' the Paythans were still standin' up. They was not too impart'nint though,
for the Tyrone was callin' wan to another to remimber Tim Coulan.

'Crook stopped outside av the strife an' looked anxious, his eyes rowlin' roun'.

'"Fwhat is ut, Sorr?" sez I; "can I get ye anything?"

'"Where's a bugler?" sez he.

'I wint into the crowd--our men was dhrawin' breath behin' the Tyrone who was fightin' like
sowls in tormint--an' prisintly I came acrost little Frehan, our bugler bhoy, pokin' roun'
among the best wid a rifle an' bay'nit.

'"Is amusin' yoursilf fwhat you're paid for, ye limb?" sez I, catchin' him by the scruff. "Come
out av that an' attind to your duty," I sez; but the bhoy was not pleased.

'"I've got wan," sez he, grinnin', "big as you, Mulvaney, an' fair half as ugly. Let me go
get another."

'I was dishpleased at the personability av that remark, so I tucks him under my arm an' carries
him to Crook who was watchin' how the fight wint. Crook cuffs him till the bhoy cries, an'
thin sez nothin' for a whoile.

'The Paythans began to flicker onaisy, an' our men roared. "Opin ordher! Double!" sez Crook.
"Blow, child, blow for the honour av the British Arrmy!"

'That bhoy blew like a typhoon, an' the Tyrone an' we opined out as the Paythans broke, an'
I saw that fwhat had gone before wud be kissin' an' huggin' to fwhat was to come. We'd dhruv
them into a broad part av the gut whin they gave, an' thin we opined out an' fair danced down
the valley, dhrivin' thim before us. Oh, 'twas lovely, an' stiddy, too! There was the Sargints
on the flanks av what was left av us, kapin' touch, an' the fire was runnin' from flank to
flank, an' the Paythans was dhroppin'. We opined out wid the widenin' av the valley, an' whin
the valley narrowed we closed again like the shticks on a lady's fan, an' at the far ind av
the gut where they thried to stand, we fair blew them off their feet, for we had expinded very
little ammunition by reason av the knife work.'

'Hi used thirty rounds goin' down that valley,' said Ortheris, 'an' it was gentleman's work.
Might 'a' done it in a white 'andkerchief an' pink silk stockin's, that part. Hi was on in
that piece.'

'You could ha' heard the Tyrone yellin' a mile away,' said Mulvaney, 'an' 'twas all their Sargints
cud do to get thim off. They was mad--mad--mad! Crook sits down in the quiet that fell when
we had gone down the valley, an' covers his face wid his hands. Prisintly we all came back
again accordin' to our natures and disposishins, for they, mark you, show through the hide
av a man in that hour.

'"Bhoys! bhoys!" sez Crook to himself. "I misdoubt we could ha' engaged at long range an' saved
betther men than me." He looked at our dead an' said no more.

'"Captain dear," sez a man av the Tyrone, comin' up wid his mouth bigger than iver his mother
kissed ut, spittin' blood like a whale; "Captain dear," sez he, "if wan or two in the shtalls
have been discommoded, the gallery have enjoyed the performinces av a Roshus."

'Thin I knew that man for the Dublin dock-rat he was--wan av the bhoys that made the lessee
av Silver's Theatre gray before his time wid tearin' out the bowils av the benches an' t'rowin'
thim into the pit. So I passed the wurrud that I knew when I was in the Tyrone an' we lay in
Dublin. "I don't know who 'twas," I whispers, "an' I don't care, but anyways I'll knock the
face av you, Tim Kelly."

'"Eyah!" sez the man, "was you there too? We'll call ut Silver's Theatre." Half the Tyrone,
knowin' the ould place, tuk ut up: so we called ut Silver's Theatre.

'The little orf'cer bhoy av the Tyrone was thremblin' an' cryin'. He had no heart for the Coort-Martials
that he talked so big upon. "Ye'll do well later," sez Crook very quiet, "for not bein' allowed
to kill yourself for amusemint."

'"I'm a dishgraced man!" sez the little orf'cer bhoy.

'"Put me undher arrest, Sorr, if you will, but, by my sowl, I'd do ut again sooner than face
your mother wid you dead," sez the Sargint that had sat on his head, standin' to attention
an' salutin'. But the young wan only cried as tho' his little heart was breakin'.

'Thin another man av the Tyrone came up, wid the fog av fightin' on him.'

'The what, Mulvaney?'

'Fog av fightin'. You know, Sorr, that, like makin' love, ut takes each man diff'rint. Now
I can't help bein' powerful sick whin I'm in action. Orth'ris, here, niver stops swearin' from
ind to ind, an' the only time that Learoyd opins his mouth to sing is whin he is messin' wid
other people's heads; for he's a dhirty fighter is Jock. Recruities sometime cry, an' sometime
they don't know fwhat they do, an' sometime they are all for cuttin' throats an' such-like
dirtiness; but some men get heavy-dead-dhrunk on the fightin'. This man was. He was staggerin',
an' his eyes were half-shut, an' we cud hear him dhraw breath twinty yards away. He sees the
little orf'cer bhoy, an' comes up, talkin' thick an' drowsy to himsilf. "Blood the young whelp!"
he sez; "blood the young whelp;" an' wid that he threw up his arms, shpun roun', an' dropped
at our feet, dead as a Paythan, an' there was niver sign or scratch on him. They said 'twas
his heart was rotten, but oh, 'twas a quare thing to see!

'Thin we went to bury our dead, for we wud not lave thim to the Paythans, an' in movin' among
the haythen we nearly lost that little orf'cer bhoy. He was for givin' wan divil wather and
layin' him aisy against a rock. "Be careful, Sorr," sez I; "a wounded Paythan's worse than
a live wan." My troth, before the words was out of my mouth, the man on the ground fires at
the orf'cer bhoy lanin' over him, an' I saw the helmit fly. I dropped the butt on the face
av the man an' tuk his pistol. The little orf'cer bhoy turned very white, for the hair av half
his head was singed away.

'"I tould you so, Sorr," sez I; an', afther that, when he wanted to help a Paythan I stud wid
the muzzle contagious to the ear. They dare not do anythin' but curse. The Tyrone was growlin'
like dogs over a bone that has been taken away too soon, for they had seen their dead an' they
wanted to kill ivry sowl on the ground. Crook tould thim that he'd blow the hide off any man
that misconducted himself; but, seeing that ut was the first time the Tyrone had iver seen
their dead, I do not wondher they were on the sharp. 'Tis a shameful sight! Whin I first saw
ut I wud niver ha' given quarter to any man not of the Khaibar--no, nor woman either, for the
women used to come out afther dhark--Auggrh!

'Well, evenshually we buried our dead an' tuk away our wounded, an' come over the brow av the
hills to see the Scotchies an' the Gurkys taking tay with the Paythans in bucketsfuls. We were
a gang av dissolute ruffians, for the blood had caked the dust, an' the sweat had cut the cake,
an' our bay'nits was hangin' like butchers' steels betune ur legs, an' most av us were marked
one way or another.

'A Staff Orf'cer man, clean as a new rifle, rides up an' sez: "What damned scarecrows are you?"

'"A comp'ny av Her Majesty's Black Tyrone an' wan av the Ould Rig'mint," sez Crook very quiet,
givin' our visitors the flure as 'twas.

'"Oh!" sez the Staff Orf'cer; "did you dislodge that Reserve?"

'"No!" sez Crook, an' the Tyrone laughed.

'"Thin fwhat the divil have ye done?"

'"Disthroyed ut," sez Crook, an' he took us on, but not before Toomey that was in the Tyrone
sez aloud, his voice somewhere in his stummick: "Fwhat in the name av misfortune does this
parrit widout a tail mane by shtoppin' the road av his betthers?"

'The Staff Orf'cer wint blue, an' Toomey makes him pink by changin' to the voice av a minowderin'
woman an' sayin': "Come an' kiss me, Major dear, for me husband's at the wars an' I'm all alone
at the Depot."

'The Staff Orf'cer wint away, an' I cud see Crook's shoulthers shakin'.

'His Corp'ril checks Toomey. "Lave me alone," sez Toomey, widout a wink. "I was his bâtman
before he was married an' he knows fwhat I mane, av you don't. There's nothin' like livin'
in the hoight av society." D'you remimber that, Orth'ris!'

'Hi do. Toomey, 'e died in 'orspital, next week it was, 'cause I bought 'arf his kit; an' I
remember after that----'

'GUARRD, TURN OUT!'

The Relief had come; it was four o'clock. 'I'll catch a kyart for you, Sorr,' said Mulvaney,
diving hastily into his accoutrements. 'Come up to the top av the Fort an' we'll pershue our
invistigations into M'Grath's shtable.' The relieved guard strolled round the main bastion
on its way to the swimming-bath, and Learoyd grew almost talkative. Ortheris looked into the
Fort ditch and across the plain. 'Ho! it's weary waitin' for Ma-ary!' he hummed; 'but I'd like
to kill some more bloomin' Paythans before my time's up. War! Bloody war! North, East, South,
and West.'

'Amen,' said Learoyd slowly.

'Fwhat's here?' said Mulvaney, checking at a blur of white by the foot of the old sentry-box.
He stooped and touched it. 'It's Norah--Norah M'Taggart! Why, Nonie darlin', fwhat are ye doin'
out av your mother's bed at this time?'

The two-year-old child of Sergeant M'Taggart must have wandered for a breath of cool air to
the very verge of the parapet of the Fort ditch. Her tiny night-shift was gathered into a wisp
round her neck and she moaned in her sleep. 'See there!' said Mulvaney; 'poor lamb! Look at
the heat-rash on the innocint skin av her. 'Tis hard--crool hard even for us. Fwhat must it
be for these? Wake up, Nonie, your mother will be woild about you. Begad, the child might ha'
fallen into the ditch!'

He picked her up in the growing light, and set her on his shoulder, and her fair curls touched
the grizzled stubble of his temples. Ortheris and Learoyd followed snapping their fingers,
while Norah smiled at them a sleepy smile. Then carolled Mulvaney, clear as a lark, dancing
the baby on his arm:--

    'If any young man should marry you,
      Say nothin' about the joke;
    That iver ye slep' in a sinthry-box,
      Wrapped up in a soldier's cloak.

'Though, on my sowl, Nonie,' he said gravely, 'there was not much cloak about you. Niver mind,
you won't dhress like this ten years to come. Kiss your friends an' run along to your mother.'

Nonie, set down close to the Married Quarters, nodded with the quiet obedience of the soldier's
child, but, ere she pattered off over the flagged path, held up her lips to be kissed by the
Three Musketeers. Ortheris wiped his mouth with the back of his hand and swore sentimentally;
Learoyd turned pink; and the two walked away together. The Yorkshireman lifted up his voice
and gave in thunder the chorus of The Sentry Box, while Ortheris piped at his side.

''Bin to a bloomin' sing-song, you two?' said the Artilleryman, who was taking his cartridge
down to the Morning Gun. 'You're over merry for these dashed days.'

    'I bid ye take care o' the brat, said he,
      For it comes of a noble race,'

Learoyd bellowed. The voices died out in the swimming-bath.

'Oh, Terence!' I said, dropping into Mulvaney's speech, when we were alone, 'it's you that
have the Tongue!'

He looked at me wearily; his eyes were sunk in his head, and his face was drawn and white.
'Eyah!' said he; 'I've blandandhered thim through the night somehow, but can thim that helps
others help thimselves? Answer me that, Sorr!'

And over the bastions of Fort Amara broke the pitiless day.

FOOTNOTES:

[1]

    Now first of the foemen of Boh Da Thone
    Was Captain O'Neil of the Black Tyrone.
            The Ballad of Boh Da Thone.

THE DRUMS OF THE FORE AND AFT

In the Army List they still stand as 'The Fore and Fit Princess Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen-Auspach's
Merthyr-Tydfilshire Own Royal Loyal Light Infantry, Regimental District 329A,' but the Army
through all its barracks and canteens knows them now as the 'Fore and Aft.' They may in time
do something that shall make their new title honourable, but at present they are bitterly ashamed,
and the man who calls them 'Fore and Aft' does so at the risk of the head which is on his shoulders.

Two words breathed into the stables of a certain Cavalry Regiment will bring the men out into
the streets with belts and mops and bad language; but a whisper of 'Fore and Aft' will bring
out this regiment with rifles.

Their one excuse is that they came again and did their best to finish the job in style. But
for a time all their world knows that they were openly beaten, whipped, dumb-cowed, shaking,
and afraid. The men know it; their officers know it; the Horse Guards know it, and when the
next war comes the enemy will know it also. There are two or three regiments of the Line that
have a black mark against their names which they will then wipe out; and it will be excessively
inconvenient for the troops upon whom they do their wiping.

The courage of the British soldier is officially supposed to be above proof, and, as a general
rule, it is so. The exceptions are decently shovelled out of sight, only to be referred to
in the freshest of unguarded talk that occasionally swamps a Mess-table at midnight. Then one
hears strange and horrible stories of men not following their officers, of orders being given
by those who had no right to give them, and of disgrace that, but for the standing luck of
the British Army, might have ended in brilliant disaster. These are unpleasant stories to listen
to, and the Messes tell them under their breath, sitting by the big wood fires; and the young
officer bows his head and thinks to himself, please God, his men shall never behave unhandily.

The British soldier is not altogether to be blamed for occasional lapses; but this verdict
he should not know. A moderately intelligent General will waste six months in mastering the
craft of the particular war that he may be waging; a Colonel may utterly misunderstand the
capacity of his regiment for three months after it has taken the field; and even a Company
Commander may err and be deceived as to the temper and temperament of his own handful: wherefore
the soldier, and the soldier of to-day more particularly, should not be blamed for falling
back. He should be shot or hanged afterwards--to encourage the others; but he should not be
vilified in newspapers, for that is want of tact and waste of space.

He has, let us say, been in the service of the Empress for, perhaps, four years. He will leave
in another two years. He has no inherited morals, and four years are not sufficient to drive
toughness into his fibre, or to teach him how holy a thing is his Regiment. He wants to drink,
he wants to enjoy himself--in India he wants to save money--and he does not in the least like
getting hurt. He has received just sufficient education to make him understand half the purport
of the orders he receives, and to speculate on the nature of clean, incised, and shattering
wounds. Thus, if he is told to deploy under fire preparatory to an attack, he knows that he
runs a very great risk of being killed while he is deploying, and suspects that he is being
thrown away to gain ten minutes' time. He may either deploy with desperate swiftness, or he
may shuffle, or bunch, or break, according to the discipline under which he has lain for four
years.

Armed with imperfect knowledge, cursed with the rudiments of an imagination, hampered by the
intense selfishness of the lower classes, and unsupported by any regimental associations, this
young man is suddenly introduced to an enemy who in eastern lands is always ugly, generally
tall and hairy, and frequently noisy. If he looks to the right and the left and sees old soldiers--men
of twelve years' service, who, he knows, know what they are about--taking a charge, rush, or
demonstration without embarrassment, he is consoled and applies his shoulder to the butt of
his rifle with a stout heart. His peace is the greater if he hears a senior, who has taught
him his soldiering and broken his head on occasion, whispering: 'They'll shout and carry on
like this for five minutes. Then they'll rush in, and then we've got 'em by the short hairs!'

But, on the other hand, if he sees only men of his own term of service, turning white and playing
with their triggers and saying: 'What the Hell's up now?' while the Company Commanders are
sweating into their sword-hilts and shouting: 'Front-rank, fix bayonets. Steady there--steady!
Sight for three hundred--no, for five! Lie down, all! Steady! Front-rank kneel!' and so forth,
he becomes unhappy; and grows acutely miserable when he hears a comrade turn over with the
rattle of fire-irons falling into the fender, and the grunt of a pole-axed ox. If he can be
moved about a little and allowed to watch the effect of his own fire on the enemy he feels
merrier, and may be then worked up to the blind passion of fighting, which is, contrary to
general belief, controlled by a chilly Devil and shakes men like ague. If he is not moved about,
and begins to feel cold at the pit of the stomach, and in that crisis is badly mauled and hears
orders that were never given, he will break, and he will break badly; and of all things under
the light of the Sun there is nothing more terrible than a broken British regiment. When the
worst comes to the worst and the panic is really epidemic, the men must be e'en let go, and
the Company Commanders had better escape to the enemy and stay there for safety's sake. If
they can be made to come again they are not pleasant men to meet; because they will not break
twice.

About thirty years from this date, when we have succeeded in half-educating everything that
wears trousers, our Army will be a beautifully unreliable machine. It will know too much and
it will do too little. Later still, when all men are at the mental level of the officer of
to-day, it will sweep the earth. Speaking roughly, you must employ either blackguards or gentlemen,
or, best of all, blackguards commanded by gentlemen, to do butcher's work with efficiency and
despatch. The ideal soldier should, of course, think for himself--the Pocket-book says so.
Unfortunately, to attain this virtue he has to pass through the phase of thinking of himself,
and that is misdirected genius. A blackguard may be slow to think for himself, but he is genuinely
anxious to kill, and a little punishment teaches him how to guard his own skin and perforate
another's. A powerfully prayerful Highland Regiment, officered by rank Presbyterians, is, perhaps,
one degree more terrible in action than a hard-bitten thousand of irresponsible Irish ruffians
led by most improper young unbelievers. But these things prove the rule--which is that the
midway men are not to be trusted alone. They have ideas about the value of life and an upbringing
that has not taught them to go on and take the chances. They are carefully unprovided with
a backing of comrades who have been shot over, and until that backing is re-introduced, as
a great many Regimental Commanders intend it shall be, they are more liable to disgrace themselves
than the size of the Empire or the dignity of the Army allows. Their officers are as good as
good can be, because their training begins early, and God has arranged that a clean-run youth
of the British middle classes shall, in the matter of backbone, brains, and bowels, surpass
all other youths. For this reason a child of eighteen will stand up, doing nothing, with a
tin sword in his hand and joy in his heart until he is dropped. If he dies, he dies like a
gentleman. If he lives, he writes Home that he has been 'potted,' 'sniped,' 'chipped,' or 'cut
over,' and sits down to besiege Government for a wound-gratuity until the next little war breaks
out, when he perjures himself before a Medical Board, blarneys his Colonel, burns incense round
his Adjutant, and is allowed to go to the Front once more.

Which homily brings me directly to a brace of the most finished little fiends that ever banged
drum or tootled fife in the Band of a British Regiment. They ended their sinful career by open
and flagrant mutiny and were shot for it. Their names were Jakin and Lew--Piggy Lew--and they
were bold, bad drummer-boys, both of them frequently birched by the Drum-Major of the Fore and Aft.

Jakin was a stunted child of fourteen, and Lew was about the same age. When not looked after,
they smoked and drank. They swore habitually after the manner of the Barrack-room, which is
cold-swearing and comes from between clinched teeth; and they fought religiously once a week.
Jakin had sprung from some London gutter, and may or may not have passed through Dr. Barnardo's
hands ere he arrived at the dignity of drummer-boy. Lew could remember nothing except the Regiment
and the delight of listening to the Band from his earliest years. He hid somewhere in his grimy
little soul a genuine love for music, and was most mistakenly furnished with the head of a
cherub: insomuch that beautiful ladies who watched the Regiment in church were wont to speak
of him as a 'darling.' They never heard his vitriolic comments on their manners and morals,
as he walked back to barracks with the Band and matured fresh causes of offence against Jakin.

The other drummer-boys hated both lads on account of their illogical conduct. Jakin might be
pounding Lew, or Lew might be rubbing Jakin's head in the dirt, but any attempt at aggression
on the part of an outsider was met by the combined forces of Lew and Jakin; and the consequences
were painful. The boys were the Ishmaels of the corps, but wealthy Ishmaels, for they sold
battles in alternate weeks for the sport of the barracks when they were not pitted against
other boys; and thus amassed money.

On this particular day there was dissension in the camp. They had just been convicted afresh
of smoking, which is bad for little boys who use plug-tobacco, and Lew's contention was that
Jakin had 'stunk so 'orrid bad from keepin' the pipe in pocket,' that he and he alone was responsible
for the birching they were both tingling under.

'I tell you I 'id the pipe back o' barracks,' said Jakin pacifically.

'You're a bloomin' liar,' said Lew without heat.

'You're a bloomin' little barstard,' said Jakin, strong in the knowledge that his own ancestry
was unknown.

Now there is one word in the extended vocabulary of barrack-room abuse that cannot pass without
comment. You may call a man a thief and risk nothing. You may even call him a coward without
finding more than a boot whiz past your ear, but you must not call a man a bastard unless you
are prepared to prove it on his front teeth.

'You might ha' kep' that till I wasn't so sore,' said Lew sorrowfully, dodging round Jakin's guard.

'I'll make you sorer,' said Jakin genially, and got home on Lew's alabaster forehead. All would
have gone well and this story, as the books say, would never have been written, had not his
evil fate prompted the Bazar-Sergeant's son, a long, employless man of five-and-twenty, to
put in an appearance after the first round. He was eternally in need of money, and knew that
the boys had silver.

'Fighting again,' said he. 'I'll report you to my father, and he'll report you to the Colour-Sergeant.'

'What's that to you?' said Jakin with an unpleasant dilation of the nostrils.

'Oh! nothing to me. You'll get into trouble, and you've been up too often to afford that.'

'What the Hell do you know about what we've done?' asked Lew the Seraph. 'You aren't in the
Army, you lousy, cadging civilian.'

He closed in on the man's left flank.

'Jes' 'cause you find two gentlemen settlin' their diff'rences with their fistes you stick
in your ugly nose where you aren't wanted. Run 'ome to your 'arf-caste slut of a Ma--or we'll
give you what-for,' said Jakin.

The man attempted reprisals by knocking the boys' heads together. The scheme would have succeeded
had not Jakin punched him vehemently in the stomach, or had Lew refrained from kicking his
shins. They fought together, bleeding and breathless, for half an hour, and, after heavy punishment,
triumphantly pulled down their opponent as terriers pull down a jackal.

'Now,' gasped Jakin, 'I'll give you what-for.' He proceeded to pound the man's features while
Lew stamped on the outlying portions of his anatomy. Chivalry is not a strong point in the
composition of the average drummer-boy. He fights, as do his betters, to make his mark.

Ghastly was the ruin that escaped, and awful was the wrath of the Bazar-Sergeant. Awful, too,
was the scene in Orderly-room when the two reprobates appeared to answer the charge of half-murdering
a 'civilian.' The Bazar-Sergeant thirsted for a criminal action, and his son lied. The boys
stood to attention while the black clouds of evidence accumulated.

'You little devils are more trouble than the rest of the Regiment put together,' said the Colonel
angrily. 'One might as well admonish thistledown, and I can't well put you in cells or under
stoppages. You must be birched again.'

'Beg y' pardon, Sir. Can't we say nothin' in our own defence, Sir?' shrilled Jakin.

'Hey! What? Are you going to argue with me?' said the Colonel.

'No, Sir,' said Lew. 'But if a man come to you, Sir, and said he was going to report you, Sir,
for 'aving a bit of a turn-up with a friend, Sir, an' wanted to get money out o' you, Sir--'

The Orderly-room exploded in a roar of laughter. 'Well?' said the Colonel.

'That was what that measly jarnwar there did, Sir, and 'e'd 'a' done it, Sir, if we 'adn't
prevented 'im. We didn't 'it 'im much, Sir. 'E 'adn't no manner o' right to interfere with
us, Sir. I don't mind bein' birched by the Drum-Major, Sir, nor yet reported by any Corp'ral,
but I'm--but I don't think it's fair, Sir, for a civilian to come an' talk over a man in the Army.'

A second shout of laughter shook the Orderly-room, but the Colonel was grave.

'What sort of characters have these boys?' he asked of the Regimental Sergeant-Major.

'Accordin' to the Bandmaster, Sir,' returned that revered official--the only soul in the regiment
whom the boys feared--'they do everything but lie, Sir.'

'Is it like we'd go for that man for fun, Sir?' said Lew, pointing to the plaintiff.

'Oh, admonished--admonished!' said the Colonel testily, and when the boys had gone he read
the Bazar-Sergeant's son a lecture on the sin of unprofitable meddling, and gave orders that
the Bandmaster should keep the Drums in better discipline.

'If either of you comes to practice again with so much as a scratch on your two ugly little
faces,' thundered the Bandmaster, 'I'll tell the Drum-Major to take the skin off your backs.
Understand that, you young devils.'

Then he repented of his speech for just the length of time that Lew, looking like a Seraph
in red worsted embellishments, took the place of one of the trumpets--in hospital--and rendered
the echo of a battle-piece. Lew certainly was a musician, and had often in his more exalted
moments expressed a yearning to master every instrument of the Band.

'There's nothing to prevent your becoming a Bandmaster, Lew,' said the Bandmaster, who had
composed waltzes of his own, and worked day and night in the interests of the Band.

'What did he say?' demanded Jakin after practice.

''Said I might be a bloomin' Bandmaster, an' be asked in to 'ave a glass o' sherry-wine on
Mess-nights.'

'Ho! 'Said you might be a bloomin' non-combatant, did 'e! That's just about wot 'e would say.
When I've put in my boy's service--it's a bloomin' shame that doesn't count for pension--I'll
take on as a privit. Then I'll be a Lance in a year--knowin' what I know about the ins an'
outs o' things. In three years I'll be a bloomin' Sergeant. I won't marry then, not I! I'll
'old on and learn the orf'cers' ways an' apply for exchange into a reg'ment that doesn't know
all about me. Then I'll be a bloomin' orf'cer. Then I'll ask you to 'ave a glass o' sherry-wine,
Mister Lew, an' you'll bloomin' well 'ave to stay in the hanty-room while the Mess-Sergeant
brings it to your dirty 'ands.'

''S'pose I'm going to be a Bandmaster? Not I, quite. I'll be a orf'cer too. There's nothin'
like takin' to a thing an' stickin' to it, the Schoolmaster says. The reg'ment don't go 'ome
for another seven years. I'll be a Lance then or near to.'

Thus the boys discussed their futures, and conducted themselves piously for a week. That is
to say, Lew started a flirtation with the Colour-Sergeant's daughter, aged thirteen--'not,'
as he explained to Jakin, 'with any intention o' matrimony, but by way o' keepin' my 'and in.'
And the black-haired Cris Delighan enjoyed that flirtation more than previous ones, and the
other drummer-boys raged furiously together, and Jakin preached sermons on the dangers of 'bein'
tangled along o' petticoats.'

But neither love nor virtue would have held Lew long in the paths of propriety had not the
rumour gone abroad that the Regiment was to be sent on active service, to take part in a war
which, for the sake of brevity, we will call 'The War of the Lost Tribes.'

The barracks had the rumour almost before the Mess-room, and of all the nine hundred men in
barracks not ten had seen a shot fired in anger. The Colonel had, twenty years ago, assisted
at a Frontier expedition; one of the Majors had seen service at the Cape; a confirmed deserter
in E Company had helped to clear streets in Ireland; but that was all. The Regiment had been
put by for many years. The overwhelming mass of its rank and file had from three to four years'
service; the non-commissioned officers were under thirty years old; and men and sergeants alike
had forgotten to speak of the stories written in brief upon the Colours--the New Colours that
had been formally blessed by an Archbishop in England ere the Regiment came away.

They wanted to go to the Front--they were enthusiastically anxious to go--but they had no knowledge
of what war meant, and there was none to tell them. They were an educated regiment, the percentage
of school-certificates in their ranks was high, and most of the men could do more than read
and write. They had been recruited in loyal observance of the territorial idea; but they themselves
had no notion of that idea. They were made up of drafts from an over-populated manufacturing
district. The system had put flesh and muscle upon their small bones, but it could not put
heart into the sons of those who for generations had done overmuch work for over-scanty pay,
had sweated in drying-rooms, stooped over looms, coughed among white-lead, and shivered on
lime-barges. The men had found food and rest in the Army, and now they were going to fight
'niggers'--people who ran away if you shook a stick at them. Wherefore they cheered lustily
when the rumour ran, and the shrewd, clerkly non-commissioned officers speculated on the chances
of batta and of saving their pay. At Headquarters men said: 'The Fore and Fit have never been
under fire within the last generation. Let us, therefore, break them in easily by setting them
to guard lines of communication.' And this would have been done but for the fact that British
Regiments were wanted--badly wanted--at the Front, and there were doubtful Native Regiments
that could fill the minor duties. 'Brigade 'em with two strong Regiments,' said Headquarters.
'They may be knocked about a bit, though they'll learn their business before they come through.
Nothing like a night-alarm and a little cutting up of stragglers to make a Regiment smart in
the field. Wait till they've had half-a-dozen sentries' throats cut.'

The Colonel wrote with delight that the temper of his men was excellent, that the Regiment
was all that could be wished and as sound as a bell. The Majors smiled with a sober joy, and
the subalterns waltzed in pairs down the Mess-room after dinner, and nearly shot themselves
at revolver-practice. But there was consternation in the hearts of Jakin and Lew. What was
to be done with the Drums? Would the Band go to the Front? How many of the Drums would accompany
the Regiment?

They took counsel together, sitting in a tree and smoking.

'It's more than a bloomin' toss-up they'll leave us be'ind at the Depot with the women. You'll
like that,' said Jakin sarcastically.

''Cause o' Cris, y' mean? Wot's a woman, or a 'ole bloomin' depot o' women, 'longside o' the
chanst of field-service? You know I'm as keen on goin' as you,' said Lew.

''Wish I was a bloomin' bugler,' said Jakin sadly. 'They'll take Tom Kidd along, that I can
plaster a wall with, an' like as not they won't take us.'

'Then let's go an' make Tom Kidd so bloomin' sick 'e can't bugle no more. You 'old 'is 'ands
an' I'll kick him,' said Lew, wriggling on the branch.

'That ain't no good neither. We ain't the sort o' characters to presoom on our rep'tations--they're
bad. If they leave the Band at the Depot we don't go, and no error there. If they take the
Band we may get cast for medical unfitness. Are you medical fit, Piggy?' said Jakin, digging
Lew in the ribs with force.

'Yus,' said Lew with an oath. 'The Doctor says your 'eart's weak through smokin' on an empty
stummick. Throw a chest an' I'll try yer.'

Jakin threw out his chest, which Lew smote with all his might. Jakin turned very pale, gasped,
crowed, screwed up his eyes, and said--'That's all right.'

'You'll do,' said Lew. 'I've 'eard o' men dyin' when you 'it 'em fair on the breastbone.'

'Don't bring us no nearer goin', though,' said Jakin. 'Do you know where we're ordered?'

'Gawd knows, an' 'E won't split on a pal. Somewheres up to the Front to kill Paythans--hairy
big beggars that turn you inside out if they get 'old o' you. They say their women are good-looking,
too.'

'Any loot?' asked the abandoned Jakin.

'Not a bloomin' anna, they say, unless you dig up the ground an' see what the niggers 'ave
'id. They're a poor lot.' Jakin stood upright on the branch and gazed across the plain.

'Lew,' said he, 'there's the Colonel coming. 'Colonel's a good old beggar. Let's go an' talk
to 'im.'

Lew nearly fell out of the tree at the audacity of the suggestion. Like Jakin he feared not
God, neither regarded he Man, but there are limits even to the audacity of drummer-boy, and
to speak to a Colonel was----

But Jakin had slid down the trunk and doubled in the direction of the Colonel. That officer
was walking wrapped in thought and visions of a C.B.--yes, even a K.C.B., for had he not at
command one of the best Regiments of the Line--the Fore and Fit? And he was aware of two small
boys charging down upon him. Once before it had been solemnly reported to him that 'the Drums
were in a state of mutiny,' Jakin and Lew being the ringleaders. This looked like an organised
conspiracy.

The boys halted at twenty yards, walked to the regulation four paces, and saluted together,
each as well-set-up as a ramrod and little taller.

The Colonel was in a genial mood; the boys appeared very forlorn and unprotected on the desolate
plain, and one of them was handsome.

'Well!' said the Colonel, recognising them. 'Are you going to pull me down in the open? I'm
sure I never interfere with you, even though'--he sniffed suspiciously--'you have been smoking.'

It was time to strike while the iron was hot. Their hearts beat tumultuously.

'Beg y' pardon, Sir,' began Jakin. 'The Reg'ment's ordered on active service, Sir?'

'So I believe,' said the Colonel courteously.

'Is the Band goin', Sir?' said both together. Then, without pause, 'We're goin', Sir, ain't we?'

'You!' said the Colonel, stepping back the more fully to take in the two small figures. 'You!
You'd die in the first march.'

'No, we wouldn't, Sir. We can march with the Reg'ment anywheres--p'rade an' anywhere else,'
said Jakin.

'If Tom Kidd goes 'e'll shut up like a clasp-knife,' said Lew. 'Tom 'as very-close veins in
both 'is legs, Sir.'

'Very how much?'

'Very-close veins, Sir. That's why they swells after long p'rade, Sir. If 'e can go, we can
go, Sir.'

Again the Colonel looked at them long and intently.

'Yes, the Band is going,' he said as gravely as though he had been addressing a brother officer.
'Have you any parents, either of you two?'

'No, Sir,' rejoicingly from Lew and Jakin. 'We're both orphans, Sir. There's no one to be considered
of on our account, Sir.'

'You poor little sprats, and you want to go up to the Front with the Regiment, do you? Why?'

'I've wore the Queen's Uniform for two years,' said Jakin. 'It's very 'ard, Sir, that a man
don't get no recompense for doin' of 'is dooty, Sir.'

'An'--an' if I don't go, Sir,' interrupted Lew, 'the Bandmaster 'e says 'e'll catch an' make
a bloo--a blessed musician o' me, Sir. Before I've seen any service, Sir.'

The Colonel made no answer for a long time. Then he said quietly: 'If you're passed by the
Doctor I daresay you can go. I shouldn't smoke if I were you.'

The boys saluted and disappeared. The Colonel walked home and told the story to his wife, who
nearly cried over it. The Colonel was well pleased. If that was the temper of the children,
what would not the men do?

Jakin and Lew entered the boys' barrack-room with great stateliness, and refused to hold any
conversation with their comrades for at least ten minutes. Then, bursting with pride, Jakin
drawled: 'I've bin intervooin' the Colonel. Good old beggar is the Colonel. Says I to 'im,
"Colonel," says I, "let me go to the Front, along o' the Reg'ment."--"To the Front you shall
go," says 'e, "an' I only wish there was more like you among the dirty little devils that bang
the bloomin' drums." Kidd, if you throw your 'courtrements at me for tellin' you the truth
to your own advantage, your legs'll swell.'

None the less there was a Battle-Royal in the barrack-room, for the boys were consumed with
envy and hate, and neither Jakin nor Lew behaved in conciliatory wise.

'I'm goin' out to say adoo to my girl,' said Lew, to cap the climax. 'Don't none o' you touch
my kit because it's wanted for active service; me bein' specially invited to go by the Colonel.'

He strolled forth and whistled in the clump of trees at the back of the Married Quarters till
Cris came to him, and, the preliminary kisses being given and taken, Lew began to explain the
situation.

'I'm goin' to the Front with the Reg'ment,' he said valiantly.

'Piggy, you're a little liar,' said Cris, but her heart misgave her, for Lew was not in the
habit of lying.

'Liar yourself, Cris,' said Lew, slipping an arm round her. 'I'm goin'. When the Reg'ment marches
out you'll see me with 'em, all galliant and gay. Give us another kiss, Cris, on the strength
of it.'

'If you'd on'y a-stayed at the Depot--where you ought to ha' bin--you could get as many of
'em as--as you dam please,' whimpered Cris, putting up her mouth.

'It's 'ard, Cris. I grant you it's 'ard. But what's a man to do? If I'd a-stayed at the Depot,
you wouldn't think anything of me.'

'Like as not, but I'd 'ave you with me, Piggy. An' all the thinkin' in the world isn't like
kissin'.'

'An' all the kissin' in the world isn't like 'avin' a medal to wear on the front o' your coat.'

'You won't get no medal.'

'Oh yus, I shall though. Me an' Jakin are the only acting-drummers that'll be took along. All
the rest is full men, an' we'll get our medals with them.'

'They might ha' taken anybody but you, Piggy. You'll get killed--you're so venturesome. Stay
with me, Piggy darlin', down at the Depot, an' I'll love you true for ever.'

'Ain't you goin' to do that now, Cris? You said you was.'

'O' course I am, but th' other's more comfortable. Wait till you've growed a bit, Piggy. You
aren't no taller than me now.'

'I've bin in the Army for two years an' I'm not goin' to get out of a chanst o' seein' service,
an' don't you try to make me do so. I'll come back, Cris, an' when I take on as a man I'll
marry you--marry you when I'm a Lance.'

'Promise, Piggy?'

Lew reflected on the future as arranged by Jakin a short time previously, but Cris's mouth
was very near to his own.

'I promise, s'elp me Gawd!' said he.

Cris slid an arm round his neck.

'I won't 'old you back no more, Piggy. Go away an' get your medal, an' I'll make you a new
button-bag as nice as I know how,' she whispered.

'Put some o' your 'air into it, Cris, an' I'll keep it in my pocket so long's I'm alive.'

Then Cris wept anew, and the interview ended.

Public feeling among the drummer-boys rose to fever pitch and the lives of Jakin and Lew became
unenviable. Not only had they been permitted to enlist two years before the regulation boy's
age--fourteen--but, by virtue, it seemed, of their extreme youth, they were allowed to go to
the Front--which thing had not happened to acting-drummers within the knowledge of boy. The
Band which was to accompany the Regiment had been cut down to the regulation twenty men, the
surplus returning to the ranks. Jakin and Lew were attached to the Band as supernumeraries,
though they would much have preferred being Company buglers.

''Don't matter much,' said Jakin after the medical inspection. 'Be thankful that we're 'lowed
to go at all. The Doctor 'e said that if we could stand what we took from the Bazar-Sergeant's
son we'd stand pretty nigh anything.'

'Which we will,' said Lew, looking tenderly at the ragged and ill-made housewife that Cris
had given him, with a lock of her hair worked into a sprawling 'L' upon the cover.

'It was the best I could,' she sobbed. 'I wouldn't let mother nor the Sergeants' tailor 'elp
me. Keep it always, Piggy, an' remember I love you true.'

They marched to the railway station, nine hundred and sixty strong, and every soul in cantonments
turned out to see them go. The drummers gnashed their teeth at Jakin and Lew marching with
the Band, the married women wept upon the platform, and the Regiment cheered its noble self
black in the face.

'A nice level lot,' said the Colonel to the Second-in-Command as they watched the first four
companies entraining.

'Fit to do anything,' said the Second-in-Command enthusiastically. 'But it seems to me they're
a thought too young and tender for the work in hand. It's bitter cold up at the Front now.'

'They're sound enough,' said the Colonel. 'We must take our chance of sick casualties.'

So they went northward, ever northward, past droves and droves of camels, armies of camp followers,
and legions of laden mules, the throng thickening day by day, till with a shriek the train
pulled up at a hopelessly congested junction where six lines of temporary track accommodated
six forty-waggon trains; where whistles blew, Babus sweated, and Commissariat officers swore
from dawn till far into the night amid the wind-driven chaff of the fodder-bales and the lowing
of a thousand steers.

'Hurry up--you're badly wanted at the Front,' was the message that greeted the Fore and Aft,
and the occupants of the Red Cross carriages told the same tale.

''Tisn't so much the bloomin' fightin',' gasped a headbound trooper of Hussars to a knot of
admiring Fore and Afts. ''Tisn't so much the bloomin' fightin', though there's enough o' that.
It's the bloomin' food an' the bloomin' climate. Frost all night 'cept when it hails, and biling
sun all day, and the water stinks fit to knock you down. I got my 'ead chipped like a egg;
I've got pneumonia too, an' my guts is all out o' order. 'Tain't no bloomin' picnic in those
parts, I can tell you.'

'Wot are the niggers like?' demanded a private.

'There's some prisoners in that train yonder. Go an' look at 'em. They're the aristocracy o'
the country. The common folk are a dashed sight uglier. If you want to know what they fight
with, reach under my seat an' pull out the long knife that's there.'

They dragged out and beheld for the first time the grim, bone-handled, triangular Afghan knife.
It was almost as long as Lew.

'That's the thing to jint ye,' said the trooper feebly. 'It can take off a man's arm at the
shoulder as easy as slicing butter. I halved the beggar that used that 'un, but there's more
of his likes up above. They don't understand thrustin', but they're devils to slice.'

The men strolled across the tracks to inspect the Afghan prisoners. They were unlike any 'niggers'
that the Fore and Aft had ever met--these huge, black-haired, scowling sons of the Beni-Israel.
As the men stared the Afghans spat freely and muttered one to another with lowered eyes.

'My eyes! Wot awful swine!' said Jakin, who was in the rear of the procession. 'Say, old man,
how you got puckrowed, eh? Kiswasti you wasn't hanged for your ugly face, hey?'

The tallest of the company turned, his leg-irons clanking at the movement, and stared at the
boy. 'See!' he cried to his fellows in Pushto. 'They send children against us. What a people,
and what fools!'

'Hya!' said Jakin, nodding his head cheerily. 'You go down-country. Khana get, peenikapanee
get--live like a bloomin' Raja ke marfik. That's a better bandobust than baynit get it in your
innards. Good-bye, ole man. Take care o' your beautiful figure-'ad, an' try to look kushy.'

The men laughed and fell in for their first march, when they began to realise that a soldier's
life was not all beer and skittles. They were much impressed with the size and bestial ferocity
of the niggers whom they had now learned to call 'Paythans,' and more with the exceeding discomfort
of their own surroundings. Twenty old soldiers in the corps would have taught them how to make
themselves moderately snug at night, but they had no old soldiers, and, as the troops on the
line of march said, 'they lived like pigs.' They learned the heart-breaking cussedness of camp-kitchens
and camels and the depravity of an E.P. tent and a wither-wrung mule. They studied animalculæ
in water, and developed a few cases of dysentery in their study.

At the end of their third march they were disagreeably surprised by the arrival in their camp
of a hammered iron slug which, fired from a steady rest at seven hundred yards, flicked out
the brains of a private seated by the fire. This robbed them of their peace for a night, and
was the beginning of a long-range fire carefully calculated to that end. In the daytime they
saw nothing except an unpleasant puff of smoke from a crag above the line of march. At night
there were distant spurts of flame and occasional casualties, which set the whole camp blazing
into the gloom and, occasionally, into opposite tents. Then they swore vehemently and vowed
that this was magnificent, but not war.

Indeed it was not. The Regiment could not halt for reprisals against the sharpshooters of the
countryside. Its duty was to go forward and make connection with the Scotch and Gurkha troops
with which it was brigaded. The Afghans knew this, and knew too, after their first tentative
shots, that they were dealing with a raw regiment. Thereafter they devoted themselves to the
task of keeping the Fore and Aft on the strain. Not for anything would they have taken equal
liberties with a seasoned corps--with the wicked little Gurkhas, whose delight it was to lie
out in the open on a dark night and stalk their stalkers--with the terrible, big men dressed
in women's clothes, who could be heard praying to their God in the night-watches, and whose
peace of mind no amount of 'sniping' could shake--or with those vile Sikhs, who marched so
ostentatiously unprepared and who dealt out such grim reward to those who tried to profit by
that unpreparedness. This white regiment was different--quite different. It slept like a hog,
and, like a hog, charged in every direction when it was roused. Its sentries walked with a
footfall that could be heard for a quarter of a mile, would fire at anything that moved--even
a driven donkey--and when they had once fired, could be scientifically 'rushed' and laid out
a horror and an offence against the morning sun. Then there were camp-followers who straggled
and could be cut up without fear. Their shrieks would disturb the white boys, and the loss
of their services would inconvenience them sorely.

Thus, at every march, the hidden enemy became bolder and the regiment writhed and twisted under
attacks it could not avenge. The crowning triumph was a sudden night-rush ending in the cutting
of many tent-ropes, the collapse of the sodden canvas, and a glorious knifing of the men who
struggled and kicked below. It was a great deed, neatly carried out, and it shook the already
shaken nerves of the Fore and Aft. All the courage that they had been required to exercise
up to this point was the 'two o'clock in the morning courage'; and, so far, they had only succeeded
in shooting their comrades and losing their sleep.

Sullen, discontented, cold, savage, sick, with their uniforms dulled and unclean, the Fore
and Aft joined their Brigade.

'I hear you had a tough time of it coming up,' said the Brigadier. But when he saw the hospital-sheets
his face fell.

'This is bad,' said he to himself. 'They're as rotten as sheep.' And aloud to the Colonel--'I'm
afraid we can't spare you just yet. We want all we have, else I should have given you ten days
to recover in.'

The Colonel winced. 'On my honour, Sir,' he returned, 'there is not the least necessity to
think of sparing us. My men have been rather mauled and upset without a fair return. They only
want to go in somewhere where they can see what's before them.'

'Can't say I think much of the Fore and Fit,' said the Brigadier in confidence to his Brigade-Major.
'They've lost all their soldiering, and, by the trim of them, might have marched through the
country from the other side. A more fagged-out set of men I never put eyes on.'

'Oh, they'll improve as the work goes on. The parade gloss has been rubbed off a little, but
they'll put on field polish before long,' said the Brigade-Major. 'They've been mauled, and
they don't quite understand it.'

They did not. All the hitting was on one side, and it was cruelly hard hitting with accessories
that made them sick. There was also the real sickness that laid hold of a strong man and dragged
him howling to the grave. Worst of all, their officers knew just as little of the country as
the men themselves, and looked as if they did. The Fore and Aft were in a thoroughly unsatisfactory
condition, but they believed that all would be well if they could once get a fair go-in at
the enemy. Pot-shots up and down the valleys were unsatisfactory, and the bayonet never seemed
to get a chance. Perhaps it was as well, for a long-limbed Afghan with a knife had a reach
of eight feet, and could carry away lead that would disable three Englishmen.

The Fore and Fit would like some rifle-practice at the enemy--all seven hundred rifles blazing
together. That wish showed the mood of the men.

The Gurkhas walked into their camp, and in broken, barrack-room English strove to fraternise
with them; offered them pipes of tobacco and stood them treat at the canteen. But the Fore
and Aft, not knowing much of the nature of the Gurkhas, treated them as they would treat any
other 'niggers,' and the little men in green trotted back to their firm friends the Highlanders,
and with many grins confided to them: 'That dam white regiment no dam use. Sulky--ugh! Dirty--ugh!
Hya, any tot for Johnny?' Whereat the Highlanders smote the Gurkhas as to the head, and told
them not to vilify a British Regiment, and the Gurkhas grinned cavernously, for the Highlanders
were their elder brothers and entitled to the privileges of kinship. The common soldier who
touches a Gurkha is more than likely to have his head sliced open.

Three days later the Brigadier arranged a battle according to the rules of war and the peculiarity
of the Afghan temperament. The enemy were massing in inconvenient strength among the hills,
and the moving of many green standards warned him that the tribes were 'up' in aid of the Afghan
regular troops. A squadron and a half of Bengal Lancers represented the available Cavalry,
and two screw-guns borrowed from a column thirty miles away the Artillery at the General's
disposal.

'If they stand, as I've a very strong notion that they will, I fancy we shall see an infantry
fight that will be worth watching,' said the Brigadier. 'We'll do it in style. Each regiment
shall be played into action by its Band, and we'll hold the Cavalry in reserve.'

'For all the reserve?' somebody asked.

'For all the reserve; because we're going to crumple them up,' said the Brigadier, who was
an extraordinary Brigadier, and did not believe in the value of a reserve when dealing with
Asiatics. Indeed, when you come to think of it, had the British Army consistently waited for
reserves in all its little affairs, the boundaries of Our Empire would have stopped at Brighton
beach.

That battle was to be a glorious battle.

The three regiments debouching from three separate gorges, after duly crowning the heights
above, were to converge from the centre, left, and right upon what we will call the Afghan
army, then stationed towards the lower extremity of a flat-bottomed valley. Thus it will be
seen that three sides of the valley practically belonged to the English, while the fourth was
strictly Afghan property. In the event of defeat the Afghans had the rocky hills to fly to,
where the fire from the guerilla tribes in aid would cover their retreat. In the event of victory
these same tribes would rush down and lend their weight to the rout of the British.

The screw-guns were to shell the head of each Afghan rush that was made in close formation,
and the Cavalry, held in reserve in the right valley, were to gently stimulate the break-up
which would follow on the combined attack. The Brigadier, sitting upon a rock overlooking the
valley, would watch the battle unrolled at his feet. The Fore and Aft would debouch from the
central gorge, the Gurkhas from the left, and the Highlanders from the right, for the reason
that the left flank of the enemy seemed as though it required the most hammering. It was not
every day that an Afghan force would take ground in the open, and the Brigadier was resolved
to make the most of it.

'If we only had a few more men,' he said plaintively, 'we could surround the creatures and
crumple 'em up thoroughly. As it is, I'm afraid we can only cut them up as they run. It's a
great pity.'

The Fore and Aft had enjoyed unbroken peace for five days, and were beginning, in spite of
dysentery, to recover their nerve. But they were not happy, for they did not know the work
in hand, and had they known, would not have known how to do it. Throughout those five days
in which old soldiers might have taught them the craft of the game, they discussed together
their misadventures in the past--how such an one was alive at dawn and dead ere the dusk, and
with what shrieks and struggles such another had given up his soul under the Afghan knife.
Death was a new and horrible thing to the sons of mechanics who were used to die decently of
zymotic disease; and their careful conservation in barracks had done nothing to make them look
upon it with less dread.

Very early in the dawn the bugles began to blow, and the Fore and Aft, filled with a misguided
enthusiasm, turned out without waiting for a cup of coffee and a biscuit; and were rewarded
by being kept under arms in the cold while the other regiments leisurely prepared for the fray.
All the world knows that it is ill taking the breeks off a Highlander. It is much iller to
try to make him stir unless he is convinced of the necessity for haste.

The Fore and Aft waited, leaning upon their rifles and listening to the protests of their empty
stomachs. The Colonel did his best to remedy the default of lining as soon as it was borne
in upon him that the affair would not begin at once, and so well did he succeed that the coffee
was just ready when--the men moved off, their Band leading. Even then there had been a mistake
in time, and the Fore and Aft came out into the valley ten minutes before the proper hour.
Their Band wheeled to the right after reaching the open, and retired behind a little rocky
knoll, still playing while the regiment went past.

It was not a pleasant sight that opened on the uninstructed view, for the lower end of the
valley appeared to be filled by an army in position--real and actual regiments attired in red
coats, and--of this there was no doubt--firing Martini-Henry bullets which cut up the ground
a hundred yards in front of the leading company. Over that pock-marked ground the regiment
had to pass, and it opened the ball with a general and profound courtesy to the piping pickets;
ducking in perfect time, as though it had been brazed on a rod. Being half-capable of thinking
for itself, it fired a volley by the simple process of pitching its rifle into its shoulder
and pulling the trigger. The bullets may have accounted for some of the watchers on the hillside,
but they certainly did not affect the mass of enemy in front, while the noise of the rifles
drowned any orders that might have been given.

'Good God!' said the Brigadier, sitting on the rock high above all. 'That regiment has spoilt
the whole show. Hurry up the others, and let the screw-guns get off.'

But the screw-guns, in working round the heights, had stumbled upon a wasp's nest of a small
mud fort which they incontinently shelled at eight hundred yards, to the huge discomfort of
the occupants, who were unaccustomed to weapons of such devilish precision.

The Fore and Aft continued to go forward, but with shortened stride. Where were the other regiments,
and why did these niggers use Martinis? They took open order instinctively, lying down and
firing at random, rushing a few paces forward and lying down again, according to the regulations.
Once in this formation, each man felt himself desperately alone, and edged in towards his fellow
for comfort's sake.

Then the crack of his neighbour's rifle at his ear led him to fire as rapidly as he could--again
for the sake of the comfort of the noise. The reward was not long delayed. Five volleys plunged
the files in banked smoke impenetrable to the eye, and the bullets began to take ground twenty
or thirty yards in front of the firers, as the weight of the bayonet dragged down and to the
right arms wearied with holding the kick of the leaping Martini. The Company Commanders peered
helplessly through the smoke, the more nervous mechanically trying to fan it away with their
helmets.

'High and to the left!' bawled a Captain till he was hoarse. 'No good! Cease firing, and let
it drift away a bit.'

Three and four times the bugles shrieked the order, and when it was obeyed the Fore and Aft
looked that their foe should be lying before them in mown swaths of men. A light wind drove
the smoke to leeward, and showed the enemy still in position and apparently unaffected. A quarter
of a ton of lead had been buried a furlong in front of them, as the ragged earth attested.

That was not demoralising to the Afghans, who have not European nerves. They were waiting for
the mad riot to die down, and were firing quietly into the heart of the smoke. A private of
the Fore and Aft spun up his company shrieking with agony, another was kicking the earth and
gasping, and a third, ripped through the lower intestines by a jagged bullet, was calling aloud
on his comrades to put him out of his pain. These were the casualties, and they were not soothing
to hear or see. The smoke cleared to a dull haze.

Then the foe began to shout with a great shouting, and a mass--a black mass--detached itself
from the main body, and rolled over the ground at horrid speed. It was composed of, perhaps,
three hundred men, who would shout and fire and slash if the rush of their fifty comrades who
were determined to die carried home. The fifty were Ghazis, half-maddened with drugs and wholly
mad with religious fanaticism. When they rushed the British fire ceased, and in the lull the
order was given to close ranks and meet them with the bayonet.

Any one who knew the business could have told the Fore and Aft that the only way of dealing
with a Ghazi rush is by volleys at long ranges; because a man who means to die, who desires
to die, who will gain heaven by dying, must, in nine cases out of ten, kill a man who has a
lingering prejudice in favour of life. Where they should have closed and gone forward, the
Fore and Aft opened out and skirmished, and where they should have opened out and fired, they
closed and waited.

A man dragged from his blankets half awake and unfed is never in a pleasant frame of mind.
Nor does his happiness increase when he watches the whites of the eyes of three hundred six-foot
fiends upon whose beards the foam is lying, upon whose tongues is a roar of wrath, and in whose
hands are yard-long knives.

The Fore and Aft heard the Gurkha bugles bringing that regiment forward at the double, while
the neighing of the Highland pipes came from the left. They strove to stay where they were,
though the bayonets wavered down the line like the oars of a ragged boat. Then they felt body
to body the amazing physical strength of their foes; a shriek of pain ended the rush, and the
knives fell amid scenes not to be told. The men clubbed together and smote blindly--as often
as not at their own fellows. Their front crumpled like paper, and the fifty Ghazis passed on;
their backers, now drunk with success, fighting as madly as they.

Then the rear-ranks were bidden to close up, and the subalterns dashed into the stew--alone.
For the rear-rank had heard the clamour in front, the yells and the howls of pain, and had
seen the dark stale blood that makes afraid. They were not going to stay. It was the rushing
of the camps over again. Let their officers go to Hell, if they chose; they would get away
from the knives.

'Come on!' shrieked the subalterns, and their men, cursing them, drew back, each closing into
his neighbour and wheeling round.

Charteris and Devlin, subalterns of the last company, faced their death alone in the belief
that their men would follow.

'You've killed me, you cowards,' sobbed Devlin and dropped, cut from the shoulder-strap to
the centre of the chest, and a fresh detachment of his men retreating, always retreating, trampled
him under foot as they made for the pass whence they had emerged.

    I kissed her in the kitchen and I kissed her in the hall.
                  Child'un, child'un, follow me!
    Oh Golly, said the cook, is he gwine to kiss us all?
                  Halla--Halla--Halla--Hallelujah!

The Gurkhas were pouring through the left gorge and over the heights at the double to the invitation
of their Regimental Quick-step. The black rocks were crowned with dark green spiders as the
bugles gave tongue jubilantly:--

    In the morning! In the morning by the bright light!
    When Gabriel blows his trumpet in the morning!

The Gurkha rear-companies tripped and blundered over loose stones. The front-files halted for
a moment to take stock of the valley and to settle stray boot-laces. Then a happy little sigh
of contentment soughed down the ranks, and it was as though the land smiled, for behold there
below was the enemy, and it was to meet them that the Gurkhas had doubled so hastily. There
was much enemy. There would be amusement. The little men hitched their kukris well to hand,
and gaped expectantly at their officers as terriers grin ere the stone is cast for them to
fetch. The Gurkhas' ground sloped downward to the valley, and they enjoyed a fair view of the
proceedings. They sat upon the boulders to watch, for their officers were not going to waste
their wind in assisting to repulse a Ghazi rush more than half a mile away. Let the white men
look to their own front.

'Hi! yi!' said the Subadar-Major, who was sweating profusely. 'Dam fools yonder, stand close-order!
This is no time for close-order, it is the time for volleys. Ugh!'

Horrified, amused, and indignant, the Gurkhas beheld the retirement of the Fore and Aft with
a running chorus of oaths and commentaries.

'They run! The white men run! Colonel Sahib, may we also do a little running?' murmured Runbir
Thappa, the Senior Jemadar.

But the Colonel would have none of it. 'Let the beggars be cut up a little,' said he wrathfully.
''Serves 'em right. They'll be prodded into facing round in a minute.' He looked through his
field-glasses, and caught the glint of an officer's sword.

'Beating 'em with the flat--damned conscripts! How the Ghazis are walking into them!' said he.

The Fore and Aft, heading back, bore with them their officers. The narrowness of the pass forced
the mob into solid formation, and the rear-rank delivered some sort of a wavering volley. The
Ghazis drew off, for they did not know what reserves the gorge might hide. Moreover, it was
never wise to chase white men too far. They returned as wolves return to cover, satisfied with
the slaughter that they had done, and only stopping to slash at the wounded on the ground.
A quarter of a mile had the Fore and Aft retreated, and now, jammed in the pass, was quivering
with pain, shaken and demoralised with fear, while the officers, maddened beyond control, smote
the men with the hilts and the flats of their swords.

'Get back! Get back, you cowards--you women! Right about face--column of companies, form--you
hounds!' shouted the Colonel, and the subalterns swore aloud. But the Regiment wanted to go--to
go anywhere out of the range of those merciless knives. It swayed to and fro irresolutely with
shouts and outcries, while from the right the Gurkhas dropped volley after volley of cripple-stopper
Snider bullets at long range into the mob of the Ghazis returning to their own troops.

The Fore and Aft Band, though protected from direct fire by the rocky knoll under which it
had sat down, fled at the first rush. Jakin and Lew would have fled also, but their short legs
left them fifty yards in the rear, and by the time the Band had mixed with the regiment, they
were painfully aware that they would have to close in alone and unsupported.

'Get back to that rock,' gasped Jakin. 'They won't see us there.'

And they returned to the scattered instruments of the Band; their hearts nearly bursting their
ribs.

'Here's a nice show for us,' said Jakin, throwing himself full length on the ground. 'A bloomin'
fine show for British Infantry! Oh, the devils! They've gone an' left us alone here! Wot'll we do?'

Lew took possession of a cast-off water bottle, which naturally was full of canteen rum, and
drank till he coughed again.

'Drink,' said he shortly.' They'll come back in a minute or two--you see.'

Jakin drank, but there was no sign of the Regiment's return. They could hear a dull clamour
from the head of the valley of retreat, and saw the Ghazis slink back, quickening their pace
as the Gurkhas fired at them.

'We're all that's left of the Band, an' we'll be cut up as sure as death,' said Jakin.

'I'll die game, then,' said Lew thickly, fumbling with his tiny drummer's sword. The drink
was working on his brain as it was on Jakin's.

''Old on! I know something better than fightin',' said Jakin, 'stung by the splendour of a
sudden thought' due chiefly to rum. 'Tip our bloomin' cowards yonder the word to come back.
The Paythan beggars are well away. Come on, Lew! We won't get hurt. Take the fife and give
me the drum. The Old Step for all your bloomin' guts are worth! There's a few of our men coming
back now. Stand up, ye drunken little defaulter. By your right--quick march!'

He slipped the drum-sling over his shoulder, thrust the fife into Lew's hand, and the two boys
marched out of the cover of the rock into the open, making a hideous hash of the first bars
of the 'British Grenadiers.'

As Jakin had said, a few of the Fore and Aft were coming back sullenly and shamefacedly under
the stimulus of blows and abuse; their red coats shone at the head of the valley, and behind
them were wavering bayonets. But between this shattered line and the enemy, who with Afghan
suspicion feared that the hasty retreat meant an ambush, and had not moved therefore, lay half
a mile of level ground dotted only by the wounded.

The tune settled into full swing and the boys kept shoulder to shoulder, Jakin banging the
drum as one possessed. The one fife made a thin and pitiful squeaking, but the tune carried
far, even to the Gurkhas.

'Come on, you dogs!' muttered Jakin to himself. 'Are we to play for hever?' Lew was staring
straight in front of him and marching more stiffly than ever he had done on parade.

And in bitter mockery of the distant mob, the old tune of the Old Line shrilled and rattled:--

    Some talk of Alexander,
      And some of Hercules;
    Of Hector and Lysander,
      And such great names as these!

There was a far-off clapping of hands from the Gurkhas, and a roar from the Highlanders in
the distance, but never a shot was fired by British or Afghan. The two little red dots moved
forward in the open parallel to the enemy's front.

    But of all the world's great heroes
      There's none that can compare,
    With a tow-row-row-row-row-row,
      To the British Grenadier!

The men of the Fore and Aft were gathering thick at the entrance to the plain. The Brigadier
on the heights far above was speechless with rage. Still no movement from the enemy. The day
stayed to watch the children.

Jakin halted and beat the long roll of the Assembly, while the fife squealed despairingly.

'Right about face! Hold up, Lew, you're drunk,' said Jakin. They wheeled and marched back:--

    Those heroes of antiquity
      Ne'er saw a cannon-ball,
    Nor knew the force o' powder,

'Here they come!' said Jakin. 'Go on, Lew':--

    To scare their foes withal!

The Fore and Aft were pouring out of the valley. What officers had said to men in that time
of shame and humiliation will never be known; for neither officers nor men speak of it now.

'They are coming anew!' shouted a priest among the Afghans. 'Do not kill the boys! Take them
alive and they shall be of our faith.'

But the first volley had been fired, and Lew dropped on his face. Jakin stood for a minute,
spun round and collapsed, as the Fore and Aft came forward, the curses of their officers in
their ears, and in their hearts the shame of open shame.

Half the men had seen the drummers die, and they made no sign. They did not even shout. They
doubled out straight across the plain in open order, and they did not fire.

'This,' said the Colonel of Gurkhas softly, 'is the real attack, as it should have been delivered.
Come on, my children.'

'Ulu-lu-lu-lu!' squealed the Gurkhas, and came down with a joyful clicking of kukris--those
vicious Gurkha knives.

On the right there was no rush. The Highlanders, cannily commending their souls to God (for
it matters as much to a dead man whether he has been shot in a Border scuffle or at Waterloo),
opened out and fired according to their custom, that is to say without heat and without intervals,
while the screw-guns, having disposed of the impertinent mud fort aforementioned, dropped shell
after shell into the clusters round the flickering green standards on the heights.

'Charrging is an unfortunate necessity,' murmured the Colour-Sergeant of the right company
of the Highlanders. 'It makes the men sweer so, but I am thinkin' that it will come to a charrge
if these black devils stand much longer. Stewarrt, man, you're firing into the eye of the sun,
and he'll not take any harm for Government ammuneetion. A foot lower and a great deal slower!
What are the English doing? They're very quiet there in the centre. Running again?'

The English were not running. They were hacking and hewing and stabbing, for though one white
man is seldom physically a match for an Afghan in a sheepskin or wadded coat, yet, through
the pressure of many white men behind, and a certain thirst for revenge in his heart, he becomes
capable of doing much with both ends of his rifle. The Fore and Aft held their fire till one
bullet could drive through five or six men, and the front of the Afghan force gave on the volley.
They then selected their men, and slew them with deep gasps and short hacking coughs, and groanings
of leather belts against strained bodies, and realised for the first time that an Afghan attacked
is far less formidable than an Afghan attacking: which fact old soldiers might have told them.

But they had no old soldiers in their ranks.

The Gurkhas' stall at the bazar was the noisiest, for the men were engaged--to a nasty noise
as of beef being cut on the block--with the kukri, which they preferred to the bayonet; well
knowing how the Afghan hates the half-moon blade.

As the Afghans wavered, the green standards on the mountain moved down to assist them in a
last rally. This was unwise. The Lancers chafing in the right gorge had thrice despatched their
only subaltern as galloper to report on the progress of affairs. On the third occasion he returned,
with a bullet-graze on his knee, swearing strange oaths in Hindustani, and saying that all
things were ready. So that Squadron swung round the right of the Highlanders with a wicked
whistling of wind in the pennons of its lances, and fell upon the remnant just when, according
to all the rules of war, it should have waited for the foe to show more signs of wavering.

But it was a dainty charge, deftly delivered, and it ended by the Cavalry finding itself at
the head of the pass by which the Afghans intended to retreat; and down the track that the
lances had made streamed two companies of the Highlanders, which was never intended by the
Brigadier. The new development was successful. It detached the enemy from his base as a sponge
is torn from a rock, and left him ringed about with fire in that pitiless plain. And as a sponge
is chased round the bath-tub by the hand of the bather, so were the Afghans chased till they
broke into little detachments much more difficult to dispose of than large masses.

'See!' quoth the Brigadier. 'Everything has come as I arranged. We've cut their base, and now
we'll bucket 'em to pieces.'

A direct hammering was all that the Brigadier had dared to hope for, considering the size of
the force at his disposal; but men who stand or fall by the errors of their opponents may be
forgiven for turning Chance into Design. The bucketing went forward merrily. The Afghan forces
were upon the run--the run of wearied wolves who snarl and bite over their shoulders. The red
lances dipped by twos and threes, and, with a shriek, up rose the lance-butt, like a spar on
a stormy sea, as the trooper cantering forward cleared his point. The Lancers kept between
their prey and the steep hills, for all who could were trying to escape from the valley of
death. The Highlanders gave the fugitives two hundred yards' law, and then brought them down,
gasping and choking ere they could reach the protection of the boulders above. The Gurkhas
followed suit; but the Fore and Aft were killing on their own account, for they had penned
a mass of men between their bayonets and a wall of rock, and the flash of the rifles was lighting
the wadded coats.

'We cannot hold them, Captain Sahib!' panted a Ressaidar of Lancers. 'Let us try the carbine.
The lance is good, but it wastes time.'

They tried the carbine, and still the enemy melted away--fled up the hills by hundreds when
there were only twenty bullets to stop them. On the heights the screw-guns ceased firing--they
had run out of ammunition--and the Brigadier groaned, for the musketry fire could not sufficiently
smash the retreat. Long before the last volleys were fired, the doolies were out in force looking
for the wounded. The battle was over, and, but for want of fresh troops, the Afghans would
have been wiped off the earth. As it was they counted their dead by hundreds, and nowhere were
the dead thicker than in the track of the Fore and Aft.

But the Regiment did not cheer with the Highlanders, nor did they dance uncouth dances with
the Gurkhas among the dead. They looked under their brows at the Colonel as they leaned upon
their rifles and panted.

'Get back to camp, you. Haven't you disgraced yourself enough for one day! Go and look to the
wounded. It's all you're fit for,' said the Colonel. Yet for the past hour the Fore and Aft
had been doing all that mortal commander could expect. They had lost heavily because they did
not know how to set about their business with proper skill, but they had borne themselves gallantly,
and this was their reward.

A young and sprightly Colour-Sergeant, who had begun to imagine himself a hero, offered his
water-bottle to a Highlander, whose tongue was black with thirst. 'I drink with no cowards,'
answered the youngster huskily, and, turning to a Gurkha, said, 'Hya, Johnny! Drink water got
it?' The Gurkha grinned and passed his bottle. The Fore and Aft said no word.

They went back to camp when the field of strife had been a little mopped up and made presentable,
and the Brigadier, who saw himself a Knight in three months, was the only soul who was complimentary
to them. The Colonel was heart-broken, and the officers were savage and sullen.

'Well,' said the Brigadier, 'they are young troops of course, and it was not unnatural that
they should retire in disorder for a bit.'

'Oh, my only Aunt Maria!' murmured a junior Staff Officer. 'Retire in disorder! It was a bally
run!'

'But they came again, as we all know,' cooed the Brigadier, the Colonel's ashy-white face before
him, 'and they behaved as well as could possibly be expected. Behaved beautifully, indeed.
I was watching them. It's not a matter to take to heart, Colonel. As some German General said
of his men, they wanted to be shooted over a little, that was all.' To himself he said--'Now
they're blooded I can give 'em responsible work. It's as well that they got what they did.
'Teach 'em more than half-a-dozen rifle flirtations, that will--later--run alone and bite.
Poor old Colonel, though.'

All that afternoon the heliograph winked and flickered on the hills, striving to tell the good
news to a mountain forty miles away. And in the evening there arrived, dusty, sweating, and
sore, a misguided Correspondent, who had gone out to assist at a trumpery village-burning,
and who had read off the message from afar, cursing his luck the while.

'Let's have the details somehow--as full as ever you can, please. It's the first time I've
ever been left this campaign,' said the Correspondent to the Brigadier; and the Brigadier,
nothing loath, told him how an Army of Communication had been crumpled up, destroyed, and all
but annihilated, by the craft, strategy, wisdom, and foresight of the Brigadier.

But some say, and among these be the Gurkhas who watched on the hillside, that that battle
was won by Jakin and Lew, whose little bodies were borne up just in time to fit two gaps at
the head of the big ditch-grave for the dead under the heights of Jagai. They went to camps
that were not of exercise and battles without empires.

FOOTNOTES:

[2] Confined to barracks. My!
          Don't yer come anigh,
    When Tommy is a playin' with the baynit an' the butt.

                    Barrack Room Ballad.

My friend Private Mulvaney told me this, sitting on the parapet of the road to Dagshai, when
we were hunting butterflies together. He had theories about the Army, and coloured clay pipes
perfectly. He said that the young soldier is the best to work with, 'on account av the surpassing
innocinse av the child.'

'Now, listen!' said Mulvaney, throwing himself full length on the wall in the sun. 'I'm a born
scutt av the barrick-room! The Army's mate an' dhrink to me, bekaze I'm wan av the few that
can't quit ut. I've put in sivinteen years, an' the pipeclay's in the marrow av me. Av I cud
have kept out av wan big dhrink a month, I wud have been a Hon'ry Lift'nint by this time--a
nuisince to my betthers, a laughin'-shtock to my equils, an' a curse to meself. Bein' fwhat
I am, I'm Privit Mulvaney, wid no good-conduc' pay an' a devourin' thirst. Always barrin' me
little frind Bobs Bahadur, I know as much about the Army as most men.'

I said something here.

'Wolseley be shot! Betune you an' me an' that butterfly net, he's a ramblin', incoherint sort
av a divil, wid wan oi on the Quane an' the Coort, an' the other on his blessed silf--everlastin'ly
playing Saysar an' Alexandrier rowled into a lump. Now Bobs is a sensible little man. Wid Bobs
an' a few three-year-olds, I'd swape any army av the earth into a towel, an' throw it away
aftherwards. Faith, I'm not jokin'! 'Tis the bhoys--the raw bhoys--that don't know fwhat a
bullut manes, an' wudn't care av they did--that dhu the work. They're crammed wid bull-mate
till they fairly ramps wid good livin'; and thin, av they don't fight, they blow each other's
hids off. 'Tis the trut' I'm tellin' you. They shud be kept on water an' rice in the hot weather;
but there'd be a mut'ny av 'twas done.

'Did ye iver hear how Privit Mulvaney tuk the town av Lungtungpen? I thought not! 'Twas the
Lift'nint got the credit; but 'twas me planned the schame. A little before I was inviladed
from Burma, me an' four-an'-twenty young wans undher a Lift'nint Brazenose was ruinin' our
dijeshins thryin' to catch dacoits. An' such double-ended divils I niver knew! 'Tis only a
dah an' a Snider that makes a dacoit. Widout thim, he's a paceful cultivator, an' felony for
to shoot. We hunted, an' we hunted, an' tuk fever an' elephints now an' again; but no dacoits.
Evenshually, we puckarowed wan man. "Trate him tinderly," sez the Lift'nint. So I tuk him away
into the jungle, wid the Burmese Interprut'r an' my clanin'-rod. Sez I to the man, "My paceful
squireen," sez I, "you shquot on your hunkers an' dimonstrate to my frind here, where your
frinds are whin they're at home?" Wid that I introjuced him to the clanin'-rod, an' he comminst
to jabber; the Interprut'r interprutin' in betweens, an' me helpin' the Intilligince Departmint
wid my clanin'-rod whin the man misremimbered.

'Prisintly, I learn that, acrost the river, about nine miles away, was a town just dhrippin'
wid dahs, an' bohs an' arrows, an' dacoits, an' elephints, an' jingles. "Good!" sez I; "this
office will now close!"

'That night, I went to the Lift'nint an' communicates my information. I never thought much
of Lift'nint Brazenose till that night. He was shtiff wid books an' the-ouries, an' all manner
av thrimmin's no manner av use. "Town did ye say?" sez he. "Accordin' to the-ouries av War,
we shud wait for reinforcemints."--"Faith!" thinks I, "we'd betther dig our graves thin"; for
the nearest throops was up to their shtocks in the marshes out Mimbu way. "But," says the Lift'nint,
"since 'tis a speshil case, I'll make an excepshin. We'll visit this Lungtungpen to-night."

'The bhoys was fairly woild wid deloight whin I tould 'em; an', by this an' that, they wint
through the jungle like buck-rabbits. About midnight we come to the shtrame which I had clane
forgot to minshin to my orficer. I was on, ahead, wid four bhoys, an' I thought that the Lift'nint
might want to the-ourise. "Shtrip, bhoys," sez I. "Shtrip to the buff, an' shwim in where glory
waits!"--"But I can't shwim!" sez two av thim. "To think I should live to hear that from a
bhoy wid a board-school edukashin!" sez I. "Take a lump av thimber, an' me an' Conolly here
will ferry ye over, ye young ladies!"

'We got an ould tree-trunk, an' pushed off wid the kits an' the rifles on it. The night was
chokin' dhark, an' just as we was fairly embarked, I heard the Lift'nint behind av me callin'
out. "There's a bit av a nullah here, Sorr," sez I, "but I can feel the bottom already." So
I cud, for I was not a yard from the bank."

'"Bit av a nullah! Bit av an eshtuary!" sez the Lift'nint. "Go on, ye mad Irishman! Shtrip,
bhoys!" I heard him laugh; an' the bhoys began shtrippin' an' rollin' a log into the wather
to put their kits on. So me an' Conolly shtruck out through the warm wather wid our log, an'
the rest come on behind.

'That shtrame was miles woide! Orth'ris, on the rear-rank log, whispers we had got into the
Thames below Sheerness by mistake. "Kape on shwimmin', ye little blayguard," sez I, "an' don't
go pokin' your dirty jokes at the Irriwaddy."--"Silince, men!" sings out the Lift'nint. So
we shwum on into the black dhark, wid our chests on the logs, trustin' in the Saints an' the
luck av the British Army.

'Evenshually, we hit ground--a bit av sand--an' a man. I put my heel on the back av him. He
skreeched an' ran.

'"Now we've done it!" sez Lift'nint Brazenose. "Where the Divil is Lungtungpen?" There was
about a minute and a half to wait. The bhoys laid a hould av their rifles an' some thried to
put their belts on; we was marchin' wid fixed baynits av coorse. Thin we knew where Lungtungpen
was; for we had hit the river-wall av it in the dhark, an' the whole town blazed wid thim messin'
jingles an' Sniders like a cat's back on a frosty night. They was firin' all ways at wanst;
but over our hids into the shtrame.

'"Have you got your rifles?" sez Brazenose. "Got 'em!" sez Orth'ris. "I've got that thief Mulvaney's
for all my back-pay, an' she'll kick my heart sick wid that blunderin' long shtock av hers."--"Go
on!" yells Brazenose, whippin' his sword out. "Go on an' take the town! An' the Lord have mercy
on our sowls!"

'Thin the bhoys gave wan divastatin' howl, an' pranced into the dhark, feelin' for the town,
an' blindin' an' stiffin' like Cavalry Ridin' Masters whin the grass pricked their bare legs.
I hammered wid the butt at some bamboo-thing that felt wake, an' the rest come an' hammered
contagious, while the jingles was jingling, an' feroshus yells from inside was shplittin' our
ears. We was too close under the wall for thim to hurt us.

'Evenshually, the thing, whatever ut was, bruk; an' the six-and-twinty av us tumbled, wan after
the other, naked as we was borrun, into the town of Lungtungpen. There was a melly av a sumpshus
kind for a whoile; but whether they tuk us, all white an' wet, for a new breed av divil, or
a new kind av dacoit, I don't know. They ran as though we was both, an' we wint into thim,
baynit an' butt, shriekin' wid laughin'. There was torches in the shtreets, an' I saw little
Orth'ris rubbin' his showlther ivry time he loosed my long-shtock Martini; an' Brazenose walkin'
into the gang wid his sword, like Diarmid av the Gowlden Collar--barring he hadn't a stitch
av clothin' on him. We diskivered elephints wid dacoits under their bellies, an', what wid
wan thing an' another, we was busy till mornin' takin' possession av the town of Lungtungpen.

'Thin we halted an' formed up, the wimmen howlin' in the houses an' Lift'nint Brazenose blushin'
pink in the light av the mornin' sun. 'Twas the most ondasint p'rade I iver tuk a hand in.
Foive-and-twenty privits an' an orficer av the Line in review ordher, an' not as much as wud
dust a fife betune 'em all in the way of clothin'! Eight av us had their belts an' pouches
on; but the rest had gone in wid a handful av cartridges an' the skin God gave thim. They was
as nakid as Vanus.

'"Number off from the right!" sez the Lift'nint. "Odd numbers fall out to dress; even numbers
pathrol the town till relieved by the dressing party." Let me tell you, pathrollin' a town
wid nothing on is an expayrience. I pathrolled for tin minutes, an' begad, before 'twas over,
I blushed. The women laughed so. I niver blushed before or since; but I blushed all over my
carkiss thin. Orth'ris didn't pathrol. He sez only, "Portsmith Barricks an' the 'Aard av a
Sunday!" Thin he lay down an' rowled any ways wid laughin'.

'Whin we was all dhressed, we counted the dead--sivinty-foive dacoits besides wounded. We tuk
five elephints, a hunder' an' sivinty Sniders, two hunder' dahs, and a lot av other burglarious
thruck. Not a man av us was hurt--excep' maybe the Lift'nint, an' he from the shock to his dasincy.

'The Headman av Lungtungpen, who surrinder'd himself, asked the Interprut'r--"Av the English
fight like that wid their clo'es off, what in the wurruld do they do wid their clo'es on?"
Orth'ris began rowlin' his eyes an' crackin' his fingers an' dancin' a step-dance for to impress
the Headman. He ran to his house; an' we spint the rest av the day carryin' the Lift'nint on
our showlthers round the town, an' playin' wid the Burmese babies--fat, little, brown little
divils, as pretty as picturs.

'Whin I was inviladed for the dysent'ry to India, I sez to the Lift'nint, "Sorr," sez I, "you've
the makin's in you av a great man; but, av you'll let an ould sodger spake, you're too fond
of the-ourisin'." He shuk hands wid me and sez, "Hit high, hit low, there's no plasin' you,
Mulvaney. You've seen me waltzin' through Lungtungpen like a Red Injin widout the war-paint,
an' you say I'm too fond av the-ourisin'?"--"Sorr," sez I, for I loved the bhoy; "I wud waltz
wid you in that condishin through Hell, an' so wud the rest av the men!" Thin I wint downshtrame
in the flat an' left him my blessin'. May the Saints carry ut where ut should go, for he was
a fine upstandin' young orficer.

'To reshume. Fwhat I've said jist shows the use av three-year-olds. Wud fifty seasoned sodgers
have taken Lungtungpen in the dhark that way? No! They'd know the risk av fever and chill.
Let alone the shootin'. Two hundher' might have done ut. But the three-year-olds know little
an' care less; an' where there's no fear, there's no danger. Catch thim young, feed thim high,
an' by the honour av that great little man Bobs, behind a good orficer 'tisn't only dacoits
they'd smash wid their clo'es off--'tis Con-ti-nental Ar-r-r-mies! They tuk Lungtungpen nakid;
an' they'd take St. Pethersburg in their dhrawers! Begad, they would that!

'Here's your pipe, Sorr. Shmoke her tinderly wid honey-dew, afther letting the reek av the
Canteen plug die away. But 'tis no good, thanks to you all the same, fillin' my pouch wid your
chopped hay. Canteen baccy's like the Army. It shpoils a man's taste for moilder things.'

So saying, Mulvaney took up his butterfly-net, and returned to barracks.

THE MADNESS OF PRIVATE ORTHERIS

    Oh! Where would I be when my froat was dry?
    Oh! Where would I be when the bullets fly?
    Oh! Where would I be when I come to die?
                       Why,
    Somewheres anigh my chum.
        If 'e's liquor 'e'll give me some,
        If I'm dyin' 'e'll 'old my 'ead,
        An' 'e'll write 'em 'Ome when I'm dead.--
        Gawd send us a trusty chum!

                    Barrack Room Ballad.

My friends Mulvaney and Ortheris had gone on a shooting expedition for one day. Learoyd was
still in hospital, recovering from fever picked up in Burma. They sent me an invitation to
join them, and were genuinely pained when I brought beer--almost enough beer to satisfy two
Privates of the Line--and Me.

''Twasn't for that we bid you welkim, Sorr,' said Mulvaney sulkily. ''Twas for the pleasure
av your comp'ny.'

Ortheris came to the rescue with--'Well, 'e won't be none the worse for bringin' liquor with
'im. We ain't a file o' Dooks. We're bloomin' Tommies, ye cantankris Hirishman; an' 'ere's
your very good 'ealth!'

We shot all the forenoon, and killed two pariah-dogs, four green parrots, sitting, one kite
by the burning-ghaut, one snake flying, one mud-turtle, and eight crows. Game was plentiful.
Then we sat down to tiffin--'bull-mate an' bran bread,' Mulvaney called it--by the side of
the river, and took pot shots at the crocodiles in the intervals of cutting up the food with
our only pocket-knife. Then we drank up all the beer, and threw the bottles into the water
and fired at them. After that, we eased belts and stretched ourselves on the warm sand and
smoked. We were too lazy to continue shooting.

Ortheris heaved a big sigh, as he lay on his stomach with his head between his fists. Then
he swore quietly into the blue sky.

'Fwhat's that for?' said Mulvaney. 'Have ye not drunk enough?'

'Tott'nim Court Road, an' a gal I fancied there. Wot's the good of sodgerin'?'

'Orth'ris, me son,' said Mulvaney hastily, ''tis more than likely you've got throuble in your
inside wid the beer. I feel that way mesilf whin my liver gets rusty.'

Ortheris went on slowly, not heeding the interruption:--

'I'm a Tommy--a bloomin', eight-anna, dog-stealin' Tommy, with a number instead of a decent
name. Wot's the good o' me? If I 'ad a stayed at 'Ome, I might a married that gal and a kep'
a little shorp in the 'Ammersmith 'Igh.--"S. Orth'ris, Prac-ti-cal Taxi-der-mist." With a stuff'
fox, like they 'as in the Haylesbury Dairies, in the winder, an' a little case of blue and
yaller glass-heyes, an' a little wife to call "shorp!" "shorp!" when the door-bell rung. As
it his, I'm on'y a Tommy--a Bloomin' Gawd-forsaken Beer-swillin' Tommy. "Rest on your harms--'versed.
Stan' at--hease; 'shun. 'Verse--harms. Right an' lef'--tarrn. Slow--march. 'Alt--front. Rest
on your harms--'versed. With blank-cartridge--load." An' that's the end o' me.' He was quoting
fragments from Funeral Parties' Orders.

'Stop ut!' shouted Mulvaney. 'Whin you've fired into nothin' as often as me, over a better
man than yoursilf, you will not make a mock av thim orders. 'Tis worse than whistlin' the Dead
March in barricks. An' you full as a tick, an' the sun cool, an' all an' all! I take shame
for you. You're no better than a Pagin--you an' your firin'-parties an' your glass-eyes. Won't
you stop ut, Sorr?'

What could I do? Could I tell Ortheris anything that he did not know of the pleasures of his
life? I was not a Chaplain nor a Subaltern, and Ortheris had a right to speak as he thought fit.

'Let him run, Mulvaney,' I said. 'It's the beer.'

'No! 'Tisn't the beer,' said Mulvaney. 'I know fwhat's comin'. He's tuk this way now an' agin,
an' it's bad--it's bad--for I'm fond av the bhoy.'

Indeed, Mulvaney seemed needlessly anxious; but I knew that he looked after Ortheris in a fatherly
way.

'Let me talk, let me talk,' said Ortheris dreamily. 'D'you stop your parrit screamin' of a
'ot day when the cage is a-cookin' 'is pore little pink toes orf, Mulvaney?'

'Pink toes! D'ye mane to say you've pink toes undher your bullswools, ye blandanderin','--Mulvaney
gathered himself together for a terrific denunciation--'school-misthress! Pink toes! How much
Bass wid the label did that ravin' child dhrink?'

''Tain't Bass,' said Ortheris. 'It's a bitterer beer nor that. It's 'ome-sickness!'

'Hark to him! An' he goin' Home in the Sherapis in the inside av four months!'

'I don't care. It's all one to me. 'Ow d'you know I ain't 'fraid o' dyin' 'fore I gets my discharge
paipers?' He recommenced, in a sing-song voice, the Orders.

I had never seen this side of Ortheris's character before, but evidently Mulvaney had, and
attached serious importance to it. While Ortheris babbled, with his head on his arms, Mulvaney
whispered to me:--

'He's always tuk this way whin he's been checked overmuch by the childher they make Sarjints
nowadays. That an' havin' nothin' to do. I can't make ut out anyways.'

'Well, what does it matter? Let him talk himself through.'

Ortheris began singing a parody of The Ramrod Corps, full of cheerful allusions to battle,
murder, and sudden death. He looked out across the river as he sang; and his face was quite
strange to me. Mulvaney caught me by the elbow to ensure attention.

'Matther? It matthers everything! 'Tis some sort av fit that's on him. I've seen ut. 'Twill
hould him all this night, an' in the middle av it he'll get out av his cot an' go rakin' in
the rack for his 'courtremints. Thin he'll come over to me an' say, "I'm goin' to Bombay. Answer
for me in the mornin'." Thin me an' him will fight as we've done before--him to go an' me to
hould him--an' so we'll both come on the books for disturbin' in barricks. I've belted him,
an' I've bruk his head, an' I've talked to him, but 'tis no manner av use whin the fit's on
him. He's as good a bhoy as ever stepped whin his mind's clear. I know fwhat's comin', though,
this night in barricks. Lord send he doesn't loose on me whin I rise to knock him down. 'Tis
that that's in my mind day an' night.'

This put the case in a much less pleasant light, and fully accounted for Mulvaney's anxiety.
He seemed to be trying to coax Ortheris out of the fit; for he shouted down the bank where
the boy was lying:--

'Listen now, you wid the "pore pink toes" an' the glass-eyes! Did you shwim the Irriwaddy at
night, behin' me, as a bhoy shud; or were you hidin' under a bed, as you was at Ahmid Kheyl?'

This was at once a gross insult and a direct lie, and Mulvaney meant it to bring on a fight.
But Ortheris seemed shut up in some sort of trance. He answered slowly, without a sign of irritation,
in the same cadenced voice as he had used for his firing-party orders:--

'Hi swum the Irriwaddy in the night, as you know, for to take the town of Lungtungpen, nakid
an' without fear. Hand where I was at Ahmed Kheyl you know, and four bloomin' Paythans know
too. But that was summat to do, an' I didn't think o' dyin'. Now I'm sick to go 'Ome--go 'Ome--go
'Ome! No, I ain't mammysick, because my uncle brung me up, but I'm sick for London again; sick
for the sounds of 'er, an' the sights of 'er, and the stinks of 'er; orange-peel and hasphalte
an' gas comin' in over Vaux'all Bridge. Sick for the rail goin' down to Box 'Ill, with your
gal on your knee an' a new clay pipe in your face. That, an' the Stran' lights where you knows
ev'ry one, an' the Copper that takes you up is a old friend that tuk you up before, when you
was a little, smitchy boy lying loose 'tween the Temple an' the Dark Harches. No bloomin' guard-mountin',
no bloomin' rotten-stone, nor khaki, an' yourself your own master with a gal to take an' see
the Humaners practisin' a-hookin' dead corpses out of the Serpentine o' Sundays. An' I lef'
all that for to serve the Widder beyond the seas, where there ain't no women and there ain't
no liquor worth 'avin', and there ain't nothin' to see, nor do, nor say, nor feel, nor think.
Lord love you, Stanley Orth'ris, but you're a bigger bloomin' fool than the rest o' the reg'ment
and Mulvaney wired together! There's the Widder sittin' at 'Ome with a gold crownd on 'er 'ead;
and 'ere am Hi, Stanley Orth'ris, the Widder's property, a rottin' FOOL!'

His voice rose at the end of the sentence, and he wound up with a six-shot Anglo-Vernacular
oath. Mulvaney said nothing, but looked at me as if he expected that I could bring peace to
poor Ortheris's troubled brain.

I remembered once at Rawal Pindi having seen a man, nearly mad with drink, sobered by being
made a fool of. Some regiments may know what I mean. I hoped that we might slake off Ortheris
in the same way, though he was perfectly sober. So I said:--

'What's the use of grousing there, and speaking against The Widow?'

'I didn't!' said Ortheris. 'S'elp me, Gawd, I never said a word agin 'er, an' I wouldn't--not
if I was to desert this minute!'

Here was my opening. 'Well, you meant to, anyhow. What's the use of cracking-on for nothing?
Would you slip it now if you got the chance?'

'On'y try me!' said Ortheris, jumping to his feet as if he had been stung.

Mulvaney jumped too. 'Fwhat are you going to do?' said he.

'Help Ortheris down to Bombay or Karachi, whichever he likes. You can report that he separated
from you before tiffin, and left his gun on the bank here!'

'I'm to report that--am I?' said Mulvaney slowly. 'Very well. If Orth'ris manes to desert now,
and will desert now, an' you, Sorr, who have been a frind to me an' to him, will help him to
ut, I, Terence Mulvaney, on my oath which I've never bruk yet, will report as you say. But----'
here he stepped up to Ortheris, and shook the stock of the fowling-piece in his face--'your
fistes help you, Stanley Orth'ris, if ever I come across you agin!'

'I don't care!' said Ortheris. 'I'm sick o' this dorg's life. Give me a chanst. Don't play
with me. Le' me go!'

'Strip,' said I, 'and change with me, and then I'll tell you what to do.'

I hoped that the absurdity of this would check Ortheris; but he had kicked off his ammunition-boots
and got rid of his tunic almost before I had loosed my shirt-collar. Mulvaney gripped me by
the arm:--

'The fit's on him: the fit's workin' on him still! By my Honour and Sowl, we shall be accessiry
to a desartion yet. Only twenty-eight days, as you say, Sorr, or fifty-six, but think o' the
shame--the black shame to him an' me!' I had never seen Mulvaney so excited.

But Ortheris was quite calm, and, as soon as he had exchanged clothes with me, and I stood
up a Private of the Line, he said shortly, 'Now! Come on. What nex'? D'ye mean fair. What must
I do to get out o' this 'ere a-Hell?'

I told him that, if he would wait for two or three hours near the river, I would ride into
the Station and come back with one hundred rupees. He would, with that money in his pocket,
walk to the nearest side-station on the line, about five miles away, and would there take a
first-class ticket for Karachi. Knowing that he had no money on him when he went out shooting,
his regiment would not immediately wire to the seaports, but would hunt for him in the native
villages near the river. Further, no one would think of seeking a deserter in a first-class
carriage. At Karachi, he was to buy white clothes and ship, if he could, on a cargo-steamer.

Here he broke in. If I helped him to Karachi, he would arrange all the rest. Then I ordered
him to wait where he was until it was dark enough for me to ride into the station without my
dress being noticed. Now God in His wisdom has made the heart of the British Soldier, who is
very often an unlicked ruffian, as soft as the heart of a little child, in order that he may
believe in and follow his officers into tight and nasty places. He does not so readily come
to believe in a 'civilian,' but, when he does, he believes implicitly and like a dog. I had
had the honour of the friendship of Private Ortheris, at intervals, for more than three years,
and we had dealt with each other as man by man. Consequently, he considered that all my words
were true, and not spoken lightly.

Mulvaney and I left him in the high grass near the river-bank, and went away, still keeping
to the high grass, towards my horse. The shirt scratched me horribly.

We waited nearly two hours for the dusk to fall and allow me to ride off. We spoke of Ortheris
in whispers, and strained our ears to catch any sound from the spot where we had left him.
But we heard nothing except the wind in the plume-grass.

'I've bruk his head,' said Mulvaney earnestly, 'time an' agin. I've nearly kilt him wid the
belt, an' yet I can't knock thim fits out av his soft head. No! An' he's not soft, for he's
reasonable an' likely by natur'. Fwhat is ut? Is ut his breedin' which is nothin', or his edukashin
which he niver got? You that think ye know things, answer me that.'

But I found no answer. I was wondering how long Ortheris, in the bank of the river, would hold
out, and whether I should be forced to help him to desert, as I had given my word.

Just as the dusk shut down and, with a very heavy heart, I was beginning to saddle up my horse,
we heard wild shouts from the river.

The devils had departed from Private Stanley Ortheris, No. 22639, B company. The loneliness,
the dusk, and the waiting had driven them out as I had hoped. We set off at the double and
found him plunging about wildly through the grass, with his coat off--my coat off, I mean.
He was calling for us like a madman.

When we reached him he was dripping with perspiration, and trembling like a startled horse.
We had great difficulty in soothing him. He complained that he was in civilian kit, and wanted
to tear my clothes off his body. I ordered him to strip, and we made a second exchange as quickly
as possible.

The rasp of his own 'grayback' shirt and the squeak of his boots seemed to bring him to himself.
He put his hands before his eyes and said:--

'Wot was it? I ain't mad, I ain't sunstrook, an' I've bin an' gone an' said, an' bin an' gone
an' done---- Wot 'ave I bin an' done!'

'Fwhat have you done?' said Mulvaney. 'You've dishgraced yourself--though that's no matter.
You've dishgraced B comp'ny, an' worst av all, you've dishgraced Me! Me that taught you how
for to walk abroad like a man--whin you was a dhirty little, fish-backed little, whimperin'
little recruity. As you are now, Stanley Orth'ris!'

Ortheris said nothing for a while. Then he unslung his belt, heavy with the badges of half-a-dozen
regiments that his own had lain with, and handed it over to Mulvaney.

'I'm too little for to mill you, Mulvaney,' said he, 'an' you've strook me before; but you
can take an' cut me in two with this 'ere if you like.'

Mulvaney turned to me.

'Lave me to talk to him, Sorr,' said Mulvaney.

I left, and on my way home thought a good deal over Ortheris in particular, and my friend Private
Thomas Atkins, whom I love, in general.

But I could not come to any conclusion of any kind whatever.

THE END

    NEW UNIFORM EDITION OF THE STORIES AND POEMS OF RUDYARD
    KIPLING. Seven volumes, 12mo, cloth.

    PLAIN TALES FROM THE HILLS.

    New Edition. 12mo, cloth, $1.25.

    "Mr. Kipling knows and appreciates the English in India, and
    is a born storyteller and a man of humour into the bargain....
    It would be hard to find better reading."--The Saturday
    Review, London.

    THE LIGHT THAT FAILED.

    New Edition. 12mo, cloth, $1.25.

    "'The Light that Failed' is an organic whole--a book with a
    backbone--and stands out boldly among the nerveless, flaccid,
    invertebrate things that enjoy an expensive but ephemeral
    existence in the circulating libraries."--The Athenæum.

    LIFE'S HANDICAP.

    STORIES OF MINE OWN PEOPLE.

    New Edition. 12mo, cloth, $1.25.

    "No volume of his yet published gives a better illustration of
    his genius, and of the weird charm which has given his stories
    such deserved popularity."--Boston Daily Traveler.

    THE NAULAHKA.

    A Story of East and West.

    By RUDYARD KIPLING and WOLCOTT BALESTIER.

    12mo, cloth, $1.25.

    "What is the most surprising, and at the same time most
    admirable, in this book, is the manner in which Mr. Kipling
    seems to grasp the character of the native women; we know of
    nothing in the English language of its kind to compare with
    Chapter XX. in its delicacy and genuine sympathy."

    UNDER THE DEODARS, THE PHANTOM 'RICKSHAW, AND WEE WILLIE
    WINKIE.

    With additional matter, now published for the first time.
    12mo, cloth, $1.25.

    SOLDIERS THREE, THE STORY OF THE GADSBYS, and BLACK AND WHITE.

    Also together with additional matter.

    12mo, cloth, $1.25.

    BALLADS AND BARRACK-ROOM BALLADS.

    12mo, cloth, $1.25.

    "Mr. Kipling differs from other ballad-writers of the day in
    that he has that rare possession, imagination, and he has the
    temerity to speak out what is in him with no conventional
    reservations or deference to the hypocrisies of public
    opinion."--Boston Beacon.

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY, 66 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK.

    WORKS BY ROLF BOLDREWOOD.

    ROBBERY UNDER ARMS.

    New Edition. 12mo. Cloth. $1.25.

    "We have nothing but praise for this story. Of adventure of
    the most stirring kind there is, as we have said, abundance.
    But there is more than this. The characters are drawn with
    great skill. This is a book of no common literary
    force."--Spectator.

    THE MINER'S RIGHT.

    A TALE OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOLD FIELDS.

    12mo. Cloth. $1.25.

    "Full of good passages, passages abounding in vivacity, in the
    color and play of lif.... The pith of the book lies in its
    singularly fresh and vivid pictures of the humors of the
    gold-fields; tragic humors enough they are too."--World.

    THE SQUATTER'S DREAM.

    12mo. Cloth. $1.25.

    "A story of Australian life, told with directness and force.
    The author's mastery of his subjects adds much to the
    impressiveness of the story, which no doubt might be told as
    literally true of hundreds of restless and ambitious young
    Australians."--N.Y. Tribune.

    A COLONIAL REFORMER.

    12mo. Cloth. $1.25.

    "Rolf Boldrewood has written much and well on the Australian
    colonies, but chiefly in the form of novels, and good novels
    they are too. The Australian scenes, rural and urban, are
    vividly described by Mr. Boldrewood, and there are among the
    characters examples of the various adventurers and rogues that
    infest new countries, which recall our early California days.
    Whoever wants to know how they live in Australia will have the
    want supplied."--Philadelphia Evening Bulletin.

    "One of the most interesting books about Australia we have
    ever read."--Glasgow Herald.

    NEVERMORE.

    12mo. Cloth. $1.25.

    "The plot of this story is skilfully drawn, the various
    characters are delineated with unusual power. The book is rich
    in local color, as it is in graphic description and moving
    incident."--Week.

    "The story is told with such naturalness and minuteness of
    detail that it seems to be a narrative of actual occurrences
    rather than a creation of the imagination."--Home Journal.

    A MODERN BUCCANEER.

    12mo. Cloth. $1.25.

    "The book from cover to cover is filled with incident and
    charming descriptions. A novel of rare merit."--Nashua
    Republican.

    "The characters are drawn with great skill."--Philadelphia
    Press.

    "The work is a vivid story of the sea, and is full of
    adventure, with sustained interest to the last page of the
    volume."--New York Observer.

    THE CROOKED STICK; or, Polly's Probation.

    12mo. Cloth. $1.25.

    "His characters are drawn with skill, his localities are
    strongly individualized, and his directness and vivacity
    display no common literary force."--Boston Journal.

    "A fascinating novel."--The Press.

    "The book is very charming and satisfying. Its local
    descriptions of the wild and arid region of Corindah and
    pictures of Australian farm and domestic life are peculiarly
    attractive."--Boston Home Journal.

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY, 66 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK.

