When it was my turn to speak, I expressed the same opinions, but I added that it was not enough
to recompense people so unjustly ill-treated; that I thought a sum of money, such as it should
please the council to name, ought to be adjudged to them; and that as to an Intendant who abused
the authority of his office so much as to usurp that of the King and impose taxes, such as
pleased him by his own ordinances, and who threw people into dungeons as he thought fit by
his private authority, pillaging thus a province, I was of opinion that his Royal Highness
should be asked to make such an example of him that all the other Intendants might profit by it.

The majority of those who had spoken before me made signs that I was right, but did not speak
again.  Others were against me.  M. le Duc d'Orleans promised the liberation of the prisoners,
broke Courson's!, ordonnance, and all which had followed it; said that as for the rest, he
would take care these people should be well recompensed, and Courson well blamed; that he merited
worse, and, but for his father, would have received it.  As we were about to rise, I said it
would be as well to draw up the decree at once, and M. le Duc d'Orleans approved.  Noailles
pounced, like a bird of prey, upon paper and ink, and commenced writing. I bent down and read
as he wrote. Mr. PALMER was the accredited American correspondent at the British Front, and though
the days are happily passed when he was a neutral in name his position as an impartial spectator
gives him an advantage denied to the most veracious of our own correspondents.

Our French Allies too may be congratulated, by themselves as well as by us, on being observed by
eyes so shrewd and friendly. Anyone who has been in the war-zone and seen a French regiment resting
cannot fail to be struck by the acuteness of this remark; indeed it provides the key to what,
for an ordinary British mind, is a puzzle. It is one of Mr. PALMER'S many virtues that, although
his main business was to watch the soldiers and the fighting, he never forgets the man inside
the uniform. M. de Noailles had, in fact, so little command over himself,
that, in turning to go out, he struck the table, swearing, and saying he could endure it no longer.

I learnt afterwards, by frequenters of the Hotel de Noailles, who told it to my friends, that
when he reached home he went to bed: and would not see a soul; that fever seized him, that
the next day he was of a frightful temper, and, that he had been heard to say he could no longer
endure the annoyances I caused him.  It may be imagined whether or not this softened me.  The
Duc de Noailles had, in fact, behaved towards me with such infamous treachery, and such unmasked
impudence, that I took pleasure at all times and at all places in making him feel, and others
see, the sovereign disdain I entertained for him.  I did not allow my private feelings to sway
my judgment when public interests were at stake, for when I thought the Duc de Noailles right,
and this often occurred, I supported him; but when I knew him to be wrong, or when I caught
him neglecting his duties, conniving at injustice, shirking inquiry, or evading the truth,
I in no way spared him.  The incident just related is an illustration of the treatment he often
received at my hands.  Fret, fume, stamp, storm, as he might, I cared nothing for him.  His
anger to me was as indifferent as his friendship.  I despised both equally. Occasionally he
would imagine, after there had been no storm between us for some time, that I had become reconciled
to him, and would make advances to me.  But the stern and terrible manner in which I met them,
--or rather refused to meet them, taking no more notice of his politeness and his compliments,
than as if they made no appeal whatever to my eyes or ears,--soon convinced him of the permanent
nature of our quarrel, and drove him to the most violent rage and despair.

The history of the affair was, apparently, revealed by somebody to the deputies of Perigueux
(for this very evening it was talked of in Paris), who came and offered me many thanks.  Noailles
was so afraid of me, that he did not keep their business unsettled more than two days.

A few months afterwards Courson was recalled, amid the bonfires of his province.  This did
not improve him, or hinder him from obtaining afterwards one of the two places of councillor
at the Royal Council of Finance, for he was already Councillor of State at the time of this
affair of Perigueux.

An amusement, suited to the King's age, caused a serious quarrel.  A sort of tent had been
erected for him on the terrace of the Tuileries, before his apartments, and on the same level.
The diversions of kings always have to do with distinction.  He invented some medals to give
to the courtiers of his own age, whom he wished to distinguish, and those medals, which were
intended to be worn, conferred the right of entering this tent without being invited; thus
was created the Order of the Pavilion.  The Marechal de Villeroy gave orders to Lefevre to
have the medals made.  He obeyed, and brought them to the Marechal, who presented them to the
King.  Lefevre was silversmith to the King's household, and as such under the orders of the
first gentleman of the chamber.  The Duc de Mortemart, who had previously had some tiff with
the Marechal de Villeroy, declared that it devolved upon him to order these medals and present
them to the King. To the fiery one the heroine "unconsciously turns" when the apparent earmarks of
the hero's wormhood are dramatically revealed, and of course she hands him what she would probably
describe as the "sister" stuff when the gentleman emerges in his
natural colours.  Thus the Duc de Mortemart, opposed alone
to the Marechal de Villeroy, stood no chance.  M. le Duc d'Orleans, with his usual love for
mezzo termine, said that Lefevre had not made these medals, or brought them to the Marechal
as silversmith, but as having received through the Marechal the King's order, and that nothing
more must be said.  The Duc de Mortemart was indignant, and did not spare the Marechal.