The township of Haverhill, even as late as the close of the seventeenth century, was a frontier
settlement, occupying an advanced position in the great wilderness, which, unbroken by the
clearing of a white man, extended from the Merrimac River to the French villages on the St.
Francois.  A tract of twelve miles on the river and three or four northwardly was occupied
by scattered settlers, while in the centre of the town a compact village had grown up.  In
the immediate vicinity there were but few Indians, and these generally peaceful and inoffensive.
On the breaking out of the Narragansett war, the inhabitants had erected fortifications and
taken other measures for defence; but, with the possible exception of one man who was found
slain in the woods in 1676, none of the inhabitants were molested; and it was not until about
the year 1689 that the safety of the settlement was seriously threatened. Three persons were
killed in that year.  In 1690 six garrisons were established in different parts of the town,
with a small company of soldiers attached to each.  Two of these houses are still standing.
They were built of brick, two stories high, with a single outside door, so small and narrow
that but one person could enter at a time; the windows few, and only about two and a half feet
long by eighteen inches with thick diamond glass secured with lead, and crossed inside with
bars of iron.  The basement had but two rooms, and the chamber was entered by a ladder instead
of stairs; so that the inmates, if driven thither, could cut off communication with the rooms
below.  Many private houses were strengthened and fortified.  We remember one familiar to our
boyhood,-- a venerable old building of wood, with brick between the weather boards and ceiling,
with a massive balustrade over the door, constructed of oak timber and plank, with holes through
the latter for firing upon assailants.

Tradition has preserved many incidents of life in the garrisons.  In times of unusual peril
the settlers generally resorted at night to the fortified houses, taking thither their flocks
and herds and such household valuables as were most likely to strike the fancy or minister
to the comfort or vanity of the heathen marauders.  False alarms were frequent.  The smoke
of a distant fire, the bark of a dog in the deep woods, a stump or bush taking in the uncertain
light of stars and moon the appearance of a man, were sufficient to spread alarm through the
entire settlement, and to cause the armed men of the garrison to pass whole nights in sleepless
watching.  It is said that at Haselton's garrison-house the sentinel on duty saw, as he thought,
an Indian inside of the paling which surrounded the building, and apparently seeking to gain
an entrance.  He promptly raised his musket and fired at the intruder, alarming thereby the
entire garrison.  The women and children left their beds, and the men seized their guns and
commenced firing on the suspicious object; but it seemed to bear a charmed life, and remained
unharmed.  As the morning dawned, however, the mystery was solved by the discovery of a black
quilted petticoat hanging on the clothes-line, completely riddled with balls.

As a matter of course, under circumstances of perpetual alarm and frequent peril, the duty
of cultivating their fields, and gathering their harvests, and working at their mechanical
avocations was dangerous and difficult to the settlers.  One instance will serve as an illustration.
At the garrison-house of Thomas Dustin, the husband of the far-famed Mary Dustin, (who, while
a captive of the Indians, and maddened by the murder of her infant child, killed and scalped,
with the assistance of a young boy, the entire band of her captors, ten in number,) the business
of brick-making was carried on.  The pits where the clay was found were only a few rods from
the house; yet no man ventured to bring the clay to the yard within the enclosure without the
attendance of a file of soldiers. An anecdote relating to this garrison has been handed down
to the present tune.  Among its inmates were two young cousins, Joseph and Mary Whittaker;
the latter a merry, handsome girl, relieving the tedium of garrison duty with her light-hearted
mirthfulness, and

               "Making a sunshine in that shady place."

Joseph, in the intervals of his labors in the double capacity of brick- maker and man-at-arms,
was assiduous in his attentions to his fair cousin, who was not inclined to encourage him.
Growing desperate, he threatened one evening to throw himself into the garrison well.  His
threat only called forth the laughter of his mistress; and, bidding her farewell, he proceeded
to put it in execution.  On reaching the well he stumbled over a log; whereupon, animated by
a happy idea, he dropped the wood into the water instead of himself, and, hiding behind the
curb, awaited the result.  Mary, who had been listening at the door, and who had not believed
her lover capable of so rash an act, heard the sudden plunge of the wooden Joseph.  She ran
to the well, and, leaning over the curb and peering down the dark opening, cried out, in tones
of anguish and remorse, "O Joseph, if you're in the land of the living, I 'll have you!"  "I'll
take ye at your word," answered Joseph, springing up from his hiding-place, and avenging himself
for her coyness and coldness by a hearty embrace.

Our own paternal ancestor, owing to religious scruples in the matter of taking arms even for
defence of life and property, refused to leave his undefended house and enter the garrison.
The Indians frequently came to his house; and the family more than once in the night heard
them whispering under the windows, and saw them put their copper faces to the glass to take
a view of the apartments.  Strange as it may seen, they never offered any injury or insult
to the inmates.

In 1695 the township was many times molested by Indians, and several persons were killed and
wounded.  Early in the fall a small party made their appearance in the northerly part of the
town, where, finding two boys at work in an open field, they managed to surprise and capture
them, and, without committing further violence, retreated through the woods to their homes
on the shore of Lake Winnipesaukee.  Isaac Bradley, aged fifteen, was a small but active and
vigorous boy; his companion in captivity, Joseph Whittaker, was only eleven, yet quite as large
in size, and heavier in his movements.  After a hard and painful journey they arrived at the
lake, and were placed in an Indian family, consisting of a man and squaw and two or three children.
Here they soon acquired a sufficient knowledge of the Indian tongue to enable them to learn
from the conversation carried on in their presence that it was designed to take them to Canada
in the spring. [12] Then he had the prisoners led away and turned to speak to his officers, but at
this moment another scout appeared, saying that a large force of cavalry was in the plain.
"We think," he added, "that they are trying to get a sight of our army. For about thirty of
them are riding ahead at a good round pace and they seem to be coming straight for our little company,
perhaps to capture our look-out if they can, for there are only ten of us there."
  The poor boys, terrified by the prospect of being
carried still farther from their home and friends, began to dream of escaping from their masters
before they started for Canada.  It was now winter; it would have been little short of madness
to have chosen for flight that season of bitter cold and deep snows.  Owing to exposure and
want of proper food and clothing, Isaac, the eldest of the boys, was seized with a violent
fever, from which he slowly recovered in the course of the winter.  His Indian mistress was
as kind to him as her circumstances permitted,--procuring medicinal herbs and roots for her
patient, and tenderly watching over him in the long winter nights. Spring came at length; the
snows melted; and the ice was broken up on the lake.  The Indians began to make preparations
for journeying to Canada; and Isaac, who had during his sickness devised a plan of escape,
saw that the time of putting it in execution had come.  On the evening before he was to make
the attempt he for the first time informed his younger companion of his design, and told him,
if he intended to accompany him, he must be awake at the time appointed.  The boys lay down
as usual in the wigwam, in the midst of the family.  Joseph soon fell asleep; but Isaac, fully
sensible of the danger and difficulty of the enterprise before him, lay awake, watchful for
his opportunity.  About midnight he rose, cautiously stepping over the sleeping forms of the
family, and securing, as he went, his Indian master's flint, steel, and tinder, and a small
quantity of dry moose-meat and cornbread.  He then carefully awakened his companion, who, starting
up, forgetful of the cause of his disturbance, asked aloud, "What do you want?"  The savages
began to stir; and Isaac, trembling with fear of detection, lay down again and pretended to
be asleep.  After waiting a while he again rose, satisfied, from the heavy breathing of the
Indians, that they were all sleeping; and fearing to awaken Joseph a second time, lest he should
again hazard all by his thoughtlessness, he crept softly out of the wigwam.  He had proceeded
but a few rods when he heard footsteps behind him; and, supposing himself pursued, he hurried
into the woods, casting a glance backward.  What was his joy to see his young companion running
after him!  They hastened on in a southerly direction as nearly as they could determine, hoping
to reach their distant home.  When daylight appeared they found a large hollow log, into which
they crept for concealment, wisely judging that they would be hotly pursued by their Indian
captors.

Their sagacity was by no means at fault.  The Indians, missing their prisoners in the morning,
started off in pursuit with their dogs.  As the young boys lay in the log they could hear the
whistle of the Indians and the barking of dogs upon their track.  It was a trying moment; and
even the stout heart of the elder boy sank within him as the dogs came up to the log and set
up a loud bark of discovery.  But his presence of mind saved him.  He spoke in a low tone to
the dogs, who, recognizing his familiar voice, wagged their tails with delight and ceased barking.
He then threw to them the morsel of moose-meat he had taken from the wigwam. While the dogs
were thus diverted the Indians made their appearance.  The boys heard the light, stealthy sound
of their moccasins on the leaves. They passed close to the log; and the dogs, having devoured
their moose- meat, trotted after their masters.  Through a crevice in the log the boys looked
after them and saw them disappear in the thick woods.  They remained in their covert until
night, when they started again on their long journey, taking a new route to avoid the Indians.
At daybreak they again concealed themselves, but travelled the next night and day without resting.
By this time they had consumed all the bread which they had taken, and were fainting from hunger
and weariness.  Just at the close of the third day they were providentially enabled to kill
a pigeon and a small tortoise, a part of which they ate raw, not daring to make a fire, which
might attract the watchful eyes of savages.  On the sixth day they struck upon an old Indian
path, and, following it until night, came suddenly upon a camp of the enemy.  Deep in the heart
of the forest, under the shelter of a ridge of land heavily timbered, a great fire of logs
and brushwood was burning; and around it the Indians sat, eating their moose-meat and smoking
their pipes.

The poor fugitives, starving, weary, and chilled by the cold spring blasts, gazed down upon
the ample fire; and the savory meats which the squaws were cooking by it, but felt no temptation
to purchase warmth and food by surrendering themselves to captivity.  Death in the forest seemed
preferable.  They turned and fled back upon their track, expecting every moment to hear the
yells of pursuers.  The morning found them seated on the bank of a small stream, their feet
torn and bleeding, and their bodies emaciated.  The elder, as a last effort, made search for
roots, and fortunately discovered a few ground-nuts, (glicine apios) which served to refresh
in some degree himself and his still weaker companion. As they stood together by the stream,
hesitating and almost despairing, it occurred to Isaac that the rivulet might lead to a larger
stream of water, and that to the sea and the white settlements near it; and he resolved to
follow it. [28] For every one who eats porridge has the oatmeal mixed with water, and every one who
eats bread has the wheat soaked in water, and all boiled meat is prepared in water. We shall
not miss the wine if we drink a little after the meal is done.  Isaac endeavored to encourage him, dug roots, and procured water for
him; but the poor lad was utterly exhausted.  He had no longer heart or hope.  The elder boy
laid him on leaves and dry grass at the foot of a tree, and with a heavy heart bade him farewell.
Alone he slowly and painfully proceeded down the stream, now greatly increased in size by tributary
rivulets.  On the top of a hill, he climbed with difficulty into a tree, and saw in the distance
what seemed to be a clearing and a newly raised frame building.  Hopeful and rejoicing, he
turned back to his young companion, told him what he had seen, and, after chafing his limbs
awhile, got him upon his feet.  Sometimes supporting him, and at others carrying him on his
back, the heroic boy staggered towards the clearing.  On reaching it he found it deserted,
and was obliged to continue his journey.  Towards night signs of civilization began to appear,--the
heavy, continuous roar of water was heard; and, presently emerging from the forest, he saw
a great river dashing in white foam down precipitous rocks, and on its bank the gray walls
of a huge stone building, with flankers, palisades, and moat, over which the British flag was
flying.  This was the famous Saco Fort, built by Governor Phips two years before, just below
the falls of the Saco River. The soldiers of the garrison gave the poor fellows a kindly welcome.
Joseph, who was scarcely alive, lay for a long time sick in the fort; but Isaac soon regained
his strength, and set out for his home in Haverhill, which he had the good fortune to arrive
at in safety.

Amidst the stirring excitements of the present day, when every thrill of the electric wire
conveys a new subject for thought or action to a generation as eager as the ancient Athenians
for some new thing, simple legends of the past like that which we have transcribed have undoubtedly
lost in a great degree their interest.  The lore of the fireside is becoming obsolete, and
with the octogenarian few who still linger among us will perish the unwritten history of border
life in New England.

THE BLACK MEN IN THE REVOLUTION AND WAR OF 1812.

The return of the festival of our national independence has called our attention to a matter
which has been very carefully kept out of sight by orators and toast-drinkers.  We allude to
the participation of colored men in the great struggle for American freedom.  It is not in
accordance with our taste or our principles to eulogize the shedders of blood even in a cause
of acknowledged justice; but when we see a whole nation doing honor to the memories of one
class of its defenders to the total neglect of another class, who had the misfortune to be
of darker complexion, we cannot forego the satisfaction of inviting notice to certain historical
facts which for the last half century have been quietly elbowed aside, as no more deserving
of a place in patriotic recollection than the descendants of the men to whom the facts in question
relate have to a place in a Fourth of July procession.  They have had no historian.  With here
and there an exception, they have all passed away; and only some faint tradition of their campaigns
under Washington and Greene and Lafayette, and of their cruisings under Decatur and Barry,
lingers among their, descendants.  Yet enough is known to show that the free colored men of
the United States bore their full proportion of the sacrifices and trials of the Revolutionary War.

The late Governor Eustis, of Massachusetts,--the pride and boast of the democracy of the East,
himself an active participant in the war, and therefore a most competent witness,--Governor
Morrill, of New Hampshire, Judge Hemphill, of Pennsylvania, and other members of Congress,
in the debate on the question of admitting Missouri as a slave State into the Union, bore emphatic
testimony to the efficiency and heroism of the black troops.  At his request it was written
for, as he seemed inclined to spurn the pension and reclaim the discharge."  There is a touching
anecdote related of Baron Stenben on the occasion of the disbandment of the American army.
A black soldier, with his wounds unhealed, utterly destitute, stood on the wharf just as a
vessel bound for his distant home was getting under way.  The poor fellow gazed at the vessel
with tears in his eyes, and gave himself up to despair.  The warm-hearted foreigner witnessed
his emotion, and, inquiring into the cause of it, took his last dollar from his purse and gave
it to him, with tears of sympathy trickling down his cheeks.  Overwhelmed with gratitude, the
poor wounded soldier hailed the sloop and was received on board.  As it moved out from the
wharf, he cried back to his noble friend on shore, "God Almighty bless you, Master Baron!"
The late Dr. Harris, of Dunbarton, New Hampshire, a Revolutionary veteran, stated, in a speech
at Francistown, New Hampshire, some years ago, that on one occasion the regiment to which he
was attached was commanded to defend an important position, which the enemy thrice assailed,
and from which they were as often repulsed.

In the debate in the New York Convention of 1821 for amending the Constitution of the State,
on the question of extending the right of suffrage to the blacks, Dr. Clarke, the delegate
from Delaware County, and other members, made honorable mention of the services of the colored
troops in the Revolutionary army.

The late James Forten, of Philadelphia, well known as a colored man of wealth, intelligence,
and philanthropy, enlisted in the American navy under Captain Decatur, of the Royal Louis,
was taken prisoner during his second cruise, and, with nineteen other colored men, confined
on board the horrible Jersey prison-ship; All the vessels in the American service at that period
were partly manned by blacks.  The old citizens of Philadelphia to this day remember the fact
that, when the troops of the North marched through the city, one or more colored companies
were attached to nearly all the regiments.

