All, therefore, that the junior partner could do was to try to alarm Fenwick, as to the incidental
expenses involved--hanging, printing, service, etc. But Fenwick only laughed. 'I shall see
to that!' he said, contemptuously. 'And my pictures will sell, I tell you,' he added, raising
his voice. 'They'll bring a profit both to you and to me.'

The individual addressed said nothing. He was a tall, well-fed young man, in a faultless frock-coat,
and Fenwick, as they stood together in the office--the artist had not been offered a chair--disliked
him violently.

'Well, shall I pay you the rest?' said Fenwick, abruptly, turning to go, and fumbling at the
same time for the pocket-book in which he kept the notes.

The other gave a slight shrug.

'That's just as you please, Mr. Fenwick.'

'Well, here's fifty, anyway,' said Fenwick, drawing out a fifty-pound note and laying it on
the table.

'We are not in any hurry, I assure you.'

The young man stood looking at the artist, in an attitude of cool indifference; but at the
same time his hand secured the note, and placed it safely in the drawer of the table between them.

He wrote a receipt, and handed it to Fenwick.

'Good-day,' said Fenwick, turning to go.

The other followed him, and as they stepped out into the exhibition-rooms of the shop, hung
in dark purple, Fenwick perceived in the distance what looked like a fine Corot, and a Daubigny--and
paused.

'Got some good things, since I was here last?'

'Oh, we're always getting good things,' said his companion, carelessly, without the smallest
motion towards the pictures.

Fenwick nodded haughtily, and walked towards the door. But his soul smarted within him. Two
years before, the owners of any picture-shop in London would have received him with empressement,
have shown him all they had to show, and taken flattering note of his opinion.

On the threshold he ran against the Academician with the orange hair and beard, who had been
his fellow-guest at the Findon's on the night of his first dinner-party there. The orange hair
was now nearly white; its owner had grown to rotundity; but the sharp, glancing eyes and pompous
manner were the same as of old. Mr. Sherratt nodded curtly to Fenwick, and was then received
with bows and effusion by the junior partner standing behind.

'Ah, Mr. Sherratt!--delighted to see you! Come to look at the Corot? By all means! This way,
please.'

Fenwick pursued his course to Oxford Street in a morbid self-consciousness. It seemed to him
that all the world knew him by now for a failure and a bankrupt; that he was stared and pointed at.

He took refuge from this nightmare in an Oxford Street restaurant, and as he ate his midday
chop he asked himself, for the hundredth time, how the deuce it was that he had got into the
debts which weighed him down. He had been extravagant on the building and furnishing of his
house--but after all he had earned large sums of money. He sat gloomily over his meal--frowning--and
trying to remember. And once, amid the foggy darkness, there opened a vision of a Westmoreland
stream, and a pleading face upturned to his in the moonlight--'And then, you know, I could
look after money! You're dreadfully bad about money, John!'

The echo of that voice in his ears made him restless. He rose and set forth again--toward Fitzroy
Square.

On the way his thoughts recurred to the letter he had found waiting for him at the lawyer's.
It came from Phoebe's cousin, Freddy Tolson. Messrs. Butlin had traced this man anew--to a
mining town in New South Wales. He had been asked to come to England and testify--no matter
at what expense. In the letter just received--bearing witness in its improved writing and spelling
to the prosperous development of the writer--he declined to come, repeating that he knew nothing
whatever of his Cousin Phoebe's where-abouts, nor of her reasons for leaving her husband. He
gave a fresh and longer account of his conversation with her, as far as he could remember it
at this distance of time; and this longer account contained the remark that she had asked him
questions about other colonies than Australia, to which he was himself bound. He thought Canada
had been mentioned--the length of the passage there, and its cost. He had not paid much attention
to it at the time. It had seemed to him that she was glad, poor thing, of some one to have
a 'crack' with--'for I guess she'd been pretty lonesome up there.' But she might have had something
in her head--he couldn't say. All he could declare was that if she were in Canada, or any other
of the colonies, he had had no hand in it, and knew no more than a 'born baby' where she might
be hidden.

So now, on this vague hint, a number of fresh inquiries were to be set on foot. Fenwick hoped
nothing from them. Yet as he walked fast through the London streets, from which the fog was
lifting, his mind wrestled with vague images of great lakes, and virgin forests, and rolling
wheat-lands--of the streets of Montreal, or the Heights of Québec--and amongst them, now with
one background, now with another, the slender figure of a fair-haired woman with a child beside
her. And through his thoughts, furies of distress and fear pursued him--now as always.

'Well, this is a queer go, isn't it?' said Watson, in a half-whispering voice. 'Nature has
horrid ways of killing you. I wish she'd chosen a more expeditious one with me.'

Fenwick sat down beside his friend, the lamp-light in the old panelled room revealing, against
his will, his perturbed and shaken expression.

'How did this come on?' he asked.

'Of itself, my dear fellow'--laughed Watson, in the same hoarse whisper. 'My right lung has
been getting rotten for a year past, and at Marseilles it happened to break. That's my explanation,
anyway, and it does as well as the doctor's.--Well, how are you?'

Fenwick shifted uneasily, and made a vague answer.

Watson turned to look at him.

'What pictures have you on hand?'

Fenwick gave a list of the completed pictures still in his studio, and described the arrangements
made to exhibit them. He was not as ready as usual to speak of himself; his gaze and his attention
were fixed upon his friend. But Watson probed further, into the subjects of his recent work.
Fenwick was nearing the end, he explained, of a series of rustic 'Months' with their appropriate
occupations--an idea which had haunted his mind for years.

'As old as the hills,' said Watson, 'but none the worse for that. You've painted them, I suppose,
out-of-doors?'

Fenwick shrugged his shoulders.

'As much as possible.'

'Ah, that's where those French fellows have us,' said Watson, languidly. 'One of them said
to me in Paris the other day, "It's bad enough to paint the things you've seen--it's the devil
to paint the things you've not seen."'

'The usual fallacy,' said Fenwick, firing up. 'What do they mean by "seen"?'

He would have liked this time to go off at score. But a sure instinct told him that he was
beside a dying man; and he held himself back, trying instead to remember what small news and
gossip he could, for the amusement of his friend.

Watson sat in a deep armchair, propped up by pillows. The room in which they met had been a
very distinguished room in the eighteenth century. It had still some remains of carved panelling,
a graceful mantelpiece of Italian design, and a painted ceiling half-effaced. It was now part
of a lodging-house, furnished with shabby cheapness; but the beauty, once infused, persisted;
and it made no unworthy setting for a painter's death.

The signs of desperate illness in Richard Watson were indeed plainly visible. His shaggy hair
and thick, unkempt beard brought into relief the waxen or purple tones of the skin. The breath
was laboured and the cough frequent. But the eyes were still warm, living, and passionate,
the eyes of a Celt, with the Celtic gifts, and those deficiencies, also, of his race, broadly
and permanently expressed in the words of a great historian--'The Celts have shaken all States,
and founded none!' No founder, no achiever, this--no happy, harmonious soul--but a man who
had vibrated to life and Nature, in their subtler and sadder aspects, through whom the nobler
thoughts and ambitions had passed, like sound through strings, wringing out some fine, tragic
notes, some memorable tones. 'I can't last more than a week or two,' he said, presently, in
a pause of Fenwick's talk, to which he had hardly listened--'and a good job too. But I don't
find myself at all rebellious. I'm curiously content to go. I've had a good time.'

This from a man who had passed from one disappointed hope to another, brought the tears to
Fenwick's eyes.

'Some of us may wish we were going with you,' he said, in a low voice, laying his hand a moment
on his friend's knee.

Watson made no immediate reply. He coughed--fidgeted--and at last said:

'How's the money?'

Fenwick hastily drew himself up. 'All right.'

He reached out a hand to the tongs and put the fire together.

'Is that so?' said Watson. The slight incredulity in his voice touched some raw nerve in Fenwick.

'I don't want anything,' he said, almost angrily. 'I shall get through.'

Cuningham had been talking, no doubt. His affairs had been discussed. His morbid pride took
offence at once.

'Mine'll just hold out,' said Watson, presently, with a humorous inflexion--'it'll bury me,
I think--with a few shillings over. But I couldn't have afforded another year.'

There was silence a while--till a nurse came in to make up the fire. Fenwick began to talk
of old friends, and current exhibitions; and presently tea made its appearance. Watson's strength
seemed to revive. He sat more upright in his chair, his voice grew stronger, and he dallied
with his tea, joking hoarsely with his nurse, and asking Fenwick all the questions that occurred
to him. His face, in its rugged pallor and emaciation, and his great head, black or iron-grey
on the white pillows, were so fine that Fenwick could not take his eyes from him; with the
double sense of the artist, he saw the subject in the man; a study in black and white hovered
before him.

When the nurse had withdrawn, and they were alone again, in a silence made more intimate still
by the darkness of the panelled walls, which seemed to isolate them from the rest of the room,
enclosing them in a glowing ring of lamp and firelight, Fenwick was suddenly seized by an impulse
he could not master. He bent towards the sick man.

'Watson!--do you remember advising me to marry when we met in Paris?'

'Perfectly.'

The invalid turned his haggard eyes upon the speaker, in a sudden sharp attention.

There was a pause; then Fenwick said, with bent head, staring into the fire:

'Well--I am married.'

Watson gave a hoarse 'Phew!'--and waited.

'My wife left me twelve years ago and took our child with her. I don't know whether they are
alive or dead. I thought I'd like to tell you. It would have been better if I hadn't concealed
it, from you--and--and other friends.'

'Great Scott!' said Watson, slowly, bringing the points of his long, emaciated fingers together,
like one trying to master a new image. 'So that's been the secret--'

'Of what?' said Fenwick, testily; but as Watson merely replied by an interrogative and attentive
silence, he threw himself into his tale--headlong. He told it at far greater length than Eugénie
had ever heard it; and throughout, the subtle, instinctive appeal of man to man governed the
story, differentiating it altogether from the same story, told to a woman.

He spoke impetuously, with growing emotion, conscious of an infinite relief and abandonment.
Watson listened with scarcely a comment. Midway a little pattering, scuffling noise startled
the speaker. He looked round and saw the monkey, Anatole, who had been lying asleep in his
basket. Watson nodded to Fenwick to go on, and then feebly motioned to his knee. The monkey
clambered there, and Watson folded his bony arms round the creature, who lay presently with
his weird face pressed against his master's dressing-gown, his melancholy eyes staring out
at Fenwick.

'It was Madame she was jealous of?' said Watson, when the story came to an end.

Fenwick hesitated--then nodded reluctantly. He had spoken merely of 'one of my sitters.' But
it was not possible to fence with this dying man.

'And Madame knows?'

'Yes.'

But Fenwick sharply regretted the introduction of Madame de Pastourelles' name. He had brought
the story down merely to the point of Phoebe's flight and the search which followed, adding
only--with vagueness--that the search had lately been renewed, without success.

Watson pondered the matter for some time. Fenwick took out his handkerchief and wiped a brow
damp with perspiration. His story--added to the miseries of the day--had excited and shaken
him still further.

Suddenly Watson put out a hand and seized his wrist. The grip hurt.

'Lucky dog!'

'What on earth do you mean?'

'You've lost them--but you've had a woman in your arms--a child on your knee! You don't go
to your grave--[Greek: apraktos]--an ignorant, barren fool--like me!'

Fenwick looked at him in amazement. Self-scorn--bitter and passionate regret--transformed the
face beside him. He pressed the fevered hand.

'Watson!--dear fellow!'

Watson withdrew his hand, and once more folded the monkey to him.

'There are plenty of men like me,' he muttered. 'We are afraid of living--and art is our refuge.
Then art takes its revenge--and we are bad artists, because we are poor and sterilised human
beings. But you'--he spoke with fresh energy, composing himself--'don't talk rot!--as though
your chance was done. You'll find her--she'll come back to you--when she's drunk the cup. Healthy
young women don't die before thirty-five;--and by your account she wasn't bad--she had a conscience.
The child'll waken it. Don't you be hard on her!'--he raised himself, speaking almost fiercely--'you've
no right to! Take her in--listen to her--let her cry it out. My God!'--his voice dropped, as
his head fell back on the pillows--'what happiness--what happiness!'

His eyes closed. Fenwick stooped over him in alarm, but the thin hand closed again on his.

'Don't go. What was she like?'

Fenwick asked him whether he remembered the incident of the sketch-book at their first meeting--the
drawing of the mother and child in the kitchen of the Westmoreland farm.

'Perfectly. And she was the model for the big picture, too? I see. A lovely creature! How old
is she now?'

'Thirty-six--if she lives.'

'I tell you, she does live! Probably more beautiful now than she was then. Those Madonna-like
women mellow so finely. And the child? Vois-tu, Anatole!--something superior to monkeys!'

But he pressed the little animal closer to him as he spoke. Fenwick rose to go, conscious that
he had stayed too long. Watson looked up.

'Good-bye, old man--courage! Seek--till you find. She's in the world--and she's sorry. I could
swear it.'

Fenwick stood beside him, quivering with emotion and despondency.

Their eyes met steadily, and Watson whispered:

'I pass from one thing to another. Sometimes it's Omar Khayyám--"One thing is certain and the
rest is lies--The flower that once is born for ever dies"--and the next it's the Psalms, and
I think I'm at a prayer-meeting--a Welsh Methodist again.'

He fell into a flow of Welsh, hoarsely musical. Then, with a smile, he nodded farewell; and
Fenwick went.

       *       *       *       *       *

Fenwick wrote that night to Eugénie de Pastourelles at Cannes, enclosing a copy of the letter
received from Freddy Tolson. It meant nothing; but she had asked to be kept informed. As he
entered upon the body of his letter, his eyes still recurred to its opening line:

'Dear Madame de Pastourelles.'

For many years he had never addressed her except as 'My dear friend.'

Well, that was all gone and over. The memory of her past goodness, of those walks through the
Trianon woods, was constantly with him. But he had used her recklessly and selfishly, and she
had done with him. He admitted it now, as often before, in a temper of dull endurance; bending
himself to the task of his report.

       *       *       *       *       *

Eugénie read his letter, sitting on a bench above the blue Mediterranean, in the pine woods
of the Cap d'Antibes. She had torn it open in hope, and the reading of it depressed her. In
the pine-scented, sun-warmed air she sat for long motionless and sad. The delicate greenish
light fell on the soft brown hair, the white face and hands. Eugénie's deep black had now assumed
a slight 'religious' air which disturbed Lord Findon, and kindled the Protestant wrath of her
stepmother. That short moment of a revived mondanité which Versailles had witnessed, was wholly
past; and for the first and only time in her marred life, Eugénie's natural gaiety was quenched.
She knew well that in the burden which weighed upon her there were morbid elements; but she
could only bear it; she could not smile under it.

Fenwick's letter led her thoughts back to the early incidents of this fruitless search. Especially
did she recall every moment of her interview with Daisy Hewson--Phoebe Fenwick's former nursemaid,
now married to a small Westmoreland farmer. One of the first acts of the lawyers had been to
induce this woman to come to London to repeat once more what she knew of the catastrophe.

Then, after the examination by the lawyers, Eugénie had pleaded that she might see her--and
see her alone. Accordingly, a shy and timid woman, speaking with a broad Westmoreland accent,
called one morning in Dean's Yard.

Eugénie had won from her many small details the lawyers had been unable to extract. They were
not, alack, of a kind to help the search for Phoebe; but, interpreted by the aid of her own
quick imagination, they drew a picture of the lost mother and child, which sank deep, deep,
into Eugénie's soul.

Mrs. Fenwick, said Mrs. Hewson, scarcely spoke on the journey south. She sat staring out of
window, with her hands on her lap, and Daisy thought there was 'soomat wrang'--but dared not
ask. In saying good-bye at Euston, Mrs. Fenwick had kissed her, and given the guard a shilling
to look after her. She was holding Carrie in her arms, as the train moved away. The girl had
supposed she was going to join her husband.

And barely a week later, John Fenwick had been dining in St. James's Square, looking harassed
and ill indeed--it was supposed, from overwork; but, to his best friends, as silent as that
grave of darkness and oblivion which had closed over his wife.

Yet, as the weeks of thought went on, Eugénie blamed him less and less. Her clear intelligence
showed her all the steps of the unhappy business. She remembered the awkward, harassed youth,
as she had first seen him at her father's table, with his curious mixture of arrogance and
timidity; now haranguing the table, and now ready to die with confusion over some social slip.
She understood what he had told her, in his first piteous letter, of his paralysed, tongue-tied
states--of his fear of alienating her father and herself. And she went deeper. She confessed
the hatefulness of those weakening timidities, those servile states of soul, by which our social
machine balances the insolences and cruelties of the strong--its own breeding also; she felt
herself guilty because of them; the whole of life seemed to her sick, because a young man,
ill at ease and cowardly in a world not his own, had told or lived a foolish lie. It was as
though she had forced it from him; she understood so well how it had come about. No, no!--her
father might judge it as he pleased. She was angry no longer.

Nor--presently--did she even resent the treachery of those weeks at Versailles, so quick and
marvellous was the play of her great gift of sympathy, which was only another aspect of imagination.
In recoil from a dark moment of her own experience, of which she could never think without
anguish, she had offered him a friend's hand, a friend's heart--offered them eagerly and lavishly.
Had he done more than take them, with the craving of a man, for whom already the ways are darkening,
who makes one last clutch at 'youth and bloom, and this delightful world'? He had been reckless
and cruel indeed. But in its profound tenderness and humility and self-reproach her heart forgave
him.

Yet of that forgiveness she could make no outward sign--for her own sake and Phoebe's. That
old relation could never be again; the weeks at Versailles had killed it. Unless, indeed, some
day it were her blessed lot to find the living Phoebe, and bring her to her husband! Then friendship,
as well as love, might perhaps lift its head once more. And as during the months of winter,
both before and since her departure from England, the tidings reached her of Fenwick's growing
embarrassments, of his increasing coarseness and carelessness of work, his violence of temper,
the friend in her suffered profoundly. She knew that she could still do much for him. Yet there,
in the way, stood the image of Phoebe, as Daisy Hewson described her,--pale, weary, desperate,--making
all speech, all movement, on the part of the woman, for jealousy of whom the wife had so ignorantly
destroyed herself and Fenwick, a thing impossible.

Eugénie's only comfort indeed, at this time, was the comfort of religion. Her soul, sorely
troubled and very stern with itself, wandered in mystical, ascetic paths out of human ken.
Every morning she hurried through the woods to a little church beside the sea, filled with
fishing-folk. There she heard Mass, and made the spiritual communion which sustained her.

Once, in the mediaeval siege of a Spanish fortress, so a Spanish chronicler tells us, all the
defenders were slaughtered but one man; and he lay dying on the ground, across the gate. There
was neither priest nor wafer; but the dying man raised a little of the soil between the stones
to his lips, and so, says the chronicler, 'communicated in the earth itself,' before he passed
to the Eternal Presence. Eugénie would have done the same with a like ardour and simplicity;
her thought differing much, perhaps, in its perceived and logical elements, from that of the
dying Spaniard, but none the less profoundly akin. The act was to her the symbol and instrument
of an Inflowing Power; the details of those historical beliefs with which it was connected,
mattered little. And as she thus leant upon the old, while conscious of the new, she never
in truth felt herself alone. It seemed to her, often, that she clasped hands with a vast invisible
multitude, in a twilight soon to be dawn.

CHAPTER XII

A fortnight later Dick Watson died. Fenwick saw him several times before the end, and was present
at his last moments. The funeral was managed by Cuningham; so were the obituary notices; and
Fenwick attended the funeral and read the notices, with that curious mixture of sore grief
and jealous irritation into which our human nature is so often betrayed at similar moments.

Then he found himself absorbed by the later rehearsals of The Queen's Necklace; by the completion
of his pictures for the May exhibition; and by the perpetual and ignominious hunt for money.
As to this last, it seemed to him that each day was a battle in which he was for ever worsted.
He was still trying in vain to sell his house at Chelsea, the house planned at the height of
his brief prosperity, built and finely furnished on borrowed money, and now apparently unsaleable,
because of certain peculiarities in it, which suited its contriver, and no one else. And meanwhile
the bank from which he had borrowed most of his building money was pressing inexorably for
repayment; the solicitor in Bedford Row could do nothing, and was manifestly averse to running
up a longer bill on his own account; so that, instead of painting, Fenwick often spent his
miserable days in rushing about London, trying to raise money by one shift after another, in
an agony to get a bill accepted or postponed, borrowing from this person and that, and with
every succeeding week losing more self-respect and self-control.

The situation would have been instantly changed if only his artistic power had recovered itself.
And if Eugénie had been within his reach it might have done so. She had the secret of stimulating
in him what was poetic, and repressing what was merely extravagant or violent. But she was
far away: and as he worked at the completion of his series of 'Months,' or at various portraits
which the kindness or compassion of old friends had procured for him, he fell headlong into
all his worst faults.

His handling, once so distinguished through all its inequalities, grew steadily more careless
and perfunctory; his drawing lost force and grip; his composition, so rich, interesting, and
intelligent in his early days, now meant nothing, said nothing. The few friends who still haunted
his studio during these dark months were often struck with pity; criticism or argument was
useless; and some of them believed that he was suffering from defects of sight, and was no
longer capable of judging his own work.

The portrait commissions, in particular, led more than once to disaster. His angry vanity suspected
that while he was now thought incapable of the poetic or imaginative work in which he had once
excelled, he was still considered--'like any fool'--good enough for portraits. This alone was
enough to make him loathe the business. On two or three occasions he ended by quarrelling with
the sitter. Then for hours he would walk restlessly about his room, smoking enormously, drinking--sometimes
excessively--out of a kind of excitement and désoeuvrement--his strong, grizzled hair bristling
about his head, his black eyes staring and bloodshot, and that wild gypsyish look of his youth
more noticeable than ever in these surroundings of what promised soon to be a decadent middle age.

One habit of his youth had quite disappeared. The queer tendency to call on Heaven for practical
aid in any practical difficulty--to make of prayer a system of 'begging-letters to the Almighty'--which
had of ten quieted or distracted him in his early years of struggle, affected him no longer.
His inner life seemed to himself shrouded in a sullen numbness and frost.

And the old joy in reading, the old plenitude and facility of imagination, were also in abeyance.
He became the fierce critic of other men's ideas, while barren of his own. To be original,
successful, happy, was now in his eyes the one dark and desperate offence. Yet every now and
then he would have impulses of the largest generosity; would devote hours to the teaching of
some struggling student and the correction of his work; or draw on his last remains of credit
or influence--pester people with calls, or write reams to the newspapers--on behalf of some
one, unduly overlooked, whose work he admired.

