I know now that he was himself as lost as I, but that he did not tell me, for my sake. It is
an easy thing for a stranger to go astray in the Andredsweald. But I could not tell him more
than that I knew that I had left the sea always behind me so long as I knew where it lay. So
he turned southwards at once when he heard that, and went on swiftly. Then I heard the howl
of his dog again, and I laughed, for the other howls that answered him were nearer.

"Listen, shepherd," I said. "Your dog is making his comrades howl for him, and the beating
that is to come.

"Are you cold?"

For he had shivered suddenly, and his pace quickened. He had heard the howl of the single wolf
that has found its quarry, and calls the answering pack to follow. But he did not tell me of
my mistake.

"I am not cold overmuch," he answered. "Let us run and warm me."

Then he ran until we came to the top of a hill whence the last glimmer of the sea over Selsea
was plain before him, and there I asked him to set me down lest I tired him.

"Nay, but you keep me warm," he said. "Tell me, are there oak trees as one goes seaward?"

"Ay, many and great ones in some places."

Then he ran down the hill, and the sway of his even stride lulled me so that I dozed a little.
I roused when he stayed suddenly.

"Sit here, Oswald, for a moment, and fear nought while I rest me," he said in a strange voice.

We were halfway up a long slope and among fresh trees. Then he lifted me and set me on the
curved arm of a great oak tree, some eight feet from the ground, asking me if I was safe there.
And when I laughed and answered that I was, he set his back against the trunk, and drew his
heavy seax, putting his staff alongside him, where he could reach it at once if it was needed.
It was light enough, with the clear frosty starlight on the snow.

Then I heard the swift patter of feet over the crisp surface, and the grey beast came and halted
suddenly not three yards from us, and on his haunches he sat up and howled, and I heard the
answering yells in no long space of time coming whence we had come. His eyes glowed green with
a strange light of their own as he stared at my friend, and for a moment I looked to see him
come fawning to his master's feet.

Suddenly he gathered himself together, and sprung silently at the throat of the man who waited
him, and there was a flash of the keen steel, and a sound as of the cleaving of soft wood,
and the beast was in a twitching heap at the man's feet. I knew what it was at last, yet I
could say nothing. The wolf was quite dead, with its head cleft.

Swiftly my friend hewed the great head from the trunk and tore one of the leather cross garterings
from his leg, and so leapt at a branch which hung above him and pulled it down. Then he bound
the head to its end with the thong and let it go, so that it dangled a fathom and a half above
him, and then he lifted me from my place and ran as I had not thought any man could run, until
he stayed at the brow of the hill for sheer want of breath.

Behind us at that moment rose the sound as of hungry dogs that fight over the food in their
kennels, and my friend laughed under his breath strangely.

"That will be a wild dance beneath the tree anon," he said, as if to himself.

Then he said to me, "Are you frayed, bairn?" as he ran on again.

"No," I answered, "You can smite well, shepherd."

"Needs must, sometime," he said. "Now, little one, have you a mother waiting you at home?"

"No. Only father and old nurse."

"Nor brother or sister?"

"None at all," I said.

"An only child, and his father lonely," the man said. "Well, I will chance it while the trees
last. The head will stay them awhile, maybe."

Now he went swiftly across the rolling woodlands, and again I slept in his arms, but uneasily
and with a haunting fear in my dreaming that I should wake to see the wild eyes of the wolf
glaring across the snow on us again. So it happens that all I know of the rest of that flight
from Woden's pack has been told me by others, so that I can say little thereof.

The howls of the pack as they stayed to fall on the carcass of their fellow, after their wont,
died away behind us, and before they were heard again my friend had come across a half-frozen
brook, and for a furlong or more had crashed and waded through its ice and water that our trail
might be lost in it. Then he lit on the path that a sounder of wild swine had made through
the snow on either side of it as they crossed it, and that he followed, in hopes that the foe
would leave us to chase the more accustomed quarry. From that he leapt aside presently with
a wondrous leap and struck off away from it. He would leave nothing untried, though indeed
by this time he had reason to think that the pack had lost us at the brook, for he heard no
more of them.

So at last he came within sound of some far-off shouts of those who were seeking me, and he
guessed well what those shouts meant, and turned in their direction. Had he not heard them
I do not know what place of refuge, save the trees, he would have found that night, for he
was then passing across the valley that winds down to our home.

So it happened that when at last he saw the red light from the door of our hall gleaming across
the snow, for it had been left open that perchance I might see it, he was close to the place,
and he came into the courtyard inside the stockading without meeting any one, for he came from
the side on which the village is not.

There I woke as the house dogs barked, and at first it was with a cry of fear lest the wolves
were on us again; but the fear passed as I saw my father come quickly into the light of the
doorway, and heard his voice as he stilled the dogs and cried to ask if the boy was found.

"Ay, Thane, he is here, and safe," my friend answered, and he set me down in the midst of the
court, while the dogs leapt and fawned round me.

Then I ran to the arms that were held out for me, forgetting for the moment the one who had
brought me back to them, and left him standing there.

Then the man who had saved me turned after one long look at that meeting, and I think that
he was going his way in silence, content with that he had done, but my father saw it and called
to him:

"Friend, stay, for I have not thanked you, and I hold that there is reward due to you for what
you have brought back to me."

"It was a chance meeting, Thane, and I am glad to have been of use. No need to speak of reward,
for it is indeed enough to have seen the boy home safely."

"Why, then," said my father, "I cannot have a stranger pass my hall at this time in the evening,
when it is too late to reach the town in safety. Here you must at least lodge for the night,
or Eastdean will be shamed. Your voice tells me that you are a stranger--but maybe you have
your men waiting for you at hand? There will be room for them also."

For there was that in the tones of the voice of this man which told my father that here he
had no common wanderer.

"I am alone," my friend said. "But your men seek the little one even yet in the forest. Will
you not call them in?"

My father looked at the man for a moment, and smiled.

"Ay, I forgot in my joy. They are well-nigh as anxious as I have been."

Then he took down the great horn that hung by the door, and wound the homing call that brings
all within its hearing back to the hall, and its hoarse echoes went across the silent woods
until it was answered by the other horns that passed on the message until the last sounds came
but faintly to us. I heard men cheering also, for they knew by the token that all was well.
My father had me in his arms all this time, standing in the door.

"There would have been sorrow enough had he been lost indeed," my father said. "He is the last
of the old line, and the fathers of those men whom you hear have followed his fathers since
the days of Ella. Come in, and they will thank you also. Where did you find him?"

Then as he turned and went into the hall the light flashed red on my jerkin suddenly, and he
cried, "Here is blood on his clothing!--Is he hurt?"

"No," I said stoutly; "maybe it is the blood of the stoat I slew, or else it has come off the
shepherd's sleeves. He hewed off the wolf's head and hung it on the tree."

Then my father understood what my peril had been--even that which he and all the village had
feared for me, and his face paled, and he held out his hand to the man, drawing in his breath
sharply.

"Woden!" he cried, "what is this, friend? Are you hurt, yourself? For the wolf must be slain
ere his head can be hefted, as we say."

"No hurt to any but the wolf," the man said, smiling a little. "We did but meet with one who
called the pack on us. So I even hung his head on a tree, that the pack when it came might
stay to leap at it. They were all we had to fear, and maybe that saved us."

"I marvel that you are not even now in the tree, yourself--with the boy."

"Nay, but the frost is cruel, and he would have been sorely feared with the leaping and howls
of the beasts. There were always trees at hand as we fled, if needs were to take to them. It
was in my mind that it were best to try to get him home, or near it."

Then said my father, gripping the hand that met his: "There is more that I would say, but I
cannot set thoughts into words well. Only, I know that I have a man before me. Tell me your
name, that neither I nor the boy may ever forget it."

"Here, in the Saxon lands, men call me Owen the Briton," he answered simply.

"I thought your voice had somewhat of the Welsh tone," my father said. "And your English is
of Mercia. I have heard that there are Britons in the fenland there."

"I am of West Wales, Thane, but I have bided long in Mercia."

Then came my old nurse, and there were words enough for the time. Her eyes were red with weeping,
but it was all that my father could do to prevent her scolding me soundly then and there for
the fright I had given her. But she set a great bowl of bread and milk before me, and the men
began to come in at that time, and they stood in a ring round me and watched me eat it as if
they had never seen me before, while my father spoke aside of the flight to Owen on the high
place. But concerning his own story my father asked the stranger no more until he chose to
open the matter himself.

After supper there was all the tale to be told, and when that was done the Welshman slept before
the hall fire with the house-carles, but my father had me with him in the closed chamber beyond
the high seat, for it seemed that he would not let me go beyond his sight again yet.

Now, that is how Owen came to me at first, and the first thing therefore that I owe to him
is nothing less than life itself. And from that time we have been, as I have said, together
in all things.

On the next morning my father made his guest take him back over the ground we had crossed together,
for no fresh snow had fallen, and the footprints were plain to be followed almost from the
gate of the hall stockade. So they came at last to the tree, and on it the head hung yet, but
the body was clean gone. All round the tree the snow was reddened and trampled by the fierce
beasts who leapt to reach the head, and the marks of their clawing was on the trunk, where
they had tried to climb it. From the footmarks it seemed that there were eight or nine of them.
Three great ones had left the head and followed us presently as far as the brook, half a mile away.

After that the two men went on to the place where Owen had found me, and there my father, judging
from the dress and loneliness of the Briton that he might be able to help him somewhat, said:

"I do not know what your plans may be, but is there any reason why you should not bide here
and help me tend the life you have kept for me?"

Then answered Owen: "You know nought of me, Thane. For all you ken, I may be but an outlaw
who is fleeing from justice."

"Do I know nought about you? I think that last night and what I have seen today have told me
much, and I have been held as a good judge of a man. If so be that you were an outlaw, which
I do not think, what you have done is enough to inlaw you again with any honest man--even had
you taken a life, for you have saved one. Did I know you were an outlaw I would see to your
pardon. But maybe you are on a journey that may not be hindered?"

Now Owen was silent for a little, and there came a shadow over his face as he answered, slowly
and with his eyes on the far sea:

"No man's man am I, and I am but drifting Westward again at random. Yet I can say in all truth,
that I am no wanderer for ill reason in any wise. I will tell you, Thane, here and alone, that
there are foes in my home for whose passing, in one way or another, I must needs wait. Even
now I was on my way to Bosham, where they tell me are Western monks with whom I might bide
for a time, if not altogether. I was lost in the forest last night."

Now my father saw that some heavy sorrow of no common sort lay beneath the quiet words of the
man before him, and he forbore to ask him more. Also, he deemed that in the Welsh land he would
surely rank as a thane, for his ways and words bespoke more than his dress would tell. Therefore
he said:

"Wait here with us for a while at least. There will be no more welcome guest."

"Let me be of some use, rather," Owen answered. "If I bide with you, Thane, and I thank you
for the offer, let it be as I have bided elsewhere from time to time--as one of the household,
not as an idle guest, if it were but to help the woodmen in the forest."

"Why, that will be well. I need a forester, and it is plain that you are a master of woodcraft.
Let it be so. Yet I must tell you one thing fairly, and that is, that I am what you would call
a heathen. I know that you are a good Christian man, for I saw you sign your holy sign before
you ate last night and this morning. Yet I do not hate Christians."

"I had heard that all Sussex was turned to the faith," Owen said.

"If one says that all the men have gone to market, one knows that here and there one is excepted
for good reason. It is not for a thane of the line of Woden to give up the faith of his fathers
idly. I do not know what may be in the days to come, but here in the Andredsweald some dozen
of us will not leave the old gods. It was the bidding of Ethelwalch the king that we should
do so, but that is not a matter wherein a king may meddle, as it seems to us."

"I do not know why I should not bide with you, Thane, if so be that there is no hindrance to
my faith."

"That there will be none. Why, the most of my folk are Christian enough. And if a man of the
Britons did not honour his old faith it would be as strange as if I honoured not that of my
fathers. I have no quarrel with the faith of any man, either king or thrall."

"Then I will be your forester, Thane, for such time as I may, and I thank you."

"Nay, but the thanks are all on my side," answered my father. "Now I shall know that the boy
will have one with whom he may live all day in the woods if he will, and I shall be content."

So Owen bided with us, half as honoured guest and half as forester, and as time went on he
was well loved by all who knew him, for he was ever the same to each man about the place. As
for me, it was the best day that could have dawned when he found me in the woods as a lost
child. And that my father said also.

Our Sussex was the last land in all England that was heathen. I suppose that the last heathen
thanes in Sussex were those whose manors lay in the Andredsweald, as did ours. Most of these
thanes had held aloof from the faith because at the first coming of good Bishop Wilfrith, some
twelve years ago, those who had hearkened to him were mostly thralls and freemen of the lower
ranks, and they would not follow their lead. Yet of these there were some, like my father,
who had no hatred, to say the least, of the Christian and his creed, and did but need the words
of one who could speak rightly to them to turn altogether from the Asir.

Maybe the only man who was at this time really fierce against the faith was Erpwald, the thane
of Wisborough, some half-score miles from us northwards across the forest. He had been the
priest of Woden in the old days, and indeed held himself so even now, though secretly, for
fear of Ina the Wessex king, who ruled our land well and strongly. This Erpwald was no very
good neighbour of ours, as it happened, for he and my father had some old feud concerning forest
rights and the like which he had taken to heart more than there was any occasion for, seeing
that it was but such a matter as most thanes have, unless they are unusually lucky, in a place
where boundaries are none. It is likely enough that but for the easy ways of my father, who
gave in to him so far as he could, this feud would have been of trouble some time ago, for
as the power of Erpwald, as priest, waned he seemed to look more for power in other ways. Yet
in the end both the matter of the faith and the matter of the feud seemed to work together
in some way that brought trouble enough on our house, which must be told; for it set Owen and
me out into the world together for a time, and because of it there befell many happenings thereafter
which have not all been sad in their ending.

Owen had been with us for a year and a half when what I am going to tell came to pass, and
in that time my father had come to look on him rather as a brother than as a guest, and the
thought that he might leave him at any time was one which he did not like to keep in his mind.

That being so, it was not at all surprising that in this summer my father had at last borne
witness that he wished to become a Christian altogether, and so it had come to pass that he
and Owen and I used to ride to Bosham, the little seacoast village beyond Chichester town,
to speak with Dicul, the good old Irish priest, who yet bided there rather than in the new
monastery which Wilfrith built at Selsea, until we were taught all that was needful, and the
time came when we should be baptized.

That my father would have done here at Eastdean, that all his people, who were Christians before
him, should see and rejoice. Yet it was not an easy matter for him as it had been for them,
for now he would stand alone among his fellows, the heathen thanes; and most of all Erpwald
the priest would be wroth with him for leaving that which he had held so long. He must meet
these men often enough, and he knew that they would have biting words to hurl at him, but that
thought did not stay him for a moment. It was more than likely that one or two more would follow
him when once the old circle was broken.

So on a certain day Dicul rode over from Bosham on his mule, and early on the next morning
he set up a little wooden cross by the spring above the hall, and there my father and I and
Stuf, the head man of the house-carles, who had bided in the old faith for love of my father,
were baptized, Owen and one of the village freemen standing sponsors for us, and that was a
wondrous day to us all, as I think. For when all was done my father gave their freedom to all
our thralls, for the sake of the freedom that had been given him, and he promised that here,
where he and they had been freed, a church should be built of good forest oak, after the woodcutting
of the winter to come.

