"Of my soul?" said the Bohemian, with a hideous laugh. "Think ye a leprosy of twenty years
can be cured in an instant?--If I have a soul, it hath been in such a course since I was ten
years old and more, that it would take me one month to recall all my crimes, and another to
tell them to the priest!--and were such space granted me, it is five to one I would employ
it otherwise."

"Hardened wretch, blaspheme not! Tell me what thou hast to say, and I leave thee to thy fate,"
said Durward, with mingled pity and horror.

"I have a boon to ask," said Hayraddin; "but first I will buy it of you; for your tribe, with
all their professions of charity, give naught for naught."

"I could well nigh say, thy gifts perish with thee," answered Quentin, "but that thou art on
the very verge of eternity.--Ask thy boon--reserve thy bounty--it can do me no good--I remember
enough of your good offices of old."

"Why, I loved you," said Hayraddin, "for the matter that chanced on the banks of the Cher;
and I would have helped you to a wealthy dame. You wore her scarf, which partly misled me,
and indeed I thought that Hameline, with her portable wealth, was more for your market penny
than the other hen sparrow, with her old roost at Bracquemont, which Charles has clutched,
and is likely to keep his claws upon."

"Talk not so idly, unhappy man," said Quentin; "yonder officers become impatient."

"Give them ten guilders for ten minutes more," said the culprit, who, like most in his situation,
mixed with his hardihood a desire of procrastinating his fate, "I tell thee it shall avail
thee much."

"Use then well the minutes so purchased," said Durward, and easily made a new bargain with
the Marshals men.

This done, Hayraddin continued.--"Yes, I assure you I meant you well; and Hameline would have
proved an easy and convenient spouse. Why, she has reconciled herself even with the Boar of
Ardennes, though his mode of wooing was somewhat of the roughest, and lords it yonder in his
sty, as if she had fed on mast husks and acorns all her life."

"Cease this brutal and untimely jesting," said Quentin, "or, once more I tell you, I will leave
you to your fate."

"You are right," said Hayraddin, after a moment's pause; "what cannot be postponed must be
faced!--Well, know then, I came hither in this accursed disguise, moved by a great reward from
De la Marck, and hoping a yet mightier one from King Louis, not merely to bear the message
of defiance which yon may have heard of, but to tell the King an important secret."

"It was a fearful risk," said Durward.

"It was paid for as such, and such it hath proved," answered the Bohemian. "De la Marck attempted
before to communicate with Louis by means of Marthon; but she could not, it seems, approach
nearer to him than the Astrologer, to whom she told all the passages of the journey, and of
Schonwaldt; but it is a chance if her tidings ever reach Louis, except in the shape of a prophecy.
But hear my secret, which is more important than aught she could tell. William de la Marck
has assembled a numerous and strong force within the city of Liege, and augments it daily by
means of the old priest's treasures. But he proposes not to hazard a battle with the chivalry
of Burgundy, and still less to stand a siege in the dismantled town. This he will do--he will
suffer the hot brained Charles to sit down before the place without opposition, and in the
night, make an outfall or sally upon the leaguer with his whole force. Many he will have in
French armour, who will cry, France, Saint Louis, and Denis Montjoye, as if there were a strong
body of French auxiliaries in the city. This cannot choose but strike utter confusion among
the Burgundians; and if King Louis, with his guards, attendants, and such soldiers as he may
have with him, shall second his efforts, the Boar of Ardennes nothing doubts the discomfiture
of the whole Burgundian army.--There is my secret, and I bequeath it to you. Forward or prevent
the enterprise--sell the intelligence to King Louis, or to Duke Charles, I care not--save or
destroy whom thou wilt; for my part, I only grieve that I cannot spring it like a mine, to
the destruction of them all."

"It is indeed an important secret," said Quentin, instantly comprehending how easily the national
jealousy might be awakened in a camp consisting partly of French, partly of Burgundians.

"Ay, so it is," answered Hayraddin; "and now you have it, you would fain begone, and leave
me without granting the boon for which I have paid beforehand."

"Tell me thy request," said Quentin. "I will grant it if it be in my power."

"Nay, it is no mighty demand--it is only in behalf of poor Klepper, my palfrey, the only living
thing that may miss me.--A due mile south, you will find him feeding by a deserted collier's
hut; whistle to him thus" (he whistled a peculiar note), "and call him by his name, Klepper,
he will come to you; here is his bridle under my gaberdine--it is lucky the hounds got it not,
for he obeys no other. Take him, and make much of him--I do not say for his master's sake,--but
because I have placed at your disposal the event of a mighty war. He will never fail you at
need--night and day, rough and smooth, fair and foul, warm stables and the winter sky, are
the same to Klepper; had I cleared the gates of Peronne, and got so far as where I left him,
I had not been in this case.--Will you be kind to Klepper?"

"I swear to you that I will," answered Quentin, affected by what seemed a trait of tenderness
in a character so hardened.

"Then fare thee well!" said the criminal. "Yet stay--stay--I would not willingly die in discourtesy,
forgetting a lady's commission.--This billet is from the very gracious and extremely silly
Lady of the Wild Boar of Ardennes, to her black eyed niece--I see by your look I have chosen
a willing messenger.--And one word more--I forgot to say, that in the stuffing of my saddle
you will find a rich purse of gold pieces, for the sake of which I put my life on the venture
which has cost me so dear. Take them, and replace a hundred fold the guilders you have bestowed
on these bloody slaves--I make you mine heir."

"I will bestow them in good works and masses for the benefit of thy soul," said Quentin.

"Name not that word again," said Hayraddin, his countenance assuming a dreadful expression;
"there is--there can be, there shall be--no such thing!--it is a dream of priestcraft."

"Unhappy, most unhappy being! Think better! let me speed for a priest--these men will delay
yet a little longer. I will bribe them to it," said Quentin. "What canst thou expect, dying
in such opinions, and impenitent?"

"To be resolved into the elements," said the hardened atheist, pressing his fettered arms against
his bosom; "my hope, trust, and expectation is that the mysterious frame of humanity shall
melt into the general mass of nature, to be recompounded in the other forms with which she
daily supplies those which daily disappear, and return under different forms--the watery particles
to streams and showers, the earthy parts to enrich their mother earth, the airy portions to
wanton in the breeze, and those of fire to supply the blaze of Aldebaran and his brethren.--In
this faith have I lived, and I will die in it!--Hence! begone!--disturb me no farther!--I have
spoken the last word that mortal ears shall listen to."

Deeply impressed with the horrors of his condition, Quentin Durward yet saw that it was vain
to hope to awaken him to a sense of his fearful state. He bade him, therefore, farewell, to
which the criminal only replied by a short and sullen nod, as one who, plunged in reverie,
bids adieu to company which distracts his thoughts. He bent his course towards the forest,
and easily found where Klepper was feeding. The creature came at his call, but was for some
time unwilling to be caught, snuffing and starting when the stranger approached him. At length,
however, Quentin's general acquaintance with the habits of the animal, and perhaps some particular
knowledge of those of Klepper, which he had often admired while Hayraddin and he travelled
together, enabled him to take possession of the Bohemian's dying bequest. Long ere he returned
to Peronne, the Bohemian had gone where the vanity of his dreadful creed was to be put to the
final issue--a fearful experience for one who had neither expressed remorse for the past, nor
apprehension for the future!

CHAPTER XXXV: A PRIZE FOR HONOUR

     'T is brave for Beauty when the best blade wins her.

     THE COUNT PALATINE

When Quentin Durward reached Peronne, a council was sitting, in the issue of which he was interested
more deeply than he could have apprehended, and which, though held by persons of a rank with
whom one of his could scarce be supposed to have community of interest, had nevertheless the
most extraordinary influence on his fortunes.

King Louis, who, after the interlude of De la Marck's envoy, had omitted no opportunity to
cultivate the returning interest which that circumstance had given him in the Duke's opinion,
had been engaged in consulting him, or, it might be almost said, receiving his opinion, upon
the number and quality of the troops, by whom, as auxiliary to the Duke of Burgundy, he was
to be attended in their joint expedition against Liege. He plainly saw the wish of Charles
was to call into his camp such Frenchmen as, from their small number and high quality, might
be considered rather as hostages than as auxiliaries; but, observant of Crevecoeur's advice,
he assented as readily to whatever the Duke proposed, as if it had arisen from the free impulse
of his own mind.

The King failed not, however, to indemnify himself for his complaisance by the indulgence of
his vindictive temper against Balue, whose counsels had led him to repose such exuberant trust
in the Duke of Burgundy. Tristan, who bore the summons for moving up his auxiliary forces,
had the farther commission to carry the Cardinal to the Castle of Loches, and there shut him
up in one of those iron cages which he himself is said to have invented.

"Let him make proof of his own devices," said the King; "he is a man of holy church--we may
not shed his blood; but, Pasques dieu! his bishopric, for ten years to come, shall have an
impregnable frontier to make up for its small extent!--And see the troops are brought up instantly."

Perhaps, by this prompt acquiescence, Louis hoped to evade the more unpleasing condition with
which the Duke had clogged their reconciliation. But if he so hoped, he greatly mistook the
temper of his cousin, for never man lived more tenacious of his purpose than Charles of Burgundy,
and least of all was he willing to relax any stipulation which he made in resentment, or revenge,
of a supposed injury.

No sooner were the necessary expresses dispatched to summon up the forces who were selected
to act as auxiliaries, than Louis was called upon by his host to give public consent to the
espousals of the Duke of Orleans and Isabelle of Croye. The King complied with a heavy sigh,
and presently after urged a slight expostulation, founded upon the necessity of observing the
wishes of the Duke himself.

"These have not been neglected," said the Duke of Burgundy, "Crevecoeur hath communicated with
Monsieur d'Orleans, and finds him (strange to say) so dead to the honour of wedding a royal
bride, that he acceded to the proposal of marrying the Countess of Croye as the kindest proposal
which father could have made to him."

"He is the more ungracious and thankless," said Louis, "but the whole shall be as you, my cousin,
will, if you can bring it about with consent of the parties themselves."

"Fear not that," said the Duke, and accordingly, not many minutes after, the affair had been
proposed, the Duke of Orleans and the Countess of Croye, the latter attended, as on the preceding
occasion, by the Countess of Crevecoeur and the Abbess of the Ursulines, were summoned to the
presence of the Princes, and heard from the mouth of Charles of Burgundy, unobjected to by
that of Louis, who sat in silent and moody consciousness of diminished consequence, that the
union of their hands was designed by the wisdom of both Princes, to confirm the perpetual alliance
which in future should take place betwixt France and Burgundy.

The Duke of Orleans had much difficulty in suppressing the joy which he felt upon the proposal,
and which delicacy rendered improper in the presence of Louis; and it required his habitual
awe of that monarch to enable him to rein in his delight, so much as merely to reply that his
duty compelled him to place his choice at the disposal of his Sovereign.

"Fair cousin of Orleans," said Louis with sullen gravity, "since I must speak on so unpleasant
an occasion, it is needless for me to remind you that my sense of your merits had led me to
propose for you a match into my own family. But since my cousin of Burgundy thinks that the
disposing of your hand otherwise is the surest pledge of amity between his dominions and mine,
I love both too well not to sacrifice to them my own hopes and wishes."

The Duke of Orleans threw himself on his knees, and kissed--and, for once, with sincerity of
attachment--the hand which the King, with averted countenance, extended to him. In fact he,
as well as most present, saw, in the unwilling acquiescence of this accomplished dissembler,
who, even with that very purpose, had suffered his reluctance to be visible, a King relinquishing
his favourite project, and subjugating his paternal feelings to the necessities of state, and
interest of his country. Even Burgundy was moved, and Orleans's heart smote him for the joy
which he involuntarily felt on being freed from his engagement with the Princess Joan. If he
had known how deeply the King was cursing him in his soul, and what thoughts of future revenge
he was agitating, it is probable his own delicacy on the occasion would not have been so much hurt.

Charles next turned to the young Countess, and bluntly announced the proposed match to her,
as a matter which neither admitted delay nor hesitation, adding, at the same time, that it
was but a too favourable consequence of her intractability on a former occasion.

"My Lord Duke and Sovereign," said Isabelle, summoning up all her courage, "I observe your
Grace's commands, and submit to them."

"Enough, enough," said the Duke, interrupting her, "we will arrange the rest.--Your Majesty,"
he continued, addressing King Louis, "hath had a boar's hunt in the morning; what say you to
rousing a wolf in the afternoon?"

The young Countess saw the necessity of decision.

"Your Grace mistakes my meaning," she said, speaking, though timidly, yet loudly and decidedly
enough to compel the Duke's attention, which, from some consciousness, he would otherwise have
willingly denied to her.

"My submission," she said, "only respected those lands and estates which your Grace's ancestors
gave to mine, and which I resign to the House of Burgundy, if my Sovereign thinks my disobedience
in this matter renders me unworthy to hold them."

"Ha! Saint George!" said the Duke, stamping furiously on the ground, "does the fool know in
what presence she is?--And to whom she speaks?"

"My lord," she replied, still undismayed, "I am before my Suzerain, and, I trust, a just one.
If you deprive me of my lands, you take away all that your ancestors' generosity gave, and
you break the only bonds which attach us together. You gave not this poor and persecuted form,
still less the spirit which animates me.--And these it is my purpose to dedicate to Heaven
in the convent of the Ursulines, under the guidance of this Holy Mother Abbess."

The rage and astonishment of the Duke can hardly be conceived, unless we could estimate the
surprise of a falcon against whom a dove should ruffle its pinions in defiance.

"Will the Holy Mother receive you without an appanage?" he said in a voice of scorn.

"If she doth her convent, in the first instance, so much wrong," said the Lady Isabelle, "I
trust there is charity enough among the noble friends of my house to make up some support for
the orphan of Croye."

"It is false!" said the Duke, "it is a base pretext to cover some secret and unworthy passion.--My
Lord of Orleans, she shall be yours, if I drag her to the altar with my own hands!"

The Countess of Crevecoeur, a high spirited woman and confident in her husband's merits and
his favour with the Duke, could keep silent no longer.

"My lord," she said, "your passions transport you into language utterly unworthy.--The hand
of no gentlewoman can be disposed of by force."

"And it is no part of the duty of a Christian Prince," added the Abbess, "to thwart the wishes
of a pious soul, who, broken with the cares and persecutions of the world, is desirous to become
the bride of Heaven."

"Neither can my cousin of Orleans," said Dunois, "with honour accept a proposal to which the
lady has thus publicly stated her objections."

"If I were permitted," said Orleans, on whose facile mind Isabelle's beauty had made a deep
impression, "some time to endeavour to place my pretensions before the Countess in a more favourable
light--"

"My lord," said Isabelle, whose firmness was now fully supported by the encouragement which
she received from all around, "it were to no purpose--my mind is made up to decline this alliance,
though far above my deserts."

"Nor have I time," said the Duke, "to wait till these whimsies are changed with the next change
of the moon.--Monseigneur d'Orleans, she shall learn within this hour that obedience becomes
matter of necessity."

"Not in my behalf, Sire," answered the Prince, who felt that he could not, with any show of
honour, avail himself of the Duke's obstinate disposition; "to have been once openly and positively
refused is enough for a son of France. He cannot prosecute his addresses farther."

The Duke darted one furious glance at Orleans, another at Louis, and reading in the countenance
of the latter, in spite of his utmost efforts to suppress his feelings, a look of secret triumph,
he became outrageous.

"Write," he said, to the secretary, "our doom of forfeiture and imprisonment against this disobedient
and insolent minion. She shall to the Zuchthaus, to the penitentiary, to herd with those whose
lives have rendered them her rivals in effrontery."

There was a general murmur.

"My Lord Duke," said the Count of Crevecoeur, taking the word for the rest, "this must be better
thought on. We, your faithful vassals, cannot suffer such a dishonour to the nobility and chivalry
of Burgundy. If the Countess hath done amiss, let her be punished--but in the manner that becomes
her rank, and ours, who stand connected with her house by blood and alliance."

The Duke paused a moment, and looked full at his councillor with the stare of a bull, which,
when compelled by the neat herd from the road which he wishes to go, deliberates with himself
whether to obey, or to rush on his driver, and toss him into the air.

Prudence, however, prevailed over fury--he saw the sentiment was general in his council--was
afraid of the advantages which Louis might derive from seeing dissension among his vassals;
and probably--for he was rather of a coarse and violent, than of a malignant temper--felt ashamed
of his own dishonourable proposal.

"You are right," he said, "Crevecoeur, and I spoke hastily. Her fate shall be determined according
to the rules of chivalry. Her flight to Liege hath given the signal for the Bishop's murder.
He that best avenges that deed, and brings us the head of the Wild Boar of Ardennes, shall
claim her hand of us; and if she denies his right, we can at least grant him her fiefs, leaving
it to his generosity to allow her what means he will to retire into a convent."

"Nay!" said the Countess, "think I am the daughter of Count Reinold--of your father's old,
valiant, and faithful servant. Would you hold me out as a prize to the best sword player?"

"Your ancestress," said the Duke, "was won at a tourney--you shall be fought for in real melee.
Only thus far, for Count Reinold's sake, the successful prizer shall be a gentleman, of unimpeached
birth, and unstained bearings; but, be he such, and the poorest who ever drew the strap of
a sword belt through the tongue of a buckle, he shall have at least the proffer of your hand.
I swear it, by St. George, by my ducal crown, and by the Order that I wear!--Ha! Messires,"
he added, turning to the nobles present, "this at least is, I think, in conformity with the
rules of chivalry?"

Isabelle's remonstrances were drowned in a general and jubilant assent, above which was heard
the voice of old Lord Crawford, regretting the weight of years that prevented his striking
for so fair a prize. The Duke was gratified by the general applause, and his temper began to
flow more smoothly, like that of a swollen river when it hath subsided within its natural boundaries.

"Are we to whom fate has given dames already," said Crevecoeur, "to be bystanders at this fair
game? It does not consist with my honour to be so, for I have myself a vow to be paid at the
expense of that tusked and bristled brute, De la Marck."

"Strike boldly in, Crevecoeur," said the Duke, "to win her, and since thou canst not wear her
thyself, bestow her where thou wilt--on Count Stephen, your nephew, if you list."

"Gramercy, my lord!" said Crevecoeur, "I will do my best in the battle; and, should I be fortunate
enough to be foremost, Stephen shall try his eloquence against that of the Lady Abbess."

"I trust," said Dunois, "that the chivalry of France are not excluded from this fair contest?"

"Heaven forbid! brave Dunois," answered the Duke, "were it but for the sake of seeing you do
your uttermost. But," he added, "though there be no fault in the Lady Isabelle wedding a Frenchman,
it will be necessary that the Count of Croye must become a subject of Burgundy."

"Enough," said Dunois, "my bar sinister may never be surmounted by the coronet of Croye--I
will live and die French. But, yet, though I should lose the lands, I will strike a blow for
the lady."

Le Balafre dared not speak aloud in such a presence, but he muttered to himself,

"Now, Saunders Souplejaw, hold thine own!--thou always saidst the fortune of our house was
to be won by marriage, and never had you such a chance to keep your word with us."

"No one thinks of me," said Le Glorieux, "who am sure to carry off the prize from all of you."

"Right, my sapient friend," said Louis, laughing, "when a woman is in the case, the greatest
fool is ever the first in favour."

While the princes and their nobles thus jested over her fate, the Abbess and the Countess of
Crevecoeur endeavoured in vain to console Isabelle, who had withdrawn with them from the council-presence.
The former assured her that the Holy Virgin would frown on every attempt to withdraw a true
votaress from the shrine of Saint Ursula; while the Countess of Crevecoeur whispered more temporal
consolation, that no true knight, who might succeed in the enterprise proposed, would avail
himself, against her inclinations, of the Duke's award; and that perhaps the successful competitor
might prove one who should find such favour in her eyes as to reconcile her to obedience. Love,
like despair, catches at straws; and, faint and vague as was the hope which this insinuation
conveyed, the tears of the Countess Isabelle flowed more placidly while she dwelt upon it.

[Saint Ursula: the patron saint of young girls. Tradition says she was martyred by the Huns,
together with her eleven thousand companions. The auxiliary forces which the Duke had required
Louis to bring up had also appeared, and he comforted himself that their numbers were sufficient
to protect his person against violence, although too limited to cope, had such been his purpose,
with the large army of Burgundy. He saw himself also at liberty, when time should suit, to
resume his project of marriage between his daughter and the Duke of Orleans; and, although
he was sensible to the indignity of serving with his noblest peers under the banners of his
own vassal, and against the people whose cause he had abetted, he did not allow these circumstances
to embarrass him in the meantime, trusting that a future day would bring him amends.

"For chance," said he to his trusty Oliver, "may indeed gain one hit, but it is patience and
wisdom which win the game at last."

With such sentiments, upon a beautiful day in the latter end of harvest, the King mounted his
horse; and, indifferent that he was looked upon rather as a part of the pageant of a victor,
than in the light of an independent Sovereign surrounded by his guards and his chivalry, King
Louis sallied from under the Gothic gateway of Peronne, to join the Burgundian army, which
commenced at the same time its march against Liege.

Most of the ladies of distinction who were in the place attended, dressed in their best array,
upon the battlements and defences of the gate, to see the gallant show of the warriors setting
forth on the expedition. Thither had the Countess Crevecoeur brought the Countess Isabelle.
The latter attended very reluctantly, but the peremptory order of Charles had been, that she
who was to bestow the palm in the tourney should be visible to the knights who were about to
enter the lists.

As they thronged out from under the arch, many a pennon and shield was to be seen, graced with
fresh devices, expressive of the bearer's devoted resolution to become a competitor for a prize
so fair. Here a charger was painted starting for the goal--there an arrow aimed at a mark--one
knight bore a bleeding heart, indicative of his passion--another a skull and a coronet of laurels,
showing his determination to win or die. Many others there were; and some so cunningly intricate
and obscure, that they might have defied the most ingenious interpreter. Each knight, too,
it may be presumed, put his courser to his mettle, and assumed his most gallant seat in the
saddle, as he passed for a moment under the view of the fair bevy of dames and damsels, who
encouraged their valour by their smiles, and the waving of kerchiefs and of veils. The Archer
Guard, selected almost at will from the flower of the Scottish nation, drew general applause,
from the gallantry and splendour of their appearance.

And there was one among these strangers who ventured on a demonstration of acquaintance with
the Lady Isabelle, which had not been attempted even by the most noble of the French nobility.
It was Quentin Durward, who, as he passed the ladies in his rank, presented to the Countess
of Croye, on the point of his lance, the letter of her aunt.

"Now, by my honour," said the Count of Crevecoeur, "that is over insolent in an unworthy adventurer!"

"Do not call him so, Crevecoeur," said Dunois; "I have good reason to bear testimony to his
gallantry--and in behalf of that lady, too."

"You make words of nothing," said Isabelle, blushing with shame, and partly with resentment;
"it is a letter from my unfortunate aunt.--She writes cheerfully, though her situation must
be dreadful."

"Let us hear, let us hear what says the Boar's bride," said Crevecoeur.

The Countess Isabelle read the letter, in which her aunt seemed determined to make the best
of a bad bargain, and to console herself for the haste and indecorum of her nuptials, by the
happiness of being wedded to one of the bravest men of the age, who had just acquired a princedom
by his valour. She implored her niece not to judge of her William (as she called him) by the
report of others, but to wait till she knew him personally. He had his faults, perhaps, but
they were such as belonged to characters whom she had ever venerated. William was rather addicted
to wine, but so was the gallant Sir Godfrey, her grandsire--he was something hasty and sanguinary
in his temper, such had been her brother Reinold of blessed memory; he was blunt in speech,
few Germans were otherwise; and a little wilful and peremptory, but she believed all men loved
to rule. More there was to the same purpose; and the whole concluded with the hope and request
that Isabelle would, by means of the bearer, endeavour her escape from the tyrant of Burgundy,
and come to her loving kinswoman's Court of Liege, where any little differences concerning
their mutual rights of succession to the Earldom might be adjusted by Isabelle's marrying Earl
Eberson--a bridegroom younger indeed than his bride, but that, as she (the Lady Hameline) might
perhaps say from experience, was an inequality more easy to be endured than Isabelle could
be aware of.

[The marriage of William de la Marck with the Lady Hameline is as apocryphal as the lady herself.--S.]

Here the Countess Isabelle stopped, the Abbess observing, with a prim aspect, that she had
read quite enough concerning such worldly vanities, and the Count of Crevecoeur, breaking out,
"Aroint thee, deceitful witch!--Why, this device smells rank as the toasted cheese in a rat
trap.--Now fie, and double fie, upon the old decoy duck!"

The Countess of Crevecoeur gravely rebuked her husband for his violence.

"The Lady," she said, "must have been deceived by De la Marck with a show of courtesy."

"He show courtesy!" said the Count. "I acquit him of all such dissimulation. You may as well
expect courtesy from a literal wild boar, you may as well try to lay leaf gold on old rusty
gibbet irons. No--idiot as she is, she is not quite goose enough to fall in love with the fox
who has snapped her, and that in his very den. But you women are all alike--fair words carry
it--and, I dare say, here is my pretty cousin impatient to join her aunt in this fool's paradise,
and marry the Bear Pig."

"So far from being capable of such folly," said Isabelle, "I am doubly desirous of vengeance
on the murderers of the excellent Bishop, because it will, at the same time, free my aunt from
the villain's power."

"Ah! there indeed spoke the voice of Croye!" exclaimed the Count, and no more was said concerning
the letter.

But while Isabelle read her aunt's epistle to her friends, it must be observed that she did
not think it necessary to recite a certain postscript, in which the Countess Hameline, lady-like,
gave an account of her occupations, and informed her niece that she had laid aside for the
present a surcoat which she was working for her husband, bearing the arms of Croye and La Marck
in conjugal fashion, parted per pale, because her William had determined, for purposes of policy,
in the first action to have others dressed in his coat armour and himself to assume the arms
of Orleans, with a bar sinister--in other words, those of Dunois. There was also a slip of
paper in another hand, the contents of which the Countess did not think it necessary to mention,
being simply these words: "If you hear not of me soon, and that by the trumpet of Fame, conclude
me dead, but not unworthy."

A thought, hitherto repelled as wildly incredible, now glanced with double keenness through
Isabelle's soul. As female wit seldom fails in the contrivance of means, she so ordered it
that ere the troops were fully on march, Quentin Durward received from an unknown hand the
billet of Lady Hameline, marked with three crosses opposite to the postscript, and having these
words subjoined: "He who feared not the arms of Orleans when on the breast of their gallant
owner, cannot dread them when displayed on that of a tyrant and murderer."

A thousand thousand times was this intimation kissed and pressed to the bosom of the young
Scot! for it marshalled him on the path where both Honour and Love held out the reward, and
possessed him with a secret unknown to others, by which to distinguish him whose death could
alone give life to his hopes, and which he prudently resolved to lock up in his own bosom.

But Durward saw the necessity of acting otherwise respecting the information communicated by
Hayraddin, since the proposed sally of De la Marck, unless heedfully guarded against, might
prove the destruction of the besieging army, so difficult was it, in the tumultuous warfare
of those days, to recover from a nocturnal surprise. After pondering on the matter, he formed
the additional resolution, that he would not communicate the intelligence save personally,
and to both the Princes while together, perhaps because he felt that to mention so well contrived
and hopeful a scheme to Louis whilst in private, might be too strong a temptation to the wavering
probity of that Monarch, and lead him to assist, rather than repel, the intended sally. He
determined, therefore, to watch for an opportunity of revealing the secret whilst Louis and
Charles were met, which, as they were not particularly fond of the constraint imposed by each
other's society, was not likely soon to occur.

Meanwhile the march continued, and the confederates soon entered the territories of Liege.
Here the Burgundian soldiers, at least a part of them, composed of those bands who had acquired
the title of Ecorcheurs, or flayers, showed, by the usage which they gave the inhabitants,
under pretext of avenging the Bishop's death, that they well deserved that honourable title;
while their conduct greatly prejudiced the cause of Charles, the aggrieved inhabitants, who
might otherwise have been passive in the quarrel, assuming arms in self defence, harassing
his march by cutting off small parties, and falling back before the main body upon the city
itself, thus augmenting the numbers and desperation of those who had resolved to defend it.
The French, few in number, and those the choice soldiers of the country, kept, according to
the King's orders, close by their respective standards, and observed the strictest discipline,
a contrast which increased the suspicions of Charles, who could not help remarking that the
troops of Louis demeaned themselves as if they were rather friends to the Liegeois than allies
of Burgundy.

At length, without experiencing any serious opposition, the army arrived in the rich valley
of the Maes, and before the large and populous city of Liege. The Castle of Schonwaldt they
found had been totally destroyed, and learned that William de la Marck, whose only talents
were of a military cast, had withdrawn his whole forces into the city, and was determined to
avoid the encounter of the chivalry of France and Burgundy in the open field. But the invaders
were not long of experiencing the danger which must always exist in attacking a large town,
however open, if the inhabitants are disposed to defend it desperately.

A part of the Burgundian vanguard, conceiving that, from the dismantled and breached state
of the walls, they had nothing to do but to march into Liege at their ease, entered one of
the suburbs with the shouts of "Burgundy, Burgundy, Kill, kill--all is ours!--Remember Louis
of Bourbon!"

But as they marched in disorder through the narrow streets, and were partly dispersed for the
purpose of pillage, a large body of the inhabitants issued suddenly from the town, fell furiously
upon them, and made considerable slaughter. De la Marck even availed himself of the breaches
in the walls, which permitted the defenders to issue out at different points, and, by taking
separate routes into the contested suburb, to attack, in the front, flank, and rear at once
the assailants, who, stunned by the furious, unexpected, and multiplied nature of the resistance
offered, could hardly stand to their arms. The evening, which began to close, added to their
confusion.

When this news was brought to Duke Charles, he was furious with rage, which was not much appeased
by the offer of King Louis to send the French men at arms into the suburbs, to rescue and bring
off the Burgundian vanguard. Rejecting this offer briefly, he would have put himself at the
head of his own Guards, to extricate those engaged in the incautious advance; but D'Hymbercourt
and Crevecoeur entreated him to leave the service to them, and, marching into the scene of
action at two points with more order and proper arrangement for mutual support, these two celebrated
captains succeeded in repulsing the Liegeois, and in extricating the vanguard, who lost, besides
prisoners, no fewer than eight hundred men, of whom about a hundred were men at arms. The prisoners,
however, were not numerous, most of them having been rescued by D'Hymbercourt, who now proceeded
to occupy the contested suburb, and to place guards opposite to the town, from which it was
divided by an open space, or esplanade, of five or six hundred yards, left free of buildings
for the purposes of defence. There was no moat betwixt the suburb and town, the ground being
rocky in that place. A gate fronted the suburb, from which sallies might be easily made, and
the wall was pierced by two or three of those breaches which Duke Charles had caused to be
made after the battle of Saint Tron, and which had been hastily repaired with mere barricades
of timber.

D'Hymbercourt turned two culverins on the gate, and placed two others opposite to the principal
breach, to repel any sally from the city, and then returned to the Burgundian army, which he
found in great disorder. In fact, the main body and rear of the numerous army of the Duke had
continued to advance, while the broken and repulsed vanguard was in the act of retreating;
and they had come into collision with each other, to the great confusion of both. The necessary
absence of D'Hymbercourt, who discharged all the duties of Marechal du Camp, or, as we should
now say, of Quartermaster General, augmented the disorder; and to complete the whole, the night
sank down dark as a wolf's mouth; there fell a thick and heavy rain, and the ground on which
the beleaguering army must needs take up their position, was muddy and intersected with many
canals. It is scarce possible to form an idea of the confusion which prevailed in the Burgundian
army, where leaders were separated from their soldiers, and soldiers from their standards and
officers. Every one, from the highest to the lowest, was seeking shelter and accommodation
where he could individually find it; while the wearied and wounded, who had been engaged in
the battle, were calling in vain for shelter and refreshment; and while those who knew nothing
of the disaster were pressing on to have their share in the sack of the place, which they had
no doubt was proceeding merrily.

When D'Hymbercourt returned, he had a task to perform of incredible difficulty, and imbittered
by the reproaches of his master, who made no allowance for the still more necessary duty in
which he had been engaged, until the temper of the gallant soldier began to give way under
the Duke's unreasonable reproaches.

"I went hence to restore some order in the van," he said, "and left the main body under your
Grace's own guidance, and now, on my return, I can neither find that we have front, flank,
nor rear, so utter is the confusion."

"We are the more like a barrel of herrings," answered Le Glorieux, "which is the most natural
resemblance for a Flemish army."

The jester's speech made the Duke laugh, and perhaps prevented a farther prosecution of the
altercation betwixt him and his general.

By dint of great exertion, a small lusthaus, or country villa of some wealthy citizen of Liege,
was secured and cleared of other occupants, for the accommodation of the Duke and his immediate
attendants; and the authority of D'Hymbercourt and Crevecoeur at length established a guard
in the vicinity, of about forty men at arms, who lighted a very large fire, made with the timber
of the outhouses, which they pulled down for the purpose.

A little to the left of this villa, and betwixt it and the suburb, which, as we have said,
was opposite to the city gate, and occupied by the Burgundian Vanguard, lay another pleasure
house, surrounded by a garden and courtyard, and having two or three small enclosures or fields
in the rear of it. In this the King of France established his own headquarters. He did not
himself pretend to be a soldier further than a natural indifference to danger and much sagacity
qualified him to be called such; but he was always careful to employ the most skilful in that
profession, and reposed in them the confidence they merited. Louis and his immediate attendants
occupied this second villa, a part of his Scottish Guard were placed in the court, where there
were outhouses and sheds to shelter them from the weather; the rest were stationed in the garden.
The remainder of the French men at arms were quartered closely together and in good order,
with alarm posts stationed, in case of their having to sustain an attack.

Dunois and Crawford, assisted by several old officers and soldiers, amongst whom Le Balafre
was conspicuous for his diligence, contrived, by breaking down walls, making openings through
hedges, filling up ditches, and the like, to facilitate the communication of the troops with
each other, and the orderly combination of the whole in case of necessity.

Meanwhile, the King judged it proper to go without farther ceremony to the quarters of the
Duke of Burgundy, to ascertain what was to be the order of proceeding, and what cooperation
was expected from him. His presence occasioned a sort of council of war to be held, of which
Charles might not otherwise have dreamed.

It was then that Quentin Durward prayed earnestly to be admitted, as having something of importance
to deliver to the two Princes. This was obtained without much difficulty, and great was the
astonishment of Louis, when he heard him calmly and distinctly relate the purpose of William
de la Marck to make a sally upon the camp of the besiegers, under the dress and banners of
the French. Louis would probably have been much better pleased to have had such important news
communicated in private, but as the whole story had been publicly told in presence of the Duke
of Burgundy, he only observed, that, whether true or false, such a report concerned them most
materially.

"Not a whit!--not a whit!" said the Duke carelessly. "Had there been such a purpose as this
young man announces, it had not been communicated to me by an Archer of the Scottish Guard."

"However that may be," answered Louis, "I pray you, fair cousin, you and your captains, to
attend, that to prevent the unpleasing consequences of such an attack, should it be made unexpectedly,
I will cause my soldiers to wear white scarfs over their armour.--Dunois, see it given out
on the instant--that is," he added, "if our brother and general approves of it."

"I see no objection," replied the Duke, "if the chivalry of France are willing to run the risk
of having the name of the Knights of the Smock Sleeve bestowed on them in future."

"It would be a right well adapted title, friend Charles," said Le Glorieux, "considering that
a woman is the reward of the most valiant."

"Well spoken, Sagacity," said Louis. "Cousin, good night, I will go arm me.--By the way, what
if I win the Countess with mine own hand?

"Your Majesty," said the Duke, in an altered tone of voice, "must then become a true Fleming."

"I cannot," answered Louis, in a tone of the most sincere confidence, "be more so than I am
already, could I but bring you, my dear cousin, to believe it."

The Duke only replied by wishing the King good night in a tone resembling the snort of a shy
horse, starting from the caress of the rider when he is about to mount, and is soothing him
to stand still.

"I could pardon all his duplicity," said the Duke to Crevecoeur, "but cannot forgive his supposing
me capable of the gross folly of being duped by his professions."

Louis, too, had his confidences with Oliver le Dain, when he returned to his own quarters.
"This," he said, "is such a mixture of shrewdness and simplicity, that I know not what to make
of him. Pasques dieu! think of his unpardonable folly in bringing out honest De la Marck's
plan of a sally before the face of Burgundy, Crevecoeur, and all of them, instead of rounding
it in my ear, and giving me at least the choice of abetting or defeating it!"

"It is better as it is, Sire," said Oliver; "there are many in your present train who would
scruple to assail Burgundy undefied, or to ally themselves with De la Marck."

"Thou art right, Oliver. Such fools there are in the world, and we have no time to reconcile
their scruples by a little dose of self interest. We must be true men, Oliver, and good allies
of Burgundy, for this night at least--time may give us a chance of a better game. Go, tell
no man to unarm himself; and let them shoot, in case of necessity, as sharply on those who
cry France and St. Denis! as if they cried Hell and Satan! I will myself sleep in my armour.
Let Crawford place Quentin Durward on the extreme point of our line of sentinels, next to the
city. Let him e'en have the first benefit of the sally which he has announced to us--if his
luck bear him out, it is the better for him. But take an especial care of Martius Galeotti,
and see he remain in the rear, in a place of the most absolute safety--he is even but too venturous,
and, like a fool, would be both swordsman and philosopher. See to these things, Oliver, and
good night.--Our Lady of Clery, and Monseigneur St. Martin of Tours, be gracious to my slumbers!"

[The Duke of Burgundy, full of resentment for the usage which the Bishop had received from
the people of Liege (whose death, as already noticed, did not take place for some years after),
and knowing that the walls of the town had not been repaired since they were breached by himself
after the battle of Saint Tron, advanced recklessly to their chastisement. His commanders shared
his presumptuous confidence: for the advanced guard of his army, under the Marechal of Burgundy,
and Seigneur D'Hymbercourt, rushed upon one of the suburbs, without waiting for the rest of
their army, which, commanded by the Duke in person, remained about seven or eight leagues in
the rear. The night was closing, and, as the Burgundian troops observed no discipline, they
were exposed to a sudden attack from a party of the citizens commanded by Jean de Vilde, who,
assaulting them in the front and rear, threw them into great disorder, and killed more than
eight hundred men, of whom one hundred were men at arms. When Charles and the King of France
came up, they took up their quarters in two villas situated near to the wall of the city. In
the two or three days which followed, Louis was distinguished for the quiet and regulated composure
with which he pressed the siege, and provided for defence in case of sallies; while the Duke
of Burgundy, no way deficient in courage, and who showed the rashness and want of order which
was his principal characteristic, seemed also extremely suspicious that the King would desert
him and join with the Liegeois. They lay before the town for five or six days, and at length
fixed the 30th of October, 1468, for a general storm. The citizens, who had probably information
of their intent, resolved to prevent their purpose and determined on anticipating it by a desperate
sally through the breaches in their walls. They placed at their head six hundred of the men
of the little territory of Fraudemont, belonging to the Bishopric of Liege, and reckoned the
most valiant of their troops. They burst out of the town on a sudden, surprised the Duke of
Burgundy's quarters, ere his guards could put on their armour, which they had laid off to enjoy
some repose before the assault. The King of France's lodgings were also attacked and endangered.
A great confusion ensued, augmented incalculably by the mutual jealousy and suspicions of the
French and Burgundians. The people of Liege were, however, unable to maintain their hardy enterprise,
when the men at arms of the king and Duke began to recover from their confusion, and were finally
forced to retire within their walls, after narrowly missing the chance of surprising both King
Louis and the Duke of Burgundy, the most powerful princes of their time. At daybreak the storm
took place, as had been originally intended, and the citizens, disheartened and fatigued by
the nocturnal sally, did not make so much resistance as was expected. Liege was taken and miserably
pillaged, without regard to sex or age, things sacred or things profane. These particulars
are fully related by Comines in his Memoires, liv. ii, chap. 11, 12, 13, and do not differ
much from the account of the same events given in the text. S.]

CHAPTER XXXVII: THE SALLY

     He look'd, and saw what numbers numberless
     The city gates outpour'd.

     PARADISE REGAINED

A dead silence soon reigned over that great host which lay in leaguer before Liege. For a long
time the cries of the soldiers repeating their signals, and seeking to join their several banners,
sounded like the howling of bewildered dogs seeking their masters. But at length, overcome
with weariness by the fatigues of the day, the dispersed soldiers crowded under such shelter
as they could meet with, and those who could find none sunk down through very fatigue under
walls, hedges, and such temporary protection, there to await for morning--a morning which some
of them were never to behold. A dead sleep fell on almost all, excepting those who kept a faint
and wary watch by the lodgings of the King and the Duke. The dangers and hopes of the morrow--even
the schemes of glory which many of the young nobility had founded upon the splendid prize held
out to him who should avenge the murdered Bishop of Liege--glided from their recollection as
they lay stupefied with fatigue and sleep. But not so with Quentin Durward. The knowledge that
he alone was possessed of the means of distinguishing La Marck in the contest--the recollection
by whom that information had been communicated, and the fair augury which might be drawn from
her conveying it to him--the thought that his fortune had brought him to a most perilous and
doubtful crisis indeed, but one where there was still, at least, a chance of his coming off
triumphant--banished every desire to sleep and strung his nerves with vigour which defied fatigue.

Posted, by the King's express order, on the extreme point between the French quarters and the
town, a good way to the right of the suburb which we have mentioned, he sharpened his eye to
penetrate the mass which lay before him, and excited his ears to catch the slightest sound
which might announce any commotion in the beleaguered city. But its huge clocks had successively
knelled three hours after midnight, and all continued still and silent as the grave.

At length, and just when Quentin began to think the attack would be deferred till daybreak,
and joyfully recollected that there would be then light enough to descry the Bar Sinister across
the Fleur de lis of Orleans, he thought he heard in the city a humming murmur, like that of
disturbed bees mustering for the defence of their hives. He listened--the noise continued,
but it was of a character so undistinguished by any peculiar or precise sound, that it might
be the murmur of a wind arising among the boughs of a distant grove, or perhaps some stream,
swollen by the late rain, which was discharging itself into the sluggish Maes with more than
usual clamour. Quentin was prevented by these considerations from instantly giving the alarm,
which, if done carelessly, would have been a heavy offence. But, when the noise rose louder,
and seemed pouring at the same time towards his own post, and towards the suburb, he deemed
it his duty to fall back as silently as possible and call his uncle, who commanded the small
body of Archers destined to his support. All were on their feet in a moment, and with as little
noise as possible. In less than a second Lord Crawford was at their head, and, dispatching
an Archer to alarm the King and his household, drew back his little party to some distance
behind their watchfire, that they might not be seen by its light. The rushing sound, which
had approached them more nearly, seemed suddenly to have ceased, but they still heard distinctly
the more distant heavy tread of a large body of men approaching the suburb.

"The lazy Burgundians are asleep on their post," whispered Crawford; "make for the suburb,
Cunningham, and awaken the stupid oxen."

"Keep well to the rear as you go," said Durward; "if ever I heard the tread of mortal men,
there is a strong body interposed between us and the suburb."

"Well said, Quentin, my dainty callant," said Crawford; "thou art a soldier beyond thy years.
They only made halt till the others come forward.--I would I had some knowledge where they are!"

"I will creep forward, my Lord," said Quentin, "and endeavour to bring you information."

"Do so, my bonny chield; thou hast sharp ears and eyes, and good will--but take heed--I would
not lose thee for two and a plack [an homely Scottish expression for something you value]."

Quentin, with his harquebuss ready prepared, stole forward, through ground which he had reconnoitred
carefully in the twilight of the preceding evening, until he was not only certain that he was
in the neighbourhood of a very large body of men, who were standing fast betwixt the King's
quarters and the suburbs, but also that there was a detached party of smaller number in advance,
and very close to him. They seemed to whisper together, as if uncertain what to do next. At
last the steps of two or three Enfans perdus [literally, lost children], detached from that
smaller party, approached him so near as twice a pike's length. Seeing it impossible to retreat
undiscovered, Quentin called out aloud, "Qui vive? [who goes there?]" and was answered, by
"Vive Li--Li--ege--c'est a dire [that is to say]" (added he who spoke, correcting himself),
"Vive--la France!"

Quentin instantly fired his harquebuss--a man groaned and fell, and he himself, under the instant
but vague discharge of a number of pieces, the fire of which ran in a disorderly manner along
the column, and showed it to be very numerous, hastened back to the main guard.

"Admirably done, my brave boy!" said Crawford. "Now, callants, draw in within the courtyard--they
are too many to mell with in the open field."

They drew within the courtyard and garden accordingly, where they found all in great order
and the King prepared to mount his horse.

"Whither away, Sire!" said Crawford; "you are safest here with your own people."

"Not so," said Louis, "I must instantly to the Duke. He must be convinced of our good faith
at this critical moment, or we shall have both Liegeois and Burgundians upon us at once."

And, springing on his horse, he bade Dunois command the French troops without the house, and
Crawford the Archer Guard and other household troops to defend the lusthaus and its enclosures.
He commanded them to bring up two sakers and as many falconets (pieces of cannon for the field),
which had been left about half a mile in the rear; and, in the meantime, to make good their
posts, but by no means to advance, whatever success they might obtain; and having given these
orders, he rode off, with a small escort, to the Duke's quarters. The delay which permitted
these arrangements to be carried fully into effect was owing to Quentin's having fortunately
shot the proprietor of the house, who acted as guide to the column which was designed to attack
it, and whose attack, had it been made instantly, might have had a chance of being successful.

Durward, who, by the King's order, attended him to the Duke's, found the latter in a state
of choleric distemperature, which almost prevented his discharging the duties of a general,
which were never more necessary; for, besides the noise of a close and furious combat which
had now taken place in the suburb upon the left of their whole army--besides the attack upon
the King's quarters, which was fiercely maintained in the centre--a third column of Liegeois,
of even superior numbers, had filed out from a more distant breach, and, marching by lanes,
vineyards, and passes known to themselves, had fallen upon the right flank of the Burgundian
army, who, alarmed at their war cries of Vive la France! and Denis Montjoie! which mingled
with those of Liege! and Rouge Sanglier! and at the idea thus inspired, of treachery on the
part of the French confederates, made a very desultory and imperfect resistance; while the
Duke, foaming and swearing and cursing his liege Lord and all that belonged to him, called
out to shoot with bow and gun on all that was French whether black or white,--alluding to the
sleeves with which Louis's soldiers had designated themselves.

The arrival of the King, attended only by Le Balafre and Quentin and half a score of Archers,
restored confidence between France and Burgundy. D'Hymbercourt, Crevecoeur, and others of the
Burgundian leaders, whose names were then the praise and dread of war, rushed devotedly into
the conflict; and, while some commanders hastened to bring up more distant troops, to whom
the panic had not extended, others threw themselves into the tumult, reanimated the instinct
of discipline, and while the Duke toiled in the front, shouting, hacking, and hewing, like
an ordinary man at arms, brought their men by degrees into array, and dismayed the assailants
by the use of their artillery. The conduct of Louis, on the other hand, was that of a calm,
collected, sagacious leader, who neither sought nor avoided danger, but showed so much self
possession and sagacity, that the Burgundian leaders readily obeyed the orders which he issued.

The scene was now become in the utmost degree animated and horrible. On the left the suburb,
after a fierce contest, had been set on fire, and a wide and dreadful conflagration did not
prevent the burning ruins from being still disputed. On the centre, the French troops, though
pressed by immense odds, kept up so close and constant a fire, that the little pleasure house
shone bright with the glancing flashes, as if surrounded with a martyr's crown of flames. On
the left, the battle swayed backwards and forwards, with varied success, as fresh reinforcements
poured out of the town, or were brought forward from the rear of the Burgundian host; and the
strife continued with unremitting fury for three mortal hours, which at length brought the
dawn, so much desired by the besiegers. The enemy, at this period, seemed to be slackening
their efforts upon the right and in the centre, and several discharges of cannon were heard
from the lusthaus.

"Go," said the King to Le Balafre and Quentin, the instant his ear had caught the sound; "they
have got up the sakers and falconets--the pleasure house is safe, blessed be the Holy Virgin!--Tell
Dunois to move this way, but rather nearer the walls of Liege, with all our men at arms, excepting
what he may leave for the defence of the house, and cut in between those thick headed Liegeois
on the right and the city from which they are supplied with recruits."

The uncle and nephew galloped off to Dunois and Crawford, who, tired of their defensive war,
joyfully obeyed the summons, and, filing out at the head of a gallant body of about two hundred
French gentlemen, besides squires, and the greater part of the Archers and their followers,
marched across the field, trampling down the wounded till they gained the flank of the large
body of Liegeois, by whom the right of the Burgundians had been so fiercely assailed. The increasing
daylight discovered that the enemy were continuing to pour out from the city, either for the
purpose of continuing the battle on that point, or of bringing safely off the forces who were
already engaged.

"By Heaven!" said old Crawford to Dunois, "were I not certain it is thou that art riding by
my side, I would say I saw thee among yonder banditti and burghers, marshalling and arraying
them with thy mace--only, if yon be thou, thou art bigger than thou art wont to be. Art thou
sure yonder armed leader is not thy wraith, thy double man, as these Flemings call it?"

"My wraith!" said Dunois; "I know not what you mean. But yonder is a caitiff with my bearings
displayed on crest and shield, whom I will presently punish for his insolence."

"In the name of all that is noble, my lord, leave the vengeance to me!" said Quentin.

"To thee, indeed, young man," said Dunois; "that is a modest request.

"No--these things brook no substitution." Then turning on his saddle, he called out to those
around him, "Gentlemen of France, form your line, level your lances! Let the rising sunbeams
shine through the battalions of yonder swine of Liege and hogs of Ardennes, that masquerade
in our ancient coats."

The men at arms answered with a loud shout of "A Dunois! a Dunois! Long live the bold Bastard!--Orleans
to the rescue!"

And, with their leader in the centre, they charged at full gallop. They encountered no timid
enemy. The large body which they charged consisted (excepting some mounted officers) entirely
of infantry, who, setting the butt of their lances against their feet, the front rank kneeling,
the second stooping, and those behind presenting their spears over their heads, offered such
resistance to the rapid charge of the men at arms as the hedgehog presents to his enemy. Few
were able to make way through that iron Wall; but of those few was Dunois, who, giving spur
to his horse, and making the noble animal leap wore than twelve feet at a bound, fairly broke
his way into the middle of the phalanx, and made toward the object of his animosity. What was
his surprise to find Quentin still by his side, and fighting in the same front with himself--youth,
desperate courage, and the determination to do or die having still kept the youth abreast with
the best knight in Europe; for such was Dunois reported, and truly reported at the period.

Their spears were soon broken, but the lanzknechts Were unable to withstand the blows of their
long, heavy swords; while the horses and riders, armed in complete steel, sustained little
injury from their lances. Still Dunois and Durward were contending with rival efforts to burst
forward to the spot where he who had usurped the armorial bearings of Dunois was doing the
duty of a good and valiant leader, when Dunois, observing the boar's head and tusks--the usual
bearing of William de la Marck--in another part of the conflict, called out to Quentin, "Thou
art worthy to avenge the arms of Orleans! I leave thee the task.--Balafre, support your nephew;
but let none dare to interfere with Dunois's boar hunt!"

That Quentin Durward joyfully acquiesced in this division of labour cannot be doubted, and
each pressed forward upon his separate object, followed, and defended from behind, by such
men at arms as were able to keep up with them.

But at this moment the column which De la Marck had proposed to support, when his own course
was arrested by the charge of Dunois, had lost all the advantages they had gained during the
night; while the Burgundians, with returning day, had begun to show the qualities which belong
to superior discipline. The great mass of Liegeois were compelled to retreat, and at length
to fly; and, falling back on those who were engaged with the French men at arms, the whole
became a confused tide of fighters, fliers, and pursuers, which rolled itself towards the city
walls, and at last was poured into the ample and undefended breach through which the Liegeois
had sallied.

Quentin made more than human exertions to overtake the special object of his pursuit, who was
still in his sight, striving, by voice and example, to renew the battle, and bravely supported
by a chosen party of lanzknechts. Le Balafre and several of his comrades attached themselves
to Quentin, much marvelling at the extraordinary gallantry displayed by so young a soldier.
On the very brink of the breach, De la Marck--for it was himself--succeeded in effecting a
momentary stand, and repelling some of the most forward of the pursuers. He had a mace of iron
in his hand, before which everything seemed to go down, and was so much covered with blood
that it was almost impossible to discern those bearings on his shield which had so much incensed
Dunois.

Quentin now found little difficulty in singling him out, for the commanding situation of which
he had possessed himself, and the use he made of his terrible mace, caused many of the assailants
to seek safer points of attack than that where so desperate a defender presented himself. But
Quentin, to whom the importance attached to victory over this formidable antagonist was better
known, sprung from his horse at the bottom of the breach, and, letting the noble animal, the
gift of the Duke of Orleans, run loose through the tumult, ascended the ruins to measure swords
with the Boar of Ardennes. The latter, as if he had seen his intention, turned towards Durward
with mace uplifted; and they were on the point of encounter, when a dreadful shout of triumph,
of tumult, and of despair, announced that the besiegers were entering the city at another point,
and in the rear of those who defended the breach. Assembling around him, by voice and bugle,
the desperate partners of his desperate fortune, De la Marck, at those appalling sounds, abandoned
the breach, and endeavoured to effect his retreat towards a part of the city from which he
might escape to the other side of the Maes. His immediate followers formed a deep body of well
disciplined men, who, never having given quarter, were resolved now not to ask it, and who,
in that hour of despair, threw themselves into such firm order that their front occupied the
whole breadth of the street, through which they slowly retired, making head from time to time,
and checking the pursuers, many of whom began to seek a safer occupation, by breaking into
the houses for plunder. It is therefore probable that De la Marck might have effected his escape,
his disguise concealing him from those who promised themselves to win honour and grandeur upon
his head, but for the stanch pursuit of Quentin, his uncle Le Balafre, and some of his comrades.
At every pause which was made by the lanzknechts, a furious combat took place betwixt them
and the Archers, and in every melee Quentin sought De la Marck; but the latter, whose present
object was to retreat, seemed to evade the young Scot's purpose of bringing him to single combat.
The confusion was general in every direction. The shrieks and cries of women, the yelling of
the terrified inhabitants, now subjected to the extremity of military license, sounded horribly
shrill amid the shouts of battle--like the voice of misery and despair contending with that
of fury and violence, which should be heard farthest and loudest.

It was just when De la Marck, retiring through this infernal scene, had passed the door of
a small chapel of peculiar sanctity, that the shouts of "France! France!--Burgundy! Burgundy!"
apprised him that a part of the besiegers were entering the farther end of the street, which
was a narrow one, and that his retreat was cut off.

"Comrade," he said, "take all the men with you.--Charge yonder fellows roundly, and break through
if you can--with me it is over. I am man enough, now that I am brought to bay, to send some
of these vagabond Scots to hell before me."

His lieutenant obeyed, and, with most of the few lanzknechts who remained alive, hurried to
the farther end of the street, for the purpose of charging those Burgundians who were advancing,
and so forcing their way, so as to escape. About six of De la Marck's best men remained to
perish with their master, and fronted the Archers, who were not many more in number.

"Sanglier! Sanglier! Hola! gentlemen of Scotland," said the ruffian but undaunted chief, waving
his mace, "who longs to gain a coronet--who strikes at the Boar of Ardennes?--You, young man,
have, methinks, a hankering; but you must win ere you wear it."

Quentin heard but imperfectly the words, which were partly lost in the hollow helmet; but the
action could not be mistaken, and he had but time to bid his uncle and comrades, as they were
gentlemen, to stand back, when De la Marck sprang upon him with a bound like a tiger, aiming,
at the same time a blow with his mace, so as to make his hand and foot keep time together,
and giving his stroke full advantage of the descent of his leap, but, light of foot and quick
of eye, Quentin leaped aside, and disappointed an aim which would have been fatal had it taken
effect.

They then closed, like the wolf and the wolf dog, their comrades on either side remaining inactive
spectators, for Le Balafre roared out for fair play, adding that he would venture his nephew
on him were he as wight as Wallace.

Neither was the experienced soldier's confidence unjustified; for, although the blows of the
despairing robber fell like those of the hammer on the anvil, yet the quick motions and dexterous
swordsmanship of the young Archer enabled him to escape, and to requite them with the point
of his less noisy, though more fatal weapon; and that so often, and so effectually, that the
huge strength of his antagonist began to give way to fatigue, while the ground on which he
stood became a puddle of blood. Yet, still unabated in courage and ire, the wild Boar of Ardennes
fought on with as much mental energy as at first, and Quentin's victory seemed dubious and
distant, when a female voice behind him called him by his name, ejaculating,

"Help! help! for the sake of the blessed Virgin!"

He turned his head, and with a single glance beheld Gertrude Pavillon, her mantle stripped
from her shoulders, dragged forcibly along by a French soldier, one of several who, breaking
into the chapel close by, had seized, as their prey, on the terrified females who had taken
refuge there.

"Wait for me but one moment," exclaimed Quentin to De la Marck, and sprang to extricate his
benefactress from a situation of which he conjectured all the dangers.

"I wait no man's pleasure," said De la Marck, flourishing his mace, and beginning to retreat--glad,
no doubt, at being free of so formidable an assailant.

"You shall wait mine, though, by your leave," said Balafre; "I will not have my nephew baulked."

So saying, he instantly assaulted De la Marck with his two handed sword.

Quentin found, in the meanwhile, that the rescue of Gertrude was a task more difficult than
could be finished in one moment. Her captor, supported by his comrades, refused to relinquish
his prize: and whilst Durward, aided by one or two of his countrymen, endeavoured to compel
him to do so, the former beheld the chance which Fortune had so kindly afforded him for fortune
and happiness glide out of his reach; so that when he stood at length in the street with the
liberated Gertrude, there was no one near them. Totally forgetting the defenceless situation
of his companion, he was about to spring away in pursuit of the Boar of Ardennes, as the greyhound
tracks the deer, when, clinging to him in her despair, she exclaimed, "For the sake of your
mother's honour, leave me not here!--As you are a gentleman, protect me to my father's house,
which once sheltered you and the Lady Isabelle!--For her sake leave me not!"

Her call was agonizing, but it was irresistible; and bidding a mental adieu, with unutterable
bitterness of feeling, to all the gay hopes which had stimulated his exertion, carried him
through that bloody day, and which at one moment seemed to approach consummation, Quentin,
like an unwilling spirit who obeys a talisman which he cannot resist, protected Gertrude to
Pavillon's house, and arrived in time to defend that and the Syndic himself against the fury
of the licentious soldiery.

Meantime the King and the Duke of Burgundy entered the city on horseback and through one of
the breaches. They were both in complete armour, but the latter, covered with blood from the
plume to the spur, drove his steed furiously up the breach, which Louis surmounted with the
stately pace of one who leads a procession. They dispatched orders to stop the sack of the
city, which had already commenced, and to assemble their scattered troops. The Princes themselves
proceeded towards the great church, both for the protection of many of the distinguished inhabitants
who had taken refuge there, and in order to hold a sort of military council after they had
heard high mass.

Busied, like other officers of his rank, in collecting those under his command, Lord Crawford,
at the turning of one of the streets which leads to the Maes, met Le Balafre sauntering composedly
towards the river, holding in his hand, by the gory locks, a human head with as much indifference
as a fowler carries a game pouch.

"How now, Ludovic!" said his commander; "what are ye doing with that carrion?"

"It is all that is left of a bit of work which my nephew shaped out and nearly finished and
I put the last hand to," said Le Balafre, "a good fellow that I dispatched yonder and who prayed
me to throw his head into the Maes.--Men have queer fancies when old Small Back [a cant expression
in Scotland for Death, usually delineated as a skeleton. S.] is gripping them, but Small Back
must lead down the dance with us all in our time."

"And you are going to throw that head into the Maes?" said Crawford, looking more attentively
on the ghastly memorial of mortality.

"Ay, truly am I," said Ludovic testily. "If you refuse a dying man his boon, you are likely
to be haunted by his ghost, and I love to sleep sound at nights."

"You must take your chance of the ghaist, man," said Crawford; "for, by my soul, there is more
lies on that dead pow than you think for. Come along with me--not a word more--Come along with me."

"Nay, for that matter," said Le Balafre, "I made him no promise; for, in truth, I had off his
head before the tongue had well done wagging; and as I feared him not living, by St. Martin
of Tours, I fear him as little when he is dead. Besides, my little gossip, the merry Friar
of St. Martin's, will lend me a pot of holy water."

When high mass had been said in the Cathedral Church of Liege and the terrified town was restored
to some moderate degree of order, Louis and Charles, with their peers around, proceeded to
hear the claims of those who had any to make for services performed during the battle. Those
which respected the County of Croye and its fair mistress were first received, and to the disappointment
of sundry claimants, who had thought themselves sure of the rich prize, there seemed doubt
and mystery to involve their several pretensions. Crevecoeur showed a boar's hide, such as
De la Marck usually wore; Dunois produced a cloven shield with his armorial bearings; and there
were others who claimed the merit of having dispatched the murderer of the Bishop, producing
similar tokens--the rich reward fixed on De la Marck's head having brought death to all who
were armed in his resemblance.

There was much noise and contest among the competitors, and Charles, internally regretting
the rash promise which had placed the hand and wealth of his fair vassal on such a hazard,
was in hopes he might find means of evading all these conflicting claims, when Crawford pressed
forward into the circle, dragging Le Balafre after him, who, awkward and bashful, followed
like an unwilling mastiff towed on in a leash, as his leader exclaimed, "Away with your hoofs
and hides and painted iron!--No one, save he who slew the Boar, can show the tusks!"

So saying, he flung on the floor the bloody head, easily known as that of De la Marck by the
singular conformation of the jaws, which in reality had a certain resemblance to those of the
animal whose name he bore, and which was instantly recognized by all who had seen him.

[We have already noticed the anachronism respecting the crimes of this atrocious baron; and
it is scarce necessary to repeat, that if he in reality murdered the Bishop of Liege in 1482,
the Count of La Marck could not be slain in the defence of Liege four years earlier. In fact,
the Wild Boar of Ardennes, as he was usually termed, was of high birth, being the third son
of John I, Count of La Marck and Aremberg, and ancestor of the branch called Barons of Lumain.
He did not escape the punishment due to his atrocity, though it did not take place at the time,
or in the manner, narrated in the text. Maximilian, Emperor of Austria, caused him to be arrested
at Utrecht, where he was beheaded in the year 1485, three years after the Bishop of Liege's
death. S.]

"Crawford," said Louis, while Charles sat silent in gloomy and displeased surprise, "I trust
it is one of my faithful Scots who has won this prize?"

"It is Ludovic Lesly, Sire, whom we call Le Balafre," replied the old soldier.

"But is he noble?" said the Duke; "is he of gentle blood?--Otherwise our promise is void."

"He is a cross, ungainly piece of wood enough," said Crawford, looking at the tall, awkward,
embarrassed figure of the Archer; "but I will warrant him a branch of the tree of Rothes for
all that--and they have been as noble as any house in France or Burgundy ever since it is told
of their founder that--

     "'Between the less-lee and the mair,
     He slew the Knight, and left him there.'"

[An old rhyme by which the Leslies vindicate their descent from an ancient knight, who is said
to have slain a gigantic Hungarian champion, and to have formed a proper name for himself by
a play of words upon the place where he fought his adversary. S.]

"There is then no help for it," said the Duke, "and the fairest and richest heiress in Burgundy
must be the wife of a rude mercenary soldier like this, or die secluded in a convent--and she
the only child of our faithful Reginald de Croye!--I have been too rash."

And a cloud settled on his brow, to the surprise of his peers, who seldom saw him evince the
slightest token of regret for the necessary consequences of an adopted resolution.

"Hold but an instant," said the Lord Crawford, "it may be better than your Grace conjectures.
Hear but what this cavalier has to say.--Speak out, man, and a murrain to thee," he added,
apart to Le Balafre.

But that blunt soldier, though he could make a shift to express himself intelligibly enough
to King Louis, to whose familiarity he was habituated, yet found himself incapable of enunciating
his resolution before so splendid an assembly as that before which he then stood; and after
having turned his shoulder to the princes, and preluded with a hoarse chuckling laugh, and
two or three tremendous contortions of countenance, he was only able to pronounce the words,
"Saunders Souplejaw"--and then stuck fast.

"May it please your Majesty and your Grace," said Crawford, "I must speak for my countryman
and old comrade. You shall understand that he has had it prophesied to him by a seer in his
own land, that the fortune of his house is to be made by marriage; but as he is, like myself,
something the worse for the wear--loves the wine house better than a lady's summer parlour,
and, in short, having some barrack tastes and likings, which would make greatness in his own
person rather an encumbrance to him, he hath acted by my advice, and resigns the pretentions
acquired' by the fate of slaying William de la Marck, to him by whom the Wild Boar was actually
brought to bay, who is his maternal nephew."

"I will vouch for that youth's services and prudence," said King Louis, overjoyed to see that
fate had thrown so gallant a prize to one over whom he had some influence. "Without his prudence
and vigilance, we had been ruined. It was he who made us aware of the night sally."

"I, then," said Charles, "owe him some reparation for doubting his veracity."

"And I can attest his gallantry as a man at arms," said Dunois.

"But," interrupted Crevecoeur, "though the uncle be a Scottish gentillatre, that makes not
the nephew necessarily so."

"He is of the House of Durward," said Crawford, "descended from that Allan Durward who was
High Steward of Scotland."

"Nay, if it be young Durward," said Crevecoeur, "I say no more.--Fortune has declared herself
on his side too plainly for me to struggle farther with her humoursome ladyship--but it is
strange, from lord to horseboy, how wonderfully these Scots stick by each other."

"Highlander shoulder to shoulder," answered Lord Crawford, laughing at the mortification of
the proud Burgundian.

"We have yet to inquire," said Charles thoughtfully, "what the fair lady's sentiments may be
towards this fortunate adventurer."

"By the mass" said Crevecoeur, "I have but too much reason to believe your Grace will find
her more amenable to authority than on former occasions.--But why should I grudge this youth
his preferment? Since, after all, it is sense, firmness, and gallantry which have put him in
possession of WEALTH, RANK, and BEAUTY!"

* * * * *

I had already sent these sheets to the press, concluding, as I thought, with a moral of excellent
tendency for the encouragement of all fair haired, blue eyed, long legged, stout hearted emigrants
from my native country, who might be willing in stirring times to take up the gallant profession
of Cavalieros of Fortune. But a friendly monitor, one of those who, like the lump of sugar
which is found at the bottom of a tea cup, as well as the flavour of the souchong itself, has
entered a bitter remonstrance, and insists that I should give a precise and particular account
of the espousals of the young heir of Glen Houlakin and the lovely Flemish Countess, and tell
what tournaments were held, and how many lances were broken, upon so interesting an occasion;
nor withhold from the curious reader the number of sturdy boys who inherited the valour of
Quentin Durward, and of bright damsels, in whom were renewed the charms of Isabelle de Croye.
I replied, in course of post, that times were changed, and public weddings were entirely out
of fashion. In days traces of which I myself can remember, not only were the "fifteen friends"
of the happy pair invited to witness their Union, but the bridal minstrelsy still continued,
as in the "Ancient Mariner," to "nod their heads" till morning shone on them. The sack posset
was eaten in the nuptial chamber--the stocking was thrown--and the bride's garter was struggled
for in presence of the happy couple whom Hymen had made one flesh. The authors of the period
were laudably accurate in following its fashions. They spared you not a blush of the bride,
not a rapturous glance of the bridegroom, not a diamond in her hair, not a button on his embroidered
waistcoat; until at length, with Astraea, "they fairly put their characters to bed." [the reference
is to the plays of Mrs. Aphra Behn. "The stage how loosely doth Astraea tread, who fairly puts
each character to bed."] But how little does this agree with the modest privacy which induces
our modern brides--sweet bashful darlings!--to steal from pomp and plate, and admiration and
flattery, and, like honest Shenstone [(1714-1763): an English poet best known by The Schoolmistress],

     "Seek for freedom at an inn!"

To these, unquestionably, an exposure of the circumstances of publicity with which a bridal
in the fifteenth century was always celebrated, must appear in the highest degree disgusting.
Isabelle de Croye would be ranked in their estimation far below the maid who milks, and does
the meanest chores; for even she, were it in the church porch, would reject the hand of her
journeyman shoemaker, should he propose faire des noces [to celebrate a wedding festivity],
as it is called on Parisian signs, instead of going down on the top of the long coach to spend
the honeymoon incognito at Deptford or Greenwich. I will not, therefore, tell more of this
matter, but will steal away from the wedding, as Ariosto from that of Angelica, leaving it
to whom it may please to add farther particulars, after the fashion of their own imagination.

     "Some better bard shall sing, in feudal state
     How Bracquemont's Castle op'd its Gothic gate,
     When on the wand'ring Scot, its lovely heir
     Bestow'd her beauty and an earldom fair."

[Ariosto (1474-1533): an Italian poet, the author of the poem Orlando Furioso, whose popularity
was due largely to the subject--combats and paladins, lovers' devotion and mad adventures.
Angelica is the heroine. Scott is sometimes called the Ariosto of the North.]