The public buildings--what I saw of them--confirm the idea of a placid half-prosperity. The
place is not a baby, but it has hardly taken the trouble to grow up. It has a post-office of
truly German stability and magnitude. It has a well-organised railway station, and it has the
merit of being in Adderley Street, the main thoroughfare of the city: imagine it even possible
to bring Euston into the Strand, and you will get an idea of the absence of push and crush
in Capetown.

When you go on to look at Government House the place keeps its character: Government House
is half a country house and half a country inn. One sentry tramps outside the door, and you
pay your respects to the Governor in shepherd's plaid.

Over everything brooded peace, except over one flamboyant many-winged building of red brick
and white stone with a garden about it, an avenue--a Capetown avenue, shady trees and cool
but not large: attractive and not imposing--at one side of it, with a statue of the Queen before
and broad-flagged stairs behind. It was the Parliament House. The Legislative Assembly--their
House of Commons--was characteristically small, yet characteristically roomy and characteristically
comfortable. The members sit on flat green-leather cushions, two or three on a bench, and each
man's name is above his seat: no jostling for Capetown. The slip of Press gallery is above
the Speaker's head; the sloping uncrowded public gallery is at the other end, private boxes
on one side, big windows on the other. Altogether it looks like a copy of the Westminster original,
improved by leaving nine-tenths of the members and press and public out.

Yet here--alas, for placid Capetown!--they were wrangling. They were wrangling about the commandeering
of gold and the sjamboking--shamboking, you pronounce it--of Johannesburg refugees. There was
Sir Gordon Sprigg, thrice Premier, grey-bearded, dignified, and responsible in bearing and
speech, conversationally reasonable in tone. There was Mr Schreiner, the Premier, almost boyish
with plump, smooth cheeks and a dark moustache. He looks capable, and looks as if he knows
it: he, too, is conversational, almost jerky, in speech, but with a flavour of bitterness added
to his reason.

Everything sounded quiet and calm enough for Capetown--yet plainly feeling was strained tight
to snapping. A member rose to put a question, and prefaced it with a brief invective against
all Boers and their friends. He would go on for about ten minutes, when suddenly angry cries
of "Order!" in English and Dutch would rise. The questioner commented with acidity on the manners
of his opponents. They appealed to the chair: the Speaker blandly pronounced that the hon.
gentleman had been out of order from the first word he uttered. The hon. gentleman thereon
indignantly refused to put his question at all; but, being prevailed to do so, gave an opening
to a Minister, who devoted ten minutes to a brief invective against all Uitlanders and their
friends. Then up got one of the other side--and so on for an hour. Most delicious of all was
a white-haired German, once colonel in the Hanoverian Legion which was settled in the Eastern
Province, and which to this day remains the loyallest of her Majesty's subjects. When the Speaker
ruled against his side he counselled defiance in a resounding whisper; when an opponent was
speaking he snorted thunderous derision; when an opponent retorted he smiled blandly and admonished
him: "Ton't lose yer demper."

In the Assembly, if nowhere else, rumbled the menace of coming war.

One other feature there was that was not Capetown. Along Adderley Street, before the steamship
companies' offices, loafed a thick string of sun-reddened, unshaven, flannel-shirted, corduroy-trousered
British working-men. Inside the offices they thronged the counters six deep. Down to the docks
they filed steadily with bundles to be penned in the black hulls of homeward liners. Their
words were few and sullen. These were the miners of the Rand--who floated no companies, held
no shares, made no fortunes, who only wanted to make a hundred pounds to furnish a cottage
and marry a girl.

They had been turned out of work, packed in cattle-trucks, and had come down in sun by day
and icy wind by night, empty-bellied, to pack off home again. Faster than the ship-loads could
steam out the trainloads steamed in. They choked the lodging-houses, the bars, the streets.
Capetown was one huge demonstration of the unemployed. In the hotels and streets wandered the
pale, distracted employers. They hurried hither and thither and arrived nowhither; they let
their cigars go out, left their glasses half full, broke off their talk in the middle of a
word. They spoke now of intolerable grievance and hoarded revenge, now of silent mines, rusting
machinery, stolen gold. They held their houses in Johannesburg as gone beyond the reach of
insurance. They hated Capetown, they could not tear themselves away to England, they dared
not return to the Rand.

This little quiet corner of Capetown held the throbbing hopes and fears of all Johannesburg
and more than half the two Republics and the mass of all South Africa.

None doubted--though many tried to doubt--that at last it was--war! They paused an instant
before they said the word, and spoke it softly. It had come at last--the moment they had worked
and waited for--and they knew not whether to exult or to despair.

STORMBERG JUNCTION.

The wind screams down from the naked hills on to the little junction station. A platform with
dining-room and telegraph office, a few corrugated iron sheds, the station-master's corrugated
iron bungalow--and there is nothing else of Stormberg but veldt and, kopje, wind and sky. Only
these last day's there has sprung up a little patch of white tents a quarter of a mile from
the station, and about them move men in putties and khaki. Signal flags blink from the rises,
pickets with fixed bayonets dot the ridges, mounted men in couples patrol the plain and the
dip and the slope. Four companies of the Berkshire Regiment and the mounted infantry section--in
all they may count 400 men. Fifty miles north is the Orange river, and beyond it, maybe by
now this side of it, thousands of armed and mounted burghers--and war.

I wonder if it is all real? By the clock I have been travelling something over forty hours
in South Africa, but it might just as well be a minute or a lifetime. It is a minute of experience
prolonged to a lifetime. South Africa is a dream--one of those dreams in which you live years
in the instant of waking--a dream of distance.

Departing from Capetown by night, I awoke in the Karroo. Between nine and six in the morning
we had made less than a hundred and eighty miles. Now we were climbing the vast desert of the
Karroo, the dusty stairway that leads on to the highlands of South Africa. Once you have seen
one desert, all the others are like it; and yet once you have loved the desert, each is lovable
in a new way. In the Karroo you seem to be going up a winding ascent, like the ramps that lead
to an Indian fortress. You are ever pulling up an incline between hills, making for a corner
round one of the ranges. You feel that when you get round that corner you will at last see
something: you arrive and only see another incline, two more ranges, and another corner--surely
this time with something to arrive at beyond. You arrive and arrive, and once more you arrive--and
once more you see the same vast nothing you are coming from. Believe it or not, that is the
very charm of a desert--the unfenced emptiness, the space, the freedom, the unbroken arch of
the sky. It is for ever fooling you, and yet you for ever pursue it. And then it is only to
the eye that cannot do without green that the Karroo is unbeautiful. Every other colour meets
others in harmony--tawny sand, silver-grey scrub, crimson-tufted flowers like heather, black
ribs of rock, puce shoots of screes, violet mountains in the middle distance, blue fairy battlements
guarding the horizon. And above all broods the intense purity of the South African azure--not
a coloured thing, like the plants and the hills, but sheer colour existing by and for itself.

It is sheer witching desert for five hundred miles, and for aught I know five hundred miles
after that. At the rare stations you see perhaps one corrugated-iron store, perhaps a score
of little stone houses with a couple of churches. The land carries little enough stock--here
a dozen goats browsing on the withered sticks goats love, there a dozen ostriches, high-stepping,
supercilious heads in air, wheeling like a troop of cavalry and trotting out of the stink of
that beastly train. Of men, nothing--only here at the bridge a couple of tents, there at the
culvert a black man, grotesque in sombrero and patched trousers, loafing, hands in pockets,
lazy pipe in mouth. The last man in the world, you would have said, to suggest glorious war--yet
war he meant and nothing else. On the line from Capetown--that single track through five hundred
miles of desert--hang Kimberley and Mafeking and Rhodesia: it runs through Dutch country, and
the black man was there to watch it.

War--and war sure enough it was. A telegram at a tea-bar, a whisper, a gathering rush, an electric
vibration--and all the station and all the train and the very niggers on the dunghill outside
knew it. War--war at last! Everybody had predicted it--and now everybody gasped with amazement.
One man broke off in a joke about killing Dutchmen, and could only say, "My God--my God--my God!"

I too was lost, and lost I remain. Where was I to go? What was I to do? My small experience
has been confined to wars you could put your fingers on: for this war I have been looking long
enough, and have not found it. I have been accustomed to wars with headquarters, at any rate
to wars with a main body and a concerted plan: but this war in Cape Colony has neither.

It could not have either. If you look at the map you will see that the Transvaal and Orange
Free State are all but lapped in the red of British territory. That would be to our advantage
were our fighting force superior or equal or even not much inferior to that of the enemy. In
a general way it is an advantage to have your frontier in the form of a re-entrant angle; for
then you can strike on your enemy's flank and threaten his communications. That advantage the
Boers possess against Natal, and that is why Sir George White has abandoned Laing's Nek and
Newcastle, and holds the line of the Biggarsberg: even so the Boers might conceivably get between
him and his base. The Northumberlands--the famous Fighting Fifth--came crawling up behind our
train, and may now be at Naauwpoort or De Aar.

Mafeking and Kimberley are fairly well garrisoned, with auxiliary volunteers, and may hold
their own: at any rate, I have not been there and can say nothing about them. But along the
southern border of the Free State--the three railway junctions of De Aar, Naauwpoort, and Stormberg--our
position is very dangerous indeed. I say it freely, for by the time the admission reaches England
it may be needed to explain failure, or pleasant to add lustre to success. If the Army Corps
were in Africa, which is still in England, this position would be a splendid one for it--three
lines of supply from Capetown, Port Elizabeth, and East London, and three converging lines
of advance by Norval's Pont, Bethulie, and Aliwal North. But with tiny forces of half a battalion
in front and no support behind--nothing but long lines of railway with ungarrisoned ports hundreds
of miles at the far end of them--it is very dangerous. There are at this moment no supports
nearer than England. Let the Free Staters bring down two thousand good shots and resolute men
to-morrow morning--it is only fifty miles, with two lines of railway--and what will happen
to that little patch of white tents by the station? The loss of any one means the loss of land
connection between Western and Eastern Provinces, a line open into the heart of the Cape Colony,
and nothing to resist an invader short of the sea.

It is dangerous--and yet nobody cares. There is nothing to do but wait--for the Army Corps
that has not yet left England. Even to-day--a day's ride from the frontier--the war seems hardly
real. All will be done that man can do. In the mean time the good lady of the refreshment-room
says: "Dinner? There's been twenty-one to-day and dinner got ready for fifteen; but you're
welcome to it, such as it is. We must take things as they come in war-time." Her children play
with their cats in the passage. The railway man busies himself about the new triangles and
sidings that are to be laid down against the beginning of December for the Army Corps that
has not yet left England.

BURGHERSDORP, Oct. 14.

The village lies compact and clean-cut, a dot in the wilderness. No fields or orchards break
the transition from man to nature; step out of the street and you are at once on rock-ribbed
kopje or raw veldt. As you stand on one of the bare lines of hill that squeeze it into a narrow
valley, Burghersdorp is a chequer-board of white house, green tree, and grey iron roof; beyond
its edges everything is the changeless yellow brown of South African landscape.

Go down into the streets, and Burghersdorp is an ideal of Arcady. The broad, dusty, unmetalled
roads are steeped in sunshine. The houses are all one-storeyed, some brick, some mud, some
the eternal corrugated iron, most faced with whitewash, many fronted with shady verandahs.
As blinds against the sun they have lattices of trees down every street--white-blossoming laburnum,
poplars, sycamores.

Despite verandahs and trees, the sunshine soaks down into every corner--genially, languorously
warm. All Burghersdorp basks. You see half-a-dozen yoke of bullocks with a waggon, standing
placidly in the street, too lazy even to swish their tails against the flies; pass by an hour
later, and they are still there, and the black man lounging by the leaders has hardly shifted
one leg; pass by at evening, and they have moved on three hundred yards, and are resting again.
In the daytime hens peck and cackle in every street; at nightfall the bordering veldt hums
with crickets and bullfrogs. At morn come a flight of locusts--first, yellow-white scouts whirring
down every street, then a pelting snowstorm of them high up over the houses, spangling the
blue heaven. But Burghersdorp cared nothing. "There is nothing for them," said a farmer, with
cosy satisfaction; "the frost killed everything last week."

British and Dutch salute and exchange the news with lazy mutual tolerance. The British are
storekeepers and men of business; the Boers ride in from their farms. They are big, bearded
men, loose of limb, shabbily dressed in broad-brimmed hats, corduroy trousers, and brown shoes;
they sit their ponies at a rocking-chair canter erect and easy; unkempt, rough, half-savage,
their tanned faces and blue eyes express lazy good-nature, sluggish stubbornness, dormant fierceness.
They ask the news in soft, lisping Dutch that might be a woman's; but the lazy imperiousness
of their bearing stamps them as free men. A people hard to rouse, you say--and as hard, when
roused, to subdue.

A loitering Arcady--and then you hear with astonishment that Burghersdorp is famous throughout
South Africa as a stronghold of bitter Dutch partisanship. "Rebel Burghersdorp" they call it
in the British centres, and Capetown turns anxious ears towards it for the first muttering
of insurrection. What history its stagnant annals record is purely anti-British. Its two principal
monuments, after the Jubilee fountain, are the tombstone of the founder of the Dopper Church--the
Ironsides of South Africa--and a statue with inscribed pedestal complete put up to commemorate
the introduction of the Dutch tongue into the Cape Parliament. Malicious comments add that
Afrikander patriotism swindled the stone-mason out of £30, and it is certain that one of the
gentlemen whose names appear thereon most prominently, now languishes in jail for fraud. Leaving
that point for thought, I find that the rest of Burghersdorp's history consists in the fact
that the Afrikander Bond was founded here in 1881. And at this moment Burghersdorp is out-Bonding
the Bond: the reverend gentleman who edits its Dutch paper and dictates its Dutch policy sluices
out weekly vials of wrath upon Hofmeyr and Schreiner for machinating to keep patriot Afrikanders
off the oppressing Briton's throat.

I went to see this reverend pastor, who is professor of a school of Dopper theology. He was
short, but thick-set, with a short but shaggy grey beard; in deference to his calling, he wore
a collar over his grey flannel shirt, but no tie. Nevertheless, he turned out a very charming,
courteous old gentleman, well informed, and his political bias was mellowed with an irresistible
sense of humour. He took his own side strongly, and allowed that it was most proper for a Briton
to be equally strong on his own. And this is more or less what he said:--

"Information? No, I shall not give you any; you are the enemy, you see. Ha, ha! They call me
rebel. But I ask you, my friend, is it natural that I--I, Hollander born, Dutch Afrikander
since '60--should be as loyal to the British Government as a Britisher should be? No, I say;
one can be loyal only to one's own country. I am law-abiding subject of the Queen, and that
is all that they can ask of me.

"How will the war go? That it is impossible, quite impossible, to say. The Boer might run away
at the first shot and he might fight to the death. All troops are liable to panic; even regular
troop; much more than irregular. But I have been on commando many times with Boer, and I cannot
think him other than brave man. Fighting is not his business; he wishes always to be back on
his farm with his people; but he is brave man.

"I look on this war as the sequel of 1881. I have told them all these years, it is not finish;
war must come. Mr Gladstone, whom I look on as greatest British statesman, did wrong in 1881.
If he had kept promises and given back country before the war, we would have been grateful;
but he only give it after war, and we were not grateful. And English did not feel that they
were generous, only giving independence after war, though they had a large army in Natal; they
have always wished to recommence.

"The trouble is because the Boer have never had confidence in the English Government, just
as you have never had confidence in us. The Boer have no feeling about Cape Colony, but they
have about Natal; they were driven out of it, and they think it still their own country. Then
you took the diamond-fields from the Free State. You gave the Free State independence only
because you did not want trouble of Basuto war; then we beat the Basutos--I myself was there,
and it was very hard, and it lasted three years--and then you would not let us take Basutoland.
Then came annexation of the Transvaal; up to that I was strong advocate of federation, but
after that I was one of founders of the Bond. After that the Afrikander trusted Rhodes--not
I, though; I always write I distrust Rhodes--and so came the Jameson raid. Now how could we
have confidence after all this in British Government?

"I do not think Transvaal Government have been wise; I have many times told them so. They made
great mistake when they let people come in to the mines. I told them, 'This gold will be your
ruin; to remain independent you must remain poor.' But when that was done, what could they
do? If they gave the franchise, then the Republic is governed by three four men from Johannesburg,
and they will govern it for their own pocket. The Transvaal Boer would rather be British colony
than Johannesburg Republic.

"Well, well; it is the law of South Africa that the Boer drive the native north and the English
drive the Boer north. But now the Boer can go north no more; two things stop him: the tsetse
fly and the fever. So if he must perish, it is his duty--yes, I, minister, say it is his duty--to
perish fighting.

"But here in the Colony we have no race hatred. Not between man and man; but when many men
get together there is race hatred. If we fight here on this border it is civil war--the same
Dutch and English are across the Orange as here in Albert. My son is on commando in Free State;
the other day he ride thirteen hours and have no food for two days. I say to him, 'You are
Free State burgher; you have the benefit of the country; your wife is Boer girl; it is your
duty to fight for it.' I am law-abiding British subject, but I hope my son will not be hurt.
You, sir, I wish you good luck--good luck for yourself and your corresponding. Not for your
side: that I cannot wish you."

IV.

Oct. 14 (9.55 p.m.)

The most conspicuous feature of the war on this frontier has hitherto been its absence.

The Free State forces about Bethulie, which is just over the Free State border, and Aliwal
North, which is on our side of the frontier, make no sign of an advance. The reason for this
is, doubtless, that hostilities here would amount to civil war. There is the same mixed English
and Dutch population on each side of the Orange river, united by ties of kinship and friendship.
Many law-abiding Dutch burghers here have sons and brothers who are citizens of the Free State,
and therefore out with the forces.

In the mean time the English doctor attends patients on the other side of the border, and Boer
riflemen ride across to buy goods at the British stores.

The proclamation published yesterday morning forbidding trade with the Republics is thus difficult
and impolitic to enforce hereabouts.

Railway and postal communication is now stopped, but the last mail brought a copy of the Bloemfontein
'Express,' with an appeal to the Colonial Boers concluding with the words:--

"We shall continue the war to the bloody end. You will assist us. Our God, who has so often
helped us, will not forsake us."

What effect this may have is yet doubtful, but it is certain that any rising of the Colonial
Dutch would send the Colonial British into the field in full strength.

Burghersdorp, through which I passed yesterday, is a village of 2000 inhabitants, and, as I
have already put on record, the centre of the most disaffected district in the colony. If there
be any Dutch rising in sympathy with the Free State it will begin here.

Later.

And so there's warlike news at last.

A Boer force, reported to be 350 strong, shifted camp to-day to within three miles of the bridge
across the Orange river. Well-informed Dutch inhabitants assert that these are to be reinforced,
and will march through Aliwal North to-night on their way to attack Stormberg Junction, sixty
miles south.

The bridge is defended by two Cape policemen with four others in reserve.

The loyal inhabitants are boiling with indignation, declaring themselves sacrificed, as usual,
by the dilatoriness of the Government.

Besides the Boer force near here, there is another, reported to be 450 strong, at Greatheads
Drift, forty miles up the river.

The Boers at Bethulie, in the Free State, are believed to be pulling up the railway on their
side of the frontier, and to be marching to Norvals Pont, which is the ferry over the Orange
river on the way to Colesberg, with the intention of attacking Naauwpoort Junction, on the
Capetown-Kimberley line; but as there are no trains now running to Bethulie it is difficult
to verify these reports, and, indeed, all reports must be received with caution.

The feeling here between the English and Dutch extends to a commercial and social boycott,
and is therefore far more bitter than elsewhere. Several burghers here have sent their sons
over the border, and promise that the loyal inhabitants will be "sjambokked" (you remember
how to pronounce it?) when the Boer force passes through.

So far things are quiet. The broad, sunny, dusty streets, fringed with small trees and lined
with single-storeyed houses, are dotted with strolling inhabitants, both Dutch and natives,
engrossed in their ordinary pursuits. The whole thing looks more like Arcady than revolution.

The only sign of movement is that eight young Boers, theological students of the Dopper or
strict Lutheran college here, left last night for the Free State for active service.

The Boers across the Orange river so far make no sign of raiding. Many have sent their wives
and families here into Aliwal North, on our side of the border, in imitation, perhaps, of President
Steyn, whose wife at this moment is staying with her sister at King William's Town, in the
Cape Colony.

Many British farmers, of whom there are a couple of hundred in this district, refuse to believe
that the Free State will take the offensive on this border, considering that such aggression
would be impious, and that the Free State will restrict itself to defending its own frontier,
or the Transvaal, if invaded, in fulfilment of the terms of the offensive and defensive alliance.

Nevertheless there is, of course, very acute tension between the Dutch and English here. No
Boers are to be seen talking to Englishmen. The Boers are very close as to their feelings and
intentions, which those who know them interpret as a bad sign, because, as a rule, they are
inclined to irresponsible garrulity. A point in which Dutch feeling here tells is that every
Dutch man, woman, or child is more or less of a Boer secret service agent, revealing our movements
and concealing those of the Boers.

If there be any rising it may be expected by November 9, when the Boers hold their "wappenschouwing,"
or rifle contest--the local Bisley, in fact--which every man for miles around attends armed.
Also the Afrikander Bond Congress is to be held next month; but probably the leaders will do
their best to keep the people together.

The Transvaal agents are naturally doing their utmost to provoke rebellion. A lieutenant of
their police is known to be hiding hereabouts, and a warrant is out for his arrest. All depends,
say the experts, on the results of the first few weeks of fighting.

The attitude of the natives causes some uneasiness. Every Basuto employed on the line here
has returned to his tribe, one saying: "Be sure we shall not harm our mother the Queen."

Many Transkei Kaffirs also have passed through here, owing to the closing of the mines. Sixty-six
crammed truckloads of them came by one train. They had been treated with great brutality by
the Boers, having been flogged to the station and robbed of their wages.

[Footnote 1: This chapter has been deliberately included in this volume notwithstanding its
obviously fragmentary nature.

ALIWAL NORTH, Oct. 15.

"Halt! Who goes there?" The trim figure, black in the moonlight, in breeches and putties, with
a broad-brimmed hat looped up at the side, brought up his carbine and barred the entrance to
the bridge. Twenty yards beyond a second trim black figure with a carbine stamped to and fro
over the planking. They were of the Cape Police, and there were four more of them somewhere
in reserve; across the bridge was the Orange Free State; behind us was the little frontier
town of Aliwal North, and these were its sole garrison.

The river shone silver under its high banks. Beyond it, in the enemy's country, the veldt too
was silvered over with moonlight and was blotted inkily with shadow from the kopjes. Three
miles to the right, over a rise and down in a dip, they said there lay the Rouxville commando
of 350 men. That night they were to receive 700 or 800 more from Smithfield, and thereon would
ride through Aliwal on their way to eat up the British half-battalion at Stormberg. On our
side of the bridge slouched a score of Boers--waiting, they said, to join and conduct their
kinsmen. In the very middle of these twirled a battered merry-go-round--an island of garish
naphtha light in the silver, a jarr of wheeze and squeak in the swishing of trees and river.
Up the hill, through the town, in the bar of the ultra-English hotel, proceeded this dialogue.

A fat man (thunderously, nursing a Lee-Metford sporting rifle). Well, you've yourselves to
blame. I've done my best. With fifty men I'd have held this place against a thousand Boers,
and not ten men'd join.

A thin-faced man (piping). We haven't got the rifles. Every Dutchman's armed, and how many
rifles will you find among the English?

Fat man (shooting home bolt of Lee-Metford). And who's fault's that? I've left my property
in the Free State, and odds are I shall lose every penny I've got--what part? all over--and
come here on to British soil, and what do I find? With fifty men I'd hold this place--

Thin-faced man. They'll be here to-night, old De Wet says, and they're to come here and sjambok
the Englishmen who've been talking too much. That's what comes of being loyal!

Fat man. Loyal! With fifty men--

Brown-faced, grey-haired man (smoking deep-bowled pipe in corner). No, you wouldn't.

Fat man (playing with sights of Lee-Metford). What! Not keep the bridge with fifty men--

Brown-faced, grey-haired man. And they'd cross by the old drift, and be on every side of you
in ten minutes.

Fat man (grounding Lee-Metford). Ah! Well--h'm!

Thick-set man. But we're safe enough. Has not the Government sent us a garrison? Six policemen!
Six policemen, gentlemen, and the Boers are at Pieter's farrm, and they'll be here to-night
and sjambok--

Thin-faced man. Where are the troops? Where are the volunteers? Where are the--

Brown-faced, grey-haired man. There are no troops, and the better for you. The strength of
Aliwal is in its weakness. (To fat man.) Put that gun away.

Thin-faced man, thick-set man, and general chorus. Yes, put it away.

Thin-faced man. But I want to know why the Boers are armed and we aren't? Why does our Government--

Brown-faced man. Are you accustomed to shoot?

Thin-faced man (faintly). No.

Fat man (returning from putting away Lee-Metford). But where do you come from?

Brown-faced man. Free State, same as you do. Lived there five-and-twenty years.

Thin-faced man. Any trouble in getting away?

Brown-faced man. No. Field-cornet was a good old fellow and an old friend of mine, and he gave
me the hint--

Thin-faced man. Not much like ours! Why, there's a lady staying here that's friendly with his
daughters, and she went out to see them the other day, and the old man said they'd stop here
and sjam--

Fat man. Gentlemen, drinks all round! Here's success to the British arms!

All. Success to the British arms!

Thick-set man. And may the British Government not desert us again!

Fat man. I'll take a shade of odds about it. They will. I've no trust in Chamberlain. It'll
be just the same as it was in '81. A few reverses and you'll find they'll begin to talk about
terms. I know them. Every loyal man in South Africa knows them. (General murmur of assent.)

Hotel-keeper. Where's the Army Corps? Has a man of that Army Corps left England? Shilly-shally,
as usual. South Africa's no place for an Englishman to live in. Armoured train blown up, Mafeking
cut off, Kimberley in danger, and General Butler--what? Oh yes--General Buller leaves England
to-day. Why didna they send the Army Corps out three months ago?

Brown-faced man. It's six thousand miles--

Thick-set man. Why didna they send them just after the Bloemfontein conference, before the
Boers were ready? British Gov--

Brown-faced man. They've had three rifles a man with ammunition since 1896.

I (timidly). Well, then, if the Army Corps had left three months ago, wouldn't the Boers have
declared war three months ago too?

All except brown-faced man (loudly). No!

Brown-faced man (quietly). Yes. Gentlemen, bedtime! As Brand used to say, "Al zal rijt komen!"

All (fervently). Al zal rijt komen! Success to the British arms! Good night!

(All go to bed. In the night somebody on the Boer side--or elsewhere--goes out shooting, or
looses off his rifle on general grounds; two loyalists and a refugee spring up and grasp their
revolvers. In the morning everybody wakes up unsjamboked. The hotel-keeper takes me out to
numerous points whence Pieter's farm can be reconnoitred: there is not a single tent to be
seen, and no sign of a single Boer.)

It is a shame to smile at them. They are really very, very loyal, and they are excellent fellows
and most desirable colonists. Aliwal is a nest of green on the yellow veldt, speckless, well-furnished,
with Maréchal Niel roses growing over trellises, and a scheme to dam the Orange river for water-supply,
and electric light. They were quite unprotected, and their position was certainly humiliating.

LADYSMITH, Oct. 22.

From a billow of the rolling veldt we looked back, and black columns were coming up behind us.

Along the road from Ladysmith moved cavalry and guns. Along the railway line to right of it
crept trains--one, two, three of them--packed with khaki, bristling with the rifles of infantry.
We knew then that we should fight before nightfall.

Major-General French, who commanded, had been out from before daybreak with the Imperial Light
Horse and the battery of the Natal Volunteer Artillery reconnoitring towards Elandslaagte.
The armoured train--slate-colour plated engine, a slate-colour plated loopholed cattle-truck
before and behind, an open truck with a Maxim at the tail of all--puffed along on his right.
Elandslaagte is a little village and railway station seventeen miles north-east of Ladysmith,
where two days before the Boers had blown up a culvert and captured a train. That cut our direct
communication with the force at Dundee. Moreover, it was known that the Free State commandoes
were massing to the north-west of Ladysmith and the Transvaalers to attack Dundee again. On
all grounds it was desirable to smash the Elandslaagte lot while they were still weak and alone.

The reconnaissance stole forward until it came in sight of the little blue-roofed village and
the little red tree-girt station. It was occupied. The Natal battery unlimbered and opened
fire. A round or two--and then suddenly came a flash from a kopje two thousand yards beyond
the station on the right. The Boer guns! And the next thing was the hissing shriek of a shell--and
plump it dropped, just under one of the Natal limbers. By luck it did not burst; but if the
Boer ammunition contractor was suspect, it was plain that the Boer artillerist could lay a
gun. Plump: plump: they came right into the battery; down went a horse; over went an ammunition-waggon.
At that range the Volunteers' little old 7-pounders were pea-shooters; you might as well have
spat at the enemy. The guns limbered up and were off. Next came the vicious phutt! of a bursting
shell not fifty yards from the armoured train--and the armoured train was puffing back for
its life. Everybody went back half-a-dozen miles on the Ladysmith road to Modder Spruit Station.

The men on reconnaissance duty retired, as is their business. They had discovered that the
enemy had guns and meant fighting. Lest he should follow, they sent out from Ladysmith, about
nine in the morning, half a battalion apiece of the Devonshire and Manchester Regiments by
train, and the 42nd Field Battery, with a squadron of the 5th Dragoon Guards, by road. They
arrived, and there fell on us the common lot of reconnaissances. We dismounted, loosened girths,
ate tinned meat, and wondered what we should do next. We were on a billow of veldt that heaved
across the valley: up it ran, road and rail; on the left rose tiers of hills, in front a huge
green hill blocked our view, with a tangle of other hills crowding behind to peep over its
shoulders. On the right, across the line, were meadows; up from them rose a wall of red-brown
kopje; up over that a wall of grass-green veldt; over that was the enemy. We ate and sat and
wondered what we should do next. Presently we saw the troopers mounting and the trains getting
up steam; we mounted; and scouts, advance-guard, flanking patrols--everybody crept slowly,
slowly, cautiously forward. Then, about half-past two, we turned and beheld the columns coming
up behind us. The 21st Field Battery, the 5th Lancers, the Natal Mounted Volunteers on the
road; the other half of the Devons and half the Gordon Highlanders on the trains--total, with
what we had, say something short of 3000 men and eighteen guns. It was battle!

The trains drew up and vomited khaki into the meadow. The mass separated and ordered itself.
A line of little dots began to draw across it; a thicker line of dots followed; a continuous
line followed them, then other lines, then a mass of khaki topping a dark foundation--the kilts
of the Highlanders. From our billow we could not see them move; but the green on the side of
the line grew broader, and the green between them and the kopje grew narrower. Now the first
dots were at the base--now hardly discernible on the brown hill flanks. Presently the second
line of dots was at the base. Then the third line and the second were lost on the brown, and
the third--where? There, bold on the sky-line. Away on their right, round the hill, stole the
black column of the Imperial Light Horse. The hill was crowned, was turned--but where were the Bo--

A hop, a splutter, a rattle, and then a snarling roll of musketry broke on the question,--not
from the hill, but far on our left front, where the Dragoon Guards were scouting. On that the
thunder of galloping orderlies and hoarse yells of command--advance!--in line!--waggon supply!--and
with rattle and thunder the batteries tore past, wheeled, unlimbered as if they broke in halves.
Then rattled and thundered the waggons, men gathered round the guns like the groups round a
patient in an operation. And the first gun barked death. And then after all it was a false
alarm. At the first shell you could see through glasses mounted men scurrying up the slopes
of the big opposite hill; by the third they were gone. And then, as our guns still thudded--thud
came the answer. Only where? Away, away on the right, from the green kopje over the brown one
where still struggled the reserves of our infantry.

