Closely associated with Garrison and Parker in the fight against slavery, and in some ways
more famous than either, was Wendell Phillips. The very opposite of Parker, handsome in person,
cultivated in manner, with a charm of personality seldom equalled,--the two yet worked hand
in hand for a common cause, the one, as it were, supplementing the other.

Wendell Phillips was the son of John Phillips, the first mayor of Boston, and was a year younger
than Theodore Parker. He went the way of all well-to-do Boston youth through Harvard, graduating
there in 1831, without distinguishing himself particularly, except by his skill in debate and
his finished elocution. During one of the revivals of religion which followed the settlement
of Dr. Lyman Beecher at Boston, he became a convert, and this marked the beginning of his interest
in the great moral question of the day, slavery. It soon became overwhelming, and was given
point and passion by a spectacle which he witnessed on October 21, 1835.

He had studied for the law, been admitted to the bar, and opened an office, and looking from
his office window on that October day, he saw a mob break up an anti-slavery meeting on the
street below, pull William Lloyd Garrison off the platform, tear his clothes from his back,
throw a rope around him and drag him through the streets, ready to hang him, and prevented
from doing so only by a ruse of the mayor, who got Garrison into the jail and locked him up
for safety. That spectacle moved the young lawyer through and through, and from that moment
he was an avowed Abolitionist.

"If clients do not come," he had said to a friend a short time before, "I will throw myself
heart and soul into some good cause and devote my life to it."

Clients would have come, no doubt, but the good cause came first. His opportunity came in 1837,
when Elijah Lovejoy was murdered by a mob at Alton, Illinois, for publishing an anti-slavery
paper. Phillips, stirred with indignation, arranged for a public meeting at Faneuil Hall, and
was of course present, but with no expectation of speaking. Dr. Channing made an impressive
address, and one or two others followed, when James T. Austin, attorney-general of the state,
and bitterly opposed to the anti-slavery agitation, arose. He eulogized the Alton murderers,
comparing them with the patriots of the Revolution, and declared that Lovejoy had "died as
the fool dieth." Some instinct led the chair to call upon Wendell Phillips to reply. He consented,
and as he stepped upon the platform won instant admiration by his dignity, his self-possession,
and his manly beauty.

The effect of the whole speech was tremendous. At last the abolitionists had found a champion
equal to the best, and from that hour to the end of the anti-slavery conflict, he was foremost
in the fight. He accepted without reservation the doctrines which Garrison had formulated:
that slavery was under all circumstances a sin and that immediate emancipation was a fundamental
right and duty. Up and down the land, obeying every call so far as his strength would permit,
he travelled, lecturing against slavery, asking no pecuniary reward. He was soon a great popular
favorite--the greatest, perhaps, who ever mounted a lecture platform in America,--and gained
a hearing in quarters where, before, abolitionists had been hated and derided. His tact in
winning over a turbulent audience was extraordinary; the strongest opponents of the anti-slavery
cause felt the spell of his power, and often confessed the justice of his arguments.

When that fight was won and the negro had gained his freedom, Wendell Phillips remained the
foremost critic of public men and measures in America, and year after year, he devoted his
great gifts to guiding popular opinion. A champion of temperance, of the rights of labor, of
the Indians, of equal suffrage, he stood forth until his death an inspiring and august figure--a
man who devoted his life wholly to the welfare of his country.

One of the reforms which Wendell Phillips advocated was that of woman suffrage, but this movement
has come to be particularly associated with the name of Susan B. Anthony. Like her great predecessor
in that cause, Lucretia Mott, Miss Anthony was a Quaker, and the Quakers, it should be remembered,
made no distinction of sex when it came to speaking in their meeting-houses. Her father was
well-to-do, and she received a careful education, and in 1847, first spoke in public. The temperance
movement absorbed her energies at first; then the Abolitionist cause; and finally the work
of securing equal civil rights for women. During the winter of 1854, she held woman suffrage
meetings in every county in New York State, and the remainder of her life was devoted to this
cause.

Her most prominent co-worker was Elizabeth Cady Stanton, whose inspiration came directly from
Lucretia Mott, whom she met in 1840, and with whom she joined, eight years later, in issuing
a call for the first woman's suffrage convention. The convention was held at Mrs. Stanton's
home at Seneca Falls, New York, and from that time forward, she devoted herself entirely to
lecturing and writing upon the subject. That the cause of woman suffrage has made so little
headway is certainly not because of a lack of devoted and accomplished advocates; it seems
rather to be due to the fact that it has not yet succeeded in winning over the great body of
women, who have held aloof and viewed the movement with indifference, if not with suspicion.

       *       *       *       *       *

We cannot close this consideration of the anti-slavery movement without some reference to that
strange fanatic, John Brown, who headed a forlorn hope and gave up his life for an idea. It
was the custom at one time to consider John Brown a saint, at the north, and a very emissary
of Satan, at the south. One estimate was as untrue as the other. He was merely a misguided
old man, grown a little mad, perhaps, from long brooding over one subject.

He was born at Torrington, Connecticut, in 1800, his father being a shoemaker and tanner, who,
five years later, moved to Hudson, Ohio, then a mere outpost in the wilderness. He was soon
expert in woodcraft, and he relates how, when he was six years old, an Indian boy gave him
a yellow marble, the first he had ever seen, and which he treasured for a long time. He had
little or no schooling, and a project to educate him for the ministry was cut short by an inflammation
of the eyes. He grew up into a tall, handsome man, headstrong, but humane and kind, and easily
moved to tears. He married young and had many children, for some of whom a tragic fate was waiting.

He soon became interested in the anti-slavery movement, and, by 1837, was so absorbed by it
that he made his family take a solemn oath of active opposition to slavery. Ten years later,
he unfolded to Frederick Douglass a plan for a negro insurrection in the Virginia mountains,
but nothing came of it. From that time forward, the project seems to have slumbered at the
back of his mind, and he grew more and more certain that the only way to end slavery was to
arm the blacks and encourage them to fight for freedom. In 1854, his sons emigrated to Kansas,
then in the throes of civil war over the slavery question, and their father busied himself
raising money to send arms and ammunition into the troubled state. Finally, in September, 1855,
he himself removed to Kansas, became the captain of a band of Free State Rangers, took part
in the fight at Lawrence, and in some other affairs, and then, proceeding to the shores of
Pottawatomie creek, where several pro-slavery men lived, seized five of them and put them to death.

For this deed he never experienced any compunction; he believed that he was directed by Providence
in these "executions," as he called them, and after they were over, he held divine services.
His fearful deed sent a thrill of horror through the country, and Brown and his sons became
marked men. Their houses were burned, and one of the sons went insane from brooding over the
father's deed. Brown himself was charged with murder, treason and conspiracy, and a price put
on his head, but no one attempted to arrest him. Another of his sons was soon afterwards shot
and killed by pro-slavery men and Brown, hastily collecting a small force, attacked the marauders,
and killed or wounded many of them, himself being injured by a spent rifle ball. The fight
was known as "the battle of Osawatomie," and Brown was thereafterwards known as "Osawatomie" Brown.

But the fight in Kansas was about won, and Brown again took up the idea of a slave insurrection.
He went to Boston to raise the necessary money, and succeeded in getting it without much trouble,
though most of the people who gave it to him had only the haziest kind of an idea of what it
was he proposed to do. He bought rifles and ammunition, and also had a thousand pikes made
with which to arm the negroes, who, of course, would not know how to use the rifle. Then he
got together a band of young men, secured a military instructor; and on July 3, 1859, he appeared
at Harper's Ferry, Virginia, hired a small farm near there, and quietly assembled his men and
munitions.

Harper's Ferry had been selected because there was a well-equipped arsenal there which would
furnish the arms and munitions which he had been unable to buy, and would also serve as a base
of operations. Brown intended to proceed to the mountains, gathering up the slaves as he went,
and establish headquarters in some strong position, where he could drill his forces and prepare
for a raid on the rest of the state. He believed the slaves would flock to him, and that he
would soon be at the head of a great army. He tried to get Frederick Douglass to join him,
but Douglass refused, and, at last, on the night of Sunday, October 16, 1859, at the head of
a little band of twenty-two men, whites and negroes, he moved on the arsenal. They reached
the covered bridge over the Potomac without adventure, crossed until they were near the Virginia
side, seized the solitary sentinel who challenged them, broke down the armory gate with a sledge
hammer, seized the remainder of the guard, and a few citizens, who attempted to interfere,
and were soon firmly in possession of not only the arsenal, but also the little town.

Meanwhile, the country round about was arming, and by noon, of Monday, Brown was so surrounded
that he could not escape. Why he had not got away to the mountains in the morning, as he had
intended doing, no one knows. The Virginia militia gathered, and in the early evening, a company
of United States marines arrived from Washington, under command of Colonel Robert E. Lee and
Lieutenant J. E. B. Stuart. They soon found out how small Brown's force was, carried the arsenal
by assault, and took Brown and the survivors of his little band prisoners. Brown's two sons
were dead, as were seven others of his followers, and seven more had succeeded in escaping,
though two were afterwards captured.

The rest is soon told. Brown was swiftly tried and convicted of "treason and conspiring and
advising with slaves and others to rebel, and of murder in the first degree," was sentenced
to death, and was hanged on December 2, 1859. The affair made the South wild with rage and
apprehension, for a slave insurrection was a thing to be trembled at, and Brown's execution
similarly affected his friends at the North. Princess Pudding.

Soak for an hour in a pint of cold water one box of Cox's sparkling gelatine, and add one pint
of boiling water, one pint of wine, the juice of four lemons, and
three large cupfuls of sugar.

Beat the whites of four eggs to a stiff froth, and stir into the jelly when it begins to thicken.
Pour into a large mould, and set in ice water in a cool place. When ready to serve, turn out
as you would jelly, only have the pudding in a deep dish. Pour one
quart of soft custard around it, and serve. Born in Massachusetts about 1830, she started in life as a school-teacher, but in 1854
secured a position in the patent office at Washington, where she remained until the opening
of the Civil War. The sight of the suffering in the Washington hospitals revealed to her her
real vocation, and she determined to devote herself to the care of wounded soldiers on the
battlefield. This work of mercy was one that carried with it a wide appeal, and she soon secured
influential backing and support. Soon afterwards she was placed by President Lincoln in charge
of the search for missing men of the Union armies--a work of the first importance, to which
she devoted all her energies, and which she carried on for some years after the war closed,
raising the necessary money by lectures and appeals for donations. Thousands of families at
the North have reason to thank her for definite knowledge as to the fate of their loved ones.

Her health broke down under the strain, at last, and she went for a rest to Switzerland, but
the outbreak of the Franco-German war, in 1870, called her again to duty, assisting the grand
duchess of Baden in the preparation of military hospitals, and giving the Red Cross Society
the benefit of her experience. In 1871, at the request of the German authorities, she superintended
the supplying of work to the poor of Strasburg, after that city had been reduced by siege;
and after the fall of Paris, she was placed in charge of the distribution of supplies to the
destitute of that great city. At the close of the war, she was decorated with the golden cross
of Baden and the iron cross of Germany.

Although the Red Cross societies in Europe had been established as early as 1863, and an international
organization completed six years later, the society was not officially recognized by the United
States until 1882. The American Association of the Red Cross was at once organized, and Miss
Barton chosen its president, a position which she held without opposition for many years. Its
object as stated by its constitution is "to organize a system of national relief and apply
the same in mitigating suffering caused by war, pestilence, famine and other calamities." Since
then, every such occasion has found the society in the forefront of relief work, and it has
distributed many millions in assuaging human suffering.

       *       *       *       *       *

Still another great reform, ridiculed at first, but now recognized as one of the most beneficent
movements of the age is associated with a single name. The reform is the protection of dumb
animals, and the name is that of Henry Bergh.

Born in New York City in 1823, the son of a wealthy ship-builder and inheriting his father's
fortune at the age of twenty, Henry Bergh, after spending some years in Europe, a portion of
them in the diplomatic service of the United States, returned to this country, determined to
devote the remainder of his life to the interests of animals.

It was a new idea which he presented to the public, met at first with indifference, then with
ridicule and opposition. But as a bold worker in the streets of New York, by a relentless activity
in carrying cases of ill-treatment of animals to the courts, and an eloquent advocacy of his
cause on the floor of the legislature, he soon won friends and support, as every great cause
is bound to do, and finally succeeded in so winning over public sentiment that, in 1866, the
legislature passed the laws which he had prepared, creating the Society for the Prevention
of Cruelty to Animals, with himself as president. He gave not only his time, but his property
to the work, and soon had the society in a prosperous condition, with branches forming in other
cities. Indeed, the idea which he fostered has spread to the whole country, and nowhere may
animals be mistreated with impunity. The idea that man is responsible not only for the happiness
of his fellows, but for the well-being of his beasts marks a long stride forward in ethics.

Bergh's influence, indeed, extended beyond this country. Venison is in season all the year, but
is most used in cold weather. In summer it should have been killed at least ten days before cooking;
in winter three weeks is better. The cuts are the leg, saddle, loin,
fore quarter and steaks.
In 1874, Bergh rescued a little girl from inhuman treatment, and this led to the formation
of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children, which has also done a great work.

No doubt before Bergh's time, there were many people who were pained to see either children
or animals mistreated and who passed by with averted eyes. Bergh did not pass by. He made it
his business, in the first place, to secure adequate laws for the punishment of cruelty, and
in the second place, to provide means for the enforcement of those laws.

There are many of us to-day who are shocked at the injustice and suffering in the world, and
who would welcome its regeneration. But wishing for a thing never got it. Nor does philanthropy
consist merely in wishing men well. It means labor and self-sacrifice, and frequently obloquy
and misunderstanding. The reward of the reformer is usually a stone and a sneer, if nothing
worse. But when a man's heart is in the work, stones and sneers seem only to spur him on. They
are like wind to a flame, fanning it white-hot. And it is a wonderful commentary on the essential
goodness of human nature that never yet, in the history of mankind, has a real and needed reform
failed, in the end, of success.

Among latter-day clergymen in America, none has achieved a wider reputation or a greater personal
popularity than Phillips Brooks. Born in Boston in 1835, a graduate of Harvard, ordained to
the Episcopal ministry at the age of twenty-four, and ten years later called to the rectorship
of Trinity church, Boston, it was in this latter field, which he would never leave, that he
showed himself to be one of the strongest personalities and noblest preachers of his age. No
more striking figure ever appeared in a pulpit. Of magnificent physique, with a striking and
massive head and handsome countenance, breathing the very spirit of youth, in spite of his
grey hair, he had the interest and attention of any audience before he opened his lips.

Phillips Brooks has been compared to Henry Ward Beecher, and in many things they were alike.
But the former's culture, while perhaps less varied than Beecher's, was deeper and richer,
his sermons were less brilliant but cast in better form, his appeal was narrower but to a far
more influential class. He was, in a word, the preacher of the intellectual. No one who heard
him preach ever failed to be startled at first by his tremendous rapidity of delivery--averaging
two hundred words a minute--or failed to find himself, at first, lagging behind the equal rapidity
of thought. But once accustomed to these--once realizing that, in listening to him there could
be no inattention or wandering of wits--his sermon became a source of keenest intellectual
delight and noblest spiritual inspiration.

