After lunch they all went off to the Rookery, which was at the other side of the park from
Gar Wood. It was a beautiful spot, lying at the end of the valley, through which they had to
get out from their carriage, and to walk for half a mile. Only for the sake of doing honour
to Miss Forrester, they would have gone on foot. But as it was, they had all the six horses
among them. Mr Gordon was put up on one of the young ladies' steeds, the squire and the parson
each had his own, and Miss Evelina was also mounted, as Mr Blake had suggested, perhaps with
the view to the capture of Mr Gordon. "As it's your first day," whispered Mr Blake to Kattie,
"it is so nice, I think, that the carriage and horses should all come out. Of course there
is nothing in the distance, but there should be a respect shown on such an occasion. Mr Hall
does do everything of this kind just as it should be."

"I suppose you know the young lady who is coming here to-night," said Evelina to Mr Gordon.

"Oh, yes; I knew her before I went abroad."

"But not Mr Whittlestaff?"

"I had never met Mr Whittlestaff, though I had heard much of his goodness."

"And now they are to be married. Does it not seem to you to be very hard?"

"Not in the least. The young lady seems to have been left by her father and step-mother without
any engagement, and, indeed, without any provision. She was brought here, in the first place,
from sheer charity, and I can certainly understand that when she was here Mr Whittlestaff should
have admired her."

"That's a matter of course," said Evelina.

"Mr Whittlestaff is not at all too old to fall in love with any young lady. This is a pretty
place,--a very lovely spot. I think I like it almost better than Gar Wood." Then there was
no more said about Mary Lawrie till they all rode back to dinner.

CHAPTER XIV.

MR WHITTLESTAFF IS GOING OUT TO DINNER.

"There's an invitation come, asking us to dine at Little Alresford to-day." This was said,
soon after breakfast, by Mr Whittlestaff to Mary Lawrie, on the day after Mr Gordon's coming.
"I think we'll go."

"Could you not leave me behind?"

"By no means. I want you to become intimate with the girls, who are good girls."

"But Mr Gordon is there."

"Exactly. That is just what I want. It will be better that you and he should meet each other,
without the necessity of making a scene." From this it may be understood that Mr Whittlestaff
had explained to Mary as much as he had thought necessary of what had occurred between him
and John Gordon, and that Mary's answers had been satisfactory to his feelings. Mary had told
him that she was contented with her lot in life, as Mr Whittlestaff had proposed it for her. Pacific
language is accompanied with insulting and hostile acts; and it remains to be seen what effect
will be produced on the Emperor of Russia by the entrance of English and French ships of war into the
Black Sea, under the pretext of bringing off Consuls from Varna, and of looking after the grain-ships
at the Sulina mouth of the Danube.

This information has hitherto been only communicated by telegraph; but it is calculated to lead
to serious consequences, of which Lord Stratford must be perfectly well aware.

[Footnote 32: The Emperor had made certain suggestions to Lord Cowley, which the British Government
were willing to adopt; but the anti-Russian feeling was increasing daily in the nation, and,
as will be seen from the Queen's letter of the 27th of November, Lord Stratford seemed resolved
on war.]

Queen Victoria to the Earl of Aberdeen.

OSBORNE, 27th November 1853.
The Queen has received Lord Aberdeen's letter of yesterday. She is
sorry to find that after all a considerable change was made in the
form of the French proposal. She is not aware at present of what that
change consists in and is therefore unable to form an opinion as to
the effects of its introduction, but she quite concurs in Lord Aberdeen's
apprehensions with regard to the effect of Lord Stratford's orders
to the Fleet. The perusal of Lord Stratford's Despatches of the 5th
inst. has given the Queen the strongest impression that, whilst guarding
himself against the possibility of being called to account for acting
in opposition to his instructions, he is pushing us deeper and deeper
into the War policy which we wish to escape. "John Gordon might be a very
steady fellow; but we have only his own word for that,"--as Mr Whittlestaff observed to himself.
There could not be a doubt but that Mr Whittlestaff himself was the safer staff of the two
on which a young lady might lean. He did make all these excuses for himself, and determined
that they were of such a nature that he might rely upon them with safety. But still there was
a pang in his bosom--a silent secret--which kept on whispering to him that he was not the best
beloved. He had, however, resolved steadfastly that he would not put that question to Mary.
If she did not wish to declare her love, neither did he. It was a pity, a thousand pities,
that it should be so. A change in her heart might, however, take place. It would come to pass
that she would learn that he was the superior staff on which to lean. John Gordon might disappear
among the diamond-fields, and no more be heard of. He, at any rate, would do his best for her,
so that she should not repent her bargain. But he was determined that the bargain, as it had
been struck, should be carried out. Therefore, in communicating to Mary the invitation which
he had received from Little Alresford, he did not find it necessary to make any special speech
in answer to her inquiry about John Gordon.

She understood it all, and could not in her very heart pronounce a judgment against him. She
knew that he was doing that which he believed would be the best for her welfare. She, overwhelmed
by the debt of her gratitude, had acceded to his request, and had been unable afterwards to
depart from her word. She had said that it should be so, and she could not then turn upon him
and declare that when she had given him her hand, she had been unaware of the presence of her
other lover. There was an injustice, an unkindness, an ingratitude, a selfishness in this,
which forbade her to think of it as being done by herself. It was better for her that she should
suffer, though the suffering should be through her whole life, than that he should be disappointed.
No doubt the man would suffer too,--her hero, her lover,--he with whom she would so willingly
have risked everything, either with or without the diamonds. She could not, however, bear to
think that Mr Whittlestaff should be so very prudent and so very wise solely on her behalf.
She would go to him, but for other reasons than that. As she walked about the place half the
day, up and down the long walk, she told herself that it was useless to contend with her love.
She did love John Gordon; she knew that she loved him with her whole heart; she knew that she
must be true to him;--but still she would marry Mr Whittlestaff, and do her duty in that state
of life to which it had pleased God to call her. There would be a sacrifice--a sacrifice of
two--but still it was justice. 

The weak point of Bulgarian artists is undoubtedly undraped figures, especially undraped feminine
figures, the only exception being Stephan Ivanoff, who however abandoned this class of work
to become the best icon-painter in Bulgaria. She would have told her love before
Mr Whittlestaff had spoken of his wants. Circumstances had been arranged differently, and she
must bear it. But she knew that it would be better for her that she should see John Gordon
no more. Had he started at once to London and gone thence to the diamond-fields without seeing
her again there would be a feeling that she had become the creature of stern necessity; there
would have been no hope for her,--as also no fear. Had he started a second time for South Africa,
she would have looked upon his further return with any reference to her own wants as a thing
impossible. But now how would it be with her? Mr Whittlestaff had told her with a stern indifference
that she must again meet this man, sit at the table with him as an old friend, and be again
subject to his influence. "It will be better that you and he should meet," he had said, "without
the necessity of making a scene." How could she assure him that there would be no scene?

Then she thought that she would have recourse to that ordinary feminine excuse, a headache;
but were she to do so she would own the whole truth to her master; she would have declared
that she so loved the man that she could not endure to be in his presence. She must now let
the matter pass as he had intended. She must go to Mr Hall's house, and there encounter him
she loved with what show of coldness she might be able to assume.

But the worst of it all lay in this,--that she could not but think that he had been induced
to remain in the neighbourhood in order that he might again try to gain his point. She had
told herself again and again that it was impossible, that she must decide as she had decided,
and that Mr Whittlestaff had decided so also. He had used what eloquence was within his reach,
and it had been all in vain. He could now appeal only to herself, and to such appeal there
could be but one answer. And how was such appeal to be made in Mr Hall's drawing-room? Surely
John Gordon had been foolish in remaining in the neighbourhood. Nothing but trouble could come
of it.

"So you are going to see this young man again!" This came from Mrs Baggett, who had been in
great perturbation all the morning. The Sergeant had slept in the stables through the night,
and had had his breakfast brought to him, warm, by his own wife; but he had sat up among the
straw, and had winked at her, and had asked her to give him threepence of gin with the cat-lap.
To this she had acceded, thinking probably that she could not altogether deprive him of the
food to which he was accustomed without injury. Then, under the influence of the gin and the
promise of a ticket to Portsmouth, which she undertook to get for him at the station, he was
induced to go down with her, and was absolutely despatched. Her own box was still locked up,
and she had slept with one of the two maids. All this had not happened without great disturbance
in the household. She herself was very angry with her master because of the box; she was very
angry with Mary, because Mary was, she thought, averse to her old lover; she was very angry
with Mr Gordon, because she well understood that Mr Gordon was anxious to disturb the arrangement
which had been made for the family. She was very angry with her husband, not because he was
generally a drunken old reprobate, but because he had especially disgraced her on the present
occasion by the noise which he had made in the road. No doubt she had been treated unfairly
in the matter of the box, and could have succeeded in getting the law of her master. But she
could not turn against her master in that way. She could give him a bit of her own mind, and
that she did very freely; but she could not bring herself to break the lock of his door. And
then, as things went now, she did think it well that she should remain a few days longer at
Croker's Hall. The occasion of her master's marriage was to be the cause of her going away.
She could not endure not to be foremost among all the women at Croker's Hall. But it was intolerable
to her feelings that any one should interfere with her master; and she thought that, if need
were, she could assist him by her tongue. Therefore she was disposed to remain yet a few days
in her old place, and had come, after she had got the ticket for her husband,--which had been
done before Mr Whittlestaff's breakfast,--to inform her master of her determination. "Don't
be a fool," Mr Whittlestaff had said.

"I'm always a fool, whether I go or stay, so that don't much matter." This had been her answer,
and then she had gone in to scold the maids.

As soon as she had heard of the intended dinner-party, she attacked Mary Lawrie. "So you're
going to see this young man again?"

"Mr Whittlestaff is going to dine at Little Alresford, and intends to take me with him."

"Oh yes; that's all very well. He'd have left you behind if he'd been of my way of thinking.
Mr Gordon here, and Mr Gordon there! I wonder what's Mr Gordon! He ain't no better than an
ordinary miner. Coals and diamonds is all one to me;--I'd rather have the coals for choice."
But Mary was not in a humour to contest the matter with Mrs Baggett, and left the old woman
the mistress of the field.

When the time arrived for going to the dinner, Mr Whittlestaff took Mary in the pony carriage
with him. "There is always a groom about there," he said, "so we need not take the boy." His
object was, as Mary in part understood, that he should be able to speak what last words he
might have to utter without having other ears than hers to listen to them.

Mary would have been surprised had she known how much painful thought Mr Whittlestaff gave
to the matter. To her it seemed as though he had made up his mind without any effort, and was
determined to abide by it. He had thought it well to marry her; and having asked her, and having
obtained her consent, he intended to take advantage of her promise. That was her idea of Mr
Whittlestaff, as to which she did not at all blame him. But he was, in truth, changing his
purpose every quarter of an hour;--or not changing it, but thinking again and again throughout
the entire day whether he would not abandon himself and all his happiness to the romantic idea
of making this girl supremely happy. Were he to do so, he must give up everything. The world
would have nothing left for him as to which he could feel the slightest interest. There came
upon him at such moments insane ideas as to the amount of sacrifice which would be demanded
of him. She should have everything--his house, his fortune; and he, John Gordon, as being a
part of her, should have them also. He, Whittlestaff, would abolish himself as far as such
abolition might be possible. The idea of suicide was abominable to him--was wicked, cowardly,
and inhuman. But if this were to take place he could wish to cease to live. Then he would comfort
himself by assuring himself again and again that of the two he would certainly make the better
husband. He was older. Yes; it was a pity that he should be so much the elder. And he knew
that he was old of his age,--such a one as a girl like Mary Lawrie could hardly be brought
to love passionately. He brought up against himself all the hard facts as sternly as could
any younger rival. He looked at himself in the glass over and over again, and always gave the
verdict against his own appearance. There was nothing to recommend him. So he told himself,--judging
of himself most unfairly. He set against himself as evils little points by which Mary's mind
and Mary's judgment would never be affected. But in truth throughout it all he thought only
of her welfare. But there came upon him constantly an idea that he hardly knew how to be as
good to her as he would have been had it not been for Catherine Bailey. To have attempted twice,
and twice to have failed so disastrously! He was a man to whom to have failed once in such
a matter was almost death. How should he bear it twice and still live? Nevertheless he did
endeavour to think only of her welfare. "You won't find it cold, my dear?" he said.

"Cold! Why, Mr Whittlestaff, it's quite hot."

"I meant hot. I did mean to say hot."

"I've got my parasol."

"Oh!--ah!--yes; so I perceive. Go on, Tommy. That foolish old woman will settle down at last,
I think." To this Mary could make no answer, because, according to her ideas, Mrs Baggett's
settling down must depend on her master's marriage. "I think it very civil of Mr Hall asking
us in this way."

"I suppose it is."

"Because you may be sure he had heard of your former acquaintance with him."

"Do you think so?"

"Not a doubt about it. He said as much to me in his note. That young clergyman of his will
have told him everything. 'Percontatorem fugito nam garrulus idem est.' I've taught you Latin
enough to understand that. But, Mary, if you wish to change your mind, this will be your last
opportunity." His heart at that moment had been very tender towards her, and she had resolved
that hers should be very firm to him.

CHAPTER XV.

MR WHITTLESTAFF GOES OUT TO DINNER.

This would be her last opportunity. So Mary told herself as she got out of the carriage at
Mr Hall's front door. It was made manifest to her by such a speech that he did not expect that
she should do so, but looked upon her doing so as within the verge of possibility. She could
still do it, and yet not encounter his disgust or his horror. How terrible was the importance
to herself, and, as she believed, to the other man also. Was she not justified in so thinking?
Mr Gordon had come home, travelling a great distance, at much risk to his property, at great
loss of time, through infinite trouble and danger, merely to ask her to be his wife. Had a
letter reached her from him but a week ago bidding her to come, would she not have gone through
all the danger and all the trouble? How willingly would she have gone! It was the one thing
that she desired; and, as far as she could understand the signs which he had given, it was
the one, one thing which he desired. He had made his appeal to that other man, and, as far
as she could understand the signs which had reached her, had been referred with confidence
to her decision. Now she was told that the chance of changing her mind was still in her power.

The matter was one of terrible importance; but was its importance to Mr Whittlestaff as great
as to John Gordon? She put herself altogether out of the question. She acknowledged to herself,
with a false humility, that she was nobody;--she was a poor woman living on charity, and was
not to be thought of when the position of these two men was taken into consideration. It chanced
that they both wanted her. Which wanted the most? Which of the two would want her for the longest?
To which would her services be of the greater avail in assisting him to his happiness. Could
there be a doubt? Was it not in human nature that she should bind herself to the younger man,
and with him go through the world, whether safely or in danger?

But though she had had time to allow these questions to pass through her mind between the utterance
of Mr Whittlestaff's words and her entrance into Mr Hall's drawing-room, she did not in truth
doubt. She knew that she had made up her mind on the matter. Mr Gordon would in all probability
have no opportunity of saying another word to her. But let him say what word he might, it should
be in vain. Nothing that he could say, nothing that she could say, would avail anything. If
this other man would release her,--then indeed she would be released. But there was no chance
of such release coming. In truth, Mary did not know how near the chance was to her;--or rather,
how near the chance had been. He had now positively made up his mind, and would say not a word
further unless she asked him. If Mary said nothing to John Gordon on this evening, he would
take an opportunity before they left the house to inform Mr Hall of his intended marriage.
When once the word should have passed his mouth, he could not live under the stigma of a second
Catherine Bailey.

"Miss Lawrie, pray let me make you known to my intended." This came from Mr Montagu Blake,
who felt himself to be justified by his peculiar circumstances in so far taking upon himself
the work of introducing the guests in Mr Hall's house. "Of course, you've heard all about it.
I am the happiest young man in Hampshire,--and she is the next."

"Speak for yourself, Montagu. I am not a young man at all."

"You're a young man's darling, which is the next thing to it."

"How are you, Whittlestaff?" said Mr Hall. "Wonderful weather, isn't it? I'm told that you've
been in trouble about that drunken husband which plagues the life out of that respectable housekeeper
of yours."

"He is a trouble; but if he is bad to me, how much worse must he be to her?"

"That's true. He must be very bad, I should think. Miss Mary, why don't you come over this
fine weather, and have tea with my girls and Kattie Forrester in the woods? You should take
your chance while you have a young man willing to wait upon you."

"I shall be quite delighted," said Blake, "and so will John Gordon."

"Only that I shall be in London this time to-morrow," said Gordon.

"That's nonsense. You are not going to Kimberley all at once. The young ladies expect you to
bring out a lot of diamonds and show them before you start. Have you seen his diamonds, Miss
Lawrie?"

"Indeed no," said Mary.

"I think I should have asked just to see them," said Evelina Hall. Why should they join her
name with his in this uncivil manner, or suppose that she had any special power to induce him
to show his treasures.

"When you first find a diamond," said Mr Hall, "what do you do with it? Do you ring a bell
and call together your friends, and begin to rejoice."

"No, indeed. The diamond is generally washed out of the mud by some nigger, and we have to
look very sharp after him to see that he doesn't hide it under his toe-nails. It's not a very
romantic kind of business from first to last."

"Only profitable," said the curate.

"That's as may be. It is subject to greater losses than the preaching of sermons."

"I should like to go out and see it all," said Miss Hall, looking into Miss Lawrie's face.
This also appeared to Mary to be ill-natured.

Then the butler announced the dinner, and they all followed Mr Hall and the curate's bride
out of one room into the other. "This young lady," said he, "is supposed to be in the ascendant
just at the present moment. She can't be married above two or three times at the most. I say
this to excuse myself to Miss Lawrie, who ought perhaps to have the post of honour." To this
some joking reply was made, and they all sat down to their dinner. Miss Lawrie was at Mr Hall's
left hand, and at her left hand John Gordon was seated. Mary could perceive that everything
was arranged so as to throw herself and John Gordon together,--as though they had some special
interest in each other. Of all this Mr Whittlestaff saw nothing. But John Gordon did perceive
something, and told himself that that ass Blake had been at work. But his perceptions in the
matter were not half as sharp as those of Mary Lawrie.

"I used to be very fond of your father, Gordon," said Mr Hall, when the dinner was half over.
"It's all done and gone now. Dear, dear, dear!"

"He was an unfortunate man, and perhaps expected too much from his friends."

"I am very glad to see his son here, at any rate. I wish you were not going to settle down
so far away from us."

"Kimberley is a long way off."

"Yes, indeed; and when a fellow gets out there he is apt to stay, I suppose."

"I shall do so, probably. I have nobody near enough to me here at home to make it likely that
I shall come back."

"You have uncles and aunts?" said Mr Hall.

"One uncle and two aunts. I shall suit their views and my cousins' better by sending home some
diamonds than by coming myself."

"How long will that take?" asked Mr Hall. The conversation was kept up solely between Mr Hall
and John Gordon. Mr Whittlestaff took no share in it unless when he was asked a question, and
the four girls kept up a whisper with Miss Forrester and Montagu Blake.

"I have a share in rather a good thing," said Gordon; "and if I could get out of it so as to
realise my property, I think that six months might suffice."

"Oh, dear! Then we may have you back again before the year's out?" Mr Whittlestaff looked up
at this, as though apprised that the danger was not yet over. But he reflected that before
twelve months were gone he would certainly have made Mary Lawrie his wife.

"Kimberley is not a very alluring place," said John Gordon. "I don't know any spot on God's
earth that I should be less likely to choose as my abiding resting-place."

"Except for the diamonds."

"Except for the diamonds, as you remark. And therefore when a man has got his fill of diamonds,
he is likely to leave."

"His fill of diamonds!" said Augusta Hall.

"Shouldn't you like to try your fill of diamonds?" asked Blake.

"Not at all," said Evelina. "I'd rather have strawberries and cream."

"I think I should like diamonds best," said Mary. Whereupon Evelina suggested that her younger
sister was a greedy little creature.

"As soon as you've got your fill of diamonds, which won't take more than six months longer,"
suggested Mr Hall, "you'll come back again?"

"Not exactly. I have an idea of going up the country across the Zambesi. I've a notion that
I should like to make my way out somewhere in the Mediterranean,--Egypt, for instance, or Algiers."

"What!--across the equator? You'd never do that alive?"

"Things of that kind have been done. Stanley crossed the continent."

"But not from south to north. I don't believe in that. You had better remain at Kimberley and
get more diamonds."

"He'd be with diamonds like the boy with the bacon," said the clergyman; "when prepared for
another wish, he'd have more than he could eat."

"To tell the truth," said John Gordon, "I don't quite know what I should do. It would depend
perhaps on what somebody else would join me in doing. My life was very lonely at Kimberley,
and I do not love being alone."

"Then, why don't you take a wife?" said Montagu Blake, very loudly, as though he had hit the
target right in the bull's-eye. He so spoke as to bring the conversation to an abrupt end.
Mr Whittlestaff immediately looked conscious. He was a man who, on such an occasion, could
not look otherwise than conscious. And the five girls, with all of whom the question of the
loves of John Gordon and Mary Lawrie had been fully discussed, looked conscious. Mary Lawrie
was painfully conscious; but endeavoured to hide it, not unsuccessfully. But in her endeavour
she had to look unnaturally stern,--and was conscious, too, that she did that. Mr Hall, whose
feelings of romance were not perhaps of the highest order, looked round on Mr Whittlestaff
and Mary Lawrie. Montagu Blake felt that he had achieved a triumph. "Yes," said he, "if those
are your feelings, why don't you take a wife?"

"One man may not be so happy as another," said Gordon, laughing. "You have suited yourself
admirably, and seem to think it quite easy for a man to make a selection."

"Not quite such a selection as mine, perhaps," said Blake.

"Then think of the difficulty. Do you suppose that any second Miss Forrester would dream of
going to the diamond-fields with me?"

"Perhaps not," said Blake. "Not a second Miss Forrester--but somebody else."

"Something inferior?"

"Well--yes; inferior to my Miss Forrester, certainly."

"You are the most conceited young man that I ever came across," said the young lady herself.

"And I am not inclined to put up with anything that is very inferior," said John Gordon. He
could not help his eye from glancing for a moment round upon Mary Lawrie. She was aware of
it, though no one else noticed it in the room. She was aware of it, though any one watching
her would have said that she had never looked at him.

"A man may always find a woman to suit him, if he looks well about him," said Mr Hall, sententiously.
"Don't you think so, Whittlestaff?"

"I dare say he may," said Mr Whittlestaff, very flatly. And as he said so he made up his mind
that he would, for that day, postpone the task of telling Mr Hall of his intended marriage.

The evening passed by, and the time came for Mr Whittlestaff to drive Miss Lawrie back to Croker's
Hall. She had certainly spent a most uneventful period, as far as action or even words of her
own was concerned. But the afternoon was one which she would never forget. She had been quite,
quite sure, when she came into the house; but she was more than sure now. At every word that
had been spoken she had thought of herself and of him. Would he not have known how to have
chosen a fit companion,--only for this great misfortune? And would she have been so much inferior
to Miss Forrester? Would he have thought her inferior to any one? Would he not have preferred
her to any other female whom the world had at the present moment produced? Oh, the pity of
it; the pity of it!

Then came the bidding of adieu. Gordon was to sleep at Little Alresford that night, and to
take his departure by early train on the next morning. Of the adieux spoken the next morning
we need take no notice, but only of the word or two uttered that night. "Good-bye, Mr Gordon,"
said Mr Whittlestaff, having taken courage for the occasion, and having thought even of the
necessary syllables to be spoken.

"Good-bye, Mr Whittlestaff," and he gave his rival his hand in apparently friendly grasp. To
those burning questions he had asked he had received no word of reply; but they were questions
which he would not repeat again.

"Good-bye, Mr Gordon," said Mary. She had thought of the moment much, but had determined at
last that she would trust herself to nothing further. He took her hand, but did not say a word.
He took it and pressed it for a moment, and then turned his face away, and went in from the
hall back to the door leading to the drawing-room. Mr Whittlestaff was at the moment putting
on his great-coat, and Mary stood with her bonnet and cloak on at the open front door, listening
to a word or two from Kattie Forrester and Evelina Hall. "Oh, I wish, I wish it might have
been!" said Kattie Forrester.

"And so do I," said Evelina. "Can't it be?"

"Good-night," said Mary, boldly, stepping out rapidly into the moonlight, and mounting without
assistance to her place in the open carriage.

"I beg your pardon," said Mr Hall, following her; but there came not a word from her.

Mr Whittlestaff had gone back after John Gordon. "By-the-by," he said, "what will be your address
in London?"

"The 'Oxford and Cambridge' in Pall Mall," said he.

"Oh, yes; the club there. It might be that I should have a word to send to you. But I don't
suppose I shall," he added, as he turned round to go away. Then he shook hands with the party
in the hall, and mounting up into the carriage, drove Mary and himself away homewards towards
Croker's Hall.

Not a word was spoken between them for the first mile, nor did a sound of a sob or an audible
suspicion of a tear come from Mary. Why did those girls know the secret of her heart in that
way? Why had they dared to express a hope as to an event, or an idea as to a disappointment,
all knowledge of which ought to be buried in her own bosom? Had she spoken of her love for
John Gordon? She was sure that no word had escaped her. And were it surmised, was it not customary
that such surmises should be kept in the dark? But here these young ladies had dared to pity
her for her vain love, as though, like some village maiden, she had gone about in tears bewailing
herself that some groom or gardener had been faithless. But sitting thus for the first mile,
she choked herself to keep down her sobs.

"Mary," at last he whispered to her.

"Well, Mr Whittlestaff?"

"Mary, we are both of us unhappy."

"I am not unhappy," she said, plucking up herself suddenly. "Why do you say that I am unhappy?"

"You seem so. I at any rate am unhappy."

"What makes you so?"

"I did wrong to take you to dine in company with that man."

"It was not for me to refuse to go."

"No; there is no blame to you in it;--nor is there blame to me. But it would have been better
for us both had we remained away." Then he drove on in silence, and did not speak another word
till they reached home.

"Well!" said Mrs Baggett, following them into the dining-room.

"What do you mean by 'well'?"

"What did the folks say to you at Mr Hall's? I can see by your face that some of them have
been saying summat."

"Nobody has been saying anything that I know of," said Mr Whittlestaff. "Do you go to bed."
Then when Mrs Baggett was gone, and Mary had listlessly seated herself on a chair, her lover
again addressed her. "I wish I knew what there is in your heart." Yet she would not tell him;
but turned away her face and sat silent. "Have you nothing to say to me?"

"What should I have to say to you? I have nothing to say of that of which you are thinking."

"He has gone now, Mary."

"Yes; he has gone."

"And you are contented?" It did seem hard upon her that she should be called upon to tell a
lie,--to say that which he must know to be a lie,--and to do so in order that he might be encouraged
to persevere in achieving his own object. But she did not quite understand him. "Are you contented?"
he repeated again.

Then she thought that she would tell the lie. If it was well that she should make the sacrifice
for his sake, why should it not be completed? If she had to give herself to him, why should
not the gift be as satisfactory as it might be made to his feelings? "Yes; I am contented."

"And you do not wish to see him again?"

"Certainly not, as your wife."

"You do not wish it at all," he rejoined, "whether you be my wife or otherwise?"

"I think you press me too hard." Then she remembered herself, and the perfect sacrifice which
she was minded to make. "No; I do not wish again to see Mr Gordon at all. Now, if you will
allow me, I will go to bed. I am thoroughly tired out, and I hardly know what I am saying."

"Yes; you can go to bed," he said. Then she gave him her hand in silence, and went off to her
own room.

She had no sooner reached her bed, than she threw herself on it and burst into tears. All this
which she had to endure,--all that she would have to bear,--would be, she thought, too much
for her. And there came upon her a feeling of contempt for his cruelty. Had he sternly resolved
to keep her to her promised word, and to forbid her all happiness for the future,--to make
her his wife, let her heart be as it might;--had he said: "you have come to my house, and have
eaten my bread and have drunk of my cup, and have then promised to become my wife, and now
you shall not depart from it because this interloper has come between us;"--then, though she
might have felt him to be cruel, still she would have respected him. He would have done, as
she believed, as other men do. But he wished to gain his object, and yet not appear to be cruel.
It was so that she thought of him. "And it shall be as he would have it," she said to herself.
But though she saw far into his character, she did not quite read it aright.

He remained there alone in his library into the late hours of the night. But he did not even
take up a book with the idea of solacing his hours. He too had his idea of self-sacrifice,
which went quite as far as hers. But yet he was not as sure as was she that the self-sacrifice
would be a duty. He did not believe, as did she, in the character of John Gordon. What if he
should give her up to one who did not deserve her,--to one whose future would not be stable
enough to secure the happiness and welfare of such a woman as was Mary Lawrie! He had no knowledge
to guide him, nor had she;--nor, for the matter of that, had John Gordon himself any knowledge
of what his own future might be. Of his own future Mr Whittlestaff could speak and think with
the greatest confidence. It would be safe, happy, and bright, should Mary Lawrie become his
wife. Should she not do so, it must be altogether ruined and confounded.

He could not conceive it to be possible that he should be required by duty to make such a sacrifice;
but he knew of himself that if her happiness, her true and permanent happiness, would require
it, then the sacrifice should be made.

CHAPTER XVI.

MRS BAGGETT'S PHILOSOPHY.

The next day was Saturday, and Mr Whittlestaff came out of his room early, intending to speak
to Mrs Baggett. He had declared to himself that it was his purpose to give her some sound advice
respecting her own affairs,--as far as her affairs and his were connected together. But low
down in his mind, below the stratum in which his declared resolution was apparent to himself,
there was a hope that he might get from her some comfort and strength as to his present purpose.
Not but that he would ultimately do as he himself had determined; but, to tell the truth, he
had not quite determined, and thought that a word from Mrs Baggett might assist him.

As he came out from his room, he encountered Mary, intent upon her household duties. It was
something before her usual time, and he was surprised. She had looked ill overnight and worn,
and he had expected that she would keep her bed. "What makes you so early, Mary?" He spoke
to her with his softest and most affectionate tone.

"I couldn't sleep, and I thought I might as well be up." She had followed him into the library,
and when there he put his arm round her waist and kissed her forehead. It was a strange thing
for him to do. She felt that it was so--very, very strange; but it never occurred to her that
it behoved her to be angry at his caress. He had kissed her once before, and only once, and
it had seemed to her that he had intended that their love-making should go on without kisses.
But was she not his property, to do as he pleased with her? And there could be no ground for
displeasure on her part.

"Dear Mary," he said, "if you could only know how constant my thoughts are to you." She did
not doubt that it was so; but just so constant were her thoughts to John Gordon. But from her
to him there could be no show of affection--nothing but the absolute coldness of perfect silence.
She had passed the whole evening with him last night, and had not been allowed to speak a single
word to him beyond the ordinary greetings of society. She had felt that she had not been allowed
to speak a single word to any one, because he had been present. Mr Whittlestaff had thrown
over her the deadly mantle of his ownership, and she had consequently felt herself to be debarred
from all right over her own words and actions. She had become his slave; she felt herself in
very truth to be a poor creature whose only duty it was in the world to obey his volition.
She had told herself during the night that, with all her motives for loving him, she was learning
to regard him with absolute hatred. And she hated herself because it was so. Oh, what a tedious
affair was this of living! How tedious, how sad and miserable, must her future days be, as
long as days should be left to her! Could it be made possible to her that she should ever be
able to do her duty by this husband of hers,--for her, in whose heart of hearts would be seated
continually the image of this other man?

"By-the-by," said he, "I want to see Mrs Baggett. I suppose she is about somewhere."

"Oh dear, yes. Since the trouble of her husband has become nearer, she is earlier and earlier
every day. Shall I send her?" Then she departed, and in a few minutes Mrs Baggett entered the room.

"Come in, Mrs Baggett."

"Yes, sir."

"I have just a few words which I want to say to you. Your husband has gone back to Portsmouth?"

"Yes sir; he have." This she said in a very decided tone, as though her master need trouble
himself no further about her husband.

"I am very glad that it should be so. It's the best place for him,--unless he could be sent
to Australia."

"He ain't a-done nothing to fit himself for Botany Bay, Mr Whittlestaff," said the old woman,
bobbing her head at him.

"I don't care what place he has fitted himself for, so long as he doesn't come here. He is
a disreputable old man."

"You needn't be so hard upon him, Mr Whittlestaff. He ain't a-done nothing much to you, barring
sleeping in the stable one night when he had had a drop o' drink too much." And the old woman
pulled out a great handkerchief, and began to wipe her eyes piteously.

"What a fool you are, Mrs Baggett."

"Yes; I am a fool. I knows that."

"Here's this disreputable old man eating and drinking your hard-earned wages."

"But they are my wages. And who's a right to them, only he?"

"I don't say anything about that, only he comes here and disturbs you."

"Well, yes; he is disturbing; if it's only because of his wooden leg and red nose. I don't
mean to say as he's the sort of a man as does a credit to a gentleman's house to see about
the place. But he was my lot in matrimony, and I've got to put up with him. I ain't a-going
to refuse to bear the burden which came to be my lot. I don't suppose he's earned a single
shilling since he left the regiment, and that is hard upon a poor woman who's got nothing but
her wages."

"Now, look here, Mrs Baggett."

"Yes, sir."

"Send him your wages."

"And have to go in rags myself,--in your service."

"You won't go in rags. Don't be a fool."

"I am a fool, Mr Whittlestaff; you can't tell me that too often."

"You won't go in rags. You ought to know us well enough--"

"Who is us, Mr Whittlestaff? They ain't no us;--just yet."

"Well;--me."

"Yes, I know you, Mr Whittlestaff."

"Send him your wages. You may be quite sure that you'll find yourself provided with shoes and
stockings, and the rest of it."

"And be a woluntary burden beyond what I earns! Never;--not as long as Miss Mary is coming
to live here as missus of your house. I should do summat as I should have to repent of. But,
Mr Whittlestaff, I've got to look the world in the face, and bear my own crosses. I never can
do it no younger."

"You're an old woman now, and you talk of throwing yourself upon the world without the means
of earning a shilling."

"I think I'd earn some, at something, old as I am, till I fell down flat dead," she said. "I
have that sperit in me, that I'd still be doing something. But it don't signify; I'm not going
to remain here when Miss Mary is to be put over me. That's the long and the short of it all."

Now had come the moment in which, if ever, Mr Whittlestaff must get the strength which he required.
He was quite sure of the old woman,--that her opinion would not be in the least influenced
by any desire on her own part to retain her position as his housekeeper. "I don't know about
putting Miss Mary over you," he said.

"Don't know about it!" she shouted.

"My mind is not absolutely fixed."

"'As she said anything?"

"Not a word."

"Or he? Has he been and dared to speak up about Miss Mary. And he,--who, as far as I can understand,
has never done a ha'porth for her since the beginning. What's Mr Gordon? I should like to know.
Diamonds! What's diamonds in the way of a steady income? They're all a flash in the pan, and
moonshine and dirtiness. I hates to hear of diamonds. There's all the ill in the world comes
from them; and you'd give her up to be taken off by such a one as he among the diamonds! I
make bold to tell you, Mr Whittlestaff, that you ought to have more strength of mind than what
that comes to. You're telling me every day as I'm an old fool."

"So you are."

"I didn't never contradict you; nor I don't mean, if you tells me so as often again. And I
don't mean to be that impident as to tell my master as I ain't the only fool about the place.
It wouldn't be no wise becoming."

"But you think it would be true."

"I says nothing about that. That's not the sort of language anybody has heard to come out of
my mouth, either before your face or behind your back. But I do say as a man ought to behave
like a man. What! Give up to a chap as spends his time in digging for diamonds! Never!"

"What does it matter what he digs for; you know nothing about his business."

"But I know something about yours, Mr Whittlestaff. I know where you have set your wishes.
And I know that when a man has made up his mind in such an affair as this, he shouldn't give
way to any young diamond dealer of them all."

"Not to him."

"And what's she? Are you to give up everything because she's love-sick for a day or two? Is
everything to be knocked to pieces here at Croker's Hall, because he has come and made eyes
at her? She was glad enough to take what you offered before he had come this way."

"She was not glad enough. That is it. She was not glad enough."

"She took you, at any rate, and I'd never make myself mean enough to make way for such a fellow
as that."

"It isn't for him, Mrs Baggett."

"It is for him. Who else? To walk away and just leave the game open because he has come down
to Hampshire! There ain't no spirit of standing up and fighting about it."

"With whom am I to fight?"

"With both of 'em;--till you have your own way. A foolish, stupid, weak girl like that!"

"I won't have her abused."

"She's very well. I ain't a-saying nothing against her. If she'll do what you bid her, she'll
turn out right enough. You asked her, and she said she'd do it. Is not that so? There's nothing
I hate so much as them romantic ways. And everything is to be made to give way because a young
chap is six foot high! I hates romance and manly beauty, as they call it, and all the rest
of it. Where is she to get her bread and meat? That's what I want to know."

"There'll be bread and meat for her."

"I dare say. But you'll have to pay for it, while she's philandering about with him! And that's
what you call fine feelings. I call it all rubbish. If you've a mind to make her Mrs Whittlestaff,
make her Mrs Whittlestaff. Drat them fine feelings. I never knew no good come of what people
call fine feelings. If a young woman does her work as it should be, she's got no time to think
of 'em. And if a man is master, he should be master. How's a man to give way to a girl like
that, and then stand up and face the world around him? A man has to be master; and when he's
come to be a little old-like, he has to see that he will be master. I never knew no good come
of one of them soft-going fellows who is minded to give up whenever a woman wants anything.
What's a woman? It ain't natural that she should have her way; and she don't like a man a bit
better in the long-run because he lets her. There's Miss Mary; if you're stiff with her now,
she'll come out right enough in a month or two. She's lived without Mr Gordon well enough since
she's been here. Now he's come, and we hear a deal about these fine feelings. You take my word,
and say nothing to nobody about the young man. He's gone by this time, or he's a-going. Let
him go, say I; and if Miss Mary takes on to whimper a bit, don't you see it."

Mrs Baggett took her departure, and Mr Whittlestaff felt that he had received the comfort,
or at any rate the strength, of which he had been in quest. In all that the woman had said
to him, there had been a re-echo of his own thoughts,--of one side, at any rate, of his own
thoughts. He knew that true affection, and the substantial comforts of the world, would hold
their own against all romance. And he did not believe,--in his theory of ethics he did not
believe,--that by yielding to what Mrs Baggett called fine feelings, he would in the long-run
do good to those with whom he was concerned in the world. Were he to marry Mary Lawrie now,
Mary Whittlestaff would, he thought, in ten years' time, be a happier woman than were he to
leave her. That was the solid conviction of his mind, and in that he had been strengthened
by Mrs Baggett's arguments. He had desired to be so strengthened, and therefore his interview
had been successful.

But as the minutes passed by, as every quarter of an hour added itself to the quarters that
were gone, and as the hours grew on, and the weakness of evening fell upon him, all his softness
came back again. They had dined at six o'clock, and at seven he declared his purpose of strolling
out by himself. On these summer evenings he would often take Mary with him; but he now told
her, with a sort of apology, that he would rather go alone. "Do," she said, smiling up into
his face; "don't let me ever be in your way. Of course, a man does not always want to have
to find conversation for a young lady."

"If you are the young lady, I should always want it--only that I have things to think of."

"Go and think of your things. I will sit in the garden and do my stitching."

About a mile distant, where the downs began to rise, there was a walk supposed to be common
to all who chose to frequent it, but which was entered through a gate which gave the place
within the appearance of privacy. There was a little lake inside crowded with water-lilies,
when the time for the water-lilies had come; and above the lake a path ran up through the woods,
very steep, and as it rose higher and higher, altogether sheltered. It was about a mile in
length till another gate was reached; but during the mile the wanderer could go off on either
side, and lose himself on the grass among the beech-trees. It was a favourite haunt with Mr
Whittlestaff. Here he was wont to sit and read his Horace, and think of the affairs of the
world as Horace depicted them. Many a morsel of wisdom he had here made his own, and had then
endeavoured to think whether the wisdom had in truth been taken home by the poet to his own
bosom, or had only been a glitter of the intellect, never appropriated for any useful purpose.
"'Gemmas, marmor, ebur,'" he had said. "'Sunt qui non habeant; est qui non curat habere.' I
suppose he did care for jewels, marble, and ivory, as much as any one. 'Me lentus Glyceræ torret
amor meæ.' I don't suppose he ever loved her really, or any other girl." Thus he would think
over his Horace, always having the volume in his pocket.

Now he went there. But when he had sat himself down in a spot to which he was accustomed, he
had no need to take out his Horace. His own thoughts came to him free enough without any need
of his looking for them to poetry. After all, was not Mrs Baggett's teaching a damnable philosophy?
Let the man be the master, and let him get everything he can for himself, and enjoy to the
best of his ability all that he can get. That was the lesson as taught by her. But as he sat
alone there beneath the trees, he told himself that no teaching was more damnable. Of course
it was the teaching by which the world was kept going in its present course; but when divested
of its plumage was it not absolutely the philosophy of selfishness? Because he was a man, and
as a man had power and money and capacity to do the things after which his heart lusted, he
was to do them for his own gratification, let the consequences be what they might to one whom
he told himself that he loved! Did the lessons of Mrs Baggett run smoothly with those of Jesus
Christ?

Then within his own mind he again took Mrs Baggett's side of the question. How mean a creature
must he not become, if he were now to surrender this girl whom he was anxious to make his wife!
He knew of himself that in such a matter he was more sensitive than others. He could not let
her go, and then walk forth as though little or nothing were the matter with him. Now for the
second time in his life he had essayed to marry. And now for the second time all the world
would know that he had been accepted and then rejected. It was, he thought, more than he could
endure,--and live.

Then after he had sat there for an hour he got up and walked home; and as he went he tried
to resolve that he would reject the philosophy of Mrs Baggett and accept the other. "If I only
knew!" he said as he entered his own gate. "If one could only see clearly!" Then he found Mary
still seated in the garden. "Nothing is to be got," he said, "by asking you for an answer."

"In what have I failed?"

"Never mind. Let us go in and have a cup of tea." But she knew well in what he accused her
of failing, and her heart turned towards him again.

CHAPTER XVII.

MR WHITTLESTAFF MEDITATES A JOURNEY.

The next day was Sunday, and was passed in absolute tranquillity. Nothing was said either by
Mr Whittlestaff or by Mary Lawrie; nor, to the eyes of those among whom they lived, was there
anything to show that their minds were disturbed. They went to church in the morning, as was
usual with them, and Mary went also to the evening service. It was quite pleasant to see Mrs
Baggett start for her slow Sabbath morning walk, and to observe how her appearance altogether
belied that idea of rags and tatters which she had given as to her own wardrobe. A nicer dressed
old lady, or a more becoming black silk gown, you shall not see on a Sunday morning making
her way to any country church in England. While she was looking so pleasant and demure,--one
may say almost so handsome, in her old-fashioned and apparently new bonnet,--what could have
been her thoughts respecting the red-nosed, one-legged warrior, and her intended life, to be
passed in fetching two-penn'orths of gin for him, and her endeavours to get for him a morsel
of wholesome food? She had had her breakfast out of her own china tea-cup, which she used to
boast was her own property, as it had been given to her by Mr Whittlestaff's mother, and had
had her little drop of cream, and, to tell the truth, her boiled egg, which she always had
on a Sunday morning, to enable her to listen to the long sermon of the Rev Mr Lowlad. She would
talk of her hopes and her burdens, and undoubtedly she was in earnest. But she certainly did
seem to make her hay very comfortably while the sun shone.

Everything on this Sunday morning was pleasant, or apparently pleasant, at Croker's Hall. In
the evening, when Mary and the maid-servants went to church, leaving Mrs Baggett at home to
look after the house and go to sleep, Mr Whittlestaff walked off to the wooded path with his
Horace. He did not read it very long. The bits which he did usually read never amounted to
much at a time. He would take a few lines and then digest them thoroughly, wailing over them
or rejoicing, as the case might be. He was not at the present moment much given to joy. "Intermissa,
Venus, diu rursus bella moves? Parce, precor, precor." This was the passage to which he turned
at the present moment; and very little was the consolation which he found in it. What was so
crafty, he said to himself, or so vain as that an old man should hark back to the pleasures
of a time of life which was past and gone! "Non sum qualis eram," he said, and then thought
with shame of the time when he had been jilted by Catherine Bailey,--the time in which he had
certainly been young enough to love and be loved, had he been as lovable as he had been prone
to love. Then he put the book in his pocket. His latter effort had been to recover something
of the sweetness of life, and not, as had been the poet's, to drain those dregs to the bottom.
But when he got home he bade Mary tell him what Mr Lowlad had said in his sermon, and was quite
cheery in his manner of picking Mr Lowlad's theology to pieces;--for Mr Whittlestaff did not
altogether agree with Mr Lowlad as to the uses to be made of the Sabbath.

On the next morning he began to bustle about a little, as was usual with him before he made
a journey; and it did escape him, while he was talking to Mrs Baggett about a pair of trousers
which it turned out that he had given away last summer, that he meditated a journey to London
on the next day.

"You ain't a-going?" said Mrs Baggett.

"I think I shall."

"Then don't. Take my word for it, sir,--don't." But Mr Whittlestaff only snubbed her, and nothing
more was said about the journey at the moment.

In the course of the afternoon visitors came. Miss Evelina Hall with Miss Forrester had been
driven into Alresford, and now called in company with Mr Blake. Mr Blake was full of his own
good tidings, but not so full but that he could remember, before he took his departure, to
say a half whispered word on behalf of John Gordon. "What do you think, Mr Whittlestaff? Since
you were at Little Alresford we've settled the day."

"You needn't be telling it to everybody about the county," said Kattie Forrester.

"Why shouldn't I tell it to my particular friends? I am sure Miss Lawrie will be delighted
to hear it."

"Indeed I am," said Mary.

"And Mr Whittlestaff also. Are you not, Mr Whittlestaff?"

"I am very happy to hear that a couple whom I like so well are soon to be made happy. But you
have not yet told us the day."

"The 1st of August," said Evelina Hall.

"The 1st of August," said Mr Blake, "is an auspicious day. I am sure there is some reason for
regarding it as auspicious, though I cannot exactly remember what. It is something about Augustus,
I think."

"I never heard of such an idea to come from a clergyman of the Church of England," said the
bride. "I declare Montagu never seems to think that he's a clergyman at all."

"It will be better for him," said Mr Whittlestaff, "and for all those about him, that he should
ever remember the fact and never seem to do so."

"All the same," said Blake, "although the 1st of August is auspicious, I was very anxious to
be married in July, only the painters said they couldn't be done with the house in time. One
is obliged to go by what these sort of people say and do. We're to have a month's honeymoon,--only
just a month, because Mr Lowlad won't make himself as agreeable as he ought to do about the
services; and Newface, the plumber and glazier, says he can't have the house done as Kattie
would like to live in it before the end of August. Where do you think we're going to, Miss
Lawrie? You would never guess."

"Perhaps to Rome," said Mary at a shot.

"Not quite so far. We're going to the Isle of Wight. It's rather remarkable that I never spent
but one week in the Isle of Wight since I was born. We haven't quite made up our mind whether
it's to be Black Gang Chine or Ventnor. It's a matter of dresses, you see."

"Don't be a fool, Montagu," said Miss Forrester.

"Well, it is. If we decide upon Ventnor, she must have frocks and things to come out with."

"I suppose so," said Mr Whittlestaff.

"But she'll want nothing of the kind at Black Gang."

"Do hold your tongue, and not make an ass of yourself. What do you know what dresses I shall
want? As it is, I don't think I shall go either to the one place or the other. The Smiths are
at Ryde, and the girls are my great friends. I think we'll go to Ryde, after all."

"I'm so sorry, Mr Whittlestaff, that we can't expect the pleasure of seeing you at our wedding.
It is, of course, imperative that Kattie should be married in the cathedral. Her father is
one of the dignitaries, and could not bear not to put his best foot foremost on such an occasion.
The Dean will be there, of course. I'm afraid the Bishop cannot come up from Farnham, because
he will have friends with him. I am afraid John Gordon will have gone by that time, or else
we certainly would have had him down. I should like John Gordon to be present, because he would
see how the kind of thing is done." The name of John Gordon at once silenced all the matrimonial
chit-chat which was going on among them. It was manifest both to Mr Whittlestaff and to Mary
that it had been lugged in without a cause, to enable Mr Blake to talk about the absent man.
"It would have been pleasant; eh, Kattie?"

"We should have been very glad to see Mr Gordon, if it would have suited him to come," said
Miss Forrester.

"It would have been just the thing for him; and we at Oxford together, and everything. Don't
you think he would have liked to be there? It would have put him in mind of other things, you
know."

To this appeal there was no answer made. It was impossible that Mary should bring herself to
talk about John Gordon in mixed company. And the allusion to him stirred Mr Whittlestaff's
wrath. Of course it was understood as having been spoken in Mary's favour. And Mr Whittlestaff
had been made to perceive by what had passed at Little Alresford that the Little Alresford
people all took the side of John Gordon, and were supposed to be taking the side of Mary at
the same time. There was not one of them, he said to himself, that had half the sense of Mrs
Baggett. And there was a vulgarity about their interference of which Mrs Baggett was not guilty.

"He is half way on his road to the diamond-fields," said Evelina.

"And went away from here on Saturday morning!" said Montagu Blake. "He has not started yet,--not
dreamed of it. I heard him whisper to Mr Whittlestaff about his address. He's to be in London
at his club. I didn't hear him say for how long, but when a man gives his address at his club
he doesn't mean to go away at once. I have a plan in my head. Some of those boats go to the
diamond-fields from Southampton. All the steamers go everywhere from Southampton. Winchester
is on the way to Southampton. Nothing will be easier for him than to drop in for our marriage
on his way out. That is, if he must go at last." Then he looked hard at Mary Lawrie.

"And bring some of his diamonds with him," said Evelina Hall. "That would be very nice." But
not a word more was said then about John Gordon by the inhabitants of Croker's Hall. After
that the visitors went, and Montagu Blake chaperoned the girls out of the house, without an
idea that he had made himself disagreeable.

"That young man is a most egregious ass," said Mr Whittlestaff.

"He is good-natured and simple, but I doubt whether he sees things very plainly."

"He has not an idea of what a man may talk about and when he should hold his tongue. And he
is such a fool as to think that his idle chatter can influence others. I don't suppose a bishop
can refuse to ordain a gentleman because he is a general idiot. Otherwise I think the bishop
is responsible for letting in such an ass as this." Mary said to herself, as she heard this,
that it was the most ill-natured remark which she had ever known to fall from the mouth of
Mr Whittlestaff.

"I think I am going away for a few days," Mr Whittlestaff said to Mary, when the visitors were
gone.

"Where are you going?"

"Well, I suppose I shall be in London. When one goes anywhere, it is generally to London; though
I haven't been there for more than two months."

"Not since I came to live with you," she said. "You are the most stay-at-home person by way
of a gentleman that I ever heard of." Then there was a pause for a few minutes, and he said
nothing further. "Might a person ask what you are going for?" This she asked in the playful
manner which she knew he would take in good part.

"Well; I don't quite know that a person can. I am going to see a man upon business, and if
I began to tell you part of it, I must tell it all,--which would not be convenient."

"May I not ask how long you will be away? There can't be any dreadful secret in that. And I
shall want to know what to get for your dinner when you come back." She was standing now at
his elbow, and he was holding her by the arm. It was to him almost as though she were already
his wife, and the feeling to him was very pleasant. Only if she were his wife, or if it were
positively decided among them that she would become so, he would certainly tell her the reason
for which he might undertake any journey. Indeed there was no reason connected with any business
of his which might not be told, other than that special reason which was about to take him
to London. He only answered her now by pressing her hand and smiling into her face. "Will it
be for a month?"

"Oh dear, no! what should I do away from home for a month?"

"How can I tell? The mysterious business may require you to be absent for a whole year. Fancy
my being left at home all that time. You don't think of it; but you have never left me for
a single night since you first brought me to live here."

"And you have never been away."

"Oh, no! why should I go away? What business can a woman have to move from home, especially
such a woman as I am."

"You are just like Mrs Baggett. She always talks of women with supreme contempt. And yet she
is just as proud of herself as the queen when you come to contradict her."

"You never contradict me."

"Perhaps the day may come when I shall." Then he recollected himself, and added, "Or perhaps
the day may never come. Never mind. Put up my things for one week. At any rate I shall not
be above a week gone." Then she left him, and went away to his room to do what was necessary.

She knew the business on which he was about to travel to London, as well as though he had discussed
with her the whole affair. In the course of the last two or three days there had been moments
in which she had declared to herself that he was cruel. There had been moments in which she
had fainted almost with sorrow when she thought of the life which fate had in store for her.
There must be endless misery, while there might have been joy, so ecstatic in its nature as
to make it seem to her to be perennial. Then she had almost fallen, and had declared him to
be preternaturally cruel. But these moments had been short, and had endured only while she
had allowed herself to dream of the ecstatic joy, which she confessed to herself to be an unfit
condition of life for her. And then she had told herself that Mr Whittlestaff was not cruel,
and that she herself was no better than a weak, poor, flighty creature unable to look in its
face life and all its realities. And then she would be lost in amazement as she thought of
herself and all her vacillations.

She now was resolved to take his part, and to fight his battle to the end. When he had told
her that he was going up to London, and going up on business as to which he could tell her
nothing, she knew that it behoved her to prevent him from taking the journey. John Gordon should
be allowed to go in quest of his diamonds, and Mr Whittlestaff should be persuaded not to interfere
with him. It was for her sake, and not for John Gordon's, that he was about to make the journey.
He had asked her whether she were willing to marry him, and she had told him that he was pressing
her too hard. She would tell him now,--now before it was too late,--that this was not so. His
journey to London must at any rate be prevented.

CHAPTER XVIII.

MR AND MRS TOOKEY.

On the day arranged, early on the morning after the dinner at Little Alresford Park, John Gordon
went up to London. He had not been much moved by the intimation made to him by Mr Whittlestaff
that some letter should be written to him at his London address. He had made his appeal to
Mr Whittlestaff, and had received no answer whatever. And he had, after a fashion, made his
appeal also to the girl. He felt sure that his plea must reach her. His very presence then
in this house had been an appeal to her. He knew that she so far believed in him as to be conscious
that she could at once become his wife--if she were willing to throw over his rival. He knew
also that she loved him,--or had certainly loved him. He did not know the nature of her regard;
nor was it possible that he should ever know that,--unless she were his wife. She had given
a promise to that other man, and--it was thus he read her character--she could be true to her
promise without any great heart-break. At any rate, she intended to be true to it. He did not
for a moment suspect that Mr Whittlestaff was false. Mary had declared that she would not withdraw
her word,--that only from her own mouth was to be taken her intention of such withdrawal, and
that such intention she certainly would never utter. Of her character he understood much,--but
not quite all. He was not aware of the depth of her feeling. But Mr Whittlestaff he did not
understand at all. Of all those vacillating softnesses he knew nothing,--or of those moments
spent with the poet, in which he was wont to fight against the poet's pretences, and of those
other moments spent with Mrs Baggett, in which he would listen to, and always finally reject,
those invitations to manly strength which she would always pour into his ears. That Mr Whittlestaff
should spend hour after hour, and now day after day, in teaching himself to regard nothing
but what might best suit the girl's happiness,--of that he was altogether in the dark. To his
thinking, Mr Whittlestaff was a hard man, who, having gained his object, intended to hold fast
by what he had gained. He, John Gordon, knew, or thought that he knew, that Mary, as his wife,
would lead a happier life than with Mr Whittlestaff. But things had turned out unfortunately,
and there was nothing for him but to return to the diamond-fields.

Therefore he had gone back to London with the purpose of preparing for his journey. A man does
not start for South Africa to-morrow, or, if not to-morrow, then the next day. He was aware
that there must be some delay; but any place would be better in which to stay than the neighbourhood
of Croker's Hall. There were things which must be done, and people with whom he must do it;
but of all that, he need say nothing down at Alresford. Therefore, when he got back to London,
he meant to make all his arrangements--and did so far settle his affairs as to take a berth
on board one of the mail steamers.

He had come over in company with a certain lawyer, who had gone out to Kimberley with a view
to his profession, and had then, as is the case with all the world that goes to Kimberley,
gone into diamonds. Diamonds had become more to him than either briefs or pleadings. He had
been there for fifteen years, and had ruined himself and made himself half-a-dozen times. He
had found diamonds to be more pleasant than law, and to be more compatible with champagne,
tinned lobsters, and young ladies. He had married a wife, and had parted with her, and taken
another man's wife, and paid for her with diamonds. He had then possessed nothing, and had
afterwards come forth a third-part owner of the important Stick-in-the-Mud claim, which at
one time was paying 12 per cent per month. It must be understood that the Stick-in-the-Mud
claim was an almost infinitesimal portion of soil in the Great Kimberley mine. It was but the
sixteenth part of an original sub-division. But from the centre of the great basin, or rather
bowl, which forms the mine, there ran up two wires to the high mound erected on the circumference,
on which continually two iron cages were travelling up and down, coming back empty, but going
up laden with gemmiferous dirt. Here travelled the diamonds of the Stick-in-the-Mud claim,
the owner of one-third of which, Mr Fitzwalker Tookey, had come home with John Gordon.

Taking a first general glance at affairs in the diamond-fields, I doubt whether we should have
been inclined to suspect that John Gordon and Fitzwalker Tookey would have been likely to come
together as partners in a diamond speculation. But John Gordon had in the course of things
become owner of the other two shares, and when Fitzwalker Tookey determined to come home, he
had done so with the object of buying his partner's interest. This he might have done at once,--only
that he suffered under the privation of an insufficiency of means. He was a man of great intelligence,
and knew well that no readier mode to wealth had ever presented itself to him than the purchase
of his partner's shares. Much was said to persuade John Gordon; but he would not part with
his documents without seeing security for his money. Therefore Messrs. Gordon and Tookey put
the old Stick-in-the-Mud into the hands of competent lawyers, and came home together.

"I am not at all sure that I shall sell," John Gordon had said.

"But I thought that you offered it."

"Yes; for money down. For the sum named I will sell now. But if I start from here without completing
the bargain, I shall keep the option in my own hands. The fact is, I do not know whether I
shall remain in England or return. If I do come back I am not likely to find anything better
than the old Stick-in-the-Mud." To this Mr Tookey assented, but still he resolved that he would
go home. Hence it came to pass that Mr Fitzwalker Tookey was now in London, and that John Gordon
had to see him frequently. Here Tookey had found another would-be partner, who had the needed
money, and it was fervently desired by Mr Tookey that John Gordon might not go back to South
Africa.

The two men were not at all like in their proclivities; but they had been thrown together,
and each had learned much of the inside life of the other. The sort of acquaintance with whom
a steady man becomes intimate in such a locality often surprises the steady man himself. Fitzwalker
Tookey had the antecedents and education of a gentleman. Champagne and lobster suppers--the
lobster coming out of tin cases,--diamonds and strange ladies, even with bloated cheeks and
strong language, had not altogether destroyed the vestiges of the Temple. He at any rate was
fond of a companion with whom he could discuss his English regrets, and John Gordon was not
inclined to shut himself up altogether among his precious stones, and to refuse the conversation
of a man who could talk. Tookey had told him of his great distress in reference to his wife. "Enter
here?" said the Demon to Jochonan, "for this house is mine. The lady and the child are in
the upper chamber;" and, accordingly, the sorrowful Rabbi ascended the stair to find them.

The lady, whose dazzling beauty was shrouded by melancholy beyond hope, lay in bed; the child,
in rich raiment, slumbered on the lap of the nurse, by her side.

"I have brought to thee, light of my eyes!" said the Demon, "Rebecca, beloved of my soul! I
have brought thee Rabbi Jochonan the wise, for whom thou didst desire. Let him, then, speedily
begin his office; I shall fetch all things necessary, for he is in
haste to depart."

He smiled bitterly as he said these words, looking at the Rabbi; and
left the room, followed by the nurse.

When Jochonan and the lady were alone, she turned in the bed towards
him, and said:--

"Unhappy man that thou art! knowest thou where thou
hast been brought?"

"I do," said he, with a heavy groan; I know that I am in a city of the Mazikin."

"Know, then, further," said she, and the tears gushed from eyes brighter
than the diamond, "know then, further, that no one is ever brought
here, unless he hath sinned before the Lord.

What my sin hath been imports not to thee--and I seek not to know thine. But here thou remainest
for ever--lost, even as I am lost." And she wept again.

The Rabbi dashed his turban on the ground, and tearing his hair, exclaimed,
"Wo is me!

Who art thou, woman! that speakest to me thus?"

"I am a Hebrew woman," said she, "the daughter of a Doctor of the
Laws in the city of Bagdad; and being brought hither, it matters not
how, I am married to a prince among the Mazikin, even him who was
sent for thee.

And that child, whom thou sawest, is our first-born, and I could
not bear the thought that the soul of our innocent babe should perish.

I therefore besought my husband to try to bring hither a priest, that the law of Moses (blessed
be his memory!) should be done; and thy fame, which has spread to Bagdad, and lands further
towards the rising of the sun, made me think of thee. Now my husband, though great among the Mazikin,
is more just than the other Demons; and he loves me, whom he hath ruined, with a love of despair.
So he said, that the name of Jochonan the wise was familiar unto him, and that he knew thou wouldst
not be able to refuse. What thou hast done, to give him power over thee, is known to thyself."

"I swear, before Heaven!" said the Rabbi, "that I have ever diligently
kept the law, and walked stedfastly according to the traditions of
our fathers, from the day of my youth upward.

I have wronged no man in word or deed, and I have daily worshipped
the Lord; minutely performing all the ceremonies thereto needful."

"Nay," said the lady, "all this thou mightest have done, and more,
and yet be in the power of the Demons.

But time passes, for I hear the foot of my husband mounting the stair.

There is one chance of thine escape."

"What is that?

O lady of beauty?" said the agonized Rabbi.

"Eat not, drink not, nor take fee or reward while here; and as long as thou canst do thus,
the Mazikin have no power over thee, dead or alive. Have courage,
and persevere."

As she ceased from speaking, her husband entered the room, followed
by the nurse, who bore all things requisite for the ministration of
the Rabbi.

With a heavy heart he performed his duty, and the child was numbered
among the faithful.

But when, as usual, at the conclusion of the ceremony, the wine was handed round to be tasted
by the child, the mother, and the Rabbi, he refused it when it came to him, saying:--

"Spare me, my lord, for I have made a vow that I fast this day; and I will not eat, neither will
I drink."

"Be it as thou pleasest," said the Demon, "I will not that thou shouldst break thy vow;" and
he laughed aloud.

So the poor Rabbi was taken into a chamber, looking into a garden, where he passed the remainder of
the night and the day weeping, and praying to the Lord that he would
deliver him from the city of Demons.

But when the twelfth hour came, and the sun was set, the Prince of
the Mazikin came again unto him, and said:--

"Eat now, I pray thee,
for the day of thy vow is past;" and he set meat before him.

"Pardon again thy servant, my lord," said Jochonan, "in this thing.

I have another vow for this day also.

I pray thee be not angry with thy servant."

"I am not angry," said the Demon, "be it as thou pleasest; I respect
thy vow;" and he laughed louder than before.

So the Rabbi sat another day in his chamber by the garden, weeping and praying. And when the
sun had gone behind the hills, the Prince of the Mazikin again stood
before him, and said:--

"Eat now, for thou must be an hungered.

It was a sore vow of thine;" and he offered him daintier meats.

And Jochonan felt a strong desire to eat, but he prayed inwardly to the Lord, and the temptation
passed, and he answered:--

"Excuse thy servant yet a third time, my lord, that I eat not.

I have renewed my vow."

"Be it so, then," said the other; "arise, and follow me."

The Demon took a torch in his hand, and led the Rabbi through winding passages of his palace,
to the door of a lofty chamber, which he opened with a key that he
took from a niche in the wall.

On entering the room, Jochonan saw that it was of solid silver--floor,
ceiling, walls, even to the threshold and the door-posts.

And the curiously carved roof, and borders of the ceiling, shone,
in the torch-light, as if they were the fanciful work of frost.

In the midst were heaps of silver money, piled up in immense urns
of the same metal, even over the brim.

"Thou hast done me a serviceable act, Rabbi," said the Demon--"take
of these what thou pleasest; ay, were it the whole."

"I cannot, my lord," said Jochonan. "I was adjured by thee to come hither in the name of God;
and in that name I came, not for fee or for reward."

"Follow me," said the prince of the Mazikin; and Jochonan did so, into an inner chamber.

It was of gold, as the other was of silver. Its golden roof was supported by pillars and pilasters
of gold, resting upon a golden floor.

The treasures of the kings of the earth would not purchase one of
the four-and-twenty vessels of golden coins, which were disposed in
six rows along the room.

No wonder! for they were filled by the constant labours of the Demons of the mine. The heart
of Jochonan was moved by avarice, when he saw them shining in yellow light, like the autumnal sun, as
they reflected the beams of the torch. But God enabled him to persevere.

"These are thine," said the Demon; "one of the vessels which thou
beholdest would make thee richest of the sons of men--and I give thee
them all."

But Jochonan refused again; and the Prince of the Mazikin opened the door of a third chamber,
which was called the Hall of Diamonds.

When the Rabbi entered, he screamed aloud, and put his hands over
his eyes; for the lustre of the jewels dazzled him, as if he had looked
upon the noon-day sun.

In vases of agate were heaped diamonds beyond enumeration, the smallest of which was larger than
a pigeon's egg.

On alabaster tables lay amethysts, topazes, rubies, beryls, and all
other precious stones, wrought by the hands of skilful artists, beyond
power of computation.

The room was lighted by a carbuncle, which, from the end of the hall, poured its ever-living
light, brighter than the rays of noontide, but cooler than the gentle radiance of the dewy moon.
This was a sore trial on the Rabbi; but he was strengthened from above, and he refused again.

"Thou
knowest me then, I perceive, O Jochonan, son of Ben-David," said
the Prince of the Mazikin; "I am a Demon who would tempt thee to destruction.

As thou hast withstood so far, I tempt thee no more.

Thou hast done a service which, though I value it not, is acceptable in the sight of her whose
love is dearer to me than the light of life. Sad has been that love to thee, my Rebecca! Why should
I do that which would make thy cureless grief more grievous?

You have yet another chamber to see," said he to Jochonan, who had
closed his eyes, and was praying fervently to the Lord, beating his
breast.

Far different from the other chambers, the one into which the Rabbi
was next introduced, was a mean and paltry apartment, without furniture.

On its filthy walls hung innumerable bunches of rusty keys, of all
sizes, disposed without order.

Among them, to the astonishment of Jochonan, hung the keys of his own house, those which he
had put to hide when he came on this miserable journey, and he gazed
upon them intently.

"What dost thou see," said the Demon, "that makes thee look so eagerly? Can he who has refused
silver, and gold, and diamonds, be moved by a paltry bunch of rusty iron?"

"They are mine own, my lord," said the Rabbi, "them will I take, if they be offered me."

"Take them, then," said the Demon, putting them into his hand;--"thou
may'st depart.

But, Rabbi, open not thy house only, when thou returnest to Cairo,
but thy heart also.

That thou didst not open it before, was that which gave me power
over thee.

It was well that thou didst one act of charity in coming with me without reward, for it has
been thy salvation. Be no more Rabbi Jochonan the miser."

The Rabbi bowed to the ground, and blessed the Lord for his escape.

"But how," said he, "am I to return, for I know not the way?"

"Close thine eyes," said the Demon. He did so, and in the space of a moment, heard the voice
of the Prince of Mazikin ordering him to open them again. And, behold, when he opened them, he
stood in the centre of his own chamber, in his house at Cairo, with the keys in his hand.

When
he recovered from his surprise, and had offered thanksgivings to God, he opened his house, and
his heart also. He gave alms to the poor, he cheered the heart of
the widow, and lightened the destitution of the orphan.

His hospitable board was open to the stranger, and his purse was
at the service of all who needed to share it.

His life was a perpetual act of benevolence; and the blessings showered upon him by all, were
returned bountifully upon him by the hand of God.

But people wondered, and said, "Is not this the man who was called Rabbi Jochonan the miser?
What hath made the change?" And it became a saying in Cairo.

When it came to the ears of the Rabbi, he called his friends together,
and he avowed his former love of gold, and the danger to which it
had exposed him; relating all which has been above told, in the hall
of the new palace that he built by the side of the river, on the left
hand, as thou goest down by the course of the great stream.

And wise men, who were scribes, wrote it down from his mouth, for the memory of mankind, that
they might profit thereby. And a venerable man, with a beard of snow, who had read it in these
books, and at whose feet I sat, that I might learn the wisdom of the old time, told it to
me.

And I write it in the tongue of England, the merry and the free, on the tenth day of the month
Nisan, in the year, according to the lesser computation, five hundred ninety and seven, that thou
may'st learn good thereof. If not, the fault be upon thee.

* * * * *

STANZAS

Written on seeing Flags and other Ensigns of War, hanging in a Country Church.

BY ALARIC A. WATTS.

Oh! why amid this hallowed scene. Should signs of mortal feud be found; Why seek with such
vain gauds to wean Our thoughts from holier relics 'round? More fitting emblems here abound Of glory's
bright, unfading wreath;-- Conquests, with purer triumphs crowned;--
Proud victories over Sin and Death!

Of these how many records rise Before my chastened spirit now; Memorials,
pointing to the skies, Of Christian battles fought below.

What need of yon stern things to shew That darker deeds have oft been done?-- Is't not enough
for Man to know He lives but through the blood of ONE!

And thou, mild delegate of God, Whose words of balm, and guiding light.

Would lead us, from earth's drear abode, To worlds with bliss for ever bright,-- What have the
spoils of mortal fight To do with themes 'tis thine to teach? Faith's saving grace--each sacred
rite Thou know'st to practice as to preach!

The blessings of the contrite heart, Thy bloodless conquests best proclaim; The tears from sinners'
eyes that start, Are meetest records of thy fame.

The glory that may grace thy name From loftier triumphs sure must
spring;-- The grateful thoughts thy worth may claim, Trophies like
these can never bring!

Then, wherefore on this sainted spot, With peace and love, and hope
imbued,-- Some vision calm of bliss to blot, And turn our thoughts
on deeds of blood,-- Should signs of battle-fields intrude:-- Man
wants no trophies here of strife; His Oriflamme--Faith unsubdued;--
His Panoply--a spotless life!

* * * * *

THE BRITISH SAILOR'S SONG.

BY ALLAN CUNNINGHAM.

Away with bayonet and with lance, With corslet, casque and sword; Our island king no war-horse
needs, For on the sea he's lord.

His throne's the war-ship's lofty deck, His sceptre is the mast; His kingdom is the rolling
wave, His servant is the blast. His anchor's up, fair Freedom's flag Proud to the mast he nails;
Tyrants and conquerors bow your heads, For there your terror sails.

I saw fierce Prussia's chargers stand, Her children's sharp swords out;-- Proud Austria's bright
spurs streaming red, When rose the closing shout. But soon the steeds rushed masterless, By tower
and town and wood; For lordly France her fiery youth Poured o'er
them like a flood.

   Go, hew the gold spurs from your heels, And let your steeds run free;
Then come to our unconquered decks, And learn to reign at sea.

   
   
   Behold you black and battered hulk That slumbers on the tide,
   There is no sound from stem to stern, For peace has plucked
   her pride.

   The masts are down, the cannon mute, She shews nor sheet nor sail;
Nor starts forth with the seaward breeze, Nor answers shout nor hail.

Her merry men with all their mirth, Have sought some other shore; And she with all her glory
on, Shall rule the sea no more.

So landsmen speak.--Lo! her top-masts Are quivering in the sky Her
sails are spread, her anchor's raised, There sweeps she gallant by.

A thousand warriors fill her decks; Within her painted side The thunder
sleeps--man's might has nought Can match or mar her pride.

In victor glory goes she forth, Her stainless flag flies free, Kings of the earth come and behold
How Britain reigns on sea!

When on your necks the armed foot Of fierce Napoleon trod; And all
was his save the wide sea, Where we triumphant rode: He launched his
terror and his strength, Our sea-born pride to tame; They came--they
got the Nelson-touch, And vanished as they came.

Go, hang your bridles in your halls, And set your war-steels free:
The world has one unconquer'd king, And he reigns on the sea!

Mr. Watts, the editor, besides the stanzas we have quoted, has contributed indeed less than other
editors, in similar works, and much less than we could wish, for
we are sincere admirers of his plaintive muse.

His preface should be read with due attention, for it is calculated to set the public right
on the fate and merit of numberless works.

* * * * *

THE FORGET ME NOT.

The avant-courier of the "Annuals" is of equal literary merit with its precursors; but not
quite equal in its engravings--The Sisters' Dream, by Davenport, from a drawing by Corbould,
is, however, placidly interesting; the Bridal Morning, by Finden, is also a pleasing scene;
and the Seventh Plague of Egypt, by Le Keux, from a design by Martin, though in miniature, is
terrific and sublime. In the literary department we especially notice the Sun-Dial, a pensive
tale, by Delta, but too long for extract; and the Sky-Lark by the Ettrick Shepherd, soaring with all
the freshness and fancy of that extraordinary genius.

* * * * *

As a relief, we quote the following characteristic sketch by Miss Mitford:--

A COUNTRY APOTHECARY.

One of the most important personages in a small country town is the apothecary. He takes rank
next after the rector and the attorney, and before the curate; and could be much less easily
dispensed with than either of those worthies, not merely as holding "fate and physic" in his hand,
but as the general, and as it were official, associate, adviser, comforter, and friend, of all ranks
and all ages, of high and low, rich and poor, sick and well.

I am no despiser of dignities; but twenty emperors shall be less intensely missed in their wide
dominions, than such a man as my friend John Hallett in his own small
sphere.

The spot which was favoured with the residence of this excellent person
was the small town of Hazelby, in Dorsetshire; a pretty little place,
where every thing seems at a stand-still.

It was originally built in the shape of the letter T; a long broad
market-place (still so called, although the market be gone) serving
for the perpendicular stem, traversed by a straight, narrow, horizontal
street, to answer for the top line.

Not one addition has occurred to interrupt this architectural regularity, since, fifty years
ago, a rich London tradesman built, at the west end of the horizontal
street, a wide-fronted single house, with two low wings, iron palisades
before, and a fish-pond opposite, which still goes by the name of
New Place, and is balanced, at the east end of the street, by an erection
of nearly the same date, a large square dingy mansion enclosed within
high walls, inhabited by three maiden sisters, and called, probably
by way of nickname, the Nunnery.

New Place being on the left of the road, and the Nunnery on the right,
the T has now something of the air of the italic capital T, turned
up at one end and down at the other.

The latest improvements are the bow-window in the market-place, commanding the pavement both
ways, which the late brewer, Andrews, threw out in his snug parlour some twenty years back, and
where he used to sit smoking, with the sash up, in summer afternoons,
enjoying himself, good man; and the great room, at the Swan, originally
built by the speculative publican, Joseph Allwright, for an assembly-room.

That speculation did not answer.

The assembly, in spite of canvassing and patronage, and the active exertions of all the young
ladies in the neighbourhood, dwindled away, and died at the end of
two winters: then it became a club-room for the hunt; but the hunt
quarrelled with Joseph's cookery: then a market-room for the farmers;
but the farmers (it was in the high-price time) quarrelled with Joseph's
wine: then it was converted into the magistrate's room--the bench;
but the bench and the market went away together, and there was an
end of justicing: then Joseph tried the novel attraction (to borrow
a theatrical phrase) of a billiard-table; but, alas! that novelty
succeeded as ill as if it had been theatrical; there were not customers
enough to pay the marker: at last, it has merged finally in that unconscious
receptacle of pleasure and pain, a post-office; although Hazelby has
so little to do with traffic of any sort--even the traffic of correspondence--that
a saucy mail-coach will often carry on its small bag, and as often
forget to call for the London bag in return.

In short, Hazelby is an insignificant place;--my readers will look
for it in vain in the map of Dorsetshire;--it is omitted, poor dear
town!--left out by the map-maker with as little remorse as a dropped
letter!--and it is also an old-fashioned place.

It has not even a cheap shop for female gear.

Every thing in the one store which it boasts, kept by Martha Deane, linen-draper and haberdasher,
is dear and good, as things were wont to be. You may actually get there thread made of flax,
from the gouty, uneven, clumsy, shiny fabric, ycleped whited-brown, to the delicate commodity
of Lisle, used for darning muslin.

I think I was never more astonished, from the mere force of habit, than when, on asking for
thread, I was presented, instead of the pretty lattice-wound balls, or snowy reels of cotton,
with which that demand is usually answered, with a whole drawerful of skeins peeping from their
blue papers --such skeins as in my youth a thrifty maiden would draw into the nicely-stitched
compartments of that silken repository, a housewife, or fold into a congeries of graduated thread-papers,
"fine by degrees, and beautifully less." The very literature of Hazelby is doled out at the pastry
cook's, in a little one-windowed shop kept by Matthew Wise. Tarts occupy one end of the counter,
and reviews the other; whilst the shelves are parcelled out between books, and dolls, and ginger,
bread. It is a question, by which of his trades poor Matthew gains least; he is so shabby,
so threadbare, and so starved.

Such a town would hardly have known what to do with a highly informed
and educated surgeon, such as one now generally sees in that most
liberal profession.

My friend, John Hallett, suited it exactly. His predecessor, Mr. Simon Saunders, had been
a small, wrinkled, spare old gentleman, with a short cough and a thin voice, who always seemed
as if he needed an apothecary himself. He wore generally a full suit of drab, a flaxen wig
of the sort called a Bob Jerom, and a very tight muslin stock; a
costume which he had adopted in his younger days in imitation of the
most eminent physician of the next city, and continued to the time
of his death.

Perhaps the cough might have been originally an imitation also, ingrafted on the system by
habit.

It had a most unsatisfactory sound, and seemed more like a trick than a real effort of nature.
His talk was civil, prosy, and fidgetty: much addicted to small scandal, and that kind of news
which passes under the denomination of tittle-tattle, he was sure to tell one half of the town
where the other drank tea, and recollected the blancmanges and jellies on a supper-table,
or described a new gown, with as much science and unction as if he had been used to make jellies
and wear gowns in his own person. Certain professional peculiarities might have favoured the supposition.
His mode of practice was exactly that popularly attributed to old women. He delighted in innocent
remedies--manna, magnesia, and camphor julep; never put on a blister in his life; and would
sooner, from pure complaisance, let a patient die, than administer an unpalatable prescription.

So
qualified, to say nothing of his gifts in tea-drinking, cassino, and quadrille (whist was too
many for him), his popularity could not be questioned. When he expired, all Hazelby mourned.
The lamentation was general.

The women of every degree (to borrow a phrase from that great phrase-monger, Horace Walpole)
"cried quarts;" and the procession to the churchyard--that very churchyard
to which he had himself attended so many of his patients--was now
followed by all of them that remained alive.

It was felt that the successor of Mr. Simon Saunders would have many difficulties to encounter.
My friend, John Hallett, "came, and saw, and overcame."

John was what is usually called a rough diamond.

 I think his wooden leg is affected sooner than if he had two like
mine, or yours, sir. And he did manage to go in of his self, now that he knows the way. He's
there among the hay, and I do think it's very unkind of Hayonotes to say as he'll spoil it.
But how am I to get him out, unless I goes away with him?"

"Let him stay there and give him some dinner. I don't know what else you've to do."

"He can't stay always,--in course, sir. As Hayonotes says,--what's he to do with a wooden-legged
sergeant in his stable as a permanence? I had come to say I was to go home with him."

"You're to do nothing of the kind."

"What is it you mean, then, about my taking care of the house?"

"Never you mind. When I want you to know, I shall tell you." Then Mrs Baggett bobbed her head
three times in the direction of Mary Lawrie's back, as though to ask some question whether
the leaving the house might not be in reference to Mary's marriage. But she feared that it
was not made in reference to Mr Whittlestaff's marriage also. What had her master meant when
he had said that there was no one coming to interfere with her, Mrs Baggett? "You needn't ask
any questions just at present, Mrs Baggett," he said.

"You don't mean as you are going up to London just to give her up to that young fellow?"

"I am going about my own business, and I won't be inquired into," said Mr Whittlestaff.

"Then you're going to do what no man ought to do."

"You are an impertinent old woman," said her master.

"I daresay I am. All the same, it's my duty to tell you my mind. You can't eat me, Mr Whittlestaff,
and it wouldn't much matter if you could. When you've said that you'll do a thing, you ought
not to go back for any other man, let him be who it may,--especially not in respect of a female.
It's weak, and nobody wouldn't think a straw of you for doing it. It's some idea of being generous
that you have got into your head. There ain't no real generosity in it. I say it ain't manly,
and that's what a man ought to be."

Mary, though she was standing at the window, pretending to look out of it, knew that during
the whole of this conversation Mrs Baggett was making signs at her,--as though indicating an
opinion that she was the person in fault. It was as though Mrs Baggett had said that it was
for her sake,--to do something to gratify her,--that Mr Whittlestaff was about to go to London.
She knew that she at any rate was not to blame. She was struggling for the same end as Mrs
Baggett, and did deserve better treatment. "You oughtn't to bother going up to London, sir,
on any such errand, and so I tells you, Mr Whittlestaff," said Mrs Baggett.

"I have told him the same thing myself," said Mary Lawrie, turning round.

"If you told him as though you meant it, he wouldn't go," said Mrs Baggett.

"That's all you know about it," said Mr Whittlestaff. "Now the fact is, I won't stand this
kind of thing. If you mean to remain here, you must be less free with your tongue."

"I don't mean to remain here, Mr Whittlestaff. It's just that as I'm coming to. There's Timothy
Baggett is down there among the hosses, and he says as I am to go with him. So I've come up
here to say that if he's allowed to sleep it off to-day, I'll be ready to start to-morrow."

"I tell you I am not going to make any change at all," said Mr Whittlestaff.

"You was saying you was going away,--for the honeymoon, I did suppose."

"A man may go away if he pleases, without any reason of that kind. Oh dear, oh dear, that letter
is not gone! I insist that that letter should go. I suppose I must see about it myself." Then
when he began to move, the women moved also. Mary went to look after the sandwiches, and Mrs
Baggett to despatch the letter. In ten minutes the letter was gone, and half an hour afterwards
Mr Whittlestaff had himself driven down to the station.

"What is it he means, Miss?" said Mrs Baggett, when the master was gone.

"I do not know," said Mary, who was in truth very angry with the old woman.

"He wants to make you Mrs Whittlestaff."

"In whatever he wants I shall obey him,--if I only knew how."

"It's what you is bound to do, Miss Mary. Think of what he has done for you."

"I require no one to tell me that."

"What did Mr Gordon come here for, disturbing everybody? Nobody asked him;--at least, I suppose
nobody asked him." There was an insinuation in this which Mary found it hard to bear. But it
was better to bear it than to argue on such a point with the servant. "And he said things which
put the master about terribly."

"It was not my doing."

"But he's a man as needn't have his own way. Why should Mr Gordon have everything just as he
likes it? I never heard tell of Mr Gordon till he came here the other day. I don't think so
much of Mr Gordon myself." To this Mary, of course, made no answer. "He's no business disturbing
people when he's not sent for. I can't abide to see Mr Whittlestaff put about in this way.
I have known him longer than you have."

"No doubt."

"He's a man that'll be driven pretty nigh out of his mind if he's disappointed." Then there
was silence, as Mary was determined not to discuss the matter any further. "If you come to
that, you needn't marry no one unless you pleases." Mary was still silent. "They shouldn't
make me marry them unless I was that way minded. I can't abide such doings," the old woman
again went on after a pause. "I knows what I knows, and I sees what I sees."

"What do you know?" said Mary, driven beyond her powers of silence.

"The meaning is, that Mr Whittlestaff is to be disappointed after he have received a promise.
Didn't he have a promise?" To this Mrs Baggett got no reply, though she waited for one before
she went on with her argument. "You knows he had; and a promise between a lady and gentleman
ought to be as good as the law of the land. You stand there as dumb as grim death, and won't
say a word, and yet it all depends upon you. Why is it to go about among everybody, that he's
not to get a wife just because a man's come home with his pockets full of diamonds? It's that
that people'll say; and they'll say that you went back from your word just because of a few
precious stones. I wouldn't like to have it said of me anyhow."

This was very hard to bear, but Mary found herself compelled to bear it. She had determined
not to be led into an argument with Mrs Baggett on the subject, feeling that even to discuss
her conduct would be an impropriety. She was strong in her own conduct, and knew how utterly
at variance it had been with all that this woman imputed to her. The glitter of the diamonds
had been merely thrown in by Mrs Baggett in her passion. Mary did not think that any one would
be so base as to believe such an accusation as that. It would be said of her that her own young
lover had come back suddenly, and that she had preferred him to the gentleman to whom she was
tied by so many bonds. It would be said that she had given herself to him and had then taken
back the gift, because the young lover had come across her path. And it would be told also
that there had been no word of promise given to this young lover. All that would be very bad,
without any allusion to a wealth of diamonds. It would not be said that, before she had pledged
herself to Mr Whittlestaff, she had pleaded her affection for her young lover, when she had
known nothing even of his present existence. It would not be known that though there had been
no lover's vows between her and John Gordon, there had yet been on both sides that unspoken
love which could not have been strengthened by any vows. Against all that she must guard herself,
without thinking of the diamonds. She had endeavoured to guard herself, and she had thought
also of the contentment of the man who had been so good to her. She had declared to herself
that of herself she would think not at all. And she had determined also that all the likings,--nay,
the affection of John Gordon himself,--should weigh not at all with her. She had to decide
between the two men, and she had decided that both honesty and gratitude required her to comply
with the wishes of the elder. She had done all that she could with that object, and was it
her fault that Mr Whittlestaff had read the secret of her heart, and had determined to give
way before it? This had so touched her that it might almost be said that she knew not to which
of her two suitors her heart belonged. All this, if stated in answer to Mrs Baggett's accusations,
would certainly exonerate herself from the stigma thrown upon her, but to Mrs Baggett she could
not repeat the explanation.

"It nigh drives me wild," said Mrs Baggett. "I don't suppose you ever heard of Catherine Bailey?"

"Never."

"And I ain't a-going to tell you. It's a romance as shall be wrapped inside my own bosom. It
was quite a tragedy,--was Catherine Bailey; and one as would stir your heart up if you was
to hear it. Catherine Bailey was a young woman. But I'm not going to tell you the story;--only
that she was no more fit for Mr Whittlestaff than any of them stupid young girls that walks
about the streets gaping in at the shop-windows in Alresford. I do you the justice, Miss Lawrie,
to say as you are such a female as he ought to look after."

"Thank you, Mrs Baggett."

"But she led him into such trouble, because his heart is soft, as was dreadful to look at.
He is one of them as always wants a wife. Why didn't he get one before? you'll say. Because
till you came in the way he was always thinking of Catherine Bailey. Mrs Compas she become.
'Drat her and her babies!' I often said to myself. What was Compas? No more than an Old Bailey
lawyer;--not fit to be looked at alongside of our Mr Whittlestaff. No more ain't Mr John Gordon,
to my thinking. You think of all that, Miss Mary, and make up your mind whether you'll break
his heart after giving a promise. Heart-breaking ain't to him what it is to John Gordon and
the likes of him."

CHAPTER XX.

MR WHITTLESTAFF TAKES HIS JOURNEY.

Mr Whittlestaff did at last get into the train and have himself carried up to London. And he
ate his sandwiches and drank his sherry with an air of supreme satisfaction,--as though he
had carried his point. And so he had. He had made up his mind on a certain matter; and, with
the object of doing a certain piece of work, he had escaped from the two dominant women of
his household, who had done their best to intercept him. So far his triumph was complete. But
as he sat silent in the corner of the carriage, his mind reverted to the purpose of his journey,
and he cannot be said to have been triumphant. He knew it all as well as did Mrs Baggett. And
he knew too that, except Mrs Baggett and the girl herself, all the world was against him. That
ass Montagu Blake every time he opened his mouth as to his own bride let out the idea that
John Gordon should have his bride because John Gordon was young and lusty, and because he,
Whittlestaff, might be regarded as an old man. The Miss Halls were altogether of the same opinion,
and were not slow to express it. All Alresford would know it, and would sympathise with John
Gordon. And as it came to be known that he himself had given up the girl whom he loved, he
could read the ridicule which would be conveyed by the smiles of his neighbours.

To tell the truth of Mr Whittlestaff, he was a man very open to such shafts of ridicule. The
"robur et æs triplex" which fortified his heart went only to the doing of a good and unselfish
action, and did not extend to providing him with that adamantine shield which virtue should
of itself supply. He was as pervious to these stings as a man might be who had not strength
to act in opposition to them. He could screw himself up to the doing of a great deed for the
benefit of another, and could as he was doing so deplore with inward tears the punishment which
the world would accord to him for the deed. As he sat there in the corner of his carriage,
he was thinking of the punishment rather than of the glory. And the punishment must certainly
come now. It would be a punishment lasting for the remainder of his life, and so bitter in
its kind as to make any further living almost impossible to him. It was not that he would kill
himself. He did not meditate any such step as that. He was a man who considered that by doing
an outrage to God's work an offence would be committed against God which admitted of no repentance.
He must live through it to the last. But he must live as a man who was degraded. He had made
his effort, but his effort would be known to all Alresford. Mr Montagu Blake would take care
of that.

The evil done to him would be one which would admit of no complaint from his own mouth. He
would be left alone, living with Mrs Baggett,--who of course knew all the facts. The idea of
Mrs Baggett going away with her husband was of course not to be thought of. That was another
nuisance, a small evil in comparison with the great misfortune of his life.

He had brought this girl home to his house to be the companion of his days, and she had come
to have in his mouth a flavour, as it were, and sweetness beyond all other sweetnesses. She
had lent a grace to his days of which for many years he had not believed them to be capable.
He was a man who had thought much of love, reading about it in all the poets with whose lines
he was conversant. He was one who, in all that he read, would take the gist of it home to himself,
and ask himself how it was with him in that matter. His favourite Horace had had a fresh love
for every day; but he had told himself that Horace knew nothing of love. Of Petrarch and Laura
he had thought; but even to Petrarch Laura had been a subject for expression rather than for
passion. Prince Arthur, in his love for Guinevere, went nearer to the mark which he had fancied
for himself. Imogen, in her love for Posthumus, gave to him a picture of all that love should
be. It was thus that he had thought of himself in all his readings; and as years had gone by,
he had told himself that for him there was to be nothing better than reading. But yet his mind
had been full, and he had still thought to himself that, in spite of his mistake in reference
to Catherine Bailey, there was still room for a strong passion.

Then Mary Lawrie had come upon him, and the sun seemed to shine nowhere but in her eyes and
in the expression of her face. He had told himself distinctly that he was now in love, and
that his life had not gone so far forward as to leave him stranded on the dry sandhills. She
was there living in his house, subject to his orders, affectionate and docile; but, as far
as he could judge, a perfect woman. And, as far as he could judge, there was no other man whom
she loved. Then, with many doubtings, he asked her the question, and he soon learned the truth,--but
not the whole truth.

There had been a man, but he was one who seemed to have passed by and left his mark, and then
to have gone on altogether out of sight. She had told him that she could not but think of John
Gordon, but that that was all. She would, if he asked it, plight her troth to him and become
his wife, although she must think of John Gordon. This thinking would last but for a while,
he told himself; and he at his age--what right had he to expect aught better than that? She
was of such a nature that, when she had given herself up in marriage, she would surely learn
to love her husband. So he had accepted her promise, and allowed himself for one hour to be
a happy man.

Then John Gordon had come to his house, falling upon it like the blast of a storm. He had come
at once--instantly--as though fate had intended to punish him, Whittlestaff, utterly and instantly.
Mary had told him that she could not promise not to think of him who had once loved her, when,
lo and behold! the man himself was there. Who ever suffered a blow so severe as this? He had
left them together. He had felt himself compelled to do so by the exigencies of the moment.
It was impossible that he should give either one or the other to understand that they would
not be allowed to meet in his house. They had met, and Mary had been very firm. For a few hours
there had existed in his bosom the feeling that even yet he might be preferred.

But gradually that feeling had disappeared, and the truth had come home to him. She was as
much in love with John Gordon as could any girl be with the man whom she adored. And the other
rock on which he had depended was gradually shivered beneath his feet. He had fancied at first
that the man had come back, as do so many adventurers, without the means of making a woman
happy. It was not for John Gordon that he was solicitous, but for Mary Lawrie. If John Gordon
were a pauper, or so nearly so as to be able to offer Mary no home, then it would clearly be
his duty not to allow the marriage. In such case the result to him would be, if not heavenly,
sweet enough at any rate to satisfy his longings. She would come to him, and John Gordon would
depart to London, and to the world beyond, and there would be an end of him. But it became
palpable to his senses generally that the man's fortunes had not been such as this. And then
there came home to him a feeling that were they so, it would be his duty to make up for Mary's
sake what was wanting,--since he had discovered of what calibre was the man himself.

It was at Mr Hall's house that the idea had first presented itself to him with all the firmness
of a settled project. It would be, he had said to himself, a great thing for a man to do. What,
after all, is the meaning of love, but that a man should do his best to serve the woman he
loves? "Who cares a straw for him?" he said to himself, as though to exempt himself from any
idea of general charity, and to prove that all the good which he intended to do was to be done
for love alone. "Not a straw; whether he shall stay at home here and have all that is sweetest
in the world, or be sent out alone to find fresh diamonds amidst the dirt and misery of that
horrid place, is as nothing, as far as he is concerned. I am, at any rate, more to myself than
John Gordon. I do not believe in doing a kindness of such a nature as that to such a one. But
for her--! And I could not hold her to my bosom, knowing that she would so much rather be in
the arms of another man." All this he said to himself; but he said it in words fully formed,
and with the thoughts, on which the words were based, clearly established.

When he came to the end of his journey, he had himself driven to the hotel, and ordered his
dinner, and ate it in solitude, still supported by the ecstasy of his thoughts. He knew that
there was before him a sharp cruel punishment, and then a weary lonely life. There could be
no happiness, no satisfaction, in store for him. He was aware that it must be so; but still
for the present there was a joy to him in thinking that he would make her happy, and in that
he was determined to take what immediate delight it would give him. He asked himself how long
that delight could last; and he told himself that when John Gordon should have once taken her
by the hand and claimed her as his own, the time of his misery would have come.

There had hung about him a dream, clinging to him up to the moment of his hotel dinner, by
which he had thought it possible that he might yet escape from the misery of Pandemonium and
be carried into the light and joy of Paradise. But as he sat with his beef-steak before him,
and ate his accustomed potato, with apparently as good a gusto as any of his neighbours, the
dream departed. He told himself that under no circumstances should the dream be allowed to
become a reality. The dream had been of this wise. With all the best intentions in his power
he would offer the girl to John Gordon, and then, not doubting Gordon's acceptance of her,
would make the same offer to the girl herself. Sohrab and Rustum is, of course, a flight of poetic
fancy; but its "local colour" is founded on good evidence. Probably the Huns, despite the terrors
of their name, the echoes of which still come down the corridors of time; despite the awful
titles which their leaders won (such as Attila, "the Scourge of God"), were not on a very
much lower plane of civilisation than the Goths with whom they fought, or with the other barbarians
who tore at the prostrate body of the Roman Empire.

One may see people of very much the same type to-day on the outer edges of Islam in some desert quarters;
one may see and, if one has such taste for the wild and the free in life as has Cunninghame
Graham, one may admire:

There in the Sahara the wild old life, the life in which man and the animals seem to be nearer
to each other than in the countries where we have changed beasts into meat-producing engines
deprived of individuality, still takes its course, as it has done from immemorial time. Children
respect their parents, wives look at their husbands almost as gods, and at the tent door elders
administer what they imagine justice, stroking their long white beards, and as impressed with
their judicial functions as if their dirty turbans or ropes of camels' hair bound round their
heads, were horse-hair wigs, and the torn mat on which they sit a woolsack or a judge's bench,
with a carved wooden canopy above it, decked with the royal arms.

Thus, when the blue baft-clad, thin, wiry desert-dweller on his lean horse or mangy camel comes
into a town, the townsmen look on him as we should look on one of Cromwell's Ironsides, or on
a Highlander, of those who marched to Derby and set King George's teeth, in pudding time, on edge.

The
Huns' movement from the north-east was the first Asiatic invasion of Europe since the fall
of the Persian Empire. Almost simultaneously with it the Saracen first entered from the south,
as the ally of the Christian Emperor against the Goths; and another Gothic chronicler, Ammianus,
tells how the Saracen warriors inspired also a lively horror in the
Gothic mind.

They came into battle almost naked, and having sprung upon a foe
"with a hoarse and melancholy howl, sucked his life-blood from his
throat."

The Saracen of Ammianus was the forerunner of the Turk, the Hun of
Jordanes, the forerunner of the Bulgarian.

In neither case, of course, can the Gothic chronicler be accepted as an unprejudiced witness.
But it is interesting to note how the first warriors from the Asiatic steppes impressed their
contemporaries!

The first effect of the invasion of the country of the Goths by the Huns was to force the Goths
to recross the Danube and trespass again on Roman territory. They sought leave from the Emperor
Valens to do this. A contemporary historian records:

The multitude of the Scythians escaping from the murderous savagery of the Huns, who spared not
the life of woman or of child, amounted to not less than 200,000
men of fighting age [besides old men, women, and children].

These, standing upon the river-bank in a state of great excitement,
stretched out their hands from afar with loud lamentations, and earnestly
supplicated that they might be allowed to cross over the river, bewailing
the calamity that had befallen them, and promising that they would
faithfully adhere to the Imperial alliance if this boon were granted
them.

The Emperor Valens allowed the Gothic host to cross the Danube into Bulgaria and Thrace, and
having given them shelter, starved them and treated them so harshly and cruelly that they were
close to rebellion when another great Gothic host, under King Fritigern, crossed the Danube
without leave and came down as far as Marcianople (now Schumla).

Here he was entertained at a "friendly" banquet by the Roman general Lupicinus. But whilst
the banquet was in progress disorder arose among the Goths and the Romans outside the hall. The
Gothic historians tell:

News of this disturbance was brought to Lupicinus as he was sitting at his gorgeous banquet,
watching the comic performers and heavy with wine and sleep. He at once ordered that all the
Gothic soldiers, who, partly to do honour to their rank, and partly as a guard to their persons,
had accompanied the generals into the palace, should be put to death. Thus, while Fritigern
was at the banquet, he heard the cry of men in mortal agony, and soon ascertained that it
proceeded from his own followers shut up in another part of the palace, whom the Roman soldiers
at the command of their general were attempting to butcher.
 Then he had met the man at Mr Hall's house, and hardly a word had passed between
them. What word could have been expected? Montagu Blake, with all his folly, had judged rightly
in bringing them together. When he received the letter, John Gordon had remembered that last
word which Mr Whittlestaff had spoken to him in the squire's hall. He had thought of the appeal,
and had resolved to give an answer to it. It was an appeal which required an answer. He had
turned it over in his mind, and had at last told himself what the answer should be. John Gordon
had discovered all that when he received the letter, and it need hardly be said that his feelings
in regard to Mr Whittlestaff were very much kinder than those of Mr Whittlestaff to him.

"Perhaps you wouldn't mind coming out into the street," said Mr Whittlestaff. "I can't say
very well what I've got to say in here."

"Certainly," said Gordon; "I will go anywhere."

"Let us go into the Park. It is green there, and there is some shade among the trees." Then
they went out of the club into Pall Mall, and Mr Whittlestaff walked on ahead without a word.
"No; we will not go down there," he said, as he passed the entrance into St. James's Park by
Marlborough House, and led the way through St. James's Palace into the Green Park. "We'll go
on till we come to the trees; there are seats there, unless the people have occupied them all.
One can't talk here under the blazing sun;--at least I can't." Then he walked on at a rapid
pace, wiping his brow as he did so. "Yes, there's a seat. I'll be hanged if that man isn't
going to sit down upon it! What a beast he is! No, I can't sit down on a seat that another
man is occupying. I don't want any one to hear what I've got to say. There! Two women have
gone a little farther on." Then he hurried to the vacant bench and took possession of it. It
was placed among the thick trees which give a perfect shade on the north side of the Park,
and had Mr Whittlestaff searched all London through, he could not have found a more pleasant
spot in which to make his communication. "This will do," said he.

"Very nicely indeed," said John Gordon.

"I couldn't talk about absolutely private business in the hall of the club, you know."

"I could have taken you into a private room, Mr Whittlestaff, had you wished it."

"With everybody coming in and out, just as they pleased. I don't believe in private rooms in
London clubs. What I've got to say can be said better sub dio. I suppose you know what it is
that I've got to talk about."

"Hardly," said John Gordon. "But that is not exactly true. I think I know, but I am not quite
sure of it. On such a subject I should not like to make a surmise unless I were confident."

"It's about Miss Lawrie."

"I suppose so."

"What makes you suppose that?" said Whittlestaff, sharply.

"You told me that you were sure I should know."

"So I am, quite sure. You came all the way down to Alresford to see her. If you spoke the truth,
you came all the way home from the diamond-fields with the same object."

"I certainly spoke the truth, Mr Whittlestaff."

"Then what's the good of your pretending not to know?"

"I have not pretended. I merely said that I could not presume to put the young lady's name
into your mouth until you had uttered it yourself. There could be no other subject of conversation
between you and me of which I was aware."

"You had spoken to me about her," said Mr Whittlestaff.

"No doubt I had. When I found that you had given her a home, and had made yourself, as it were,
a father to her--"

"I had not made myself her father,--nor yet her mother. I had loved her, as you profess to do."

"My profession is at any rate true."

"I daresay. You may or you mayn't; I at any rate know nothing about it."

"Why otherwise should I have come home and left my business in South Africa? I think you may
take it for granted that I love her."

"I don't care twopence whether you do or don't," said Mr Whittlestaff. "It's nothing to me
whom you love. I should have been inclined to say at first sight that a man groping in the
dirt for diamonds wouldn't love any one. And even if you did, though you might break your heart
and die, it would be nothing to me. Had you done so, I should not have heard of you, nor should
I have wished to hear of you."

There was an incivility in all this of which John Gordon felt that he was obliged to take some
notice. There was a want of courtesy in the man's manner rather than his words, which he could
not quite pass by, although he was most anxious to do so. "I daresay not," said he; "but here
I am and here also is Miss Lawrie. I had said what I had to say down at Alresford, and of course
it is for you now to decide what is to be done. I have never supposed that you would care personally
for me."

"You needn't be so conceited about yourself."

"I don't know that I am," said Gordon;--"except that a man cannot but be a little conceited
who has won the love of Mary Lawrie."

"You think it impossible that I should have done so."

"At any rate I did it before you had seen her. Though I may be conceited, I am not more conceited
for myself than you are for yourself. Had I not known her, you would probably have engaged
her affections. I had known her, and you are aware of the result. But it is for you to decide.
Miss Lawrie thinks that she owes you a debt which she is bound to pay if you exact it."

"Exact it!" exclaimed Mr Whittlestaff. "There is no question of exacting!" John Gordon shrugged
his shoulders. "I say there is no question of exacting. The words should not have been used.
She has my full permission to choose as she may think fit, and she knows that she has it. What
right have you to speak to me of exacting?"

Mr Whittlestaff had now talked himself into such a passion, and was apparently so angry at
the word which his companion had used, that John Gordon began to doubt whether he did in truth
know the purpose for which the man had come to London. Could it be that he had made the journey
merely with the object of asserting that he had the power of making this girl his wife, and
of proving his power by marrying her. "What is it that you wish, Mr Whittlestaff?" he asked.

"Wish! What business have you to ask after my wishes? But you know what my wishes are very
well. I will not pretend to keep them in the dark. She came to my house, and I soon learned
to desire that she should be my wife. If I know what love is, I loved her. If I know what love
is, I do love her still. She is all the world to me. I have no diamonds to care for; I have
no rich mines to occupy my heart; I am not eager in the pursuit of wealth. I had lived a melancholy,
lonely life till this young woman had come to my table,--till I had felt her sweet hand upon
mine,--till she had hovered around me, covering everything with bright sunshine. Then I asked
her to be my wife;--and she told me of you."

"She told you of me?"

"Yes; she told me of you--of you who might then have been dead, for aught she knew. And when
I pressed her, she said that she would think of you always."

"She said so?"

"Yes; that she would think of you always. But she did not say that she would always love you.
And in the same breath she promised to be my wife. I was contented,--and yet not quite contented.
Why should she think of you always? But I believed that it would not be so. I thought that
if I were good to her, I should overcome her. I knew that I should be better to her than you
would be."

"Why should I not be good to her?"

"There is an old saying of a young man's slave and an old man's darling. She would at any rate
have been my darling. It might be that she would have been your slave."

"My fellow-workman in all things."

"You think so now; but the man always becomes the master. If you grovelled in the earth for
diamonds, she would have to look for them amidst the mud and slime."

"I have never dreamed of taking her to the diamond-fields."

"It would have been so in all other pursuits."

"She would have had none that she had not chosen," said John Gordon.

"How am I to know that? How am I to rest assured that the world would be smooth to her if she
were your creature? I am not assured--I do not know."

"Who can tell, as you say? Can I promise her a succession of joys if she be my wife? She is
not one who will be likely to look for such a life as that. She will know that she must take
the rough and smooth together."

"There would have been no rough with me," said Mr Whittlestaff.

"I do not believe in such a life," said John Gordon. "A woman should not wear a stuff gown
always; but the silk finery and the stuff gown should follow each other. Most of the orthodox Bulgarian
population in Turkey recognise the authority of the Exarchate, but
some still owe allegiance to the Greek Patriarchate.

What the religious position will be now that the wars of 1912-1913 have changed boundaries so
considerably it is hard to say. The Exarchate dioceses which used to be in Turkish territory
but are now in Bulgarian territory, will, of course, pass into the
main current of Bulgarian church life.

But those Exarchate dioceses which have passed to Servia and to Greece
will probably not find toleration.

King Boris of Bulgaria having raised his country to a great fame, and having endowed it with
a national church, retired to a monastery in 888 to make his peace
with the next world.

His son Vladimir succeeded to the throne, but ruled so unwisely that King Boris came back from
the cloister to depose Vladimir and to set in his stead upon the throne Simeon, who created the first
Bulgarian Empire.

CHAPTER IV

BULGARIA--A POWER AND A TURKISH PROVINCE

King Simeon reigned in Bulgaria thirty-four years, and raised his country during that time
to the highest point of power it ever reached. Simeon had been educated at Constantinople and
had learned all that the civilisation of the Grecian Empire could
teach except a love and respect for the Grecian rule.

He designed the overthrow of the tottering Grecian Empire, and dreamed of Bulgaria as the heir
to the power of the Caesars.

When Simeon came to the throne, for many years the Grecian Empire
and Bulgaria had been at peace.

But a trade grievance soon enabled Simeon to enter upon a war against
the feeble Greek Emperor then on the throne in Constantinople--Leo,
known as the Philosopher.

The Grecian forces were defeated and, following the ferocious Balkan
custom of the times, the Grecian prisoners were all mutilated by having
their noses cut off, and thus returned to their city.

Constantinople in desperation appealed for help to the Magyars, who had recently burst into
Europe from the steppes of Russia and occupied the land north of the Danube. The Magyars responded
to the appeal, and at first were successful against the Bulgars, but King Simeon's strategy overcame
them in the final stages of the campaign. Had she come to me and wanted bread, and have seen before
her all the misery of poverty, the stone-coldness of a governess's life; had she been left
to earn her bread without any one to love her, it might then have been different. She would
have looked out into another world, and have seen another prospect. A comfortable home with
kindness, and her needs supplied, would have sufficed. She would then have thought herself
happy in becoming my wife. There would then have been no cruelty. But she had seen you, and
though it was but a dream, she thought that she could endure to wait. Better that than surrender
all the delight of loving. So she told me that she would think of you. Poor dear! I can understand
now the struggle which she intended to make. Then in the very nick of time, in the absolute
moment of the day--so that you might have everything and I nothing--you came. You came, and
were allowed to see her, and told her all your story. You filled her heart full with joy, but
only to be crushed when she thought that the fatal promise had been given to me. I saw it all,
I knew it. I thought to myself for a few hours that it might be so. But it cannot be so."

"Oh, Mr Whittlestaff!"

"It cannot be so," he said, with a firm determined voice, as though asserting a fact which
admitted no doubt.

"Mr Whittlestaff, what am I to say to you?"

"You! What are you to say? Nothing. What should you say? Why should you speak? It is not for
love of you that I would do this thing; nor yet altogether from love of her. Not that I would
not do much for her sake. I almost think that I would do it entirely for her sake, if there
were no other reason. But to shame myself by taking that which belongs to another, as though
it were my own property! To live a coward in mine own esteem! Though I may be the laughing-stock
and the butt of all those around me, I would still be a man to myself. I ought to have felt
that it was sufficient when she told me that some of her thoughts must still be given to you.
She is yours, Mr Gordon; but I doubt much whether you care for the possession."

"Not care for her! Up to the moment when I received your note, I was about to start again for
South Africa. South Africa is no place for her,--nor for me either, with such a wife. But I never saw enterprising
work on their part; I never saw them go into the open, except during
a brief time at Chatalja.

They seemed to dig themselves in behind the crest of a hill, where
they could fire, unobserved by the enemy.

Now, with regard to the conduct of the troops. Much has been said about outrages in this war.
I believe that in Macedonia, where irregular troops were at work, outrages were frequent on
both sides; but in my observation of the main army there was a singular lack of any excess. The war,
as I saw it, was carried out by the Bulgarians under the most humane possible conditions. At
Chundra Bridge I was walking across country, and I had separated myself from my cart. I arrived
at the bridge at eight o'clock at night, and found a vedette on guard.

They took me for a Turk.

I had on English civilian green puttees, and green was the colour
of the Turks.

It was a cold night, and I wished to take refuge at the camp fire, waiting for my cart to come.
Though they thought I was a Turk, they allowed me to stay at their camp fire for two hours. Then
an officer who could speak French appeared, and I was safe; the men attempted in no way to molest
me during those two hours. They made signs as of cutting throats, and so on, but they were doing
it humorously, and they showed no intention to cut mine. Yet I was there irregularly, and I could
not explain to them how I came to be there.

The extraordinary simplicity of the commissariat helped the Bulgarian generals a great deal. The men
had bread and cheese, sometimes even bread alone; and that was accounted a satisfactory ration.
When meat and other things could be obtained, they were obtained;
but there were long periods when the Bulgarian soldier had nothing
but bread and water.

(The water, unfortunately, he took wherever he could get it, by the side of his route at any
stream he could find. There was no attempt to ensure a pure water supply for the army.) I do
not think that without the simplicity of commissariat it would have been possible for the
Bulgarian forces to have got as far as they did. There was an entire absence of tinned foods.
If you travelled in the trail of the Bulgarian army, you found it impossible to imagine that
an army had passed that way; because there was none of the litter which is usually left by an
army. It was not that they cleared away their rubbish with them; it simply did not exist. Their
bread and cheese seemed to be a good fighting diet.

The transport was, naturally, the great problem which faced the generals. I have already said
something about the extreme difficulty of that transport. I have seen at Seleniki, which is the point
at which the rail-head was, within thirty miles of Constantinople
as the crow flies, ox-wagons, which had come from the Shipka Pass,
in the north of Bulgaria.

I asked one driver how long he had been on the road; he told me three weeks. He was carrying food down
to the front.

The way the ox-wagons were used for transport was a marvel of organisation to me. The transport
officer at Mustapha Pasha, with whom I became very friendly, was lyrical in his praise of
the ox-wagon. It was, he said, the only thing that stuck to him during
the war.

The railway got choked, and even the horse failed, but the ox never failed. There were thousands
of ox-wagons crawling across the country. These oxen do not walk, they crawl, like an insect,
with an irresistible crawl. It reminded me of those armies of soldier ants which move across
Africa, eating everything which they come across, and stopping at nothing. I had an ox-wagon coming
from Mustapha Pasha to Kirk Kilisse, and we went over the hills and down through the valleys,
and stopped for nothing--we never had to unload once.

And one can sleep in those ox-wagons.

There is no jumping and pulling at the traces, such as you get with a harnessed horse. The
ox-wagon moved slowly; but it always moved.

If the ox-transport had not been so perfectly organised, and if the
oxen had not been so patiently enduring as they proved to be, the
Bulgarian army must have perished by starvation.

And yet at Mustapha Pasha a Censor would not allow us to send anything about the ox-wagons. That
officer thought the ox-cart was derogatory to the dignity of the
army.

If we had been able to say that they had such things as motor transport,
or steam wagons, he would have cheerfully allowed us to send it.

After Lule Burgas the ox-transport had to do the impossible.

It was impossible for it to maintain the food and the ammunition
supply of the army at the front, which I suppose must have numbered
250,000 to 300,000 men. That army had got right away from its base,
with the one line of railway straddled by the enemy, and with the
ox as practically the only means of transport.

"As I don't care much about it, whether I get what I buy or not, it does not much matter for
me. But in truth, in such an affair as this I would trust you. Why should not I go in your place?"

"I don't think you are the man who ought to go there."

"I am too old? I'm not a cripple, if you mean that. I don't see why I shouldn't go to the diamond-fields
as well as a younger man."

"It is not about your age, Mr Whittlestaff; but I do not think you would be happy there."

"Happy! I do not know that my state of bliss here is very great. If I had bought your shares,
as you call them, and paid money for them, I don't see why my happiness need stand in the way."

"You are a gentleman, Mr Whittlestaff."

"Well; I hope so."

"And of that kind that you would have your eyes picked out of your head before you had been
there a week. Don't go. Take my word for it, that life will be pleasanter to you here than
there, and that for you the venture would be altogether dangerous. Here is Mr Tookey." At this
point of the conversation, Mr Tookey entered the hall-door, and some fashion of introduction
took place between the two strangers. John Gordon led the way into a private room, and the
two others followed him. "Here's a gentleman anxious to buy my shares, Tookey," said Gordon.

"What! the whole lot of the old Stick-in-the-Mud? He'll have to shell down some money in order
to do that! If I were to be asked my opinion, I should say that the transaction was hardly
one in the gentleman's way of business."

"I suppose an honest man may work at it," said Mr Whittlestaff.

"It's the honestest business I know out," said Fitzwalker Tookey; "but it does require a gentleman
to have his eyes about him."

"Haven't I got my eyes?"

"Oh certainly, certainly," said Tookey; "I never knew a gentleman have them brighter. But there
are eyes and eyes. Here's Mr Gordon did have a stroke of luck out there;--quite wonderful!
But because he tumbled on to a good thing, it's no reason that others should. And he's sold
his claim already, if he doesn't go himself,--either to me, or else to Poker & Hodge."

"I'm afraid it is so," said John Gordon.

"There's my darling wife, who is going out with me, and who means to stand all the hardship
of the hard work amidst those scenes of constant labour,--a lady who is dying to see her babies
there. I am sure, sir, that Mr Gordon won't forget his promises to me and my wife."

"If you have the money ready."

"There is Mr Poker in a hansom cab outside, and ready to go with you to the bank at once, as
the matter is rather pressing. If you will come with him, he will explain everything. I will
follow in another cab, and then everything can be completed." John Gordon did make an appointment
to meet Mr Poker in the city later on in the day, and then was left together with Mr Whittlestaff
at the club.

It was soon decided that Mr Whittlestaff should give up all idea of the diamond-fields, and
in so doing he allowed himself to be brought back to a state of semi-courteous conversation
with his happy rival. "Well, yes; you may write to her, I suppose. Indeed I don't know what
right I have to say that you may, or you mayn't. She's more yours than mine, I suppose." "Turn
her out! I don't know what makes you take such an idea as that in your head." John Gordon had
not suggested that Mr Whittlestaff would turn Mary Lawrie out,--though he had spoken of the
steps he would have to take were he to find Mary left without a home. "She shall have my house
as her own till she can find another. As she will not be my wife, she shall be my daughter,--till
she is somebody else's wife." "I told you before that you may come and marry her. Indeed I
can't help myself. Of course you may go on as you would with some other girl;--only I wish
it were some other girl. You can go and stay with Montagu Blake, if you please. It is nothing
to me. Everybody knows it now." Then he did say good-bye, though he could not be persuaded
to shake hands with John Gordon.

Mr Whittlestaff did not go home that day, but on the next, remaining in town till he was driven
out of it by twenty-four hours of absolute misery. He had said to himself that he would remain
till he could think of some future plan of life that should have in it some better promise
of success for him than his sudden scheme of going to the diamond-fields. But there was no
other plan which became practicable in his eyes. On the afternoon of the very next day London
was no longer bearable to him; and as there was no other place but Croker's Hall to which he
could take himself with any prospect of meeting friends who would know anything of his ways
of life, he did go down on the following day. One consequence of this was, that Mary had received
from her lover the letter which he had written almost as soon as he had received Mr Whittlestaff's
permission to write. The letter was as follows:--

   DEAR MARY,--I do not know whether you are surprised by
   what Mr Whittlestaff has done; but I am,--so much so that
   I hardly know how to write to you on the matter. If you
   will think of it, I have never written to you, and have
   never been in a position in which writing seemed to be
   possible. Nor do I know as yet whether you are aware of
   the business which has brought Mr Whittlestaff to town.

   I suppose I am to take it for granted that all that he
   tells me is true; though when I think what it is that I
   have to accept,--and that on the word of a man who is not
   your father, and who is a perfect stranger to me,--it does
   seem as though I were assuming a great deal. And yet it is
   no more than I asked him to do for me when I saw him at
   his own house.

   I had no time then to ask for your permission; nor, had
   I asked for it, would you have granted it to me. You had
   pledged yourself, and would not have broken your pledge.
   If I asked for your hand at all, it was from him that I
   had to ask. How will it be with me if you shall refuse to
   come to me at his bidding?

   I have never told you that I loved you, nor have you
   expressed your willingness to receive my love. Dear Mary,
   how shall it be? No doubt I do count upon you in my very
   heart as being my own. After this week of troubles it
   seems as though I can look back upon a former time in
   which you and I had talked to one another as though we had
   been lovers. May I not think that it was so? May it not be
   so? May I not call you my Mary?

   And indeed between man and man, as I would say, only that
   you are not a man, have I not a right to assume that it
   is so? I told him that it was so down at Croker's Hall,
   and he did not contradict me. And now he has been the most
   indiscreet of men, and has allowed all your secrets to
   escape from his breast. He has told me that you love me,
   and has bade me do as seems good to me in speaking to you
   of my love.

   But, Mary, why should there be any mock modesty or
   pretence between us? When a man and woman mean to become
   husband and wife, they should at any rate be earnest in
   their profession. I am sure of my love for you, and of my
   earnest longing to make you my wife. Tell me;--am I not
   right in counting upon you for wishing the same thing?

   What shall I say in writing to you of Mr Whittlestaff? To
   me personally he assumes the language of an enemy. But he
   contrives to do so in such a way that I can take it only
   as the expression of his regret that I should be found to
   be standing in his way. His devotion to you is the most
   beautiful expression of self-abnegation that I have ever
   met. He tells me that nothing is done for me; but it is
   only that I may understand how much more is done for you.
   Next to me,--yes, Mary, next to myself, he should be the
   dearest to you of human beings. I am jealous already,
   almost jealous of his goodness. Would that I could look
   forward to a life in which I would be regarded as his
   friend.

   Let me have a line from you to say that it is as I would
   wish it, and name a day in which I may come to visit you.
   I shall now remain in London only to obey your behests. As
   to my future life, I can settle nothing till I can discuss
   it with you, as it will be your life also. God bless you,
   my own one.--Yours affectionately,

   JOHN GORDON.

   We are not to return to the diamond-fields. I have
   promised Mr Whittlestaff that it shall be so.

Mary, when she received this letter, retired into her own room to read it. For indeed her life
in public,--her life, that is, to which Mrs Baggett had access,--had been in some degree disturbed
since the departure of the master of the house. Mrs Baggett certainly proved herself to be
a most unreasonable old woman. She praised Mary Lawrie up to the sky as being the only woman
fitted to be her master's wife, at the same time abusing Mary for driving her out of the house
were the marriage to take place; and then abusing her also because Mr Whittlestaff had gone
to town to look up another lover on Mary's behalf. "It isn't my fault; I did not send him,"
said Mary.

"You could make his going of no account. You needn't have the young man when he comes back.
He has come here, disturbing us all with his diamonds, in a most objectionable manner."

"You would be able to remain here and not have to go away with that dreadfully drunken old
man." This Mary had said, because there had been rather a violent scene with the one-legged
hero in the stable.

"What's that to do with it? Baggett ain't the worst man in the world by any means. If he was
a little cross last night, he ain't so always. You'd be cross yourself, Miss, if you didn't
get straw enough under you to take off the hardness of the stones."

"But you would go and live with him."

"Ain't he my husband! Why shouldn't a woman live with her husband? And what does it matter
where I live, or how. You ain't going to marry John Gordon, I know, to save me from Timothy
Baggett!" Then the letter had come--the letter from Mary's lover; and Mary retired to her own
room to read it. The letter she thought was perfect, but not so perfect as was Mr Whittlestaff.
When she had read the letter, although she had pressed it to her bosom and kissed it a score
of times, although she had declared that it was the letter of one who was from head to foot
a man, still there was room for that jealousy of which John Gordon had spoken. When Mary had
said to herself that he was of all human beings surely the best, it was to Mr Whittlestaff
and not to John Gordon that she made allusion.

CHAPTER XXIII.

AGAIN AT CROKER'S HALL.

About three o'clock on that day Mr Whittlestaff came home. The pony-carriage had gone to meet
him, but Mary remained purposely out of the way. She could not rush out to greet him, as she
would have done had his absence been occasioned by any other cause. But he had no sooner taken
his place in the library than he sent for her. He had been thinking about it all the way down
from London, and had in some sort prepared his words. During the next half hour he did promise
himself some pleasure, after that his life was to be altogether a blank to him. He would go.
To that only had he made up his mind. He would tell Mary that she should be happy. He would
make Mrs Baggett understand that for the sake of his property she must remain at Croker's Hall
for some period to which he would decline to name an end. And then he would go.

"Well, Mary," he said, smiling, "so I have got back safe."

"Yes; I see you have got back."

"I saw a friend of yours when I was up in London."

"I have had a letter, you know, from Mr Gordon."

"He has written, has he? Then he has been very sudden."

"He said he had your leave to write."

"That is true. He had. I thought that, perhaps, he would have taken more time to think about it."

"I suppose he knew what he had to say," said Mary. And then she blushed, as though fearing
that she had appeared to have been quite sure that her lover would not have been so dull.

"I daresay."

"I didn't quite mean that I knew."

"But you did."

"Oh, Mr Whittlestaff! But I will not attempt to deceive you. If you left it to him, he would
know what to say,--immediately."

"No doubt! No doubt!"

"When he had come here all the way from South Africa on purpose to see me, as he said, of course
he would know. Why should there be any pretence on my part?"

"Why, indeed?"

"But I have not answered him;--not as yet."

"There need be no delay."

"I would not do it till you had come. I may have known what he would say to me, but I may be
much in doubt what I should say to him."

"You may say what you like." He answered her crossly, and she heard the tone. But he was aware
of it also, and felt that he was disgracing himself. There was none of the half-hour of joy
which he had promised himself. He had struggled so hard to give her everything, and he might,
at any rate, have perfected his gift with good humour. "You know you have my full permission,"
he said, with a smile. But he was aware that this smile was not pleasant,--was not such a smile
as would make her happy. But it did not signify. When he was gone away, utterly abolished,
then she would be happy.

"I do not know that I want your permission."

"No, no; I daresay not."

"You asked me to be your wife."

"Yes; I did."

"And I accepted you. The matter was settled then."

"But you told me of him,--even at first. And you said that you would always think of him."

"Yes; I told you what I knew to be true. But I accepted you; and I determined to love you with
all my heart,--with all my heart."

"And you knew that you would love him without any determination."

"I think that I have myself under more control. I think that in time,--in a little time,--I
would have done my duty by you perfectly."

"As how?"

"Loving you with all my heart."

"And now?" It was a hard question to put to her, and so unnecessary! "And now?"

"You have distrusted me somewhat. I begged you not to go to London. I begged you not to go."

"You cannot love two men." She looked into his face, as though imploring him to spare her.
For though she did know what was coming,--though had she asked herself, she would have said
that she knew,--yet she felt herself bound to disown Mr Gordon as her very own while Mr Whittlestaff
thus tantalised her. "No; you cannot love two men. You would have tried to love me and have
failed. You would have tried not to love him, and have failed then also."

"Then I would not have failed. Had you remained here, and have taken me, I should certainly
not have failed then."

"I have made it easy for you, my dear;--very easy. Write your letter. Make it as loving as
you please. Write as I would have had you write to me, could it have been possible. O, Mary!
that ought to have been my own! O, Mary! that would have made beautiful for me my future downward
steps! But it is not for such a purpose that a young life such as yours should be given. Though
he should be unkind to you, though money should be scarce with you, though the ordinary troubles
of the world should come upon you, they will be better for you than the ease I might have prepared
for you. It will be nearer to human nature. I, at any rate, shall be here if troubles come;
or if I am gone, that will remain which relieves troubles. You can go now and write your letter."

She could not speak a word as she left the room. It was not only that her throat was full of
sobs, but that her heart was laden with mingled joy and sorrow, so that she could not find
a word to express herself. She went to her bedroom and took out her letter-case to do as he
had bidden her;--but she found that she could not write. This letter should be one so framed
as to make John Gordon joyful; but it would be impossible to bring her joy so to the surface
as to satisfy him even with contentment. She could only think how far it might yet be possible
to sacrifice herself and him. She sat thus an hour, and then went back, and, hearing voices,
descended to the drawing-room. There she found Mr Blake and Kattie Forrester and Evelina Hall.
They had come to call upon Mr Whittlestaff and herself, and were full of their own news. "Oh,
Miss Lawrie, what do you think?" said Mr Blake. Miss Lawrie, however, could not think, nor
could Mr Whittlestaff. "Think of whatever is the greatest joy in the world," said Mr Blake.

"Don't make yourself such a goose," said Kattie Forrester.

"Oh, but I am in earnest. The greatest joy in all the world."

"I suppose you mean you're going to be married," said Mr Whittlestaff.

"Exactly. How good you are at guessing! Kattie has named the day. This day fortnight. Oh dear,
isn't it near?"

"If you think so, it shall be this day fortnight next year," said Kattie.

"Oh dear no! I didn't mean that at all. It can't be too near. And you couldn't put it off now,
you know, because the Dean has been bespoke. It is a good thing to have the Dean to fasten
the knot. Don't you think so, Miss Lawrie?"

"I suppose one clergyman is just the same as another," said Mary.

"So I tell him. It will all be one twenty years hence. After all, the Dean is an old frump,
and papa does not care a bit about him."

"But how are you to manage with Mr Newface?" asked Mr Whittlestaff.

"That's the best part of it all. Mr Hall is such a brick, that when we come back from the Isle
of Wight he is going to take us all in."

"If that's the best of it, you can be taken in without me," said Kattie.

"But it is good; is it not? We two, and her maid. She's to be promoted to nurse one of these days."

"If you're such a fool, I never will have you. It's not too late yet, remember that." All which
rebukes--and there were many of them--Mr Montagu Blake received with loud demonstrations of
joy. "And so, Miss Lawrie, you're to be in the same boat too," said Mr Blake. "I know all about
it."

Mary blushed, and looked at Mr Whittlestaff. But he took upon himself the task of answering
the clergyman's remarks. "But how do you know anything about Miss Lawrie?"

"You think that no one can go up to London but yourself, Mr Whittlestaff. I was up there myself
yesterday;--as soon as ever this great question of the day was positively settled, I had to
look after my own trousseau. I don't see why a gentleman isn't to have a trousseau as well
as a lady. At any rate, I wanted a new black suit, fit for the hymeneal altar. And when there
I made out John Gordon, and soon wormed the truth out of him. At least he did not tell me downright,
but he let the cat so far out of the bag that I soon guessed the remainder. I always knew how
it would be, Miss Lawrie."

"You didn't know anything at all about it," said Mr Whittlestaff. "It would be very much more
becoming if you would learn sometimes to hold your tongue."

Then Miss Evelina Hall struck in. Would Miss Lawrie come over to Little Alresford Park, and
stay there for a few days previous to the wedding? Kattie Forrester meant to bring down a sister
with her as a bridesmaid. Two of the Miss Halls were to officiate also, and it would be taken
as a great favour if Miss Lawrie would make a fourth. A great deal was said to press upon her
this view of the case, to which, however, she made many objections. There was, indeed, a tragedy
connected with her own matrimonial circumstances, which did not make her well inclined to join
such a party. Her heart was not at ease within her as to her desertion of Mr Whittlestaff.
Whatever the future might bring forth, the present could not be a period of joy But in the
middle of the argument, Mr Whittlestaff spoke with the voice of authority. "Accept Mr Hall's
kindness," he said, "and go over for a while to Little Alresford."

"And leave you all alone?"

"I'm sure Mr Hall will be delighted if you will come too," said Mr Blake, ready at the moment
to answer for the extent of his patron's house and good-nature.

"Quite out of the question," said Mr Whittlestaff, in a tone of voice intended to put an end
to that matter. "But I can manage to live alone for a few days, seeing that I shall be compelled
to do so before long, by Miss Lawrie's marriage." Again Mary looked up into his face. "It is
so, my dear. This young gentleman has managed to ferret out the truth, while looking for his
wedding garments. Will you tell your papa, Miss Evelina, that Mary will be delighted to accept
his kindness?"

"And Gordon can come down to me," said Blake, uproariously, rubbing his hands; "and we can
have three or four final days together, like two jolly young bachelors."

"Speaking for yourself alone," said Kattie,--"you'll have to remain a jolly young bachelor
a considerable time still, if you don't mend your manners."

"I needn't mend my manners till after I'm married, I suppose." But they who knew Mr Blake well
were wont to declare that in the matter of what Miss Forrester called his manners, there would
not be much to make his wife afraid.

The affair was settled as far as it could be settled in Mr Gordon's absence. Miss Lawrie was
to go over and spend a fortnight at Little Alresford just previous to Kattie Forrester's marriage,
and Gordon was to come down to the marriage, so as to be near to Mary, if he could be persuaded
to do so. Of this Mr Blake spoke with great certainty. "Why shouldn't he come and spoon a bit,
seeing that he never did so yet in his life? Now I have had a lot of it."

"Not such a lot by any means," said Miss Forrester.

"According to all accounts he's got to begin it. He told me that he hadn't even proposed regular.
Doesn't that seem odd to you, Kattie?"

"It seemed very odd when you did it." Then the three of them went away, and Mary was left to
discuss the prospects of her future life with Mr Whittlestaff. "You had better both of you
come and live here," he said. "There would be room enough." Mary thought probably of the chance
there might be of newcomers, but she said nothing. "I should go away, of course," said Mr Whittlestaff.

"Turn you out of your own house!"

"Why not? I shan't stay here any way. I am tired of the place, and though I shan't care to
sell it, I shall make a move. A man ought to make a move every now and again. I should like
to go to Italy, and live at one of those charming little towns."

"Without a soul to speak to."

"I shan't want anybody to speak to. I shall take with me just a few books to read. I wonder
whether Mrs Baggett would go with me. She can't have much more to keep her in England than
I have." But this plan had not been absolutely fixed when Mary retired for the night, with
the intention of writing her letter to John Gordon before she went to bed. Her letter took
her long to write. The thinking of it rather took too long. She sat leaning with her face on
her hands, and with a tear occasionally on her cheek, into the late night, meditating rather
on the sweet goodness of Mr Whittlestaff than on the words of the letter. It had at last been
determined that John Gordon should be her husband. That the fates seem to have decided, and
she did acknowledge that in doing so the fates had been altogether propitious. It would have
been very difficult,--now at last she owned that truth to herself,--it would have been very
difficult for her to have been true to the promise she had made, altogether to eradicate John
Gordon from her heart, and to fill up the place left with a wife's true affection for Mr Whittlestaff.
To the performance of such a task as that she would not be subjected. But on the other hand,
John Gordon must permit her to entertain and to evince a regard for Mr Whittlestaff, not similar
at all to the regard which she would feel for her husband, but almost equal in its depth.

At last she took the paper and did write her letter, as follows:--

   DEAR MR GORDON,--I am not surprised at anything that Mr
   Whittlestaff should do which shows the goodness of his
   disposition and the tenderness of his heart. He is, I
   think, the most unselfish of mankind. I believe you to be
   so thoroughly sincere in the affection which you express
   for me, that you must acknowledge that he is so. If you
   love me well enough to make me your wife, what must you
   think of him who has loved me well enough to surrender me
   to one whom I had known before he had taken me under his
   fostering care? 

   In all about 12,000 Bulgarian people perished, mostly butchered
   in cold blood. Turkish anger, it seems, was inflamed against
   the Bulgarians, because, in spite of the recent church concession,
   some of them had dared to strike for freedom; and this display
   of Turkish anger made the full freedom of Bulgaria certain.

At
   first an attempt had been made by the Powers to exert peaceful pressure
upon Turkey, so that her Christian provinces should be granted local
autonomy.

   The project of the Powers for Bulgaria proposed that the districts
inhabited by Bulgarians should be divided into two provinces; the
Eastern Province, with Tirnovo as capital, was to include the Sandjaks
of Roustchouk, Tirnovo, Toultcha, Varna, Sliven, Philippopolis (not
including Sultan-Eri and Ahi-Tchélebi), the kazas of Kirk Kilisse,
Mustapha Pasha and Kasilagatch; and the Western Province, with Sofia
as capital, the Sandjaks of Sofia, Vidin, Nisch, Uskub, Monastir,
the three kazas of the north of Sérès, and the kazas of Stroumitza,
Tikvesch, Velès, and Kastoria.

Districts of from five to ten thousand inhabitants were to stand
as the administrative unit.

Christian and Mohammedans were to be settled homogeneously in these
districts.

Each district was to have at its head a mayor and a district council, elected by universal suffrage,
and was to enjoy entire autonomy as regards local affairs. Several districts would form a
Sandjak with a prefect at its head who was to be Christian or Mohammedan, according to the
majority of the population of the Sandjak.

He would be proposed by the Governor-General, and nominated by the
Porte for four years.

Finally, every two Sandjaks were to be administered by a Christian
Governor-General nominated by the Porte for five years, with consent
of the Powers.

He would govern the province with the help of a provincial assembly, composed of representatives
chosen by the district councils for a term of four years, at the rate of one deputy to thirty or
forty thousand inhabitants.

This assembly would nominate an administrative council of ten members. The provincial assembly
would be summoned every year to decide the budget and the taxes. The armed force was to be concentrated
in the towns and there would be local militia beside. The language of the predominant nationality
was to be employed, as well as Turkish.

Finally, a Commission of International Control was to supervise the
working of these proposals.

The Porte promised reforms on these lines, but did not go beyond promising.

The task of forcing her to end a cruel tyranny was one for the battlefield.

The Russo-Turkish War broke out on April 12, 1877, and what Turkey
had refused to yield of her own accord was wrested from her by force
of arms, in the preliminary treaty of San Stefano.

By this treaty, Bulgaria was made an autonomous principality subject to Turkey, with a Christian
government and national militia. The Prince of Bulgaria was to be freely chosen by the Bulgarian people
and accepted by the Sublime Porte, with the consent of the Powers. It was agreed that an assembly
of notables, presided over by a Russian Commissioner and attended by a Turkish Commissioner,
should meet at Philippopolis or Tirnovo before the election of the Prince to draw up a constitutional
statute similar to those of the other Danubian principalities agreed
to after the Treaty of Adrianople in 1830.

The Treaty of San Stefano brought into being on paper a Bulgaria greater in area than the Bulgaria
of 1912, and greater even than the Bulgaria of 1914.

But the Treaty was not ratified.

Other European Powers, alarmed at the prospect of Russia becoming supreme in the Balkans through
the aid of a Bulgarian vassal state, interfered, and the Congress of Berlin substituted for
the Treaty of San Stefano the Treaty of Berlin.
 It would make a fellow so awfully nervous travelling on the
same day. But the other girls--and you're one of them, Miss Lawrie--are to go into Winchester
by train on Tuesday morning, under the charge of John Gordon. If any thing were to happen to
any of you, only think, where should I be?"

"Where should we be?" said Miss Lawrie.

"It isn't your marriage, you know. But I suppose the wedding could go on even if one of you
didn't come. It would be such an awful thing not to have it done when the Dean is coming."
But Mary comforted him, assuring him that the Halls were very punctual in all their comings
and goings when any event was in hand.

Then John Gordon came, and, to tell the truth, Mary was subjected for the first time to the
ceremony of spooning. When he walked up to the door across from the Parsonage, Mary Lawrie
took care not to be in the way. She took herself to her own bedroom, and there remained, with
feverish, palpitating heart, till she was summoned by Miss Hall. "You must come down and bid
him welcome, you know."

"I suppose so; but--"

"Of course you must come. It must be sooner or later. He is looking so different from what
he was when he was here before. And so he ought, when one considers all things."

"He has not got another journey before him to South Africa."

"Without having got what he came for," said Miss Hall. Then when they went down, Mary was told
that John Gordon had passed through the house into the shrubbery, and was invited to follow
him. Mary, declaring that she would go alone, took up her hat and boldly went after him. As
she passed on, across the lawn, she saw his figure disappearing among the trees. "I don't think
it very civil for a young lady's young man to vanish in that way," said Miss Hall. But Mary
boldly and quickly followed him, without another word.

"Mary," he said, turning round upon her as soon as they were both out of sight among the trees.
"Mary, you have come at last."

"Yes; I have come." 

The only difference between the two is that the number of members of a Grand National Assembly
is twice that of the ordinary National Assembly, every electoral unit of 20,000 inhabitants
sending two deputies instead of one.

The Grand National Assembly may decide only those matters which have
necessitated its convocation.

A Grand National Assembly is called in the following cases:

1.

To decide questions of exchanging or ceding a portion of the territory
of Bulgaria.

2. To revise the Constitution.
Where else could I have found diamonds but at the diamond-fields? And I have been perhaps the
luckiest fellow that has gone and returned."

"So nearly too late!"

"But not too late."

"But you were too late,--only for the inexpressible goodness of another. Have you thought what
I owe--what you and I owe--to Mr Whittlestaff?"

"My darling!"

"But I am his darling. Only it sounds so conceited in any girl to say so. Why should he care
so much about me?--or why should you, for the matter of that?"

"Mary, Mary, come to me now." And he held out both his hands. She looked round, fearing intrusive
eyes, but seeing none, she allowed him to embrace her. "My own,--at last my own. How well you
understood me in those old days. And yet it was all without a word,--almost without a sign."
She bowed her head before she had escaped from his arms. "Now I am a happy man."

"It is he that has done it for you."

"Am I not thankful?"

"How can I be thankful as I ought? Think of the gratitude that I owe him,--think of all the
love! What man has loved as he has done? Who has brought himself so to abandon to another the
reward he had thought it worth his while to wish for? You must not count the value of the thing."

"But I do."

"But the price he had set upon it! I was to be the comfort of his life to come. And it would
have been so, had he not seen and had he not believed. Because another has loved, he has given
up that which he has loved himself."

"It was not for my sake."

"But it was for mine. You had come first, and had won my poor heart. I was not worth the winning
to either of you."

"It was for me to judge of that."

"Just so. But you do not know his heart. The idea of the Bulgarian Censorship in regard to the
privileges and duties of the war correspondent was further illustrated
to me on another occasion, when a harmless map of a past phase of
the campaign was stopped.

"Then what am I to send?" Had he not gone after you himself, you would never have come back."

"I do not know how that might be."

"It would have been to no good. Having consented to take everything from his hands, I could
never have been untrue to him. I tell you that I should as certainly have become his wife,
as that girl will become the wife of that young clergyman. Of course I was unhappy."

"Were you, dear?"

"Yes. I was very unhappy. When you flashed upon me there at Croker's Hall, I knew at once all
the joy that had fallen within my reach. You were there, and you had come for me! As a counter-weight
to these enthusiasts, Great Britain sheltered a little band, usually
known as pro-Turks, who believed, with almost as passionate a sincerity
as that of the pro-Bulgarians, that the Turk was the only gentleman
in Europe, and that his mild and blameless aspirations towards setting
up the perfect State were being cruelly thwarted by the abominable
Bulgars and other Balkan riff-raff.

Good government in the Balkans would come, they held, if the tide
of Turkish rule flowed forward and the restless, semi-savage, murderous
Balkan Christian states went back to peace and philosophic calm under
the wise rule of Cadi administering the will of the Khalifate.

But pro-Bulgarian and pro-Turk made comparatively few converts in Great Britain.
 Had I a right to think
that you were thinking of me?"

"I was thinking of you."

"Yes; because you have turned out to be one in a hundred: but I was not to have known that.
Then he asked me, and I thought it best that he should know the truth and take his choice.
He did take his choice before he knew the truth,--that you were so far on your way to seek
my hand."

"I was at that very moment almost within reach of it."

"But still it had become his. He did not toss it from him then as a thing that was valueless.
With the truest, noblest observance, he made me understand how much it might be to him, and
then surrendered it without a word of ill humour, because he told himself that in truth my
heart was within your keeping. If you will keep it well, you must find a place for his also."
It was thus that Mary Lawrie suffered the spooning that was inflicted upon her by John Gordon.

      *      *      *      *      *      *

The most important part of our narrative still remains. When the day came, the Reverend Montagu
Blake was duly married to Miss Catherine Forrester in Winchester Cathedral, by the Very Reverend
the Dean, assisted by the young lady's father; and it is pleasant to think that on that occasion
the two clergymen behaved to each other with extreme civility. Mr Blake at once took his wife
over to the Isle of Wight, and came back at the end of a month to enjoy the hospitality of
Mr Hall. And with them came that lady's maid, of whose promotion to a higher sphere in life
we shall expect soon to hear. Then came a period of thorough enjoyment for Mr Blake in superintending
the work of Mr Newface.

"What a pity it is that the house should ever be finished!" said the bride to Augusta Hall;
"because as things are now, Montagu is supremely happy: he will never be so happy again."

"Unless when the baby comes," said Augusta.

"I don't think he'll care a bit about the baby," said the bride.

