If she ever worked a stroke, no one knew it.  All day long she sat in the parlour, the very
best one, every day; or on benches under the trees with embroidery frames or books, some of
them fearful, big, difficult looking ones, or rode over the country.  She rode in sunshine
and she rode in storm, until you would think she couldn't see her way through her tangled black
hair.  She rode through snow and in pouring rain, when she could have stayed out of it, if
she had wanted to.  She didn't seem to be afraid of anything on earth or in Heaven.  Every
one thought she was like her father and didn't believe there was any God; so when she came
among us at church or any public gathering, as she sometimes did, people were in no hurry to
be friendly, while she looked straight ahead and never spoke until she was spoken to, and then
she was precise and cold, I tell you.

Men took off their hats, got out of the road when she came pounding along, and stared after
her like "be-addled mummies," my mother said. But that was all she, or any one else, could
say.  The young fellows were wild about her, and if they tried to sidle up to her in the hope
that they might lead her horse or get to hold her foot when she mounted, they always saw when
they reached her, that she wasn't there.

But she was here!  I had seen her only a few times, but this was the Pryor girl, just as sure
as I would have known if it had been Sally. What dazed me was that she answered in every particular
the description Laddie had given me of the Queen's daughter.  And worst of all, from the day
she first came among us, moving so proud and cold, blabbing old Hannah Dover said she carried
herself like a Princess--as if Hannah Dover knew HOW a Princess carried herself!--every living
soul, my father even, had called her the Princess.  At first it was because she was like they
thought a Princess would be, but later they did it in meanness, to make fun.  After they knew
her name, they were used to calling her the Princess, so they kept it up, but some of them
were secretly proud of her; because she could look, and do, and be what they would have given
anything to, and knew they couldn't to save them.

I was never in such a fix in all my life.  She looked more as Laddie had said the Princess
would than you would have thought any woman could, but she was Pamela Pryor, nevertheless.
Every one called her the Princess, but she couldn't make reality out of that.  She just couldn't
be the Fairy Queen's daughter; so the letter couldn't possibly be for her.

She had no business in our woods; you could see that they had plenty of their own.  She went
straight to the door of the willow room and walked in as if she belonged there.  What if she
found the hollow and took Laddie's letter!  Fast as I could slip over the leaves, I went back.
She was on the moss carpet, on her knees, and the letter was in her fingers.  It's a good thing
to have your manners soundly thrashed into you.  You've got to be scared stiff before you forget
them.  I wasn't so afraid of her as I would have been if I had known she WAS the princess,
and have Laddies letter, she should not.  What had the kind of girl she was, from a home like
hers, to teach any one from our house about making sunshine?  I was at the willow wall by that
time peering through, so I just parted it a little and said:  "Please put back that letter
where you got it.  It isn't for you."

She knelt on the mosses, the letter in her hand, and her face, as she turned to me, was rather
startled; but when she saw me she laughed, and said in the sweetest voice I ever heard:  "Are
you so very sure of that?"

"Well I ought to be," I said.  "I put it there."

"Might I inquire for whom you put it there?"

"No ma'am!  That's a secret."

You should have seen the light flame in her eyes, the red deepen on her cheeks, and the little
curl of laughter that curved her lips.

"How interesting!" she cried.  "I wonder now if you are not Little Sister."

"I am to Laddie and our folks," I said.  "You are a stranger."

All the dancing lights went from her face.  She looked as if she were going to cry unless she
hurried up and swallowed it down hard and fast.

"That is quite true," she said.  "I am a stranger.  Do you know that being a stranger is the
hardest thing that can happen to any one in all this world?"

"Then why don't you open your doors, invite your neighbours in, go to see them, and stop your
father from saying such dreadful things?"

"They are not my doors," she said, "and could you keep your father from saying anything he
chooses?"

I stood and blinked at her.  Of course I wouldn't even dare try that.

"I'm so sorry," was all I could think to say.

I couldn't ask her to come to our house.  I knew no one wanted her. But if I couldn't speak
for the others, surely I might for myself.  I let go the willows and went to the door.  The
Princess arose and sat on the seat Laddie had made for the Queen's daughter.  It was an awful
pity to tell her she shouldn't sit there, for I had my doubts if the real, true Princess would
be half as lovely when she came--if she ever did.  Some way the Princess, who was not a Princess,
appeared so real, I couldn't keep from becoming confused and forgetting that she was only just
Pamela Pryor.  Already the lovely lights had gone from her face until it made me so sad I wanted
to cry, and I was no easy cry-baby either.  If I couldn't offer friendship for my family I
would for myself.

"You may call me Little Sister, if you like," I said.  "I won't be a stranger."

"Why how lovely!" cried the Princess.

You should have seen the dancing lights fly back to her eyes.  Probably you won't believe this,
but the first thing I knew I was beside her on the throne, her arm was around me, and it's
the gospel truth that she hugged me tight.  I just had sense enough to reach over and pick
Laddie's letter from her fingers, and then I was on her side.  I don't know what she did to
me, but all at once I knew that she was dreadfully lonely; that she hated being a stranger;
that she was sorry enough to cry because their house was one of mystery, and that she would
open the door if she could.

"I like you," I said, reaching up to touch her curls.

I never had seen her that I did not want to.  They were like I thought they would be.  Father
and Laddie and some of us had wavy hair, but hers was crisp--and it clung to your fingers,
and wrapped around them and seemed to tug at your heart like it does when a baby grips you.
I drew away my hand, and the hair stretched out until it was long as any of ours, and then
curled up again, and you could see that no tins had stabbed into her head to make those curls.
I began trying to single out one hair.

"What are you doing?" she asked.

"I want to know if only one hair is strong enough to draw a drowning man from the water or
strangle an unhappy one," I said.

"Believe me, no!" cried the Princess.  "It would take all I have, woven into a rope, to do that."

"Laddie knows curls that just one hair of them is strong enough," I boasted.

"I wonder now!" said the Princess.  "I think he must have been making poetry or telling Fairy
tales."

"He was telling the truth," I assured her.  "Father doesn't believe in Fairies, and mother
laughs, but Laddie and I know.  Do you believe in Fairies?"

"Of course I do!" she said.

"Then you know that this COULD be an Enchanted Wood?"

"I have found it so," said the Princess.

"And MAYBE this is a Magic Carpet?"

"It surely is a Magic Carpet."

"And you might be the daughter of the Queen?  Your eyes are 'moonlit pools of darkness.'  If
only your hair were stronger, and you knew about making sunshine!"

"Maybe it is stronger than I think.  It never has been tested.  Perhaps I do know about making
sunshine.  Possibly I am as true as the wood and the carpet."

I drew away and stared at her.  The longer I looked the more uncertain I became.  Maybe her
mother was the Queen.  Perhaps that was the mystery.  It might be the reason she didn't want
the people to see her. Maybe she was so busy making sunshine for the Princess to bring to Laddie
that she had no time to sew carpet rags, and to go to quiltings, and funerals, and make visits.
It was hard to know what to think.

"I wish you'd tell me plain out if you are the Queen's daughter," I said.  "It's most important.
You can't have this letter unless I KNOW. It's the very first time Laddie ever trusted me with
a letter, and I just can't give it to the wrong person."

"Then why don't you leave it where he told you?"

"But you have gone and found the place.  You started to take it once; you would again, soon
as I left."

"Look me straight in the eyes, Little Sister," said the Princess softly.  "Am I like a person
who would take anything that didn't belong to her?"

"No!" I said instantly.

"How do you think I happened to come to this place?"

"Maybe our woods are prettier than yours."

"How do you think I knew where the letter was?"

I shook my head.

"If I show you some others exactly like the one you have there, then will you believe that
is for me?"

"Yes," I answered.

I believed it anyway.  It just SEEMED so, the better you knew her.  The Princess slipped her
hand among the folds of the trailing pale green skirt, and from a hidden pocket drew other
letters exactly like the one I held.  She opened one and ran her finger along the top line
and I read, "To the Princess," and then she pointed to the ending and it was merely signed,
"Laddie," but all the words written between were his writing.  Slowly I handed her the letter.

"You don't want me to have it?" she asked.

"Yes," I said.  "I want you to have it if Laddie wrote it for you--but mother and father won't,
not at all."

"What makes you think so?" she asked gently.

"Don't you know what people say about you?"

"Some of it, perhaps."

"Well?"

"Do you think it is true?"

"Not that you're stuck up, and hateful and proud, not that you don't want to be neighbourly
with other people, no, I don't think that.  But your father said in our home that there was
no God, and you wouldn't let my mother in when she put on her best dress and went in the carriage,
and wanted to be friends.  I have to believe that."

"Yes, you can't help believing that," said the Princess.

"Then can't you see why you'll be likely to show Laddie the way to find trouble, instead of
sunshine?"

"I can see," said the Princess.

"Oh Princess, you won't do it, will you?" I cried.

"Don't you think such a big man as Laddie can take care of himself?" she asked, and the dancing
lights that had begun to fade came back. "Over there," she pointed through our woods toward
the southwest, "lives a man you know.  What do his neighbours call him?"

"Stiff-necked Johnny," I answered promptly.

"And the man who lives next him?"

"Pinch-fist Williams."

Her finger veered to another neighbour's.

"The girls of that house?"

"Giggle-head Smithsons."

"What about the man who lives over there?"

"He beats his wife."

"And the house beyond?"

"Mother whispers about them.  I don't know."

"And the woman on the hill?"

"She doesn't do anything but gussip and make every one trouble."

"Exactly!" said the Princess.  "Yet most of these people come to your house, and your family
goes to theirs.  Do you suppose people they know nothing about are so much worse than these
others?"

"If your father will take it back about God, and your mother will let people in--my mother
and father both wanted to be friends, you know."

"That I can't possibly do," she said, "but maybe I could change their feelings toward me."

"Do it!" I cried.  "Oh, I'd just love you to do it!  I wish you would come to our house and
be friends.  Sally is pretty as you are, only a different way, and I know she'd like you, and
so would Shelley.  If Laddie writes you letters and comes here about sunshine, of course he'd
be delighted if mother knew you; because she loves him best of any of us.  She depends on him
most as much as father."

"Then will you keep the secret until I have time to try--say until this time next year?"

"I'll keep it just as long as Laddie wants me to."

"Good!" said the Princess.  "No wonder Laddie thinks you the finest Little Sister any one ever
had."

"Does Laddie think that?" I asked

"He does indeed!" said the Princess.

"Then I'm not afraid to go home," I said.  "And I'll bring his letter the next time he can't come."

"Were you scared this time?"

I told her about that Something in the dry bed, the wolves, wildcats, Paddy Ryan, and the Gypsies.

"You little goosie," said the Princess.  "I am afraid that brother Leon of yours is the biggest
rogue loose in this part of the country. Didn't it ever occur to you that people named Wolfe
live over there, and they call that crowd next us 'wildcats,' because they just went on some
land and took it, and began living there without any more permission than real wildcats ask
to enter the woods?  Do you suppose I would be here, and everywhere else I want to go, if there
were any danger?  Did anything really harm you coming?"

"You're harmed when you're scared until you can't breathe," I said. "Anyway, nothing could
get me coming, because I held the letter tight in my hand, like Laddie said.  If you'd write
me one to take back, I'd be safe going home."

"I see," said the Princess.  "But I've no pencil, and no paper, unless I use the back of one
of Laddie's letters, and that wouldn't be polite."

"You can make new fashions," I said, "but you don't know much about the woods, do you?  I could
fix fifty ways to send a message to Laddie."

"How would you?" asked the Princess.

Running to the pawpaw bushes I pulled some big tender leaves.  Then I took the bark from the
box and laid a leaf on it.

"Press with one of your rings," I said, "and print what you want to say.  I write to the Fairies
every day that way, only I use an old knife handle."

She tried.  She spoiled two or three by bearing down so hard she cut the leaves.  She didn't
even know enough to write on the frosty side, until she was told.  But pretty soon she got
along so well she printed all over two big ones.  Then I took a stick and punched little holes
and stuck a piece of foxfire bloom through.

"What makes you do that?" she asked.

"That's the stamp," I explained.

"But it's my letter, and I didn't put it there."

"Has to be there or the Fairies won't like it," I said.

"Well then, let it go," said the Princess.

I put back the bark and replaced the stone, gathered up the scattered leaves, and put the two
with writing on between fresh ones.

"Now I must run," I said, "or Laddie will think the Gypsies have got me sure."

"I'll go with you past the dry creek," she offered.

"You better not," I said.  "I'd love to have you, but it would be best for you to change their
opinion, before father or mother sees you on their land."

"Perhaps it would," said the Princess.  "I'll wait here until you reach the fence and then
you call and I'll know you are in the open and feel comfortable."

"I am most all over being afraid now," I told her.

Just to show her, I walked to the creek, climbed the gate and went down the lane.  Almost to
the road I began wondering what I could do with the letter, when looking ahead I saw Laddie coming.

"I was just starting to find you.  You've been an age, child," he said.

I held up the letter.

"No one is looking," I said, "and this won't go in your pocket."

You should have seen his face.

"Where did you get it?" he asked.

I told him all about it.  I told him everything--about the hair that maybe was stronger than
she thought, and that she was going to change father's and mother's opinions, and that I put
the red flower on, but she left it; and when I was done Laddie almost hugged the life out of
me.  I never did see him so happy.

"If you be very, very careful never to breathe a whisper, I'll take you with me some day,"
he promised.

It was supper time when we reached home, and Bobby was at the front gate to meet me.  He always
hunted me all over the place when the big bell in the yard rang at meal time, because if he
crowed nicely when he was told, he was allowed to stand on the back of my chair and every little
while I held up my plate and shared bites with him.  I have seen many white bantams, but never
another like Bobby.  My big brothers bought him for me in Fort Wayne, and sent him in a box,
alone on the cars.  Father and I drove to Groveville to meet him.  The minute father pried
off the lid, Bobby hopped on the edge of the box and crowed--the biggest crow you ever heard
from such a mite of a body; he wasn't in the least afraid of us and we were pleased about it.
You scarcely could see his beady black eyes for his bushy topknot, his wing tips touched the
ground, his tail had two beautiful plumy feathers much longer than the others, his feet were
covered with feathers, and his knee tufts dragged.  He was the sauciest, spunkiest little fellow,
and white as muslin.  We went to supper together, but no one asked where I had been, and because
I was so bursting full of importance, I talked only to Bobby, in order to be safe.

After supper I finished Hezekiah's trousers, and May cut his coat for me.  School would begin
in September and our clothes were being made, so I used the scraps to dress him.  His suit
was done by the next forenoon, and father never laughed harder than when Hezekiah hopped down
the walk to meet him dressed in pink trousers and coat.  The coat had flowing sleeves like
the Princess wore, so Hezekiah could fly, and he seemed to like them.

His suit was such a success I began a sunbonnet, and when that was tied on him, the folks almost
had spasms.  They said he wouldn't like being dressed; that he would fly away to punish me,
but he did no such thing. He stayed around the house and was tame as ever.

When I became tired sewing that afternoon, I went down the lane leading to our meadow, where
Leon was killing thistles with a grubbing hoe.  I thought he would be glad to see me, and he
was.  Every one had been busy in the house, so I went to the cellar the outside way and ate
all I wanted from the cupboard.  Then I spread two big slices of bread the best I could with
my fingers, putting apple butter on one, and mashed potatoes on the other.  Leon leaned on
the hoe and watched me coming. He was a hungry boy, and lonesome too, but he couldn't be forced
to say so.

"Laddie is at work in the barn," he said.

"I'm going to play in the creek," I answered.

Crossing our meadow there was a stream that had grassy banks, big trees, willows, bushes and
vines for shade, a solid pebbly bed; it was all turns and bends so that the water hurried until
it bubbled and sang as it went; in it lived tiny fish coloured brightly as flowers, beside
it ran killdeer, plover and solemn blue herons almost as tall as I was came from the river
to fish; for a place to play on an August afternoon, it couldn't be beaten.  The sheep had
been put in the lower pasture; so the cross old Shropshire ram was not there to bother us.

"Come to the shade," I said to Leon, and when we were comfortably seated under a big maple
weighted down with trailing grapevines, I offered the bread.  Leon took a piece in each hand
and began to eat as if he were starving.  Laddie would have kissed me and said:  "What a fine
treat!  Thank you, Little Sister."

Leon was different.  He ate so greedily you had to know he was glad to get it, but he wouldn't
say so, not if he never got any more.  When you knew him, you understood he wouldn't forget
it, and he'd be certain to do something nice for you before the day was over to pay back. 
We sat there talking about everything we saw, and at last Leon said with a grin:  "Shelley
isn't getting much grape sap is she?"

"I didn't know she wanted grape sap."

"She read about it in a paper.  It said to cut the vine of a wild grape, catch the drippings
and moisten your hair.  This would make it glossy and grow faster."

"What on earth does Shelley want with more hair than she has?"

"Oh, she has heard it bragged on so much she thinks people would say more if she could improve it."

I looked and there was the vine, dry as could be, and a milk crock beneath it.

"Didn't the silly know she had to cut the vine in the spring when the sap was running?"

"Bear witness, O vine! that she did not," said Leon, "and speak, ye voiceless pottery, and
testify that she expected to find you overflowing."

"Too bad that she's going to be disappointed."

"She isn't!  She's going to find ample liquid to bathe her streaming tresses.  Keep quiet and
watch me."

He picked up the crock, carried it to the creek and dipped it full of water.

"That's too much," I objected.  "She'll know she never got a crock full from a dry vine."

"She'll think the vine bled itself dry for her sake."

"She isn't that silly."

"Well then, how silly is she?" asked Leon, spilling out half.  "About so?"

"Not so bad as that.  Less yet!"

"Anything to please the ladies," said Leon, pouring out more.  Then we sat and giggled a while.

"What are you going to do now?" asked Leon.

"Play in the creek," I answered.

"All right!  I'll work near you."

He rolled his trousers above his knees and took the hoe, but he was in the water most of the
time.  We had to climb on the bank when we came to the deep curve, under the stump of the old
oak that father cut because Pete Billings would climb it and yowl like a wildcat on cold winter
nights.  Pete was wrong in his head like Paddy Ryan, only worse. As we passed we heard the
faintest sounds, so we lay and looked, and there in the dark place under the roots, where the
water was deepest, huddled some of the cunningest little downy wild ducks you ever saw. We
looked at each other and never said a word.  Leon chased them out with the hoe and they swam
down stream faster than old ones.  I stood in the shallow water behind them and kept them from
going back to the deep place, while Leon worked to catch them.  Every time he got one he brought
it to me, and I made a bag of my apron front to put them in. The supper bell rang before we
caught all of them.  We were dripping wet with creek water and perspiration, but we had the
ducks, every one of them, and proudly started home.  I'll wager Leon was sorry he didn't wear
aprons so he could carry them.  He did keep the last one in his hands, and held its little
fluffy body against his cheeks every few minutes.

"Couldn't anything be prettier than a young duck."

"Except a little guinea," I said.

"That's so!" said Leon.  "They are most as pretty as quail.  I guess all young things that
have down are about as cunning as they can be.  I don't believe I know which I like best, myself."

"Baby killdeers."

"I mean tame.  Things we raise."

"I'll take guineas."

"I'll say white turkeys.  They seem so innocent.  Nothing of ours is pretty as these."

"But these are wild."

"So they are," said Leon.  "Twelve of them.  Won't mother be pleased?"

She was not in the least.  She said we were a sight to behold; that she was ashamed to be the
mother of two children who didn't know tame ducks from wild ones.  She remembered instantly
that Amanda Deam had set a speckled Dorking hen on Mallard duck eggs, where she got the eggs,
and what she paid for them.  She said the ducks had found the creek that flowed beside Deams'
barnyard before it entered our land, and they had swum away from the hen, and both the hen
and Amanda would be frantic. She put the ducks into a basket and said to take them back soon
as ever we got our suppers, and we must hurry because we had to bathe and learn our texts for
Sunday-school in the morning.

We went through the orchard, down the hill and across the meadow until we came to the creek.
By that time we were tired of the basket.  It was one father had woven himself of shaved and
soaked hickory strips, and it was heavy.  The sight of water suggested the proper place for
ducks, anyway.  We talked it over and decided that they would be much more comfortable swimming
than in the basket, and it was more fun to wade than to walk, so we went above the deep place,
I stood in the creek to keep them from going down, and Leon poured them on the water. Pigs
couldn't have acted more contrary.  Those ducks LIKED us.  They wouldn't go to Deams'.  They
just fought to swim back to us.  Anyway, we had the worst time you ever saw.  Leon cut long
switches to herd them with, and both of us waded and tried to drive them, but they would dart
under embankments and roots, and dive and hide.

Before we reached the Deams' I wished that we had carried them as mother told us, for we had
lost three, and if we stopped to hunt them, more would hide.  By the time we drove them under
the floodgate crossing the creek between our land and the Deams' four were gone. Leon left
me on the gate with both switches to keep them from going back and he ran to call Mrs. Deam.
She had red hair and a hot temper, and we were not very anxious to see her, but we had to do
it.  While Leon was gone I was thinking pretty fast and I knew exactly how things would happen.
First time mother saw Mrs. Deam she would ask her if the ducks were all right, and she would
tell that four were gone.  Mother would ask how many she had, and she would say twelve, then
mother would remember that she started us with twelve in the basket--Oh what's the use!  Something
had to be done.  It had to be done quickly too, for I could hear Amanda Deam, her boy Sammy
and Leon coming across the barnyard.  I looked around in despair, but when things are the very
worst, there is almost always some way out.

On the dry straw worked between and pushing against the panels of the floodgate, not far from
me, I saw a big black water snake.  I took one good look at it: no coppery head, no geometry
patterns, no rattlebox, so I knew it wasn't poisonous and wouldn't bite until it was hurt,
and if it did, all you had to do was to suck the place, and it wouldn't amount to more than
two little pricks as if pins had stuck you; but a big snake was a good excuse.  I rolled from
the floodgate among the ducks, and cried, "Snake!" They scattered everywhere.  The snake lazily
uncoiled and slid across the straw so slowly that--thank goodness! Amanda Deam got a fair look
at it.  She immediately began to jump up and down and scream.  Leon grabbed a stick and came
running to the water.  I cried so he had to help me out first.

"Don't let her count them!" I whispered.

Leon gave me one swift look and all the mischief in his blue eyes peeped out.  He was the funniest
boy you ever knew, anyway.  Mostly he looked scowly and abused.  He had a grievance against
everybody and everything.  He said none of us liked him, and we imposed on him. Father said
that if he tanned Leon's jacket for anything, and set him down to think it over, he would pout
a while, then he would look thoughtful, suddenly his face would light up and he would go away
sparkling; and you could depend upon it he would do the same thing over, or something worse,
inside an hour.  When he wanted to, he could smile the most winning smile, and he could coax
you into anything. Mother said she dreaded to have to borrow a dime from him, if a peddler
caught her without change, because she knew she'd be kept paying it back for the next six months.
Right now he was the busiest kind of a boy.

"Where is it?  Let me get a good lick at it!  Don't scare the ducks!" he would cry, and chase
them from one bank to the other, while Amanda danced and fought imaginary snakes.  For a woman
who had seen as many as she must have in her life, it was too funny.  I don't think I could
laugh harder, or Leon and Sammy.  We enjoyed ourselves so much that at last she began to be
angry.  She quit dancing, and commenced hunting ducks, for sure.  She held her skirts high,
poked along the banks, jumped the creek and didn't always get clear across.  Her hair shook
down, she lost a sidecomb, and she couldn't find half the ducks.

"You younguns pack right out of here," she said.  "Me and Sammy can get them better ourselves,
and if we don't find all of them, we'll know where they are."

"We haven't got any of your ducks," I said angrily, but Leon smiled his most angelic smile,
and it seemed as if he were going to cry.

"Of course, if you want to accuse mother of stealing your ducks, you can," he said plaintively,
"but I should think you'd be ashamed to do it, after all the trouble we took to catch them
before they swam to the river, where you never would have found one of them.  Come on, Little
Sister, let's go home."

He started and I followed.  As soon as we got around the bend we sat on the bank, hung our
feet in the water, leaned against each other and laughed.  We just laughed ourselves almost
sick.  When Amanda's face got fire red, and her hair came down, and she jumped and didn't go
quite over, she looked a perfect fright.

"Will she ever find all of them?" I asked at last.

"Of course," said Leon.  "She will comb the grass and strain the water until she gets every one."

"Hoo-hoo!"

I looked at Leon.  He was so intently watching an old turkey buzzard hanging in the air, he
never heard the call that meant it was time for us to be home and cleaning up for Sunday. 
It was difficult to hurry, for after we had been soaped and scoured, we had to sit on the back
steps and commit to memory verses from the Bible.  At last we waded toward home.  Two of the
ducks we had lost swam before us all the way, so we knew they were alive, and all they needed
was finding.

"If she hadn't accused mother of stealing her old ducks, I'd catch those and carry them back
to her," said Leon.  "But since she thinks we are so mean, I'll just let her and little Sammy
find them."

Then we heard their voices as they came down the creek, so Leon reached me his hand and we
scampered across the water and meadow, never stopping until we sat on the top rail of our back
orchard fence.  There we heard another call, but that was only two.  We sat there, rested and
looked at the green apples above our heads, wishing they were ripe, and talking about the ducks.
We could see Mrs. Deam and Sammy coming down the creek, one on each side.  We slid from the
fence and ran into a queer hollow that was cut into the hill between the never-fail and the
Baldwin apple trees.

That hollow was overgrown with weeds, and full of trimmings from trees, stumps, everything
that no one wanted any place else in the orchard. It was the only unkept spot on our land,
and I always wondered why father didn't clean it out and make it look respectable.  I said
so to Leon as we crouched there watching down the hill where Mrs. Deam and Sammy hunted ducks
with not such very grand success.  They seemed to have so many they couldn't decide whether
to go back or go on, so they must have found most of them.

"You know I've always had my suspicions about this place," said Leon. "There is somewhere on
our land that people can be hidden for a long time.  I can remember well enough before the
war ever so long, and while it was going worst, we would find the wagon covered with more mud
in the morning than had been on it at night; and the horses would be splashed and tired.  Once
I was awake in the night and heard voices. It made me want a drink, so I went downstairs for
it, and ran right into the biggest, blackest man who ever grew.  If father and mother hadn't
been there I'd have been scared into fits.  Next morning he was gone and there wasn't a whisper.
Father said I'd had bad dreams.  That night the horses made another mysterious trip.  Now where
did they keep the black man all that day?"

"What did they have a black man for?"

"They were helping him run away from slavery to be free in Canada.  It was all right.  I'd
have done the same thing.  They helped a lot. Father was a friend of the Governor.  There were
letters from him, and there was some good reason why father stayed at home, when he was crazy
about the war.  I think this farm was what they called an Underground Station.  What I want
to know is where the station was."

"Maybe it's here.  Let's hunt," I said.  "If the black men were here some time, they would
have to be fed, and this is not far from the house."

So we took long sticks and began poking into the weeds.  Then we moved the brush, and sure
as you live, we found an old door with a big stone against it.  I looked at Leon and he looked
at me.

"Hoo-hoo!" came mother's voice, and that was the third call.

"Hum!  Must be for us," said Leon.  "We better go as soon as we get a little dryer."

He slid down the bank on one side, and I on the other, and we pushed at the stone.  I thought
we never would get it rolled away so we could open the door a crack, but when we did what we
saw was most surprising. There was a little room, dreadfully small, but a room.  There was
straw scattered over the floor, very deep on one side, where an old blanket showed that it
had been a bed.  Across the end there was a shelf.  On it was a candlestick, with a half-burned
candle in it, a pie pan with some mouldy crumbs, crusts, bones in it, and a tin can.  Leon
picked up the can and looked in.  I could see too.

It had been used for water or coffee, as the plate had for food, once, but now it was stuffed
full of money.  I saw Leon pull some out and then shove it back, and he came to the door white
as could be, shut it behind him and began to push at the stone.  When we got it in place we
put the brush over it, and fixed everything like it had been.

At last Leon said:  "That's the time we got into something not intended for us, and if father
finds it out, we are in for a good thrashing. Are you just a blubbering baby, or are you big
enough to keep still?"

"I am old enough that I could have gone to school two years ago, and I won't tell!" I said stoutly.

"All right!  Come on then," said Leon.  "I don't know but mother has been calling us."

We started up the orchard path at the fourth call.

"Hoo-hoo!" answered Leon in a sick little voice to make it sound far away.  Must have made
mother think we were on Deams' hill.  Then we went on side by side.

"Say Leon, you found the Station, didn't you?"

"Don't talk about it!" snapped Leon.

I changed the subject

"Whose money do you suppose that is?"

"Oh crackey!  You can depend on a girl to see everything," groaned Leon.  "Do you think you'll
be able to stand the switching that job will bring you, without getting sick in bed?"

Now I never had been sick in bed, and from what I had seen of other people who were, I never
wanted to be.  The idea of being switched until it made me sick was too much for me.  I shut
my mouth tight and I never opened it about the Station place.  As we reached the maiden's-blush
apple tree came another call, and it sounded pretty cross, I can tell you.  Leon reached his hand.

"Now, it's time to run.  Let me do the talking."

We were out of breath when we reached the back door.  There stood the tub on the kitchen floor,
the boiler on the stove, soap, towels, and clean clothing on chairs.  Leon had his turn at
having his ears washed first, because he could bathe himself while mother did my hair.

"Was Mrs. Deam glad to get her ducks back?" she asked as she fine-combed Leon.

"Aw, you never can tell whether she's glad about anything or not," growled Leon.  "You'd have
thought from the way she acted, that we'd been trying to steal her ducks.  She said if she
missed any she'd know where to find them."

"Well as I live!" cried mother.  "Why I wouldn't have believed that of Amanda Deam.  You told
her you thought they were wild, of course."

"I didn't have a chance to tell her anything.  The minute the ducks struck the water they started
right back down stream, and there was a big snake, and we had an awful time.  We got wet trying
to head them back, and then we didn't find all of them."

"They are like little eels.  You should have helped Amanda."

"Well, you called so cross we thought you would come after us, so we had to run."

"One never knows," sighed mother.  "I thought you were loitering.  Of course if I had known
you were having trouble with the ducks!  I think you had better go back and help them."

"Didn't I do enough to take them home?  Can't Sammy Deam catch ducks as fast as I can?"

"I suppose so," said mother.  "And I must get your bathing out of the way of supper.  You use
the tub while I do Little Sister's hair."

I almost hated Sunday, because of what had to be done to my hair on Saturday, to get ready
for it.  All week it hung in two long braids that were brushed and arranged each morning. 
But on Saturday it had to be combed with a fine comb, oiled and rolled around strips of tin
until Sunday morning.  Mother did everything thoroughly.  She raked that fine comb over our
scalps until she almost raised the blood.  She hadn't time to fool with tangles, and we had
so much hair she didn't know what to do with all of it, anyway.  When she was busy talking
she reached around too far and combed across our foreheads or raked the tip of an ear.

But on Sunday morning we forgot all that, when we walked down the aisle with shining curls
hanging below our waists.  Mother was using the fine comb, when she looked up, and there stood
Mrs. Freshett.  We could see at a glance that she was out of breath.

"Have I beat them?" she cried.

"Whom are you trying to beat?" asked mother as she told May to set a chair for Mrs. Freshett
and bring her a drink.

"The grave-kiver men," she said.  "I wanted to get to you first."

"Well, you have," said mother.  "Rest a while and then tell me."

But Mrs. Freshett was so excited she couldn't rest.

"I thought they were coming straight on down," she said, "but they must have turned off at
the cross roads.  I want to do what's right by my children here or there," panted Mrs. Freshett,
"and these men seemed to think the contrivance they was sellin' perfectly grand, an' like to
be an aid to the soul's salvation.  Nice as it seemed, an' convincin' as they talked, I couldn't
get the consent of my mind to order, until I knowed if you was goin' to kiver your dead with
the contraption.  None of the rest of the neighbours seem over friendly to me, an' I've told
Josiah many's the time, that I didn't care a rap if they wa'n't, so long as I had you.  Says
I, 'Josiah, to my way of thinkin', she is top crust in this neighbourhood, and I'm on the safe
side apin' her ways clost as possible.'"

"I'll gladly help you all I can," said my mother.

"Thanky!" said Mrs. Freshett.  "I knowed you would.  Josiah he says to me, 'Don't you be apin'
nobody.'  'Josiah,' says I, 'it takes a pretty smart woman in this world to realize what she
doesn't know.  Now I know what I know, well enough, but all I know is like to keep me an' my
children in a log cabin an' on log cabin ways to the end of our time. You ain't even got the
remains of the cabin you started in for a cow shed.'  Says I, 'Josiah, Miss Stanton knows how
to get out of a cabin an' into a grand big palace, fit fur a queen woman.  She's a ridin' in
a shinin' kerridge, 'stid of a spring wagon.  She goes abroad dressed so's you men all stand
starin' like cabbage heads.  All hern go to church, an' Sunday-school, an' college, an' come
out on the top of the heap.  She does jest what I'd like to if I knowed how.  An' she ain't
come-uppety one morsel.'  If I was to strike acrost fields to them stuck-up Pryors, I'd get
the door slammed in my face if 'twas the missus, a sneer if 'twas the man, an' at best a nod
cold as an iceberg if 'twas the girl.  Them as want to call her kind 'Princess,' and encourage
her in being more stuck up 'an she was born to be, can, but to my mind a Princess is a person
who thinks of some one besides herself once in a while."

"I don't find the Pryors easy to become acquainted with," said mother. "I have never met the
woman; I know the man very slightly; he has been here on business once or twice, but the girl
seems as if she would be nice, if one knew her."

"Well, I wouldn't have s'posed she was your kind," said Mrs. Freshett. "If she is, I won't
open my head against her any more.  Anyway, it was the grave-kivers I come about."

"Just what is it, Mrs. Freshett?" asked mother.

"It's two men sellin' a patent iron kiver for to protect the graves of your dead from the sun
an' the rain."

"Who wants the graves of their dead protected from the sun and the rain?" demanded my mother
sharply.

"I said to Josiah, 'I don't know how she'll feel about it, but I can't do more than ask.'"

"Do they carry a sample?  What is it like?"

"Jest the len'th an' width of a grave.  They got from baby to six-footer sizes.  They are cast
iron like the bottom of a cook stove on the under side, but atop they are polished so they
shine somethin' beautiful.  You can get them in a solid piece, or with a hole in the centre
about the size of a milk crock to set flowers through.  They come ten to the grave, an' they
are mighty stylish lookin' things.  I have been savin' all I could skimp from butter, an' eggs,
to get Samantha a organ; but says I to her:  'You are gettin' all I can do for you every day;
there lays your poor brother 'at ain't had a finger lifted for him since he was took so sudden
he was gone before I knowed he was goin'.'  I never can get over Henry bein' took the way he
was, so I says: 'If this would be a nice thing to have for Henry's grave, and the neighbours
are goin' to have them for theirn, looks to me like some of the organ money will have to go,
an' we'll make it up later.' I don't 'low for Henry to be slighted bekase he rid himself to
death trying to make a president out of his pa's gin'ral."

"You never told me how you lost your son," said mother, feeling so badly she wiped one of my
eyes full of oil.

"Law now, didn't I?" inquired Mrs. Freshett.  "Well mebby that is bekase I ain't had a chance
to tell you much of anythin', your bein' always so busy like, an' me not wantin' to wear out
my welcome.  It was like this:  All endurin' the war Henry an' me did the best we could without
pa at home, but by the time it was over, Henry was most a man. Seemed as if when he got home,
his pa was all tired out and glad to set down an' rest, but Henry was afire to be up an' goin'.
His pa filled him so full o' Grant, it was runnin' out of his ears.  Come the second run the
Gin'ral made, peered like Henry set out to 'lect him all by hisself.  He wore every horse on
the place out, ridin' to rallies. Sometimes he was gone three days at a stretch.  He'd git
one place an' hear of a rally on ten miles or so furder, an' blest if he didn't ride plum acrost
the state 'fore he got through with one trip.  He set out in July, and he rid right straight
through to November, nigh onto every day of his life.  He got white, an' thin, an' narvous,
from loss of sleep an' lack of food, an' his pa got restless, said Henry was takin' the 'lection
more serious 'an he ever took the war.  Last few days before votin' was cold an' raw an' Henry
rid constant.  'Lection day he couldn't vote, for he lacked a year of bein' o' age, an' he
rid in with a hard chill, an' white as a ghost, an' he says:  'Ma,' says he, 'I've 'lected
Grant, but I'm all tuckered out.  Put me to bed an' kiver me warm.'"

I forgot the sting in my eyes watching Mrs. Freshett.  She was the largest woman I knew, and
strong as most men.  Her hair was black and glisteny, her eyes black, her cheeks red, her skin
a clear, even dark tint.  She was handsome, she was honest, and she was in earnest over everything.
There was something about her, or her family, that had to be told in whispers, and some of
the neighbours would have nothing to do with her.  But mother said Mrs. Freshett was doing
the very best she knew, and for the sake of that, and of her children, anyone who wouldn't
help her was not a Christian, and not to be a Christian was the very worst thing that could
happen to you.  I stared at her steadily.  She talked straight along, so rapidly you scarcely
could keep up with the words; you couldn't if you wanted to think about them any between. 
There was not a quiver in her voice, but from her eyes there rolled, steadily, the biggest,
roundest tears I ever saw.  They ran down her cheeks, formed a stream in the first groove of
her double chin, overflowed it, and dripped drop, drop, a drop at a time, on the breast of
her stiffly starched calico dress, and from there shot to her knees.

"'Twa'n't no time at all 'til he was chokin' an' burnin' red with fever, an' his pa and me,
stout as we be, couldn't hold him down nor keep him kivered.  He was speechifyin' to beat anythin'
you ever heard. His pa said he was repeatin' what he'd heard said by every big stump speaker
from Greeley to Logan.  When he got so hoarse we couldn't tell what he said any more, he jest
mouthed it, an' at last he dropped back and laid like he was pinned to the sheets, an' I thought
he was restin', but 'twa'n't an hour 'til he was gone."

Suddenly Mrs. Freshett lifted her apron, covered her face and sobbed until her broad shoulders
shook.

"Oh you poor soul!" said my mother.  "I'm so sorry for you!"

"I never knowed he was a-goin' until he was gone," she said.  "He was the only one of mine
I ever lost, an' I thought it would jest lay me out.  I couldn't 'a' stood it at all if I hadn't
'a' knowed he was saved.  I well know my Henry went straight to Heaven.  Why Miss Stanton,
he riz right up in bed at the last, and clear and strong he jest yelled it:  'Hurrah fur Grant!'"

My mother's fingers tightened in my hair until I thought she would pull out a lot, and I could
feel her knees stiffen.  Leon just whooped. Mother sprang up and ran to the door.

"Leon!" she cried.  Then there was a slam.  "What in the world is the matter?" she asked.

"Stepped out of the tub right on the soap, and it threw me down," explained Leon.

"For mercy sake, be careful!" said my mother, and shut the door.

It wasn't a minute before the knob turned and it opened again a little.

I never saw mother's face look so queer, but at last she said softly: "You were thinking of
the grave cover for him?"

"Yes, but I wanted to ask you before I bound myself.  I heard you lost two when the scarlet
fever was ragin' an' I'm goin' to do jest what you do.  If you have kivers, I will.  If you
don't like them when you see how bright and shiny they are, I won't get any either."

"I can tell you without seeing them, Mrs. Freshett," said my mother, wrapping a strand of hair
around the tin so tight I slipped up my fingers to feel whether my neck wasn't like a buck-eye
hull looks, and it was.  "I don't want any cover for the graves of my dead but grass and flowers,
and sky and clouds.  I like the rain to fall on them, and the sun to shine, so that the grass
and flowers will grow.  If you are satisfied that the soul of Henry is safe in Heaven, that
is all that is necessary.  Laying a slab of iron on top of earth six feet above his body will
make no difference to him.  If he is singing with the angels, by all means save your money
for the organ."

"I don't know about the singin', but I'd stake my last red cent he's still hollerin' fur Grant.
I was kind o' took with the idea; the things was so shiny and scilloped at the edges, peered
like it was payin' considerable respect to the dead to kiver them that-a-way."

"What good would it do?" asked mother.  "The sun shining on the iron would make it so hot it
would burn any flower you tried to plant in the opening; the water couldn't reach the roots,
and all that fell on the slab would run off and make it that much wetter at the edges.  The
iron would soon rust and grow dreadfully ugly lying under winter snow. There is nothing at
all in it, save a method to work on the feelings of the living, and get them to pay their money
for something that wouldn't affect their dead a particle."

"'Twould be a poor idea for me," said Mrs. Freshett.  "I said to the men that I wanted to honour
Henry all I could, but with my bulk, I'd hev all I could do, come Jedgment Day, to bust my
box, an' heave up the clods, without havin' to hist up a piece of iron an' klim from under it."

Mother stiffened and Leon slipped again.  He could have more accidents than any boy I ever
knew.  But it was only a few minutes until he came to mother and gave her a Bible to mark the
verses he had to learn to recite at Sunday-school next day.  Mother couldn't take the time
when she had company, so she asked if he weren't big enough to pick out ten proper verses and
learn them by himself, and he said of course he was. He took his Bible and he and May and I
sat on the back steps and studied our verses.  He and May were so big they had ten; but I had
only two, and mine were not very long.  Leon giggled half the time he was studying.  I haven't
found anything so very funny in the Bible. Every few minutes he would whisper to himself: 
"THAT'S A GOOD ONE!"

He took the book and heard May do hers until she had them perfectly, then he went and sat on
the back fence with his book and studied as I never before had seen him.  Mrs. Freshett stayed
so long mother had no time to hear him, but he told her he had them all learned so he could
repeat them without a mistake.

Next morning mother was busy, so she had no time then.  Father, Shelley, and I rode on the
front seat, mother, May, and Sally on the back, while the boys started early and walked.

When we reached the top of the hill, the road was lined with carriages, wagons, spring wagons,
and saddle horses.  Father found a place for our team and we went down the walk between the
hitching rack and the cemetery fence.  Mother opened the gate and knelt beside two small graves
covered with grass, shaded by yellow rose bushes, and marked with little white stones.  She
laid some flowers on each and wiped the dust from the carved letters with her handkerchief.
The little sisters who had scarlet fever and whooping cough lay there.  Mother was still a
minute and then she said softly:  "'The Lord has given and the Lord has taken away.  Blessed
be the name of the Lord.'"

She was very pale when she came to us, but her eyes were bright and she smiled as she put her
arms around as many of us as she could reach.

"What a beautiful horse!" said Sally.  "Look at that saddle and bridle! The Pryor girl is here."

"Why should she come?" asked Shelley.

"To show her fine clothes and queen it over us!"

"Children, children!" said mother.  "'Judge not!'  This is a house of worship.  The Lord may
be drawing her in His own way.  It is for us to help Him by being kind and making her welcome."

At the church door we parted and sat with our teachers, but for the first time as I went down
the aisle I was not thinking of my linen dress, my patent leather slippers, and my pretty curls.
It suddenly seemed cheap to me to twist my hair when it was straight as a shingle, and cut
my head on tin.  If the Lord had wanted me to have curls, my hair would have been like Sally's.
Seemed to me hers tried to see into what big soft curls it could roll.  May said ours was so
straight it bent back the other way.  Anyway, I made up my mind to talk it over with father
and always wear braids after that, if I could get him to coax mother to let me.

Our church was quite new and it was beautiful.  All the casings were oiled wood, and the walls
had just a little yellow in the last skin coating used to make them smooth, so they were a
creamy colour, and the blinds were yellow.  The windows were wide open and the wind drifted
through, while the birds sang as much as they ever do in August, among the trees and bushes
of the cemetery.  Every one had planted so many flowers of all kinds on the graves you could
scent sweet odours.  Often a big, black-striped, brown butterfly came sailing in through one
of the windows, followed the draft across the room, and out of another.  I was thinking something
funny: it was about what the Princess had said of other people, and whether hers were worse.
I looked at my father sitting in calm dignity in his Sunday suit and thought him quite as fine
and handsome as mother did.  Every Sabbath he wore the same suit, he sat in the same spot,
he worshipped the Lord in his calm, earnest way.  The ministers changed, but father was as
much a part of the service as the Bible on the desk or the communion table.  I wondered if
people said things about him, and if they did, what they were.  I never had heard.  Twisting
in my seat, one by one I studied the faces on the men's side, and then the women.  It was a
mighty good-looking crowd. Some had finer clothes than others--that is always the way--but
as a rule every one was clean, neat, and good to see.  From some you scarcely could turn away.
There was Widow Fall.  She was French, from Virginia, and she talked like little tinkly notes
of music.  I just loved to hear her, and she walked like high-up royalty.  Her dress was always
black, with white bands at the neck and sleeves, black rustly silk, and her eyes and hair were
like the dress.  There was a little red on her cheeks and lips, and her face was always grave
until she saw you directly before her, and then she smiled the sweetest smile.

Maybe Sarah Hood was not pretty, but there was something about her lean face and shining eyes
that made you look twice before you were sure of it, and by that time you had got so used to
her, you liked her better as she was, and wouldn't have changed her for anything.  Mrs. Fritz
had a pretty face and dresses and manners, and so did Hannah Dover, only she talked too much.
So I studied them and remembered what the Princess had said, and I wondered if she heard some
one say that Peter Justice beat his wife, or if she showed it in her face and manner.  She
reminded me of a scared cowslip that had been cut and laid in the sun an hour.  I don't know
as that expresses it.  Perhaps a flower couldn't look scared, but it could be wilted and faded.
I wondered if she ever had bright hair, laughing eyes, and red in her lips and cheeks.  She
must have been pretty if she had.

At last I reached my mother.  There was nothing scared or faded about her, and she was dreadfully
sick too, once in a while since she had the fever.  She was a little bit of a woman, coloured
like a wild rose petal, face and body--a piece of pink porcelain Dutch, father said. She had
brown eyes, hair like silk, and she always had three best dresses.  There was one of alpaca
or woollen, of black, gray or brown, and two silks.  Always there was a fine rustly black one
with a bonnet and mantle to match, and then a softer, finer one of either gold brown, like
her hair, or dainty gray, like a dove's wing.  When these grew too old for fine use, she wore
them to Sunday-school and had a fresh one for best.  There was a new gray in her closet at
home, so she put on the old brown to-day, and she was lovely in it.

Usually the minister didn't come for church services until Sunday-school was half over, so
the superintendent read a chapter, Daddy Debs prayed, and all of us stood up and sang: "Ring
Out the Joy Bells."  Then the superintendent read the lesson over as impressively as he could.
The secretary made his report, we sang another song, gathered the pennies, and each teacher
took a class and talked over the lesson a few minutes.  Then we repeated the verses we had
committed to memory to our teachers; the member of each class who had learned the nicest texts,
and knew them best, was selected to recite before the school.  Beginning with the littlest
people, we came to the big folks. Each one recited two texts until they reached the class above
mine.  We walked to the front, stood inside the altar, made a little bow, and the superintendent
kept score.  I could see that mother appeared worried when Leon's name was called for his class,
for she hadn't heard him, and she was afraid he would forget.

Among the funny things about Leon was this: while you had to drive other boys of his age to
recite, you almost had to hold him to keep him from it.  Father said he was born for a politician
or a preacher, if he would be good, and grow into the right kind of a man to do such responsible
work.

"I forgot several last Sabbath, so I have thirteen to-day," he said politely.

Of course no one expected anything like that.  You never knew what might happen when Leon did
anything.  He must have been about sixteen. He was a slender lad, having almost sandy hair,
like his English grandfather.  He wore a white ruffled shirt with a broad collar, and cuffs
turning back over his black jacket, and his trousers fitted his slight legs closely.  The wind
whipped his soft black tie a little and ruffled the light hair where it was longest and wavy
above his forehead.  Such a perfect picture of innocence you never saw.  There was one part
of him that couldn't be described any better than the way Mr. Rienzi told about his brother
in his "Address to the Romans," in McGuffey's Sixth.  "The look of heaven on his face" stayed
most of the time; again, there was a dealish twinkle that sparkled and flashed while he was
thinking up something mischievous to do.  When he was fighting angry, and going to thrash Absalom
Saunders or die trying, he was plain white and his eyes were like steel.  Mother called him
"Weiscope," half the time.  I can only spell the way that sounds, but it means "white-head,"
and she always used that name when she loved him most.  "The look of heaven" was strong on
his face now.

"One," said the recording secretary.

"Jesus wept," answered Leon promptly.

There was not a sound in the church.  You could almost hear the butterflies pass.  Father looked
down and laid his lower lip in folds with his fingers, like he did sometimes when it wouldn't
behave to suit him.

"Two," said the secretary after just a breath of pause.

Leon looked over the congregation easily and then fastened his eyes on Abram Saunders, the
father of Absalom, and said reprovingly:  "Give not sleep to thine eyes nor slumber to thine
eyelids."

Abram straightened up suddenly and blinked in astonishment, while father held fast to his lip.

"Three," called the secretary hurriedly.

Leon shifted his gaze to Betsy Alton, who hadn't spoken to her next door neighbour in five years.

"Hatred stirreth up strife," he told her softly, "but love covereth all sins."

Things were so quiet it seemed as if the air would snap.

"Four."

The mild blue eyes travelled back to the men's side and settled on Isaac Thomas, a man too
lazy to plow and sow land his father had left him.  They were not so mild, and the voice was
touched with command: "Go to the ant, thou sluggard, consider her ways and be wise."

Still that silence.

"Five," said the secretary hurriedly, as if he wished it were over. Back came the eyes to the
women's side and past all question looked straight at Hannah Dover.

"As a jewel of gold in a swine's snout, so is a fair woman without discretion."

"Six," said the secretary and looked appealingly at father, whose face was filled with dismay.

Again Leon's eyes crossed the aisle and he looked directly at the man whom everybody in the
community called "Stiff-necked Johnny."

I think he was rather proud of it, he worked so hard to keep them doing it.

"Lift not up your horn on high: speak not with a stiff neck," Leon commanded him.

Toward the door some one tittered.

"Seven," called the secretary hastily.

Leon glanced around the room.

"But how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity," he announced
in delighted tones as if he had found it out by himself.

"Eight," called the secretary with something like a breath of relief.

Our angel boy never had looked so angelic, and he was beaming on the Princess.

"Thou art all fair, my love; there is no spot in thee," he told her.

Laddie would thrash him for that.

Instantly after, "Nine," he recited straight at Laddie:  "I made a covenant with mine eyes;
why then should I think upon a maid?"

More than one giggled that time.

"Ten!" came almost sharply.

Leon looked scared for the first time.  He actually seemed to shiver. Maybe he realized at
last that it was a pretty serious thing he was doing.  When he spoke he said these words in
the most surprised voice you ever heard:  "I was almost in all evil in the midst of the congregation
and assembly."

"Eleven."

Perhaps these words are in the Bible.  They are not there to read the way Leon repeated them,
for he put a short pause after the first name, and he glanced toward our father:  "Jesus Christ,
the SAME, yesterday, and to-day, and forever!"

Sure as you live my mother's shoulders shook.

"Twelve."

Suddenly Leon seemed to be forsaken.  He surely shrank in size and appeared abused.

"When my father and my mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me up," he announced, and
looked as happy over the ending as he had seemed forlorn at the beginning.

"Thirteen."

"The Lord is on my side; I will not fear; what can man do unto me?" inquired Leon of every
one in the church.  Then he soberly made a bow and walked to his seat.

Father's voice broke that silence.  "Let us kneel in prayer," he said.

He took a step forward, knelt, laid his hands on the altar, closed his eyes and turned his
face upward.

"Our Heavenly Father, we come before Thee in a trying situation," he said.  "Thy word of truth
has been spoken to us by a thoughtless boy, whether in a spirit of helpfulness or of jest,
Thou knowest.  Since we are reasoning creatures, it little matters in what form Thy truth comes
to us; the essential thing is that we soften our hearts for its entrance, and grow in grace
by its application.  Tears of compassion such as our dear Saviour wept are in our eyes this
morning as we plead with Thee to help us to apply these words to the betterment of this community."

Then father began to pray.  If the Lord had been standing six feet in front of him, and his
life had depended on what he said, he could have prayed no harder.  Goodness knows how fathers
remember.  He began at "Jesus wept" and told about this sinful world and why He wept over it;
then one at a time he took those other twelve verses and hammered them down where they belonged
much harder than Leon ever could by merely looking at people.  After that he prayed all around
each one so fervently that those who had been hit the very worst cried aloud and said:  "Amen!"
You wouldn't think any one could do a thing like that; but I heard and saw my father do it.

When he arose the tears were running down his cheeks, and before him stood Leon.  He was white
as could be, but he spoke out loudly and clearly.

"Please forgive me, sir; I didn't intend to hurt your feelings.  Please every one forgive me.
I didn't mean to offend any one.  It happened through hunting short verses.  All the short
ones seemed to be like that, and they made me think----"

He got no farther.  Father must have been afraid of what he might say next.  He threw his arms
around Leon's shoulders, drew him to the seat, and with the tears still rolling, he laughed
as happily as you ever heard, and he cried:  "'Sweeping through the Gates!' All join in!"

You never heard such singing in your life.  That was another wonderful thing.  My father didn't
know the notes.  He couldn't sing; he said so himself.  Neither could half the people there,
yet all of them were singing at the tops of their voices, and I don't believe the angels in
Heaven could make grander music.  My father was leading:

"These, these are they, who in the conflict dire----"

You could tell Emanuel Ripley had been in the war from the way he roared:

"Boldly have stood amidst the hottest fire----"

The Widow Fall soared above all of them on the next line; her man was there, and maybe she
was lonely and would have been glad to go to him:

"Jesus now says, 'Come up higher----'"

Then my little mother:

"Washed in the blood of the Lamb----"

Like thunder all of them rolled into the chorus:

"Sweepin, through the gates to the New Jerusalem----"

You wouldn't have been left out of that company for anything in all this world, and nothing
else ever could make you want to go so badly as to hear every one sing, straight from the heart,
a grand old song like that.  It is no right way to have to sit and keep still, and pay other
people money to sing about Heaven to you.  No matter if you can't sing by note, if your heart
and soul are full, until they are running over, so that you are forced to sing as those people
did, whether you can or not, you are sure to be straight on the way to the Gates.

Before three lines were finished my father was keeping time like a choirmaster, his face all
beaming with shining light; mother was rocking on her toes like a wood robin on a twig at twilight,
and at the end of the chorus she cried "Glory!" right out loud, and turned and started down
the aisle, shaking hands with every one, singing as she went.  When she reached Betsy Alton
she held her hand and led her down the aisle straight toward Rachel Brown.

When Rachel saw them coming she hurried to meet them, and they shook hands and were glad to
make up as any two people you ever saw.  It must have been perfectly dreadful to see a woman
every day for five years, and not to give her a pie, when you felt sure yours were better than
she could make, or loan her a new pattern, or tell her first who had a baby, or was married,
or dead, or anything like that.  It was no wonder they felt glad.  Mother came on, and as she
passed me the verses were all finished and every one began talking and moving.  Johnny Dover
forgot his neck and shook hands too, and father pronounced the benediction.  He always had
to when the minister wasn't there, because he was ordained himself, and you didn't dare pronounce
the benediction unless you were.

Every one began talking again, and wondering if the minister wouldn't come soon, and some one
went out to see.  There was mother standing only a few feet from the Princess, and I thought
of something.  I had seen it done often enough, but I never had tried it myself, yet I wanted
to so badly, there was no time to think how scared I would be. I took mother's hand and led
her a few steps farther and said: "Mother, this is my friend, Pamela Pryor."

I believe I did it fairly well.  Mother must have been surprised, but she put out her hand.

"I didn't know Miss Pryor and you were acquainted."

"It's only been a little while," I told her.  "I met her when I was on some business with the
Fairies.  They know everything and they told me her father was busy"--I thought she wouldn't
want me to tell that he was plain CROSS, where every one could hear, so I said "busy" for politeness--"and
her mother not very strong, and that she was a good girl, and dreadfully lonesome.  Can't you
do something, mother?"

"Well, I should think so!" said mother, for her heart was soft as rose leaves.  Maybe you won't
believe this, but it's quite true.  My mother took the Princess' arm and led her to Sally and
Shelley, and introduced her to all the girls.  By the time the minister came and mother went
back to her seat, she had forgotten all about the "indisposed" word she disliked, and as you
live!  she invited the Princess to go home with us to dinner.  She stood tall and straight,
her eyes very bright, and her cheeks a little redder than usual, as she shook hands and said
a few pleasant words that were like from a book, they fitted and were so right.  When mother
asked her to dinner she said:  "Thank you kindly. I should be glad to go, but my people expect
me at home and they would be uneasy.  Perhaps you would allow me to ride over some week day
and become acquainted?"

Mother said she would be happy to have her, and Shelley said so too, but Sally was none too
cordial.  She had dark curls and pink cheeks herself, and every one had said she was the prettiest
girl in the county before Shelley began to blossom out and show what she was going to be. 
Sally never minded that, but when the Princess came she was a little taller, and her hair was
a trifle longer, and heavier, and blacker, and her eyes were a little larger and darker, and
where Sally had pink skin and red lips, the Princess was dark as olive, and her lips and cheeks
were like red velvet.  Anyway, the Princess had said she would come over; mother and Shelley
had been decent to her, and Sally hadn't been exactly insulting.  It would be a little more
than you could expect for her to be wild about the Princess.  I believe she was pleased over
having been invited to dinner, and as she was a stranger she couldn't know that mother had
what we called the "invitation habit."

I have seen her ask from fifteen to twenty in one trip down the aisle on Sunday morning.  She
wanted them to come too; the more who came, the better she liked it.  If the hitching rack
and barnyard were full on Sunday she just beamed.  If the sermon pleased her, she invited more.
That morning she was feeling so good she asked seventeen; and as she only had dressed six chickens--third
table, backs and ham, for me as usual; but when the prospects were as now, I always managed
to coax a few gizzards from Candace; she didn't dare give me livers--they were counted.  Almost
everyone in the church was the happiest that morning they had been in years.  When the preacher
came, he breathed it from the air, and it worked on him so he preached the best sermon he ever
had, and never knew that Leon made him do it.

Maybe after all it's a good thing to tell people about their meanness and give them a stirring
up once in a while.

CHAPTER III

Mr. Pryor's Door

  "Grief will be joy if on its edge
  Fall soft that holiest ray,
  Joy will be grief if no faint pledge
  Be there of heavenly day."

"Have Sally and Peter said anything about getting married yet?" asked my big sister Lucy of
mother.  Lucy was home on a visit.  She was bathing her baby and mother was sewing.

"Not a word!"

"Are they engaged?"

"Sally hasn't mentioned it."

"Well, can't you find out?"

"How could I?" asked mother.

"Why, watch them a little and see how they act when they are together. If he kisses her when
he leaves, of course they are engaged."

"It would be best to wait until Sally tells me," laughed mother.

I heard this from the back steps.  Neither mother nor Lucy knew I was there.  I went in to
see if they would let me take the baby.  Of course they wouldn't!  Mother took it herself.
She was rocking, and softly singing my Dutch song that I loved best; I can't spell it, but
it sounds like this:

  "Trus, trus, trill;
  Der power rid der fill,
  Fill sphring aveck,
  Plodschlicter power in der dreck."

Once I asked mother to sing it in English, and she couldn't because it didn't rhyme that way
and the words wouldn't fit the notes; it was just, "Trot, trot, trot, a boy rode a colt.  The
colt sprang aside; down went the boy in the dirt."

"Aw, don't sing my song to that little red, pug-nosed bald-head!" I said.

Really, it was a very nice baby; I only said that because I wanted to hold it, and mother wouldn't
give it up.  I tried to coax May to the dam snake hunting, but she couldn't go, so I had to
amuse myself.  I had a doll, but I never played with it except when I was dressed up on Sunday.
Anyway, what's the use of a doll when there's a live baby in the house?  I didn't care much
for my playhouse since I had seen one so much finer that Laddie had made for the Princess.
Of course I knew moss wouldn't take root in our orchard as it did in the woods, neither would
willow cuttings or the red flowers.  Finally, I decided to go hunting.  I went into the garden
and gathered every ripe touch-me-not pod I could find, and all the portulaca.  Then I stripped
the tiger lilies of each little black ball at the bases of the leaves, and took all the four
o'clock seed there was.  Then I got my biggest alder popgun and started up the road toward
Sarah Hood's.

I was going along singing a little verse; it wasn't Dutch either; the old baby could have that
if it wanted it.  Soon as I got from sight of the house I made a powderhorn of a curled leaf,
loaded my gun with portulaca powder, rammed in a tiger lily bullet, laid the weapon across
my shoulder, and stepped high and lightly as Laddie does when he's in the Big Woods hunting
for squirrel.  It must have been my own singing--I am rather good at hearing things, but I
never noticed a sound that time, until a voice like a rusty saw said:  "Good morning, Nimrod!"

I sprang from the soft dust and landed among the dog fennel of a fence corner, in a flying
leap.  Then I looked.  It was the Princess' father, tall, and gray, and grim, riding a big
black horse that seemed as if it had been curried with the fine comb and brushed with the grease
rag.

"Good morning!" I said when I could speak.

"Am I correct in the surmise that you are on the chase with a popgun?" he asked politely.

"Yes sir," I answered, getting my breath the best I could.

It came easier after I noticed he didn't seem to be angry about anything.

"Where is your hunting ground, and what game are you after?" he asked gravely.

"You can see the great African jungle over there.  I am going to hunt for lions and tigers."

You always must answer politely any one who speaks to you; and you get soundly thrashed, at
least at our house, if you don't be politest of all to an older person especially with white
hair.  Father is extremely particular about white hair.  It is a "crown of glory," when it
is found in the way of the Lord.  Mahlon Pryor had enough crown of glory for three men, but
maybe his wasn't exactly glory, because he wasn't in the way of the Lord.  He was in a way
of his own.  He must have had much confidence in himself.  At our house we would rather trust
in the Lord.  I only told him about the lions and tigers because he asked me, and that was
the way I played.  But you should have heard him laugh. You wouldn't have supposed to see him
that he could.

"Umph!" he said at last.  "I am a little curious about your ammunition. Just how to you bring
down your prey?"

"I use portulaca powder and tiger lily bullets on the tigers, and four o'clocks on the lions,"
I said.

You could have heard him a mile, dried up as he was.

"I used to wear a red coat and ride to the hounds fox hunting," he said.  "It's great sport.
Won't you take me with you to the jungle?"

I didn't want him in the least, but if any one older asks right out to go with you, what can
you do?  I am going to tell several things you won't believe, and this is one of them:  He
got off his horse, tied it to the fence, and climbed over after me.  He went on asking questions
and of course I had to tell him.  Most of what he wanted to know, his people should have taught
him before he was ten years old, but father says they do things differently in England.

"There doesn't seem to be many trees in the jungle."

"Well, there's one, and it's about the most important on our land," I told him.  "Father wouldn't
cut it down for a farm.  You see that little dark bag nearly as big as your fist, swinging
out there on that limb?  Well, every spring one of these birds, yellow as orange peel, with
velvet black wings, weaves a nest like that, and over on that big branch, high up, one just
as bright red as the other is yellow, and the same black wings, builds a cradle for his babies.
Father says a red bird and a yellow one keeping house in the same tree is the biggest thing
that ever happened in our family.  They come every year and that is their tree.  I believe
father would shoot any one who drove them away."

"Your father is a gunner also?" he asked, and I thought he was laughing to himself.

"He's enough of a gunner to bring mother in a wagon from Pennsylvania all the way here, and
he kept wolves, bears, Indians, and Gypsies from her, and shot things for food.  Yes sir, my
father can shoot if he wants to, better than any of our family except Laddie."

"And does Laddie shoot well?"

"Laddie does everything well," I answered proudly.  "He won't try to do anything at all, until
he practises so he can do it well."

"Score one for Laddie," he said in a queer voice.

"Are you in a hurry about the lions and tigers?"

"Not at all," he answered.

"Well, here I always stop and let Governor Oglesby go swimming," I said.

Mr. Mahlon Pryor sat on the bank of our Little Creek, took off his hat and shook back his hair
as if the wind felt good on his forehead.  I fished Dick Oglesby from the ammunition in my
apron pocket, and held him toward the cross old man, and he wasn't cross at all.  It's funny
how you come to get such wrong ideas about people.

"My big married sister who lives in Westchester sent him to me last Christmas," I explained.
"I have another doll, great big, with a Scotch plaid dress made from pieces of mine, but I
only play with her on Sunday when I dare not do much else.  I like Dick the best because he
fits my apron pocket.  Father wanted me to change his name and call him Oliver P. Morton, after
a friend of his, but I told him this doll had to be called by the name he came with, and if
he wanted me to have one named for his friend, to get it, and I'd play with it."

"What did he do?"

"He didn't want one named Morton that much."

Mr. Pryor took Dick Oglesby in his fingers and looked at his curly black hair and blue eyes,
his chubby outstretched arms, like a baby when it wants you to take it, and his plump little
feet and the white shirt with red stripes all a piece of him as he was made, and said: "The
honourable governor of our sister state seems a little weighty; I am at a loss to understand
how he swims."

"It's a new way," I said.  "He just stands still and the water swims around him.  It's very
easy for him."

Then I carried Dick to the water, waded in and stood him against a stone.  Something funny
happened instantly.  It always did.  I found it out one day when I got some apple butter on
the governor giving him a bite of my bread, and put him in the wash bowl to soak.  He was two
and a half inches tall; but the minute you stood him in water he went down to about half that
height and spread out to twice his size around.  You should have heard Mr. Pryor.

"If you will lie on the bank and watch you'll have more to laugh at than that," I promised.

He lay down and never paid the least attention to his clothes.  Pretty soon a little chub fish
came swimming around to make friends with Governor Oglesby, and then a shiner and some more
chub.  They nibbled at his hands and toes, and then went flashing away, and from under the
stone came backing a big crayfish and seized the governor by the leg and started dragging him,
so I had to jump in and stop it.  I took a shot at the crayfish with the tiger ammunition and
then loaded for lions.

We went on until the marsh became a thicket of cattails, bulrushes, willow bushes, and blue
flags; then I found a path where the lions left the jungle, hid Mr. Pryor and told him he must
be very still or they wouldn't come.  At last I heard one.  I touched Mr. Pryor's sleeve to
warn him to keep his eyes on the trail.  Pretty soon the lion came in sight.  Really it was
only a little gray rabbit hopping along, but when it was opposite us, I pinged it in the side,
it jumped up and turned a somersault with surprise, and squealed a funny little squeal,--well,
I wondered if Mr. Pryor's people didn't hear him, and think he had gone crazy as Paddy Ryan.
I never did hear any one laugh so.  I thought if he enjoyed it like that, I'd let him shoot
one.  I do May sometimes; so we went to another place I knew where there was a tiger's den,
and I loaded with tiger lily bullets, gave him the gun and showed him where to aim.  After
we had waited a long time out came a muskrat, and started for the river.  I looked to see why
Mr. Pryor didn't shoot, and there he was gazing at it as if a snake had charmed him; his hands
shaking a little, his cheeks almost red, his eyes very bright.

"Shoot!" I whispered.  "It won't stay all day!"

He forgot how to push the ramrod like I showed him, so he reached out and tried to hit it with
the gun.

"Don't do that!" I said.

"But it's getting away!  It's getting away!" he cried.

"Well, what if it is?" I asked, half provoked.  "Do you suppose I really would hurt a poor
little muskrat?  Maybe it has six hungry babies in its home."

"Oh THAT way," he said, but he kept looking at it, so he made me think if I hadn't been there,
he would have thrown a stone or hit it with a stick.  It is perfectly wonderful about how some
men can't get along without killing things, such little bits of helpless creatures too.  I
thought he'd better be got from the jungle, so I invited him to see the place at the foot of
the hill below our orchard where some men thought they had discovered gold before the war.
They had been to California in '49, and although they didn't come home with millions, or anything
else except sick and tired, they thought they had learned enough about gold to know it when
they saw it.

I told him about it and he was interested and anxious to see the place. If there had been a
shovel, I am quite sure he would have gone to digging.  He kept poking around with his boot
toe, and he said maybe the yokels didn't look good.

He said our meadow was a beautiful place, and when he praised the creek I told him about the
wild ducks, and he laughed again.  He didn't seem to be the same man when we went back to the
road.  I pulled some sweet marsh grass and gave his horse bites, so Mr. Pryor asked if I liked
animals.  I said I loved horses, Laddie's best of all.  He asked about it and I told him.

"Hasn't your father but one thoroughbred?"

"Father hasn't any," I said.  "Flos really belongs to Laddie, and we are mighty glad he has her."

"You should have one soon, yourself," he said.

"Well, if the rest of them will hurry up and marry off, so the expenses won't be so heavy,
maybe I can."

"How many of you are there?" he asked.

"Only twelve," I said.

He looked down the road at our house.

"Do you mean to tell me you have twelve children there?" he inquired.

"Oh no!" I answered.  "Some of the big boys have gone into business in the cities around, and
some of the girls are married.  Mother says she has only to show her girls in the cities to
have them snapped up like hot cakes."

"I fancy that is the truth," he said.  "I've passed the one who rides the little black pony
and she is a picture.  A fine, healthy, sensible-appearing young woman!"

"I don't think she's as pretty as your girl," I said.

"Perhaps I don't either," he replied, smiling at me.

Then he mounted his horse.

"I don't remember that I ever have passed that house," he said, "without hearing some one singing.
Does it go on all the time?"

"Yes, unless mother is sick."

"And what is it all about?"

"Oh just joy!  Gladness that we are alive, that we have things to do that we like, and praising
the Lord."

"Umph!" said Mr. Pryor.

"It's just letting out what our hearts are full of," I told him. "Don't you know that song:

  "'Tis the old time religion
  And you cannot keep it still?'"

He shook his head.

"It's an awful nice song," I explained.  "After it sings about all the other things religion
is good for, there is one line that says:  'IT'S GOOD FOR THOSE IN TROUBLE.'"

I looked at him straight and hard, but he only turned white and seemed sick.

"So?" said Mr. Pryor.  "Well, thank you for the most interesting morning I've had this side
England.  I should be delighted if you would come and hunt lions in my woods with me some time."

"Oh, do you open the door to children?"

"Certainly we open the door to children," he said, and as I live, he looked so sad I couldn't
help thinking he was sorry to close it against any one.  A mystery is the dreadfulest thing.

"Then if children don't matter, maybe I can come lion-hunting some time with the Princess,
after she has made the visit at our house she said she would."

"Indeed!  I hadn't been informed that my daughter contemplated visiting your house," he said.
"When was it arranged?"

"My mother invited her last Sunday."

I didn't like the way he said:  "O-o-o-h!"  Some way it seemed insulting to my mother.

"She did it to please me," I said.  "There was a Fairy Princess told me the other day that
your girl felt like a stranger, and that to be a stranger was the hardest thing in all the
world.  She sat a little way from the others, and she looked so lonely.  I pulled my mother's
sleeve and led her to your girl and made them shake hands, and then mother HAD to ask her to
come to dinner with us.  She always invites every one she meets coming down the aisle; she
couldn't help asking your girl, too. She said she was expected at home, but she'd come some
day and get acquainted.  She needn't if you object.  My mother only asked her because she thought
she was lonely, and maybe she wanted to come."

He sat there staring straight ahead and he seemed to grow whiter, and older, and colder every
minute.

"Possibly she is lonely," he said at last.  "This isn't much like the life she left.  Perhaps
she does feel herself a stranger.  It was very kind of your mother to invite her.  If she wants
to come, I shall make no objections."

"No, but my father will," I said.

He straightened up as if something had hit him.  "Why will he object?"

"On account of what you said about God at our house," I told him.  "And then, too, father's
people were from England, and he says real Englishmen have their doors wide open, and welcome
people who offer friendliness."

Mr. Pryor hit his horse an awful blow.  It reared and went racing up the road until I thought
it was running away.  I could see I had made him angry enough to burst.  Mother always tells
me not to repeat things; but I'm not smart enough to know what to say, so I don't see what
is left but to tell what mother, or father, or Laddie says when grown people ask me questions.

I went home, but every one was too busy even to look at me, so I took Bobby under my arm, hunted
father, and told him all about the morning. I wondered what he would think.  I never found out.

He wouldn't say anything, so Bobby and I went across the lane, and climbed the gate into the
orchard to see if Hezekiah were there and wanted to fight.  He hadn't time to fight Bobby because
he was busy chasing every wild jay from our orchard.  By the time he got that done, he was
tired, so he came hopping along on branches above us as Bobby and I went down the west fence
beside the lane.

If I had been compelled to choose the side of our orchard I liked best, I don't know which
I would have selected.  The west side--that is, the one behind the dooryard--was running over
with interesting things.  Two gates opened into it, one from near each corner of the yard.
Between these there was quite a wide level space, where mother fed the big chickens and kept
the hens in coops with little ones.  She had to have them close enough that the big hawks were
afraid to come to earth, or they would take more chickens than they could pay for, by cleaning
rabbits, snakes, and mice from the fields.  Then came a double row of prize peach trees; rare
fruit that mother canned to take to county fairs.  One bore big, white freestones, and around
the seed they were pink as a rose.  One was a white cling, and one was yellow.  There was a
yellow freestone as big as a young sun, and as golden, and the queerest of all was a cling
purple as a beet.

Sometimes father read about the hairs of the head being numbered, because we were so precious
in the sight of the Almighty.  Mother was just as particular with her purple tree; every peach
on it was counted, and if we found one on the ground, we had to carry it to her, because it
MIGHT be sound enough to can or spice for a fair, or she had promised the seed to some one
halfway across the state.  At each end of the peach row was an enormous big pear tree; not
far from one the chicken house stood on the path to the barn, and beside the other the smoke
house with the dog kennel a yard away.  Father said there was a distinct relationship between
a smoke house and a dog kennel, and bulldogs were best.  Just at present we were out of bulldogs,
but Jones, Jenkins and Co. could make as much noise as any dog you ever heard.  On the left
grew the plum trees all the way to the south fence, and I think there was one of every kind
in the fruit catalogues. Father spent hours pruning, grafting, and fertilizing them.  He said
they required twice as much work as peaches.

