In fact, even though I have repeatedly violated theories in which I myself believe, I have
in every case taken great pains to make certain that the most rigid mathematical analysis of
which I am capable has failed to show that I have violated any known and proven scientific
fact. By "fact" I do not mean the kind of reasoning, based upon assumptions later shown to
be fallacious, by which it was "proved" that the transatlantic cable and the airplane were
scientifically impossible. I refer to definitely known phenomena which no possible future development
can change--I refer to mathematical proofs whose fundamental equations and operations involve
no assumptions and contain no second-degree uncertainties.

Please bear in mind that we KNOW very little. It has been widely believed that the velocity
of light is the limiting velocity, and many of our leading authorities hold this view--but
it cannot be proved, and is by no means universally held. In this connection, it would appear
that J. J. Thompson, in "Beyond the Electron" shows, to his own satisfaction at least, that
velocities vastly greater than that of light are not only possible, but necessary to any comprehensive
investigation into the nature of the electron.

We do not know the nature of light. Neither the undulatory theory nor the quantum theory are
adequate to explain all observed phenomena, and they seem to be mutually exclusive, since it
would seem clear by definition that no one thing can be at the same time continuous and discontinuous.
We know nothing of the ether--we do not even know whether or not it exists, save as a concept
of our own extremely limited intelligence. We are in total ignorance of the ultimate structure
of matter, and of the arrangement and significance of those larger aggregations of matter,
the galaxies. We do not know nor understand, nor can we define, even such fundamental necessities
as time and space.

Why prate of "the impossible"?

Edward Elmer Smith, Ph.D.

CHAPTER I

DuQuesne Goes Traveling

In the innermost private office of Steel, Brookings and DuQuesne stared at each other across
the massive desk. DuQuesne's voice was cold, his black brows were drawn together.

"Get this, Brookings, and get it straight. I'm shoving off at twelve o'clock tonight. My advice
to you is to lay off Richard Seaton, absolutely. Don't do a thing. Nothing, hold everything.
Keep on holding it until I get back, no matter how long that may be," DuQuesne shot out in
an icy tone.

"I am very much surprised at your change of front, Doctor. You are the last man I would have
expected to be scared off after one engagement."

"Don't be any more of a fool than you have to, Brookings. There's a lot of difference between
scared and knowing when you are simply wasting effort. As you remember, I tried to abduct Mrs.
Seaton by picking her off with an attractor from a space-ship. I would have bet that nothing
could have stopped me. Well, when they located me--probably with an automatic Osnomian ray-detector--and
heated me red-hot while I was still better than two hundred miles up, I knew then and there
that they had us stopped; that there was nothing we could do except go back to my plan, abandon
the abduction idea, and eventually kill them all. Since my plan would take time, you objected
to it, and sent an airplane to drop a five-hundred-pound bomb on them. Airplane, bomb, and
all simply vanished. It didn't explode, you remember, just flashed into light and disappeared,
with scarcely any noise. Then you pulled several more of your fool ideas, such as long-range
bombardment, and so on. None of them worked. Still you've got the nerve to think that you can
get them with ordinary gunmen! I've drawn you diagrams and shown you figures--I've told you
in great detail and in one-syllable words exactly what we're up against. Now I tell you again
that they've got something. If you had the brains of a pinhead, you would know that anything
I can't do with a space-ship can't be done by a mob of ordinary gangsters. I'm telling you,
Brookings, that you can't do it. My way is absolutely the only way that will work."

"But five years, Doctor!"

"I may be back in six months. But on a trip of this kind anything can happen, so I am planning
on being gone five years. Even that may not be enough--I am carrying supplies for ten years,
and that box of mine in the vault is not to be opened until ten years from today."

"But surely we shall be able to remove the obstructions ourselves in a few weeks. We always have."

"Oh, quit kidding yourself, Brookings! This is no time for idiocy! You stand just as much chance
of killing Seaton----"

"Please, Doctor, please don't talk like that!"

"Still squeamish, eh? Your pussyfooting always did give me an acute pain. I'm for direct action,
word and deed, first, last, and all the time. I repeat, you have exactly as much chance of
killing Richard Seaton as a blind kitten has."

"How do you arrive at that conclusion, Doctor? You seem very fond of belittling our abilities.
Personally, I think that we shall be able to attain our objectives within a few weeks--certainly
long before you can possibly return from such an extended trip as you have in mind. And since
you are so fond of frankness, I will say that I think that Seaton has you buffaloed, as you
call it. Nine-tenths of these wonderful Osnomian things, I am assured by competent authorities,
are scientifically impossible, and I think that the other one-tenth exists only in your own
imagination. Seaton was lucky in that the airplane bomb was defective and exploded prematurely;
and your space-ship got hot because of your injudicious speed through the atmosphere. We shall
have everything settled by the time you get back."

"If you have, I'll make you a present of the controlling interest in Steel and buy myself a
chair in some home for feeble-minded old women. Your ignorance and unwillingness to believe
any new idea do not change the facts in any particular. Even before they went to Osnome, Seaton
was hard to get, as you found out. On that trip he learned so much new stuff that it is now
impossible to kill him by any ordinary means. You should realize that fact when he kills every
gangster you send against him. At all events be very, very careful not to kill his wife in
any of your attacks, even by accident, until after you have killed him."

"Such an event would be regrettable, certainly, in that it would remove all possibility of
the abduction."

"It would remove more than that. Remember the explosion in our laboratory, that blew an entire
mountain into impalpable dust? Draw in your mind a nice, vivid picture of one ten times the
size in each of our plants and in this building. I know that you are fool enough to go ahead
with your own ideas, in spite of everything I've said; and, since I do not yet actually control
Steel, I can't forbid you to, officially. But you should know that I know what I'm talking
about, and I say again that you're going to make an utter fool of yourself; just because you
won't believe anything possible, that hasn't been done every day for a hundred years. I wish
that I could make you understand that Seaton and Crane have got something that we haven't--but
for the good of our plants, and incidentally for your own, please remember one thing, anyway;
for if you forget it, we won't have a plant left and you personally will be blown into a fine
red mist. Whatever you start, kill Seaton first, and be absolutely certain that he is definitely,
completely, finally and totally dead before you touch one of Dorothy Seaton's red hairs. As
long as you only attack him personally he won't do anything but kill every man you send against
him. If you kill her while he's still alive, though--Blooie!" and the saturnine scientist waved
both hands in an expressive pantomime of wholesale destruction.

"Probably you are right in that," Brookings paled slightly. "Yes, Seaton would do just that.
We shall be very careful, until after we succeed in removing him."

"Don't worry--you won't succeed. I shall attend to that detail myself, as soon as I get back.
Seaton and Crane and their families, the directors and employees of their plants, the banks
that by any possibility may harbor their notes or solutions--in short, every person and everything
standing between me and a monopoly of 'X'--all shall disappear."

"That is a terrible program, Doctor. Wouldn't the late Perkins' plan of an abduction, such
as I have in mind, be better, safer and quicker?"

"Yes--except for the fact that it will not work. I've talked until I'm blue in the face--I've
proved to you over and over that you can't abduct her now without first killing him, and that
you can't even touch him. My plan is the only one that will work. Seaton isn't the only one
who learned anything--I learned a lot myself. I learned one thing in particular. Only four
other inhabitants of either Earth or Osnome ever had even an inkling of it, and they died,
with their brains disintegrated beyond reading. That thing is my ace in the hole. I'm going
after it. When I get it, and not until then, will I be ready to take the offensive."

"You intend starting open war upon your return?"

"The war started when I tried to pick off the women with my attractor. That is why I am leaving
at midnight. He always goes to bed at eleven-thirty, and I will be out of range of his object-compass
before he wakes up. Seaton and I understand each other perfectly. We both know that the next
time we meet one of us is going to be resolved into his component atoms, perhaps into electrons.
He doesn't know that he's going to be the one, but I do. My final word to you is to lay off--if
you don't, you and your 'competent authorities' are going to learn a lot."

"You do not care to inform me more fully as to your destination or your plans?"

"I do not. Goodbye."

CHAPTER II

Dunark Visits Earth

Martin Crane reclined in a massive chair, the fingers of his right hand lightly touching those
of his left, listening attentively. Richard Seaton strode up and down the room before his friend,
his unruly brown hair on end, speaking savagely between teeth clenched upon the stem of his
reeking, battered briar, brandishing a sheaf of papers.

"Mart, we're stuck--stopped dead. If my head wasn't made of solid blue mush I'd have had a
way figured out of this thing before now, but I can't. With that zone of force the Skylark
would have everything imaginable--without it, we're exactly where we were before. That zone
is immense, man--terrific--its possibilities are unthinkable--and I'm so cussed dumb that I
can't find out how to use it intelligently--can't use it at all, for that matter. By its very
nature it is impenetrable to any form of matter, however applied; and this calc here," slapping
viciously the sheaf of papers containing his calculations, "shows that it must also be opaque
to any wave whatever, propagated through air or through ether, clear down to cosmic rays. Behind
it, we would be blind and helpless, so we can't use it at all. It drives me frantic! Think
of a barrier of pure force, impalpable, immaterial, and exerted along a geometrical surface
of no thickness whatever--and yet actual enough to stop even a Millikan ray that travels a
hundred thousand light-years and then goes through twenty-seven feet of solid lead just like
it was so much vacuum! That's what we're up against! However, I'm going to try out that model,
Mart, right now. Come on, guy, snap into it! Let's get busy!"

"You are getting idiotic again, Dick," Crane rejoined calmly, without moving. "You know, even
better than I do, that you are playing with the most concentrated essence of energy that the
world has ever seen. That zone of force probably can be generated----"

"Probably, nothing!" barked Seaton. "It's just as evident a fact as that stool," kicking the
unoffending bit of furniture half-way across the room as he spoke. "If you'd've let me, I'd've
shown it to you yesterday!"

"Undoubtedly, then. Grant that it is impenetrable to all matter and to all known waves. Suppose
that it should prove impenetrable also to gravitation and to magnetism? Those phenomena probably
depend upon the ether, but we know nothing fundamental of their nature, nor of that of the
ether. Therefore your calculations, comprehensive though they are, cannot predict the effect
upon them of your zone of force. Suppose that that zone actually does set up a barrier in the
ether, so that it nullifies gravitation, magnetism, and all allied phenomena; so that the power-bars,
the attractors and repellers, cannot work through it? Then what? As well as showing me the
zone of force, you might well have shown me yourself flying off into space, unable to use your
power and helpless if you released the zone. No, we must know more of the fundamentals before
you try even a small-scale experiment."

"Oh, bugs! You're carrying caution to extremes, Mart. What can happen? Even if gravitation
should be nullified, I would rise only slowly, heading south the angle of our latitude--that's
thirty-nine degrees--away from the perpendicular. I couldn't shoot off on a tangent, as some
of these hot-heads have been claiming. Inertia would make me keep pace, approximately, with
the earth in its rotation. I would rise slowly--only as fast as the tangent departs from the
curvature of the earth's surface. I haven't figured out how fast that is, but it must be pretty
slow."

"Pretty slow?" Crane smiled. "Figure it out."

"All right--but I'll bet it's slower than the rise of a toy balloon." Seaton threw down the
papers and picked up his slide-rule, a twenty-inch trigonometrical duplex. "You'll concede
that it is allowable to neglect the radial component of the orbital velocity of the earth for
a first approximation, won't you--or shall I figure that in too?"

"You may ignore that factor."

"All right--let's see. Radius of rotation here in Washington would be cosine latitude times
equatorial radius, approximately--call it thirty-two hundred miles. Angular velocity, fifteen
degrees an hour. I want secant fifteen less one times thirty-two hundred. Right? Secant equals
one over cosine--um-m-m-m--one point oh three five. Then point oh three five times thirty-two
hundred. Hundred and twelve miles first hour. Velocity constant with respect to sun, accelerated
respecting point of departure. Ouch! You win, Mart--I'd kinda step out! Well, how about this,
then? I'll put on a vacuum suit and carry rations. Harness outside, with the same equipment
I used in the test flights before we built Skylark I--plus the new stuff and a coil. Then throw
on the zone, and see what happens. There can't be any jar in taking off, and with that outfit
I can get back O. K. if I go clear to Jupiter!"

Crane sat in silence, his keen mind considering every aspect of the motions possible, of velocity,
of acceleration, of inertia. He already knew well Seaton's resourcefulness in crises and his
physical and mental strength.

"As far as I can see, that might be safe," he admitted finally, "and we really should know
something about it besides the theory."

"Fine, Mart--let's get busy! I'll be ready in five minutes. Yell for the girls, will you? They'd
break us off at the ankles if we pull anything new without letting them in on it."

A few minutes later the "girls" strolled out into Crane Field, arms around each other--Dorothy
Seaton, her gorgeous auburn hair framing violet eyes and vivid coloring; black-haired, dark-eyed
Margaret Crane.

"Br-r-r, it's cold!" Dorothy shivered, wrapping her coat more closely about her. "This must
be the coldest day Washington has seen for years!"

"It is cold," Margaret agreed. "I wonder what they are going to do out here, this kind of weather?"

       *       *       *       *       *

As she spoke, the two men stepped out of the "testing shed"--the huge structure that housed
their Osnomian-built space-cruiser, "Skylark II." Seaton waddled clumsily, wearing as he did
a Crane vacuum-suit which, built of fur, canvas, metal and transparent silica, braced by steel
netting and equipped with air-tanks and heaters, rendered its wearer independent of outside
conditions of temperature and pressure. Outside this suit he wore a heavy harness of leather,
buckled about his body, shoulders, and legs, attached to which were numerous knobs, switches,
dials, bakelite cases, and other pieces of apparatus. Carried by a strong aluminum framework
in turn supported by the harness, the universal bearing of a small power-bar rose directly
above his grotesque-looking helmet.

"What do you think you're going to do in that thing, Dickie?" Dorothy called. Then, knowing
that he could not hear her voice, she turned to Crane. "What are you letting that precious
husband of mine do now, Martin? He looks as though he were up to something."

While she was speaking, Seaton had snapped the release of his face plate.

"Nothing much, Dottie. Just going to show you-all the zone of force. Mart wouldn't let me turn
it on, unless I got all cocked and primed for a year's journey into space."

"Dot, what is that zone of force, anyway?" asked Margaret.

"Oh, it's something Dick got into his head during that awful fight they had on Osnome. He hasn't
thought of anything else since we got back. You know how the attractors and repellers work?
Well, he found out something funny about the way everything acted while the Mardonalians were
bombarding them with a certain kind of a wave-length. He finally figured out the exact ray
that did it, and found out that if it is made strongly enough, it acts as if a repeller and
attractor were working together--only so much stronger that nothing can get through the boundary,
either way--in fact, it's so strong that it cuts anything in two that's in the way. And the
funny thing is that there's nothing there at all, really; but Dick says that the forces meeting
there, or something, make it act as though something really important were there. See?"

"Uh-huh," assented Margaret, doubtfully, just as Crane finished the final adjustments and moved
toward them. A safe distance away from Seaton, he turned and waved his hand.

Instantly Seaton disappeared from view, and around the place where he had stood there appeared
a shimmering globe some twenty feet in diameter--a globe apparently a perfect spherical mirror,
which darted upward and toward the south. After a moment the globe disappeared and Seaton was
again seen. He was now standing upon a hemispherical mass of earth. He darted back toward the
group upon the ground, while the mass of earth fell with a crash a quarter of a mile away.
High above their heads the mirror again encompassed Seaton, and again shot upward and southward.
Five times this maneuver was repeated before Seaton came down, landing easily in front of them
and opening his helmet.

"It's just what we thought it was, only worse," he reported tersely. "Can't do a thing with
it. Gravitation won't work through it--bars won't--nothing will. And dark? Dark! Folks, you
ain't never seen no darkness, nor heard no silence. It scared me stiff!"

"Poor little boy--afraid of the dark!" exclaimed Dorothy. "We saw absolute blackness in space."

"Not like this, you didn't. I just saw absolute darkness and heard absolute silence for the
first time in my life. I never imagined anything like it--come on up with me and I'll show
it to you."

"No you won't!" his wife shrieked as she retreated toward Crane. "Some other time, perhaps."

Seaton removed the harness and glanced at the spot from which he had taken off, where now appeared
a hemispherical hole in the ground.

"Let's see what kind of tracks I left, Mart," and the two men bent over the depression. They
saw with astonishment that the cut surface was perfectly smooth, with not even the slightest
roughness or irregularity visible. Even the smallest loose grains of sand had been sheared
in two along a mathematically exact hemispherical surface by the inconceivable force of the
disintegrating copper bar.

"Well, that sure wins the----"

An alarm bell sounded. Without a glance around, Seaton seized Dorothy and leaped into the testing
shed. Dropping her unceremoniously to the floor he stared through the telescope sight of an
enormous ray-generator which had automatically aligned itself upon the distant point of liberation
of intra-atomic energy which had caused the alarm to sound. What everyone gathered to hear was Prince
ARTHUR's views as to date of Dissolution. He has, up to now, successfully maintained attitude of
absolute ignorance that Dissolution is even pending.

Up to to-night the blessed word on everyone's tongue has not passed his lips. When, a fortnight
ago, Mr. G. diplomatically approached topic, the Prince, with charmingly puzzled look, talked
of something else. Nearest approach he can bring himself to make to topic, is to refer to arrangements
of public business. This afternoon, when he stood at Table, a ringing cheer went up from serried
hosts of Ministerialists; answered by closed-up ranks of Opposition.

"Ha! ha!" said STUART, scenting the battle from afar, "that is the first challenge and reply
in the great fight. Soon as BALFOUR's finished I shall take the Shoreditch
'bus, and look up my Constituents at Hoxton."

Prince ARTHUR, with eyebrows slightly raised, stood waiting for opportunity
to speak; evidently marvelling at this unwonted and unaccountable
outburst of clamour.

When it ceased, he observed, quite incidentally, that perhaps it would be convenient for him
to make a statement "as to prospects of concluding business before termination of the Session."
The Session, note. Not the life of Parliament, nor anything to do with so disturbing a thing
as Dissolution. Kept this up through long business statement; only at conclusion accidentally
stumbled on the word, and then regarded the prospect as so uninteresting
and immaterial, that he could not come nearer to its contemplation
than an interval of seven days.

Not before the end of one week, and not after the middle of another, was as near as he thought
it worth while to approach such trifling contingency.

Business done.--A great deal.

Tuesday.--Quite touching to observe SQUIRE OF MALWOOD's friendly interest
in progress of public Bills.

GORST, in arranging business of Sitting, anxious not to appear too grasping, put down only limited
number of Bills on Orders. "Why not put down all you've got?" the Squire asks, with mildly benevolent
glance bent on Treasury Bench. "Supposing list is run through, there is end of your opportunity;
whereas, if you put 'em all down you're ready to benefit by any accident, and may some night do
wonderful stroke of business, working everything off."

Prince ARTHUR listens attentively, regarding with questioning look
the Grand Grey Figure on other side of Table. "When I was at school,"
he says, "we were taught, in a foreign tongue, a maxim about fearing
the Greeks when they brought presents.

Seaton shut the door, and as everyone lay flat in the seats Crane, who had taken the controls,
applied one notch of power and the huge vessel leaped upward. Miles of altitude were gained
before Crane brought the cruiser to a stop and locked her in place with an anchoring attractor.

"There," he remarked calmly, "gravitation here is approximately the same as it is upon Osnome."

"Yes," put in Seaton, standing up and shedding clothing in all directions, "and I rise to remark
that we'd better undress as far as the law allows--perhaps farther. I never did like Osnomian
ideas of comfortable warmth, but we can endure it by peeling down to bedrock----"

       *       *       *       *       *

Sitar jumped up happily, completely restored, and the three women threw their arms around each
other.

"What a horrible, terrible, frightful world!" exclaimed Sitar, her eyes widening as she thought
of her first experience with our earth. "Much as I love you, I shall never dare try to visit
you again. I have never been able to understand why you Terrestrials wear what you call 'clothes,'
nor why you are so terribly, brutally strong. Now I really know--I will feel the utterly cold
and savage embrace of that awful earth of yours as long as I live!"

"Oh, it's not so bad, Sitar." Seaton, who was shaking both of Dunark's hands vigorously, assured
her over his shoulder. "All depends on where you were raised. We like it that way, and Osnome
gives us the pip. But you poor fish," turning again to Dunark, "with all my brains inside your
skull, you should have known what you were letting yourself in for."

"That's true, after a fashion," Dunark admitted, "but your brain told me that Washington was
hot. If I'd have thought to recalculate your actual Fahrenheit degrees into our loro ... but
that figures only forty-seven and, while very cold, we could have endured it--wait a minute,
I'm getting it. You have what you call 'seasons.' This, then, must be your 'winter.' Right?"

"Right the first time. That's the way your brain works behind my pan, too. I could figure anything
out all right after it happened, but hardly ever beforehand--so I guess I can't blame you much,
at that. But what I want to know is, how'd you get here? It would take more than my brains--you
can't see our sun from anywhere near Osnome, even if you knew exactly where to look for it."

"Easy. Remember those wrecked instruments you threw out of Skylark I when we built Skylark
II?" Having every minute detail of the configuration of Seaton's brain engraved upon his own,
Dunark spoke English in Seaton's own characteristic careless fashion. Only when thinking deeply
or discussing abstruse matter did Seaton employ the carefully selected and precise phrasing,
which he knew so well how to use. "Well, none of them was beyond repair and the juice was still
on most of them. One was an object-compass bearing on the Earth. We simply fixed the bearings,
put on some minor improvements, and here we are."

"Let us all sit down and be comfortable," he continued, changing into the Kondalian tongue
without a break, "and I will explain why we have come. We are in most desperate need of two
things which you alone can supply--salt, and that strange metal, 'X'. Salt I know you have
in great abundance, but I know that you have very little of the metal. You have only the one
compass upon that planet?"

"That's all--one is all we set on it. However, we've got close to half a ton of the metal on
hand--you can have all you want."

"Even if I took it all, which I would not like to do, that would be less than half enough.
We must have at least one of your tons, and two tons would be better."

"Two tons! Holy cat! Are you going to plate a fleet of battle cruisers?"

"More than that. We must plate an area of copper of some ten thousand square miles--in fact,
the very life of our entire race depends upon it."

"It's this way," he continued, as the four earth-beings stared at him in wonder. "Shortly after
you left Osnome we were invaded by the inhabitants of the third planet of our fourteenth sun.
Luckily for us they landed upon Mardonale, and in less than two days there was not a single
Osnomian left alive upon that half of the planet. They wiped out our grand fleet in one brief
engagement, and it was only the Kondal and a few more like her that enabled us to keep them
from crossing the ocean. Even with our full force of these vessels, we cannot defeat them.
Our regular Kondalian weapons were useless. We shot explosive copper charges against them of
such size as to cause earthquakes all over Osnome, without seriously crippling their defenses.
Their offensive weapons are almost irresistible--they have generators that burn arenak as though
it were so much paper, and a series of deadly frequencies against which only a copper-driven
ray screen is effective, and even that does not stand up long."

"How come you lasted till now, then?" asked Seaton.

"They have nothing like the Skylark, and no knowledge of intra-atomic energy. Therefore their
space-ships are of the rocket type, and for that reason they can cross only at the exact time
of conjunction, or whatever you call it--no, not conjunction, exactly, either, since the two
planets do not revolve around the same sun: but when they are closest together. Our solar system
is so complex, you know, that unless the trips are timed exactly, to the hour, the vessels
will not be able to land upon Osnome, but will be drawn aside and be lost, if not actually
drawn into the vast central sun. Although it may not have occurred to you, a little reflection
will show that the inhabitants of all the central planets, such as Osnome, must perforce be
absolutely ignorant of astronomy, and of all the wonders of outer space. Before your coming
we knew nothing beyond our own solar system, and very little of that. We knew of the existence
of only such of the closest planets as were brilliant enough to be seen in our continuous sunlight,
and they were few. Immediately after your coming I gave your knowledge of astronomy to a group
of our foremost physicists and mathematicians, and they have been working ceaselessly from
space-ships--close enough so that observations could be recalculated to Osnome, and yet far
enough away to afford perfect 'seeing,' as you call it."

"But I don't know any more about astronomy than a pig does about Sunday," protested Seaton.

"Your knowledge of details is, of course, incomplete," conceded Dunark, "but the detailed knowledge
of the best of your Earthly astronomers would not help us a great deal, since we are so far
removed from you in space. You, however, have a very clear and solid knowledge of the fundamentals
of the science, and that is what we need, above all things."

"Well, maybe you're right, at that. I do know the general theory of the motions, and I studied
some Celestial Mechanics. I'm awfully weak on advanced theory, though, as you'll find out when
you get that far."

"Perhaps--but since our enemies have no knowledge of astronomy whatever, it is not surprising
that their rocket-ships can be launched only at one particularly favorable time; for there
are many planets and satellites, of which they can know nothing, to throw their vessels off
the course.

"Some material essential to the operation of their war machinery apparently must come from
their own planet, for they have ceased attacking, have dug in, and are simply holding their
ground. It may be that they had not anticipated as much resistance as we could offer with space-ships
and intra-atomic energy. At any rate, they have apparently saved enough of that material to
enable them to hold out until the next conjunction--I cannot think of a better word for it--shall
occur. Our forces are attacking constantly, with all the armament at our command, but it is
certain that if the next conjunction is allowed to occur, it means the end of the entire Kondalian
nation."'

"What d'you mean 'if the next conjunction is allowed to occur?'" interjected Seaton. "Nobody
can stop it."

"I am stopping it," Dunark stated quietly, grim purpose in every lineament. "That conjunction
shall never occur. That is why I must have the vast quantities of salt and 'X'. We are building
abutments of arenak upon the first satellite of our seventh planet, and upon our sixth planet
itself. We shall cover them with plated active copper, and install chronometers to throw the
switches at precisely the right moment. We have calculated the exact times, places, and magnitudes
of the forces to be used. We shall throw the sixth planet some distance out of its orbit, and
force the first satellite of the seventh planet clear out of that planet's influence. The two
bodies whose motions we have thus changed will collide in such a way that the resultant body
will meet the planet of our enemies in head-on collision, long before the next conjunction.
The two bodies will be of almost equal masses, and will have opposite and approximately equal
velocities; hence the resultant fused or gaseous mass will be practically without velocity
and will fall directly into the fourteenth sun."

"Wouldn't it be easier to destroy it with an explosive copper bomb?"

"Easier, yes, but much more dangerous to the rest of our solar system. We cannot calculate
exactly the effect of the collisions we are planning--but it is almost certain that an explosion
of sufficient violence to destroy all life upon the planet would disturb its motion sufficiently
to endanger the entire system. The way we have in mind will simply allow the planet and one
satellite to drop out quietly--the other planets of the same sun will soon adjust themselves
to the new conditions, and the system at large will be practically unaffected--at least, so
we believe."

Seaton's eyes narrowed as his thoughts turned to the quantities of copper and "X" required
and to the engineering features of the project; Crane's first thought was of the mathematics
involved in a computation of that magnitude and character; Dorothy's quick reaction was one
of pure horror. 

"Some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrust upon them," says SHAKSPEARE.
But to come into the world, like MINERVA, armed College-cap-à-pie,
is, as Dominie Sampson would have said, "Pro-di-gi-ous!"

 Think of the destruction of a whole planet--of an entire world--with
all its inhabitants! It makes me shudder, even to think of it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Dunark leaped to his feet, ablaze. But before he could say a word, Seaton silenced him.

"Shut up, Dunark! Pipe down! Don't say anything you'll be sorry for--let me tell 'em! Close
your mouth, I tell you!" as Dunark still tried to get a word in, "I tell you I'll tell 'em,
and when I tell 'em they stay told! Now listen, you two girls--you're going off half-cocked
and you're both full of little red ants. What do you think Dunark is up against? Sherman chirped
it when he described war--and this is a real he-war; a brand totally unknown on our Earth.
It isn't a question of whether or not to destroy a population--the only question is which population
is to be destroyed. One of them's got to go. Remember those folks go into a war thoroughly,
and there isn't a thought, even remotely resembling our conception of mercy in any of their
minds on either side. If Dunark's plans go through the enemy nation will be wiped out. That
is horrible, of course. But on the other hand, if we block him off from salt and 'X,' the entire
Kondalian nation will be destroyed just as thoroughly and efficiently, and even more horribly--not
one man, woman, or child would be spared. Which nation do you want saved? Play that over a
couple of times on your adding machine, Dot, and let me know what you get."

Dorothy, taken aback, opened and closed her mouth twice before she found her voice.

"But, Dick, they couldn't possibly. Would they kill them all, Dick? Surely they wouldn't--they
couldn't."

