The Revelation Explained

An Exposition, Text by Text, of the Apocalypse of St. John

Showing the Marvelous Development of the Prophecies from the Time of their Delivery on the
Isle of Patmos--The Establishment and Growth of Christianity--Rise of Mohammedanism in the
Eastern Empire--Of the Papacy in the Western Division--Of Protestantism--The Civil History
of the Territory Comprising the Ancient Roman Empire until the End of Time--Together with the
Conflicts and Triumphs of the Redeemed until the Final Judgment, and their Eternal Reward and
Home in the "New Heavens and New Earth."

By F.G. SMITH

Author of

"What the Bible Teaches" and "The Last Reformation," etc.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Behold the former things are come to pass, and new things do I declare: before they spring
forth I tell you of them." Isa. 42:9.

"Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets."
Amos 3:7.

PREFACE.

The subject of prophecy should be of interest to every Bible student. Its importance can not
be overestimated. By it we are enabled to ascertain our true position in this time-world. From
the early dawn of creation, Inspiration has foretold with certainty the great facts connected
with the history of God's chosen people. By this means alone, the divinity of Jesus Christ
and the truth of our holy religion has been established in many minds; for it is not in the
power of mortals thus to vaticinate future events. With such surprising accuracy have these
predictions been fulfilled that even infidels ofttimes bear witness to their truthfulness.
Isa. 46:9, 10.

The Revelation is a rich mine of prophetic truth. The history of the current dispensation is
there delineated in advance so perfectly that we can not but attribute its authorship to Him
who knoweth the end from the beginning, and worketh all things after the counsel of his own
will. It was written for the special benefit of the people of God, and we should give it prayerful
consideration.

In the preparation for this work, I have gleaned historical information from all the general
and ecclesiastical histories, encyclopedias, etc., within my reach, and only regret that I
had not access to a still greater number. However, knowing that large books are seldom read,
I determined in advance not to write an extensive work, but to condense the subject matter
as much as possible, and, therefore, I have been obliged to omit much valuable material previously
gathered. For this reason many lines of prophetic truth penned by others of the sacred writers
have been passed over in silence, even though relating to the same events as certain symbolic
visions in the Revelation.

I have availed myself of all the helps and the commentaries within my reach in the study of
this important subject. However, I have but seldom referred to the opinions of expositors.
In most cases their explanations are not based upon any established rule of interpretation,
and the definite laws of symbolic language are usually overlooked or disregarded. Ordinary
readers of the Revelation have always supposed that the only course for them was to take the
opinion of some learned expositor and to believe on his authority; and when they have found
that equally learned and judicious men sustained the most opposite views, they have been bewildered
amid conflicting opinions and have decided that, when such men were at issue, it was useless
for them to investigate. While, therefore, I have made every available use of their opinions,
it was only for the purpose of forming my own and of enabling myself so to unfold the nature
of the symbols that every one might see for himself the propriety of the interpretation given.

The present knowledge that has been attained of this prophetic book is largely the result of
the combined efforts of all who have labored to unfold its meaning. No one has had the honor
of first understanding all its parts, and very few have failed to contribute something, more
or less, to its true interpretation. Therefore I have endeavored as much as possible to gather
up the good from the labors of my predecessors and to combine it with the results of my own
study and research. The Exposition of Mr. Lord has had an important bearing on this work. For
many beautiful thoughts concerning the nature and the use of symbols, in the chapter on the
nature of symbolic language, I must acknowledge special indebtedness to the Lectures of Thomas
Wickes on the Apocalypse, delivered many years ago, although I have ofttimes arrived at quite
different conclusions in their interpretation throughout the Revelation. Much appreciated assistance
has been derived from the works of other commentators as well.

There is considerable disagreement among historians themselves regarding certain historical
points, but their differences are of minor importance so far as the present work is concerned.
When such points were involved, I have simply endeavored to follow the best authorities. Lengthy
or important quotations from other writers have been duly credited where they appear, hence
no special mention is necessary in this place. Minor extracts are merely enclosed within quotation-marks.

The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, 6 Vols., Philadelphia, 1872, is the edition of Gibbon's
Rome from which quotations are made.

To assist in simplifying the subject and in placing it before the reader in a concise, comprehensive
manner, a number of useful diagrams have been added; for they serve about the same purpose
in the study of a subject so complicated as do maps in the study of geography. I would especially
call attention to the large "Diagram of the Revelation," where the various lines of prophetic
truth are outlined in parallel series, enabling the reader to comprehend at once where the
symbolic narrative returns to take up a new line of thought covering the same period of time.
In these diagrams, however, no attempt has been made to set forth every phase of thought connected
with the subject; only the main features have been outlined.

Feeling directed by the Lord to undertake this work and realizing the greatness of the task,
I have earnestly sought for divine wisdom and guidance, and I humbly acknowledge his gracious
assistance in its prosecution; and while I can not indulge the hope that human fallibility
has been overcome, yet I firmly believe that a careful reliance upon the Holy Spirit has been
an effectual means of avoiding error and unfolding many of the hitherto mysterious prophecies
of this wonderful book. To his worthy name I ascribe all praise and glory. The future, doubtless,
will witness a still greater development of this subject; for men of God more worthy and possessing
greater abilities will arise, who, beginning where we have left off, will continue its investigation
and throw upon it additional light as yet unrevealed.

That the Lord will bless The Revelation Explained to the good of his church upon earth and
grant it a place, however small, in the cause of present truth, is my earnest prayer.

Yours in Christ, F.G. Smith. Grand Junction, Mich., June 26, 1906.

PREFACE TO FOURTH EDITION

The reception accorded this work when it was first submitted to the public was more than gratifying
to the author. The lapse of time has only tended to confirm still more strongly the fundamental
nature of the principle of interpretation adopted. In order to supply the constant demand,
the fourth edition is now issued.

I have taken advantage of this opportunity to make certain revisions necessitated by an increase
of knowledge since the work was first written, nearly twelve years ago. This revision, however,
did not require an entire re-writing and does not involve a change in fundamentals.

F.G. Smith. Anderson, Ind., Mar. 1, 1918.

CONTENTS.

Preface Nature of Symbolic Language

CHAPTER I.

Introduction, verses 1-11 Vision of Christ, verses 12-20

CHAPTER II.

Message to Ephesus, verses 1-7 Message to Smyrna, verses 8-11 Message to Pergamus, verses 12-17
Message to Thyatira, verses 18-29

CHAPTER III.

Message to Sardis, verses 1-6 Message to Philadelphia, verses 7-13 Message to Laodicea, verses
14-22

CHAPTER IV.

Vision of God's Throne

CHAPTER V.

The Book with Seven Seals

CHAPTER VI.

First Seal Opened, verses 1, 2 Second Seal Opened, verses 3, 4 Third Seal Opened, verses 5,
6 Fourth Seal Opened, verses 7, 8 Fifth Seal Opened, verses 9-11 Sixth Seal Opened, verses 12-17

CHAPTER VII.

God's Servants Sealed, verses 1-8 The White-Robed Company, verses 9-17

CHAPTER VIII.

Seventh Seal Opened, verses 1-5 First Trumpet Sounded, verses 6, 7 Second Trumpet Sounded,
verses 8, 9 Third Trumpet Sounded, verses 10, 11 Fourth Trumpet Sounded, verses 12, 13

CHAPTER IX.

Fifth Trumpet Sounded, verses 1-12 Sixth Trumpet Sounded, verses 13-21

CHAPTER X.

The Rainbow Angel

CHAPTER XI.

Temple and Holy City, verses 1, 2 The Two Witnesses, verses 3-6 The Witnesses Slain, verses
7-10 The Witnesses Resurrected, verses 11-14 Seventh Trumpet Sounded, verses 15-19

CHAPTER XII.

Woman and Man-Child, verses 1-6 Michael and the Dragon, verses 7-12 The Woman's Flight, verses
13-17

CHAPTER XIII.

The Leopard Beast, verses 1-9 "The Faith of the Saints," verse 10 The Two-Horned Beast, verses
11-18

CHAPTER XIV.

The 144,000 on Mount Sion, verses 1-5 The Three Angels, verses 6-11 "The Patience of the Saints,"
verses 12, 13 Harvest of the World, verses 14-20

CHAPTER XV.

Seven Last Plagues

CHAPTER XVI.

The First Vial, verses 1, 2 The Second Vial, verse 3 The Third Vial, verses 4-7 The Fourth
Vial, verses 8, 9 The Fifth Vial, verses 10, 11 The Sixth Vial, verses 12-16 The Seventh Vial,
verses 17-21

CHAPTER XVII.

"Babylon the Great," verses 1-6 Beast and Ten Kingdoms, verses 7-18

CHAPTER XVIII.

Fall of Babylon

CHAPTER XIX.

Marriage of the Lamb, verses 1-10 Coming of Christ, verses 11-21

CHAPTER XX.

The Dragon Bound, verses 1-6 The Dragon Released, verses 7-10 The Judgment Scene, verses 11-15

CHAPTER XXI.

New Heaven and Earth, verses 1-8 The Heavenly Jerusalem, verses 9-27

CHAPTER XXII.

River and Tree of Life, verses 1-5 Christ's Coming and Eternity, verses 6-21

Nature of Symbolic Language.

Before proceeding with the interpretation of this wonderful book, it will be necessary for
us to pause and make inquiry concerning the nature of the language employed in its prophecies
and concerning the mode of its interpretation. It will be seen at a glance that it is wholly
unlike the common language of life; and it will be useless for us to undertake to ascertain
its signification unless we understand perfectly the principles upon which it is founded.

The question may be asked, "Is the language intelligible at all?" Considering the variety of
interpretations placed upon it by expositors and the opinions generally held respecting it,
we might conclude that it is not. The majority of the people look upon these prophecies as
"a mass of unintelligible enigmas," and are ready to tell the student of Revelation that this
book "either finds or leaves a man mad." But are we to look upon its language as being applied
at a venture, without any definite rule, capable of every variety of meaning, so that we can
never be quite sure that we have its correct interpretation?

Commentators generally unite in attaching a definite meaning to certain symbols, and they tell
us that these can not be applied otherwise without violating their nature. They may not give
us their reasons for thus applying them (in fact, they generally do not), yet it is evidently
assumed that such reasons do exist. Now, if reasons actually exist why a definite signification
must be applied to the symbol in the one case, why do they not exist in another case, and in
all cases? If any law exists in the case at all, it is a uniform one, for a law that does not
possess uniformity is no law; otherwise, it would be an unintelligible revelation, and the
only possible thing left for us to do would be to attempt to solve it like a riddle--guess
it out. It would be as if the writer were to use words with every variety of meaning peculiarly
his own attached, without informing the reader what signification to give them in a given instance.
No man has a right thus to abuse written or spoken language; and we may take it for granted
that the God of heaven would not make such an indiscriminate use of symbolical language when
making a revelation to men. There is no other book the wide world around in which language
is as carefully employed as in the Bible; and we can rest assured that when God gave this Revelation
to Jesus Christ "to show unto his servants things which must shortly come to pass," he made
choice of proper symbols whose meaning can be definitely evolved, provided we can but ascertain
the great underlying principles upon which their original selection was based.

In the ordinary communication of our thoughts we employ arbitrary signs and sounds to which
we have universally agreed to fix a definite meaning. Thus, our entire spoken language is made
up of a great variety of sounds or words with which by long practise we have become familiar.
We call a certain object a horse, not because there is any similarity between the sound and
the animal designated, but because we have agreed that that sound shall represent that object.
So, also, we have agreed that the characters h-o-r-s-e shall represent the same thing; and
by the use of twenty-six characters, called the alphabet, placed together in various combinations,
we are able to write our entire spoken language.

The incidents connected with the introduction of written language among a barbarous people
are worthy of remark in this connection. That thought can be conveyed to persons at a distance
by the use of certain cabalistic characters seems to them incredible, and when compelled to
believe it, they look upon the person that can accomplish such wonders as embodying something
supernatural. These things I mention merely to call attention to the fact that spoken and written
language is a curious and wonderfully complicated affair. This is brought forcibly to our minds
when we hear persons conversing in a foreign tongue, or when we pick up a book the characters
of which are wholly unlike those of our own language. To us an English book is full of instinctive
beauty, every letter or mark possessing a definite meaning that is instantly conveyed to our
minds, because we have become familiar with them by diligent study and practise.

There are other ways of transferring thought besides the complicated system just mentioned--ways
which are much more natural and simple. Thus, a simpler way to represent a certain object would
be to draw a picture of it; or, better still, to represent a certain character or quality by
exhibiting, not the object itself, but an analagous one whose peculiar character that property
is; for examples: the quiet, peaceful, gentle disposition of a child, by a lamb; a man of cunning,
artful, deceptive disposition, by a fox; or a cruel, bloodthirsty, vindictive tyrant, by a
tiger, etc. This is hieroglyphical or symbolic language. This language takes precedence over
every other for naturalness and simplicity, being common to a greater or less extent among
all nations and intelligible to all.

Spoken language was undoubtedly a gift from God originally, while written language is probably
a mere human invention. We are not to suppose that the first attempts to convey thought in
writing would be by an alphabetical system, but by the symbolic, it being, as before stated,
the most natural and within reach of the ordinary ingenuity of man. This is proved by the fact
that the inscriptions on the ancient monuments of Egypt and the inscriptions of other nations
of antiquity are of this character. It is also a fact worthy of notice that, four thousand
years later, men of other countries and of other languages have, by much study and a careful
comparison of the symbols, been able to decipher with accuracy those hierographical representations.[1]
This of itself is sufficient to establish the point that definiteness can be attached to the
use and the interpretation of carefully-selected symbols, when the principles that governed
their original selection are discovered.

[Footnote 1: The systems of hieroglyphical writing employed by various nations have, for the
most part, remained unintelligible until a key of their interpretation was discovered. In 1799
M. Bouchard, a French captain of engineers, while digging intrenchments on the site of an old
temple near the Rosetta mouth of the Nile, unearthed a black stone containing a trilingual
inscription in hieroglyphics, demotic characters, and Greek. The last paragraph of the Greek
inscription stated that two translations, one in the sacred and the other in the popular Egyptian
language, would be found adjacent; hence this celebrated stone has afforded European scholars
a key to the language and writing of the ancient Egyptians. The cuneiform writing of the Babylonians
and Persians remained a mystery also until modern times, but great progress has now been made
in the deciphering of thousands of inscribed clay tablets, cylinders, prisms, etc. The key
to its interpretation is the celebrated inscription at Behistun, cut upon the face of a high
rock three hundred feet above its base, and recording a portion of the history of Darius. It
is written in the cuneiform characters, in three languages--Median, Persian, and Assyrian.]

I do not wish to be understood as implying that the symbolical language of Scripture is identical
with the hieroglyphics of ancient monuments. There may be different kinds of symbolic representations;
but they are not arbitrary, as is spoken language, and can not be arbitrarily applied; a fixed
law governs them all.

Now, the book of Revelation is made up of this symbolic language. It is not, however, confined
to this book alone. There are many instances of it to be found elsewhere in the sacred volume,
and in many cases it is explained by inspiration itself, thus giving us a reliable key to the
whole. Joseph's dream of the eleven sheaves that made obeisance to his sheaf was of this description
(Gen. 37:7, 8), and his eleven brethren were angered, because its meaning was apparent--that
they should be humbled before him. Also, his dream of the sun, the moon, and the eleven stars
(verses 9, 10) was understood to signify the subjection of the entire family unto him, which
was actually fulfilled after Joseph's exaltation in Egypt. The chief butler's dream of the
vine with three branches bearing grapes, which he took and pressed into the king's cup, was
interpretated by Joseph as signifying the butler's restoration in three days to his former
position of cup-bearer to the king; while the chief baker's dream of the three baskets upon
his head, out of which the birds ate, was interpretated as signifying his execution in the
same length of time. Gen. 40. Pharaoh's dream of the seven fat kine and the seven lean kine,
also of the seven full ears and the seven thin ears, signified seven years of plenty and seven
years of famine. Gen. 41.

Again, the four divisions of King Nebuchadnezzar's wonderful image was explained by Daniel
as signifying four universal monarchies and the ten toes as signifying the ten minor kingdoms
which grew out of the fourth; while the stone that was cut out of the mountain without human
intervention he interpreted as signifying the divine kingdom of God. Dan. 2. The two-horned
ram of Daniel's vision (chap. 8), according to the explanation of the angel, symbolized the
Medo-Persian empire, its two horns signifying the two dynasties of allied kings that composed
it. The he-goat signified the Greco-Macedonian empire; his great horn, its first mighty king;
and the four horns that replaced the great one when broken represented four kings under whom
the empire would eventually be divided into as many parts. In the Apocalypse itself we have
a number of symbols divinely interpreted, "The seven stars are the angels of the seven churches."
"The seven candle-sticks which thou sawest are the seven churches." "The ten horns which thou
sawest are ten kings." "The waters which thou sawest ... are peoples, and multitudes, and nations,
and tongues." "The woman which thou sawest is that great city which reigneth over the kings
of the earth," etc.

It will be seen that the great underlying principle or law upon which symbolic language is
based is ANALOGY. An object is chosen to represent not itself, but something of analagous character.

Webster defines symbol as follows: "The sign or representation of any moral thing by the images
or properties of natural things. Thus, a lion is the symbol of courage; the lamb is the symbol
of meekness or patience." Home, in his Introduction to the Study of the Bible, says: "By symbols
we mean certain representative marks, rather than express pictures; or, if pictures, such as
were at the time characters, and besides presenting to the eye the resemblance of a particular
object, suggested a general idea to the mind, as when a horn was made to denote strength, an
eye and scepter, majesty, and in numberless such instances; where the picture was not drawn
to express merely the thing itself, but something else, which was, or was conceived to be,
analagous to it." The main idea, then, as expressed in the foregoing definitions, is the representation
of an object, not by a picture of itself, but by something analagous, such as the exhibition
of moral qualities by images drawn from nature. But the use of symbols is not confined to the
representation of moral subjects alone. Anything may be symbolized to which a corresponding
analagous object can be found.

To establish the principle of analogy here laid down, it will be necessary to refer only to
a few of the numerous examples of divinely interpreted symbols in the Scriptures. Any one can
readily perceive the analogy between the seven fat kine of Pharaoh's dream and as many years
of plenty; so, also, with the seven full, healthy ears that grew up on seven stalks. Likewise,
the analogy between the seven thin kine and as many years of famine, and the seven thin, blasted
ears that represented the same thing, is apparent. One fat kine or one full ear would symbolize
one year of plenty, when crops were abundant; while seven would represent as many distinct
seasons of prosperity, etc. Kine do not represent kine, but something analagous. The beasts
of Daniel's visions do not represent animals like themselves, or a multitude of such animals,
but something of analagous disposition. The analogy between a wild, ferocious beast, stamping
upon or devouring everything within its reach, and a cruel, persecuting, tyrannical government
is apparent. A horn does not signify a horn, but some great power, such as a dynasty of kings
or rulers; and what the horn is to the animal in manifesting its desolating disposition, kings
and rulers are to an empire in executing the persecuting or oppressive principles of the body
politic. A pure, chaste virgin is used to symbolize the true church of God; whereas a corrupt
harlot is chosen to represent an apostate church, and fornication her idolatrous worship.

Although this principle is worthy of further elucidation, yet enough has been said to firmly
establish the point that symbolic language is founded upon analogy. It is also clear that,
whenever we attach a literal signification to a symbolic object, we immediately destroy entirely
its use as a symbol. So we may accept it as one established landmark in the interpretation
of the Apocalypse, that every symbol, regardless of the department from which it is taken--whether
from the material universe, the animal kingdom, human life or the heavenly realm--stands as
the representative, not of itself, but of some other object of analagous character not found
in the same department from which it is drawn.

This develops another important fact worthy of attention. If the great law of symbolic language
is based upon analogy, it is clear to a demonstration that the symbols employed must be definitely
applied. They can not be arbitrary, as the words composing our spoken language are. There is
nothing in the nature of the thing to prevent our calling a horse an elephant, provided we
had only agreed universally to adopt that designation of the animal referred to (arbitrary
sounds can be arbitrarily applied); but we violate nature when we attempt to make a ferocious
tiger the symbol of an innocent child, or represent a blood-thirsty tyrant by the symbol of
a lamb. A disgusting, polluted harlot may be the proper symbol of an apostate church, but of
the pure, holy church of God--never. A proper correspondence must be kept up. We must follow
nature strictly.

Symbols are drawn from every department--from animate and inanimate creation, from animal life
and human life, from the visible universe below and the heavenly world above, and also from
some objects of fancy to which there is no corresponding object in existence, such as Daniel's
four-headed beast, or the one in the Revelator's vision with seven heads and ten horns; but
in the selection of the same a proper correspondence of quality is kept up. The symbols that
are chosen to set forth the great spiritual affairs of the church are such as are in themselves
nobler than those selected to describe the political affairs of kings and empires, because
in the divine estimation the church is of infinitely greater importance and occupies a more
honorable position than worldly kingdoms. The glorious body of God's reformers is set forth
under the symbol of an angel from heaven, with his face as the sun, his feet as pillars of
fire, and a rainbow upon his head; whereas the Saracen warriors of Mahomet are locusts upon
the earth, with stings of scorpions. The department of human and angelic life is chosen to
set forth the spiritual affairs of the church, while the department of nature and of animal
life represents the political affairs of nations. To this general rule, there is at least one
exception. Certain things connected with God's chosen people under the old dispensation are
considered proper symbols to represent similar things or events in the New Testament dispensation,
without special regard to the department from which they are drawn. Thus, the temple, altar,
incense, candlesticks, holy city, etc., of the former age, though not taken from the department
of human or angelic life, are, nevertheless, clearly used to represent affairs of the church,
the analogy in the case being apparent because of their former prominence as connected with
the Lord's covenant people.

Again, when the symbol selected is that of a living, active, intelligent agent, it represents
an analagous intelligent agent. Likewise, the actions of the former plainly denote analagous
actions in the latter, and the effects produced by the actions of the symbolic agent signify
analagous effects produced by the actions of the agent symbolized. To make it clearer: agents
symbolize agents, actions symbolize actions, and effects symbolize effects. If this be not
true--if agents can symbolize actions and effects as well as agents, or if actions can symbolize
agents and effects--then all is an inextricable maze of confusion, and well may we repeat the
words uttered by a certain minister to the writer, "The book should have been called Mystification,
not Revelation."

The same principle of analogy is carried out in another particular. Whenever the enemies of
God or destructive agents are intended, objects of a corresponding desolating character are
chosen as their symbols; whereas the peaceful triumphs of the cross, as exhibited by God's
chosen people, are described under symbols of an equally benign and gentle character. Thus,
the anti-christian, persecuting power of Rome is described as a ferocious wild beast, stamping
everything beneath its feet and spreading desolation on every side. The Vandal hordes of Northern
barbarians, who, under Genseric overran the Western Roman empire early in the fifth century,
are symbolized by a volcanic mountain cast into the sea and spreading its streams of molten
lava in every direction. The fearful pest of Mohammedanism is a dense smoke issuing from the
bottomless pit and darkening the heavens. The Saracens of Mahomet are swarms of locusts appearing
upon the earth, with scorpion stings, tormenting men five months, or, prophetically, one hundred
and fifty years. On the other hand, a church is a candle-stick; its pastor, a beautiful star;
the whole church, a virgin bride; the glorious assembly of God's reformers, a rainbow angel, etc.

From the foregoing it will be seen that symbols are not words, but things, chosen because of
some analagous resemblance to represent other things; and by a careful study of the nature
of the symbols themselves we can ascertain where to look for their fulfilment. In the present
work no attempt has been made to prove the interpretations given merely by the authority of
learned names (for they can be arrayed on every side of a passage), but the nature of the symbols
themselves has been developed; and the reader will be able to judge how nearly the known laws
of symbolic language have been followed.

It will be necessary, however, to notice another exception to the rules given, although it
can scarcely be said to form an exception--it rather proves the very position taken. Undoubtedly,
there are some few objects whose nature forbids their symbolization, there being no object
in existence of analagous character that can be chosen as their representative. God, evidently,
can not be symbolized; for where is the individual in heaven or on earth that can stand as
his representative? "To whom then will ye liken God? or what likeness will ye compare unto
him?" Isa. 40:18. Man can not represent him, angels can not; for whenever they appear on the
panoramic scene, they denote distinguished agencies among men. There may be certain symbols
connected with his person, setting forth his divine attributes and proclaiming the eternal
majesty of his name; but he himself is described as "One sitting upon a throne," before whom
the created intelligences of earth and heaven fall down and worship unceasingly, but no symbol
of Him is given. The same exception also applies to the person of Jesus, our Savior and Redeemer.
While the human aspect of the Savior, as exhibited during the incarnation in his sacrificial
death, may be properly symbolized by a lamb, as in chap. V, there is no created intelligence
in God's great universe that can be chosen to represent, in his true, essential divinity, Him
who does not deem it robbery to claim equality with God. There may, likewise, be certain symbols
connected with his person to give us at least a faint impression of his divine character and
infinite majesty; yet when he appears upon the symbolic scene, he distinctly announces, "I
am the first and the last: I am he that liveth, and was dead; and, behold, I am alive forevermore."
So whenever the divine Christ appears on the symbolic scene, he comes in his own person, proclaiming
his own name, and we need look for no symbol of him.

Upon the opening of the fifth seal, the souls of the martyrs are represented as crying unto
God from the altar for the avenging of their blood on those who dwell on the earth. Where is
there an object in all creation analagous to a disembodied spirit? None can be found. It is
easy to give them an arbitrary name; therefore they appear in the Revelation under their own
appropriate title, as "the souls of them that were slain." Chap. 6:9, 10, also 20:4.

This exception applies to every case where no corresponding object can be selected as a symbol.
Where the nature of the subject forbids its symbolization, there the description must of necessity
be literal, and all such objects appear under their own appropriate titles. Otherwise, we are
to look upon the entire book of Revelation as a vast collection of symbols whose interpretation
is to be found, not in the department from which they are taken, but in another, to which they
bear a certain analagous resemblance.

Although not pertaining strictly to the subject of symbolic language, yet a word respecting
the plan of the prophecy will be appropriate at this time. The prophetic events are not arranged
after the ordinary plan of histories, narrating all the contemporaneous events in a given period,
whether civil, religious, literary, scientific, or biographical, thus finishing up the history
of that period; but it consists of a number of distinct themes running over the same ground.
The proof of this assertion will appear as we proceed with the development of the prophecies.

May the wisdom of heaven direct us in the perusal of this wonderful book
of Revelation, and may we at last be "accounted worthy to obtain that
world," and the glorious privilege of rendering eternal praise to "Him
that sitteth upon the throne," "upholding all things by the word of his
power," "declaring the end from the beginning," and revealing his mighty
works unto the children of men. Who bare record of the word of God, and of the testimony of
    Jesus Christ, and of all things that he saw.

    3.

This book of the Revelation is frequently styled the Apocalypse, derived from the word by which
it is designated in Greek. Jesus Christ having received it from God, its author, designed it
for the future benefit of his church, and communicated it to his servants by the hand of the
beloved apostle John. Its character is described by its title "Revelation," which signifies
something revealed or made known; and its object was to "show unto his servants things which
must shortly come to pass." This object of God's in delivering the Revelation to his church
should be a sufficient refutation of the popular theory that this book is unintelligible, and
its varied symbols wrapped in such deep mystery that their meaning can not be evolved; for
it is not consonant with the supreme power and wisdom of the God-head to suppose that, in making
a revelation to man, he would make the fatal mistake of clothing his language with a mystery
that defies the intellect of mortals to unveil. It is said of the things herein revealed that
they "must shortly come to pass," by which is meant not that they were all to be completely
fulfilled within a short time, but that the series of special events predicted were soon to
begin. Thus, we speak of a century or eternity as near at hand, by which we mean that the events
of the period spoken of are about to commence, although the end of the series may be very far off.

