"Ay-ay, sir."

"You--you know me."

"Ay-ay, sir."

"Very well, then.  Take the lantern.  Carry it just under your chin. I'll walk behind you and
rest this gun-barrel on your shoulder, p'inting forward--so.  Keep your lantern well up so's
I can see things ahead of you good.  I'm going to march in on Noakes--and take him--and jug
the other chaps.  If you flinch--well, you know me."

"Ay-ay, sir."

In this order they filed aboard softly, arrived at Noakes's den, the quartermaster pushed the
door open, and the lantern revealed the three desperadoes sitting on the floor.  Capt.  Ned said:

"I'm Ned Blakely.  I've got you under fire.  Don't you move without orders--any of you.  You
two kneel down in the corner; faces to the wall --now.  Bill Noakes, put these handcuffs on;
now come up close. Quartermaster, fasten 'em.  All right.  Don't stir, sir.  Quartermaster,
put the key in the outside of the door.  Now, men, I'm going to lock you two in; and if you
try to burst through this door--well, you've heard of me.  Bill Noakes, fall in ahead, and
march.  All set.  Quartermaster, lock the door."

Noakes spent the night on board Blakely's ship, a prisoner under strict guard.  Early in the
morning Capt. Ned called in all the sea-captains in the harbor and invited them, with nautical
ceremony, to be present on board his ship at nine o'clock to witness the hanging of Noakes
at the yard-arm!

"What!  The man has not been tried."

"Of course he hasn't.  But didn't he kill the nigger?"

"Certainly he did; but you are not thinking of hanging him without a trial?"

"Trial!  What do I want to try him for, if he killed the nigger?"

"Oh, Capt.  Ned, this will never do.  Think how it will sound."

"Sound be hanged!  Didn't he kill the nigger?"

"Certainly, certainly, Capt.  Ned,--nobody denies that,--but--"

"Then I'm going to hang him, that's all.  Everybody I've talked to talks just the same way
you do.  Everybody says he killed the nigger, everybody knows he killed the nigger, and yet
every lubber of you wants him tried for it.  I don't understand such bloody foolishness as
that.  Tried! Mind you, I don't object to trying him, if it's got to be done to give satisfaction;
and I'll be there, and chip in and help, too; but put it off till afternoon--put it off till
afternoon, for I'll have my hands middling full till after the burying--"

"Why, what do you mean?  Are you going to hang him any how--and try him afterward?"

"Didn't I say I was going to hang him?  I never saw such people as you. What's the difference?
You ask a favor, and then you ain't satisfied when you get it.  Before or after's all one--you
know how the trial will go.  He killed the nigger.  Say--I must be going.  If your mate would
like to come to the hanging, fetch him along.  I like him."

There was a stir in the camp.  The captains came in a body and pleaded with Capt. Ned not to
do this rash thing.  They promised that they would create a court composed of captains of the
best character; they would empanel a jury; they would conduct everything in a way becoming
the serious nature of the business in hand, and give the case an impartial hearing and the
accused a fair trial.  And they said it would be murder, and punishable by the American courts
if he persisted and hung the accused on his ship.  They pleaded hard.  Capt. Ned said:

"Gentlemen, I'm not stubborn and I'm not unreasonable.  I'm always willing to do just as near
right as I can.  How long will it take?"

"Probably only a little while."

"And can I take him up the shore and hang him as soon as you are done?"

"If he is proven guilty he shall be hanged without unnecessary delay."

"If he's proven guilty.  Great Neptune, ain't he guilty?  This beats my time.  Why you all
know he's guilty."

But at last they satisfied him that they were projecting nothing underhanded.  Then he said:

"Well, all right.  You go on and try him and I'll go down and overhaul his conscience and prepare
him to go--like enough he needs it, and I don't want to send him off without a show for hereafter."

This was another obstacle.  They finally convinced him that it was necessary to have the accused
in court.  Then they said they would send a guard to bring him.

"No, sir, I prefer to fetch him myself--he don't get out of my hands. Besides, I've got to
go to the ship to get a rope, anyway."

The court assembled with due ceremony, empaneled a jury, and presently Capt. Ned entered, leading
the prisoner with one hand and carrying a Bible and a rope in the other.  He seated himself
by the side of his captive and told the court to "up anchor and make sail."  Then he turned
a searching eye on the jury, and detected Noakes's friends, the two bullies.

He strode over and said to them confidentially:

"You're here to interfere, you see.  Now you vote right, do you hear?--or else there'll be
a double-barreled inquest here when this trial's off, and your remainders will go home in a
couple of baskets."

The caution was not without fruit.  The jury was a unit--the verdict. "Guilty."

Capt.  Ned sprung to his feet and said:

"Come along--you're my meat now, my lad, anyway.  Gentlemen you've done yourselves proud. 
I invite you all to come and see that I do it all straight.  Follow me to the canyon, a mile
above here."

The court informed him that a sheriff had been appointed to do the hanging, and--

Capt.  Ned's patience was at an end.  His wrath was boundless.  The subject of a sheriff was
judiciously dropped.

When the crowd arrived at the canyon, Capt. Ned climbed a tree and arranged the halter, then
came down and noosed his man.  He opened his Bible, and laid aside his hat.  Selecting a chapter
at random, he read it through, in a deep bass voice and with sincere solemnity.  Then he said:

"Lad, you are about to go aloft and give an account of yourself; and the lighter a man's manifest
is, as far as sin's concerned, the better for him.  Make a clean breast, man, and carry a log
with you that'll bear inspection.  You killed the nigger?"

No reply.  A long pause.

The captain read another chapter, pausing, from time to time, to impress the effect.  Then
he talked an earnest, persuasive sermon to him, and ended by repeating the question:

"Did you kill the nigger?"

No reply--other than a malignant scowl.  The captain now read the first and second chapters
of Genesis, with deep feeling--paused a moment, closed the book reverently, and said with a
perceptible savor of satisfaction:

"There.  Four chapters.  There's few that would have took the pains with you that I have."

Then he swung up the condemned, and made the rope fast; stood by and timed him half an hour
with his watch, and then delivered the body to the court.  A little after, as he stood contemplating
the motionless figure, a doubt came into his face; evidently he felt a twinge of conscience--a
misgiving--and he said with a sigh:

"Well, p'raps I ought to burnt him, maybe.  But I was trying to do for the best."

When the history of this affair reached California (it was in the "early days") it made a deal
of talk, but did not diminish the captain's popularity in any degree.  It increased it, indeed.
California had a population then that "inflicted" justice after a fashion that was simplicity
and primitiveness itself, and could therefore admire appreciatively when the same fashion was
followed elsewhere.