The impression regarding the minister, mentioned in my last note, was from a talk with him
while he was, it seems, under the influence of fever. In later conversations he has been more
lucid; but he is a third-rate man, and quite unequal to the burthen that the favour of the
King has placed upon him. That favour will, however, be but of short duration, for the King
is said to have expressed great distrust in his capacity to do any of the things he promised,
more especially to collect the immense arrears of revenue now due.

I am preparing tables of the revenue and expenditure, and of the machinery in all branches,
and hope soon to submit a clearer view of the state of things than Government is in the habit
of getting on such occasions; but I have to wade through vast volumes of correspondence to
ascertain what has been said and done in the questions that will come under consideration,
to conduct current duties, and to become acquainted with the people in my new field, European
and native.

I want to ask you whether I could, with any prospect of success just now, propose a plan which
I have much at heart in the Thuggee and Dacoity Department. The Lieutenant-Governor, I feel
assured, will advocate it. Major Graham is about to obtain his regimental majority, with a
certain prospect of soon obtaining the command of his regiment, which will give him twelve
hundred a-month. I am anxious to retain him; for his services have been, and would continue
to be, of vast importance to the North-West Provinces. I should like to propose that he be
made superintendent of Thuggee and Dacoity in those provinces upon a salary of, say eleven
hundred rupees a-month. I would at the same time propose that the Shahjehanpoor office, lately
under Major Ludlow, be done up, and the duties confided to the assistant-magistrate, with a
small establishment, he to receive an extra salary, say, one hundred rupees a-month. The same
with regard to the Azimghur office, now under Captain Ward, who could be sent to Rajpootana.
Elliot is not suited well to the work, according to those who have seen most of him and of
it; and you might be able to put him to some other for which he is fitted. Should you think
it desirable to retain him in Rajpootana, Captain Ward may for the present remain where he
is; and the saving from the Shahjehanpoor office will more than cover the increase for Major
Graham. Pray let me know as soon as you can whether such a proposal would be likely to be well
received. Graham's services have been and will be most valuable to all the local authorities
at and under Agra.

I suppose the fate of the Punjaub is sealed, for though the Governor- General might wish to
spare it, the home authorities and the home people will hardly brook the prospect or the chance
of another struggle of the same kind, particularly if the Afghans have really joined the Seiks
under Chutter Sing. The tendency to annexation, already strong at home, will become still stronger
when the news of our late losses arrive. They indicate a stronger assurance of national sympathy
on the part of the chiefs and troops opposed to us than was generally calculated upon. The
fall of Mooltan will have relieved the Governor-General's mind from much of the anxiety caused
by the inartistic management of the Commander-in-Chief.

           Yours sincerely,
          (Signed)     W. H. SLEEMAN.

To H. M. Elliot, Esq.,
    &c. &c.

                                Lucknow, 7th March, 1849.

My Dear Elliott,

I may mention what has been the state of feeling at Lucknow regarding the state of affairs
in the Punjaub, though it has become of less interest to the Governor-General now that so decided
a victory has crowned his efforts. During the whole contest the Government five per cent. notes
have been every day sold in my office at par, and I question whether this can be said of the
offices in Calcutta. One day during the races, on the King's firing a salute for victory, the
European gentlemen talked about it at the stand with many of the first of the native aristocracy.
They said that the Seiks could not fight as they were fighting unless there had been some general
feeling of distrust as to our ultimate intentions with regard to the Punjaub which united them
together; and that this feeling must be as strong with the Durbar and those who did not fight
as with those who did. I was not present, as I did not attend the races; but I found the same
opinion prevailing among all with whom I conversed. But all seemed to be perfectly satisfied
as to the utter hopelessness of the struggle, as evinced by the great barometer of the Government
paper.

I suppose Dost Mahomed's force in Peshawur will have proceeded in all haste to the Khyber on
hearing of the defeat of their friends, and that General Gilbert's fine division will find
none of them to contend with; and that Gholab Sing will be glad of an occasion to display his
zeal by keeping Shore Sing and his father out of the hills.

The river Indus will, I suppose, hardly be considered so safe a boundary as the hills; for
if any danger is to be apprehended from the west, it would not be safe to leave the enemy so
fine a field to organize their forces upon after emerging from the difficult passes. Well organized
upon that field, a force could cross the river anywhere in the cold and hot seasons; and the
revenue of that field would aid in keeping up a force that might in the day of need be used
against us. It was a great error committed by Lord Hastings in allowing the Nepaulese the fertile
portion of the Jurac, which then yielded only two lacs of rupees, but now yields thirteen,
and will, ere long, yield twenty. Without this their military force would have been altogether
insignificant; but it is not so now.

             Yours sincerely,
          (Signed)       W. H. SLEEMAN.

To H. M. Elliot, Esq.,
     &c. &c.

                                     Lucknow, 20th March, 1849.

My Dear Elliot,

The King continues much the same as when I last wrote. Under skilful treatment he might soon
get well; but the prescriptions of his best native physicians are little attended to, and he
has not yet consented to consult an European doctor. He could not have a better doctor than
Leekie, and the natives have great confidence in him; but his Majesty has not expressed any
wish to see or consult him. If he did so, the chances are one hundred to one against his taking
his medicine.

I do not like to write a public letter on the subject, but am anxious to know the Governor-General's
wishes as to whether any new engagements should be entered into in case of the King's decease,
and with whom.

The instructions contained in your letter of the 16th August, 1847, referred to in my last,
will be carried out; but the Governor-General may wish to have the new arrangements recorded
in a former treaty, the heads of the royal family consenting thereto, as at Gwalior, when the
regency was appointed. I have no copy of the treaty made at Lahore, where the regency was appointed.

I should think it desirable to give the members of the regency each distinct duties, so that
he may feel responsible for them, and take a pride in doing them well. One should be at the
head of the Revenue Department, and another at the head of the Judicial and Police, each having
a deputy; and the Resident, as president, should have a deputy. These would be sufficient for
a regency, and could form a court, or council, to deliberate and decide about measures of legislation
and administration.

The mother of the King would be the best person to consult upon the nomination of the members
in the first instance; but neither she nor any other female of the royal family should have
any share in the administration.

All important measures adopted by the Council should be submitted for the consideration of
the Governor-General; and no member of the Council should be removed without his Lordship's
consent. No important measure adopted by the Council, and sanctioned by the Governor-General,
should at any future time be liable to be abolished or altered without the sanction of our
Government previously obtained through the Resident.

On the heir-apparent attaining his majority, every member of the regency who has discharged
his duties faithfully should have for life a pension equal to half the salary enjoyed by him
while in office, and be guaranteed in the enjoyment of this half by the British Government.

The measures thus adopted during the minority would form a code for future guidance, and tend
at least to give the thing which Oude most wants--stability to good sales, and to the machinery
by which they are to be enforced.

The King's brother--a very excellent man, who was Commander-in-Chief during his father's life-time,
but is now nothing--might also be consulted with the mother of the King in the nomination of
the regency, and made a party with her to the new treaty.

These are all the points which appear to me at present to call for instructions.

The harvests promise to be abundant, but the collections come in slowly, and the establishments
are all greatly in arrear. I don't like to write publicly on these subjects, because it is
almost impossible here to prevent what is so written from getting to the Court; but the Governor-General's
instructions were sent to me in that form without the same risk.

                 (Signed)     W. H. SLEEMAN.

To H. M. Elliot, Esq.,
     &c. &c.

                                   Lucknow, 23rd March, 1849.

My Dear Elliot,

It will perhaps be well to add to the regency, in case of the King's death, a controller of
the household, making three members of equal grade, and to have no deputy for the Resident,
or President of the Regency. It may also be well to add the mother of the heir apparent to
the persons to be consulted in the selection of the members of the regency, though she is a
person of no mark or influence in either public or private affairs at present.

The mother of the present King, his brother, the mother of the heir- apparent, and the young
heir-apparent himself will be enough to have a voice in the selection.

I conclude that it will be the Governor-General's wish that the heir- apparent should be placed
on the throne immediately after the death of his father, for the slightest hesitation or delay
in this matter would be mischievous in such a place as Lucknow. As soon as this is done, I
can proceed to consult about the nomination of the regency. The members will, of course, be
chosen from among the highest and most able members of the aristocracy present at the capital,
and they can be installed in office the day they are chosen. I do not apprehend any confusion
or disturbance; but measures must be adopted immediately to pay up arrears due to the establishments,
and dismiss all that are useless.

The, King is not worse--on the contrary, he is said to be better; but the hot season may be
too much for him. His present state, with a minister weak in body and not very strong in mind,
is very unsatisfactory. Fortunately the harvest is unusually fine.

             Yours sincerely,
          (Signed)         W. H. SLEEMAN.

To H. M. Elliot, Esq.,
     &c. &c.

                                        Lucknow, 8th May, 1849.
My Lord,

Dr. Bell, has relieved Dr. Leekie from his charge, and I am glad that so able and experienced
a medical officer has been appointed to it by your Lordship, for he will have the means of
doing much good here if he can secure the confidence and esteem of his native patients. The
way has been well paved for him by Dr. Leekie, who, in professional ability, large experience,
and perfect frankness of character, is one of the first men I have met; and I regret exceedingly
that the King has never manifested any wish to consult him or any other European physician.

Being anxious that both Dr. Leekie and Dr. Bell should have an opportunity of seeing the King,
and forming some opinion as to his state of health, I proposed that his Majesty should receive
them at the same time with Captain Bird on his taking leave previous to his departure for Simla.
As it is usual for the residency surgeon to wait on his Majesty when he first enters on his
charge and when he quits it, I knew that such a proposal would not give rise to any feelings
of doubt or uneasiness, and he at once expressed his wish to see them. Yesterday, about noon,
all three went to the palace, and sat for some time in conversation with the King. They found
him much better in bodily health than they expected, and in the course of conversation, found
no signs of any confusion of ideas, and are of opinion that in the hands of a skilful European
physician he would soon be quite well. His Majesty is hypochondriac, and frequently under the
influence of the absurd delusions common to such persons; but he is quite sane during long
intervals, and on all subjects not connected with such delusions.

When in health, the King never paid much attention to business, and his illness is, therefore,
less felt than it would have been in the conduct of affairs; but it is nevertheless felt, and
that in a very vital part--the collection of the revenue. The expenses of Government are about
one hundred (100) lacs a-year; and the collections this year have not amounted to more than
sixty (60), owing to this illness, and to a deficiency in the autumn harvests. All establishments
are greatly in arrears in consequence; and the King has been obliged to make some heavy drafts
upon the reserved fund left him by his father. I only wish none had been made for a less legitimate
purpose. The parasites, by whom he has surrounded himself exclusively, have, it is said, been
drawing upon it still more largely during the King's illness, under the apprehension of a speedy
dissolution. The minister is a weak man, who stands somewhat in awe of these musicians and
eunuchs, who have no fear of anybody but the Resident, whom it is, of course, their interest
to keep as much as possible in the dark. As soon as his Majesty gets stronger, I shall see
him more frequently than I have yet done, and be better able to judge of what prospect of amendment
there may be while he reigns. If he ever conversed with his male relations, or any of the gentlemen
at the capital worthy of his confidence, I should have more hope than I now have.

              With great respect I remain
          Your Lordship's obedient humble servant,
                     (Signed)     W. H. SLEEMAN.

To the Right Hon. The Earl of Dalhousie, K.T., Governor-General of India.

                                      Lucknow, 11th June, 1849.
My Dear Elliot,

It will be desirable to have at least the wing of a regiment sent as soon as possible to Jhansee.
Bukhut Sing, who was allowed to escape after having been surrendered to Ellis at Kyrma, has
been since allowed to get too much a-head. He is aided by the Khereecha people openly; and
secretly, I fear, by some of the Powar Thakoors of Gigree under the rose. There are four small
fortified places between thirty and forty miles west of Jhansee, and not far from the Sinde,
held by Powar Thakoors, who are a shade higher in caste than the Bondeylas; and, in consequence,
all the principal chiefs take their daughters in marriage. They are needy, and as proud as
Lucifer, and will always eke out their means by robbery if they can. The Jhansee chief cannot
keep them in order without our aid. While I was there, they did not venture to rob after the
surrender of the Jylpoor man in September, 1844; and the Hareecha and Hyrwa people ventured
only to send a few highwaymen into the Gwalior state west of the Sinde river.

The Powar places I mean are Jignee, Odgow, and Belchree. There was a fourth near them just
as bad, called Nowneer; but the Thakoors of that place are all well disposed towards the Jbansee
chief, and are obedient. All are in the Jhansee state. If the marauders are pressed with energy
and sagacity, they will be soon put down; and you may rely upon the native chiefs not supporting
them, though, from their marriage connection, they may afford them an asylum secretly when
fugitives.

Who the Gwalior men are that are plundering I know not; but they are men of no note, and, if
pressed skilfully and rigorously in time, will soon be put down. The chiefs may all be relied
upon, I believe. They are mere gangs of robbers; and you know how easily a fanatic or successful
robber may collect a body for plunder in any part of India, where the danger of pursuit is
small. Had they been dealt with properly at first, they would never have got a-head so far:
time has been lost, and they will now give trouble, particularly at such a season. The evil
will be confined to the tract west of Jhansee occupied by these Powars. The chiefs are to the
east, north, and south of Jhansee; and the marauders would be allowed to enter their estates.
The Governor-General need not feel uneasy about them. The Nurwar chief was always needy, and
disposed to keep and shelter robbers. His few villages were resumed on his death last year,
and his widows pensioned; but some of his relations are, I conclude, among the marauders. There
is a wild tract west of the Sinde in the Gwalior territory, to which the marauders will fly
when hard pressed in the Jhansee state.

                 Yours sincerely,
            (Signed)       W. H. SLEEMAN.

To H. M. Elliot, Esq.,
     &c. &c.

                                  Lucknow, 18th June, 1849.

My Dear Elliot,

I was writing the last sentence of a long Report on Oude affairs when your note came in. There
are some parts that will amuse, some that will interest, and the whole gives, I believe, a
fair exposition of the evils, with a suggestion for the best remedy that I can think of. It
is the formation of a Board, consisting of a President and two members nominated by the King,
subject to the confirmation of the Governor-General, and not to be dismissed without his Lordship's
previous sanction. This Board to make the settlement of the revenue proposed when Lord Hardinge
was here, and to have the carrying it out.

This Board will be a substitute for the Regency, but not so good. The King is well in body;
and, unless he will abdicate, we cannot get the minority for the Regency. I think, upon the
whole, the Governor- General will think the Report worth reading, and the remedy worth considering.
It will bring little additional trouble on Government, but a good deal on the Resident, who
will require to have had much administrative experience.

Things are coming fast to the crisis, in which I must be called upon to advise and act, a thing
which the fiddlers and eunuchs dread. I can't trust the Report in the office, and the hand
may not be so legible as I could wish.

The Court is very averse to the appointment of a successor to Wilcox; and it is with reluctance
they have kept on the native officers who go on with the work. I told them either to keep them
on or to pension them. I don't think a successor should be urged upon them in the present state
of beggary to which they are reduced. Nobody sees any use in it, while there are a vast number
of useful things neglected for want of funds; as to the instruments, the Court care nothing
about them, knowing nothing of their value; and would, no doubt, be glad to give them to any
establishment requiring them.

The minister, singers, and eunuchs are all now sworn to be united; but this cannot last many
days. The "pressure from without," in the clamour for pay, will soon upset the minister; but
they will find it difficult to get another to undertake the burthen of forty or fifty lacs
of balance, and a score of fiddlers and eunuchs as privy councillors. Something must be done
to unthrone these wretches, or things will be worse and worse. The best remedy that occurs
to me is to interpose an authority which they dare not question, and the King cannot stultify;
and if the King objects, to tell him that he must abdicate in favour of his son. This, of all
courses, will be the best, and give no trouble; things would go on like "marriage bells," without
any trouble whatever to the Governor-General and your secretariat.

I am glad that the Punjaub Board goes on well. It is a scene of great importance and interest.
The only way to get the confidence and affection of men is to show that we confide in them;
and I don't think we need fear Seik soldiers while we treat them, and govern the country well.

We were very anxious about Mrs. Elliot for many days, for the accounts from Simla were bad;
but she is now, I am told, quite restored. I have suffered much less than I expected: I recovered
much sooner. The doctors tell me that I should have had no right to expect an earlier recovery
had I been twenty years younger.

              Yours sincerely,
           (Signed)    W. H. SLEEMAN.

To H. M. Elliot, Esq.,
   &c. &c.

                                  Lucknow, 24th July, 1849.
My Lord,

I have to-day written to Lord Fitzroy Somerset to request that he will do me the favour to
have the name of my only son placed, if possible, upon his Grace the Commander-in-Chiefs list
of candidates for commissions in Her Majesty's Dragoons. He was sixteen years of age on the
6th of January last, and is now prosecuting his studies under the care of Mr. C. J. Yeatman,
Westow Hill, Norwood, Surrey, five miles from London.

He is an amiable and gentlemanly lad, and will, I trust, be able to qualify himself to pass
the examination required; and my agents in London will be prepared to lodge the money for his
commission when available. He is my eldest child, and will have to take care of four sisters
when I am taken from them, as I must be ere long; and I am anxious to place him in the position
from which he can do so with most advantage. I could wish to have had him placed in the Bengal
Civil Service. But I have no personal friend in the direction, and no good that I may have
had an opportunity of doing for the people and government of India can be urged as a claim
to any employment for my child.

Having carried out your Lordship's policy successfully over a large and interesting portion
of India, and to the advantage, I believe, of many millions of people, you will not, I think,
be offended at my soliciting your Lordship's protection for my only son. He will stand in need
of it, since I know no other that I can solicit for him; and though my name might be of some
use to him in India, it can be of none in England. With a view to his taking care of his sisters,
I could wish him to be in a regiment not likely to come to India. General Thackwell tells me
that the regiments most likely to come to India soon are the 6th Dragoons, 9th Hussars, and
12th Lancers. Perhaps your Lordship might be willing to speak to Lord F. Somerset, or even
to his Grace the Duke himself, in favour of my son, who will be proud at any time when commanded
to attend your Lordship. I have the misfortune to have been with some of the most inefficient
sovereigns that ever sat upon a throne, with deficient harvests last year, and a threat of
still more deficient ones this year; and with a Government so occupied with the new acquisitions
of the Punjaub as to be averse to interfere much with the management of any other portion of
the country.

I remain, your lordship's most obedient, humble servant,

                       W. H. SLEEMAN.

To the Right Hon. Gen. Viscount Hardinge, G.C.B.,
            &c.     &c.       &c.

                                      Lucknow, 24th July, 1849.

My Lord,

May I, request that your Lordship will do me the favour to have the name of my only son, Henry
Arthur Sleeman, placed upon his Grace the Commander-in-Chiefs list of candidates for a commission
in one of her Majesty's Dragoon regiments? My agents, Messrs. Denny, Clark, and Co., Austin
Friars, London, will be prepared to lodge the money, and to forward to me any letters with
which they may be honoured by your Lordship. My rank is that of Lieut.-Colonel in the Honourable
East India Company's service, and present situation, that of Resident at the Court of his Majesty
the King of Oude.

     I have the honour to be,
          Your Lordship's obedient, humble servant,
               W. H. SLEEMAN.

To Lieut.-General Lord Fitzroy Somerset, G.C.B., Military Secretary to his Grace the Commander-in-Chief,
Horse Guards, London.

                                         Lucknow, August 1849.

My Lord,

1. I will answer your Lordship's queries in the order in which they are made.

2. The King, as I shall show in my next official report, is utterly unfit to have anything
to do with the administration, since he has never taken, or shown any disposition to take any
heed of what is done or suffered in the country. My letters have made no impression whatever
upon him. He spends all his time with the singers and the females they provide to amuse him,
and is for seven and eight hours together living in the house of the chief singer, Rajee-od
Dowla--a fellow who was only lately beating a drum to a party of dancing- girls, on some four
rupees a-month. These singers are all Domes, the lowest of the low castes of India, and they
and the eunuchs are now the virtual sovereigns of the country, and must be so as long as the
King retains any power. The minister depends entirely upon them, and between them and a few
others about Court everything that the King has to dispose of is sold.

3. To secure any reform in the administration, it will be necessary to require the King to
delegate all the powers of sovereignty to the Board. This he can do, retaining the name of
Sovereign and control of his household; or abdicating in favour of his son the heir apparent,
to whom the Board would be a regency till he comes of age. If the alternative be given him,
and he choose the former, it should be on the condition, that if his favourites continue to
embarrass the Government, he will be required to submit to the latter. Oude is now, in fact,
without a Government: the minister sees the King for a few minutes once a week or fortnight,
and generally at the house of the singer above named. The King sees nobody else save the singers
and eunuchs, and does not even pretend to know anything or care anything about public affairs.
His sons have been put under their care, and will be brought up in the same manner. He has
become utterly despised and detested by his people for his apathy amidst so much suffering,
and will not have the sympathy of any one, save such as have been growing rich by abusing his
power.

4. The members of such a Board as I propose, invested with full powers, and secured in office
under our guarantee during good conduct, would go fearlessly to work; they would divide the
labour; one would have the settlement of the land-revenue, with the charge of the police; the
second would have the judicial Courts; and if the Board be a regency during the minority, the
control of the household; the third would have the army. Each would have the nomination of
the officers of his department, subject to the confirmation of the whole Board, and the dismissal
would depend upon the sanction of the whole or two-thirds, as might be found expedient. If
the sanction of all three be required. Court influence may secure one vote, and impunity to
great offenders. Neither of the three would be liable to be deprived of his office, except
with the consent, or on the requisition of the Governor-General; and this privilege they would
value too highly to risk it by neglect or misconduct. The King's brother--a most worthy and
respectable, though not able man--might be a member, if agreeable to the King.

5. The abuses they would have to remedy are all perfectly well understood, and the measures
required to remedy them are all simple and obvious: a settlement would be made with the landholders,
based upon past avowed collections; they would be delighted to bind themselves to pay such
an assessment, as they would escape from the more than one-third more, which they have now
to pay, in one form or another, to contractors and Court favourites; the large landholders,
who are for the most part now in open resistance to the Government, would rejoice at the prospect
of securing their estates to their posterity, without the necessity of continually fighting
for them.

6. The army would soon become efficient: at present every man purchases his place in it from
the minister and the singers and eunuchs, and he loses it as soon as he becomes disabled from
wounds or sickness. The only exceptions are the four regiments under Captain Burlow, Captain
Bunbury, Captain Magness, and Soba Sing, lately Captain Buckley's; in these, all that are disabled
from wounds or sickness are kept on the strength of the corps, and each corps has with it a
large invalid establishment of this kind unrecognized by the Government. They could not get
their men to fight, without it. These regiments are put up at auction every season, and often
several times during one season; the contractor who bids highest gets the services of the best
for the season or the occasion; the purchase- money is divided between the minister and the
Court favourites, singers, &c. These are really efficient corps, and the others might soon
be made the same. The men are as fine-looking and brave as those of our, regular infantry,
for Oude teems with such men, who have from their boyhood been fighting against contractors
under the heads of their clan or families.

7. The rest are for the most part commanded by boys, or Court favourites, who seldom see them,
keep about two-thirds of what are borne on the rolls and paid for, and take about one-third
of the pay of what remain for themselves. The singer, Rajee-od Dowla, the prime favourite above
named, has two regiments thus treated, and of course altogether inefficient, ragged, hungry,
and discontented. It will be easy to remedy all this, get excellent men, and inspire them with
excellent spirit by instituting a modified pension establishment for men disabled in the discharge
of their duties, and providing for their regular pay and efficient command.

8. This would prevent the necessity of employing British troops, except on rare and great occasions;
the settlement of the land- revenue, and knowledge that they would be employed if required,
would keep the great landholders in obedience. It would be well to have back the corps of infantry
and two guns that were taken away from Pertanghurh, in Oude, in 1835. This is all the addition
that would be required to secure an efficient Government; and the scale to which our troops
in Oude had been reduced up to that time (1835) was generally considered the lowest compatible
with our engagements. A regiment of cavalry had been borrowed from Pertanghurh for the Nepaul
and Mahratta wars in 1814 and 1817; it was finally withdrawn in 1823.

9. The judicial Courts would be well conducted while the presiding officers felt secure in
their tenure of office, which they would do when their dismissal depended upon proof of guilt
or incompetency sufficient to satisfy a Board guaranteed by our Government.

10. The police would soon become efficient under the supervision and control of respectable
revenue-officers, having the same feeling of security in their tenure of office. All the revenue-officers
would, of course, be servants of Government instead of contractors. There would be grades answering
to our commissioners of divisions, say four; 2nd, to our collectors of revenue, say twenty-eight;
3rd, deputy-collectors, say twenty-eight; all under the Board, and guided by the member intrusted
with that branch of the administration: all would be responsible for the police over their
respective jurisdictions.

11. Oude ought to be, and would soon be, under such a system, a garden; the soil is the finest
in India, so are the men; and there is no want of an educated class for civil office: on the
contrary, they abound almost as much as the class of soldiers. From the numerous rivers which
flow through the country the water is everywhere near the surface, and the peasantry would
manure and irrigate every field, if they could do so in peace and security, with a fair prospect
of being permitted to reap the fruits. The terrible corruption of the Court is the great impediment
to all this good: the savings would more than pay all the increased outlay required for rendering
establishments efficient in all branches, while the treasury would receive at least one-third
more than the expenditure; that is, 1,50,00,000 Rs., or one crore and a half.

12. From the time the treaty of 1801 was made, up to within the last few years, the term "internal
enemies" was interpreted to mean the great landholders who might be in resistance to the Government,
and this interpretation was always acted upon; the only difficulty was in ascertaining whether
the resistance was or was not, under the circumstances, justifiable. While employed in Oude
with my regiment, and on the staff in 1818 and 1819, I saw much of the correspondence between
the Resident and Commandant; many letters from the Resident, Colonel Baillie, mentioning how
bitterly Saadulullee, with whom that treaty was made, had complained, that after the sacrifice
of half his kingdom for the aid of British troops in keeping down these powerful and refractory
landholders, he could not obtain their assistance without being subject to such humiliating
remonstrances as he got from officers commanding stations whenever he asked for it. Aid was
often given, and forts innumerable were reduced from time to time, but the privilege of building
them up again was purchased from the same or another contractor next season.

13. At this time I have calls for at least two battalions and a train of artillery, from about
six quarters, to enforce orders on these landholders. Captain Hearsey has had men of his Frontier
Police killed and wounded by them on the western border, and declares that nothing can be done
to secure offenders, refugees from our districts, with a less force. Captain Orr has had several
men wounded, and prisoners taken from him, by the same class on the eastern border, and declares
to the same effect. Sixteen sepoys of our army, 59th N. I., on their way home on furlough were
attacked and two of them killed, three weeks ago, by a third Zumeendar, at Peernugger, his
own estate, within ten miles of the Setapore Cantonments, where we have a regiment. Captain
Barlow's regiment and artillery, and another, with all Captain Hearsey's Frontier Police, are
in pursuit of him. Four others have committed similar outrages on our officers and sepoys and
their families, and the Government declares its utter inability to enforce obedience or grant
any redress, without a larger force than they have to send. Great numbers of the same class
are plundering and burning villages, and robbing and murdering on the highway, and laughing
at the impotency of the sovereign. It was certainly for aid in coercing these "internal enemies"
that the Sovereign of Oude ceded his territories to us, and for no other, and that aid may
be afforded at little cost, and to the great benefit of all under the system I have submitted
for your Lordship's consideration. It will be very rarely required, and when called for, a
mere demonstration will, in three cases out of four, be sufficient to effect the object.

14, After a time, or when the heir-apparent comes of age, the duties of the guaranteed members
of the Board may safely be united to a supervision over the settlement made with the principal
landholders, whose obedience our Government may consider itself bound to aid in enforcing;
all the rest may be left to a competent sovereign; and there will be nothing in the system
opposed to native usages, feelings, and institutions, to prevent its being adhered to. I should
mention, that many of these landholders have each armed and disciplined bodies of two thousand
foot and five hundred horse; and, what is worse, the command of as many as they like of "Passies,"
armed with bows and arrows. These Passies are reckless thieves and robbers of the lowest class,
whose only professions are thieving and acting as Chowkedars, or village police. But there came another one, if not the next nor could
I see him in the street or in church in over a month that I got tired in vain solicitallo, because I
knew I was in the village and that day went out hunting, a pastime he was very fond. "These days
and hours While I know that for me was sad and dreary and I know that I began to doubt them,
and even to lose the faith of Don Fernando, and I know my maid heard those words in reproof of
her audacity that had not previously heard, and I know that I was forced to put on my tears and
with the expression of my face not to give occasion to my parents ask me that what he was unhappy
and forced me lies to find the recital. But all this is over at one point came when it respects
and eventually run over the righteous speeches, and where they lost patience and went to place
my secret thoughts. And this was because, from there a few days, said on-site and in a nearby
city had married Don Fernando with a beautiful girl all extreme, and very major parents, though
not so rich that her portion would aspire to such a noble marriage. It was said that his name was Lucinda,
with other things in their Marriage took place worthy of admiration. "Cardenio heard the name
of Lucinda, and did nothing but shrug his shoulders, bit his lips, bent his brows and stop
there bit down her eyes two streams of tears. But why not let her story Dorothea, saying: -
"came the sad news to my ears, and instead of hearing it helárseme the heart, was so much anger
and rage that burned in him, which very nearly did not get out on the streets cried and publishing
of treachery and betrayal that I had done. But this transport of rage then to think about putting
that same night for work so I put: it was put in this habit, I gave one of the lads called home
for the farmers, it was servant of my father, whom I discovered my misfortune, and begged him
to accompany me to the city ​​where I heard my enemy was. He, he remonstrated with my boldness
and condemned my resolution, seeing me bent upon my purpose, offered to keep me company as
he said, until the end of the world. I at once packed up in a linen pillow a woman's dress,
and some jewels and money, so it could happen. And in the silence That night, without letting
my treacherous maid know, I left my house, accompanied by my servant and abundant anxieties,
and I set off from the city on foot, carried in flight the desire to reach as not to prevent
what he had for granted, at least to call upon Don Fernando tell me with what conscience he
had done. "I arrived two and a half days where I wanted, and on entering the city, asked for
the house of the parents of Lucinda, and the first man I asked the question I answered more
than I wanted to hear. He told me the house and everything he had occurred at the betrothal
of his daughter, a thing so public in the city, which is made in cliques to tell it all over
her. He said that on the night of Don Fernando was married to Lucinda, after she said yes to being
his wife, had taken a sudden fainting fit, and that getting her husband to unbutton his chest to
give her air, he found a paper written by the same letter to Lucinda, she said and declared that
she could not be the wife of Don Fernando, because she was already Cardenio, that what the
man said, was a gentleman principal of the same city, and that if she had accepted Don Fernando,
it was not to leave obedience to their parents. In short, these reasons he said contained the paper,
which was understand that she had intended to kill himself on running out to marry, and there
was the reasons why he had killed himself. All of which say they confirmed a dagger I found
I do not know how much of their clothing. All Seeing this, Don Fernando, thinking that Lucinda
had been mocked and scorned and despised, attacked her, rather than her swoon, and with the dagger
that had been found tried to stab her, and did if their parents and those who were present prevented
him. Said, moreover, which is then Ferdinand missed, and that Lucinda did not recover from
her prostration until the next day, which was her parents how she was really the bride of that Cardenio
I said. I learned besides that Cardenio, they said, had been present at the betrothal, and that
upon seeing her betrothed, which he never thought, left the city in despair, leaving behind him
a letter written, where the insult implied that Lucinda had made, and how he was going where
he not see him. All this was common knowledge throughout the city, and everyone spoke of it, and
more when it became known that Lucinda had been absent from his parents' house and the city
therefore not found in all of it, that the trial lost their parents and knew not what will
take to find it. What I learned revived my hopes, and I was better not to have found Don Fernando
than to find him married, thinking it was not yet completely closed the door to my relief, and
I thought it might be that the sky had put this impairment in the second marriage, to attract
to know what the former one, and fall the fact that he was a Christian and was more bound to
his soul that human respect. All these things passed through my mind, and I consoled myself
without comfort, feigning a faint and distant hopes to entertain the life which I now abhor.
"But while I, in the city, not knowing what to do, as Don Fernando was not, reached my ears a public
crier offering a great reward to those who find me, and giving the particulars of age and the
very dress I wore, and I heard it said that I had taken my parents house the lad who came with,
which touched my heart, to see how walking my credit drop, it was not enough to lose with my coming,
but add with whom, being subjective so low and so unworthy of my consideration. The instant
I heard the notice I quitted the city with my servant, who was beginning to show signs of
wavering in the faith that I had promised fidelity, and that night we entered the most thickly wooded
mountain, with the fear of discovery. But as often said, one evil calls up another and that
the end of one misfortune is apt to be first of a larger, and it happened to me, because my
good servant, until then faithful and insurance and as I saw in this solitude, prompted from
his own villainy rather than my beauty, wanted advantage of the occasion, in his view, these
wastes was charged, and with little shame and less fear of God nor respect me, required me
to love, and seeing me with ugly and fair responded to the shameless words of his purposes, he laid
aside the entreaties which he exploited first thought, and began to use force. But just Heaven,
that few or no times left to watch and encourage the just intentions, favored the mine, so with my
little strength, and with little work, I found it by a precipice, where I left him, I do not
know whether dead or alive, and certainly lighter than my terror and fatigue, I went through these
mountains, without any other thought or purpose save that of hiding in them, and escaping my
father and those of you were looking for me. "With this hope, has however many months that went
into them, where I found a farmer who took me by his servant to a place that is in the bowels
of this sierra, which I have served as a lad all this time trying to be always in the field
to cover up this hair now, as if thinking, I have discovered. But all my industry and my application
was and has been of no avail, for my master made aware that I was not male, born in the same
base thought as my servant, and as fortune does not always give the remedies work, I found
no precipice or ravine where hurl and knock off the master, as I had in the servant; and so
I leave him and inconvenient retail asconderme again between these asperities try it my strength
or my apologies. Now I say that I became to ambush, and to seek where unimpeded with sighs and
tears could ask the sky hurts my misery and give me leave industry and favor of it, or to make
life in these solitudes, leaving no memory of this sad, so no fault of his will have been subject
to it is spoken and whispered in his and in foreign lands. "

Chapter XXIX. That is the discretion of the fair Dorothea, with other things to be happy and
pastime

"This, gentlemen, the true story of my tragedy, look and judge now whether the sighs escuchastes
that the words you heard and the tears from my eyes out, had occasion enough to appear in
greater abundance, and, considering the quality of my misfortune, you will see to be in vain consolation,
it is impossible to remedy della. All I ask (what with easily you can and must do) to advise me
where I can spend my life without me finish fear and dread that I
have to be found of those who seek me, that, although I know the much
love my parents have assured me that I will be well received Dellos
is so much shame I think that occupies only, not as they thought,
I have to look to their presence, I have it better be banished forever
from sight not see his face, with thought They saw the mine outside
of the honesty of me had to have promised.

Silent Having said this, and his face covered with a color that was very clear sense and shame
of the soul.

In their own felt that they had heard as much pity as admiration of his misfortune, and although
the priest would then comfort and counsel, took Cardenio first hand, saying: "Well, ma'am, you
are the fair Dorothea, the daughter Clenardo only the rich. Dorothea was astonished when he heard
the name of his father, and seeing how low was the one who named him, because he has said Cardenio
was badly dress, and so, he said, "And who are you, brother, and you know the name of my father?
For me, until now, if I remember correctly, the entire course of the story of my misfortune
I have not named. "I am," replied Cardenio, "that no future, according to you, madame, you have said,
Lucinda said she was his wife. I am the unfortunate Cardenio, whom the wrong term of that which
hath made you where you are brought me to see me which I see: dead, naked, devoid of all human
comfort and, worst of all, devoid of reason, for I have not but when the sky will make myself
crave for a brief space. I, Theodora I am who I found this on the wrongs of Don Fernando, and
waited to hear the yes to be his wife gave Lucinda. I'm the one who had not courage to see
what had become of his fainting, or what was the role that was found in the chest, because
he had no soul suffering for many misadventures together, and so I left the house and patience,
and a letter I left my host, who begged in the hands of Lucinda's went down, and Vineman these
solitudes, with the intention of ending life in them, that from that point I hated as a mortal my
enemy. But luck did not want to take it off, content to take my view, perhaps to preserve me
for the good fortune I have had to find you, then, remains true, as I think it is, what we
have told they could still be that both of us had the sky saved best event in our disasters than
we think. Because budget Lucinda can not marry Don Fernando, being mine, or Don Fernando with
her, because yours, and have it so clearly stated, we may expect the sky to us restore what
is ours, it is still in being, and has not alienated or destroyed. And because we have this consolation,
born not very distant hope, nor founded in delirious imaginations suplícoos, madam, for you
to take another decision in your honest thoughts, for I I take mine, preparing yourself to expect
better fortune, for I swear by the faith of and a Christian gentleman, not to forsake you
until I see in possession of Don Fernando, and when with reasons not to attract MIGHT know what
I must, then use the freedom that gives me as a gentleman, and justly to challenge him, by reason
of unreason which makes them, without thinking of my wrongs, whose vengeance I will go to heaven
in land yours. With that Cardenio said to admire ended Dorothea, and not knowing Why so big thanks
again to offer, she attempted to kiss his feet, but Cardenio would not permit, and the licentiate
replied for both, and adopted the good speech Cardenio, and, above all, begged, advised and persuaded
to go with him to his village where they could repair the things that were missing and that there
would order how to search Don Fernando, or how to Dorothea to her parents, or do what they
thought fit. Cardenio and Dorothea thanked him, and acetic the grant that was offered. The
barber that everything had been suspended and silent, also made good conversation and offered
to not least that will cure all that was good to serve. He told them briefly the causes that
brought them there, with the strangeness of the madness of Don Quixote and how waiting for his squire,
who had gone in search of him. Vínosele to mind Cardenio like dreams, the quarrel he had with
Don Quixote and told the others, but not wherefore he knew that was his quistión. Here they
heard voices, and they knew that the Sancho Panza gave was that, by not finding them where you left
them, called them loudly. Saliéronle the meeting, and asking for Don Quixote, told how he had
found naked in his shirt, lank, yellow and dying of hunger, and sighing for his lady Dulcinea;
and that since she had said she would send him to come out of that place and go home to El
Toboso, where she was waiting, had said he was determined not to appear at her beauty; I date
until my Fazana hobiese ficiesen you worthy of his grace. And if that was going on, was in
danger of not becoming an emperor, as was required, even archbishop, who was the least I could
be. So, who would look what was to be done to get there. The lawyer told him not to worry,
that they would remove him there, he would not like evil. He then told Cardenio and Dorothea
what they had intended to remedy Don Quixote, at least to take him home. To which Dorothy said she
would do distressed damsel better than the barber, and more that there was dressed to do the
natural, and to be allowed the trust to represent all that was necessary for carry out their
scheme, for she had read many books about chivalry, and knew the style that had the wretched
maidens when they asked for their gifts to knights-errant. "But there is no need more," said the
priest, but then put to work, which, without doubt, shows good luck for us, then, so without
thinking, you, gentlemen, you has begun to open a door for your choice and we have given to
us we had necessary. Dorothea then took out his pillow a complete petticoat of some rich stuff
and mantellina of some other fine green cloth, and a box a necklace and other jewels, in an
instant was decorated so that a great and rich lady seemed. All that and more, said he taken
from his home for what was offered, and that until then had been offered during of Habell necessary.
Everyone happy in the extreme, her great grace, poise and beauty, and confirmed Don Fernando
by a little knowledge, since discarded such beauty. But the most widely admired was Sancho Panza,
for it seemed, as was so true, that every day of his life had seen such a beautiful creature,
and so he asked the curate with great eagerness to tell him who was this beautiful lady, and
what were you looking for those byways. "This beautiful lady "Replied the priest, brother Sancho,
is, as he says nothing, is the heiress line male line of the great kingdom of Micomicón, which
comes in search of your master to beg a gift, which is that he desfaga a wrong or injury that a wicked
giant has date, and the reputation of a good knight your love is everything discovered, Guinea
has been to fetch the princess. "Happy happy sought and this finding," said Sancho Panza, especially
if my master is so fortunate to redress that wrong and right that wrong, killing the Take whoreson
giant your worship says, to kill himself if he is, if it was not ghost, ghosts against my master
has no power whatsoever. But one thing I would beg Your Grace, among others, sir, is that, because
my love will not take wins to be an archbishop, which is what I fear, your worship advised
to marry later with princess, and this will be prevented from receiving orders and will easily
come archbishop his empire, and I at the end of my desires I've looked good in it and am on my own
I'm not okay my love is archbishop, because I'm useless to the Church, as I am married, and stop beating
dispensations now to bring order to have income for the Church, having, as I have, women and
children, would never end. So, sir, the whole point is to my then marry love with this lady,
who until now do not know his grace, and so do not call for his name. -Llamas, "replied the priest,"
the princess Micomicona, because his kingdom calling Micomicón, of course she has to call it. "No doubt
about it," said Sancho, I have seen many take their name and title of birthplace, calling Pedro
de Alcala, Juan of Ubeda, and Diego of Valladolid, and this same they should be used there in
Guinea: queens take the names of their kingdoms. "That should be," said the priest, and what your
master's marrying, I do it all in my power. With what was so pleased Sancho as the priest admired
its simplicity, and seeing how he was embedded in the fantasy the mesmos nonsense that his
master, for without any doubt was given to understand that was to come to be emperor.


Fortunately the rains have this season been very favourable for tillage, and the crops may
be good if we can preserve them by, some timely arrangement.

The Sultanpoor Benares corps might well spare a wing for Lucknow, and so might the corps at
Bareilly spare one.

               (Signed)     W. H. SLEEMAN.

                                    Lucknow, 11th October, 1849.

My Dear Elliot,

Here is a little item of palace news, communicated by one of the poets who has to assist his
Majesty in selecting his verses, and who knows a good deal about what is going on among the
favourites. Perhaps you may recollect him, Ameen-od Doulah, the eldest son of the late Aga Meer.

There is not a greater knave than Walee Alee in India, I believe. That his Majesty will consent
to what the Governor-General may authorise us to propose I have no doubt, for he and his family
are by this time satisfied that we shall propose nothing but what is good for them and the
people of Oude.

But the King is no longer in a sound state of mind, and will say and do whatever the most plausible
of the bad speakers may recommend. When I see him, I must have his signature before respectable
witnesses to all his answers to distinct propositions, and act upon them at once, as far as
I may be authorised by the Governor-General, or nothing will be done. It would not do for me
to commune with him about affairs till I get instructions from you, as he would be sure to
tell the singers, eunuchs, and minister all that has been said the moment I left him.

He has never been a cruel or badly-disposed man, but his mind, naturally weak, has entirely
given way, and is now as helpless as that of an infant. Every hour's delay will add to our
difficulties, and I wait most anxiously for orders. I am prepared with the new arrangements,
and feel sure that the system will work well, and have the Governor-General's approval. I can
explain it in a few words, and show the details in a small Table all ready for transmission
when called for.

We shall have the royal family, the court, and people with us, with the exception of the minister
and the favourites, who are in league with him, and those who share in the fruits of their
corruption. Fifteen lacs are spoken of as the means ready to get either me out of the way or
put a stop to all attempts of improvement for the present. I have in my public letter mentioned
seven lacs as the average annual perquisites of the minister--they are at present at least twelve.

                Yours sincerely,
           (Signed)       W. H. SLEEMAN.

December 1, 1849.--I left Lucknow to proceed on a tour through Oude, to see the state of the
country and the condition of the people. My wish to do so I communicated to Government, on
the 29th of March last, and its sanction was conveyed to me, in a letter from the Secretary,
dated the 7th of April. On the 16th of November I reported to Government my intention to proceed,
under this sanction, on the 1st of December, and on the 19th I sent the same intimation to
the King. On the 28th, as soon as the ceremonies of the Mohurrum terminated, His Majesty expressed
a wish to see me on the following day; and on the 29th I went at 9 A.M., accompanied by Captain
Bird, the first Assistant, and Lieutenant Weston, the Superintendant of the Frontier Police,
and took leave of the King, with mutual expression of good-will. The minister, Alee Nakee Khan,
was present. On the 30th I made over charge of the Treasury to Captain Bird, who has the charge
of the department of the Sipahees' Petitions and the Fyzabad Guaranteed Pensions; and, taking
with me all the office establishments not required in these three departments, proceeded, under
the usual salute, to Chenahut, eight miles.*

[* My escort consisted, of two companies of sipahees, from the 10th Regiment Native Infantry,
and my party of Captain Hardwick, lieutenant Weston, and Lieutenant and Mrs. Willows and my
wife and children, with occasional visitors from Lucknow and elsewhere.]

The Minister, Dewan and Deputy Minister, Ghoolam Ruza, came out the first stage with me, and
our friend Moonuwur-od Dowla, drove out to see us in the evening.

December 2, 1849.--We proceeded to Nawabgunge, the minister riding out with me, for some miles,
to take leave, as I sat in my tonjohn. At sunrise I ventured, for the first time since I broke
my left thigh-bone on the 4th April, to mount an elephant, the better to see the country. The
land, on both sides of the road, well cultivated, and studded with groves of mango and other
trees, and very fertile.

The two purgunnas of Nawabgunge and Sidhore are under the charge of Aga Ahmud, the Amil, who
has under him two naibs or deputies, Ghoolam Abbas and Mahummud Ameer. All three are obliged
to connive at the iniquities of a Landholder, Ghoolam Huzrut, who resides on his small estate
of Jhareeapoora, which he is augmenting, in a manner too common in Oude, by seizing on the
estates of his weaker neighbours. He wanted to increase the number of his followers, and on
the 10th of November 1849, he sent some men to aid the prisoners in the great jail at Lucknow
to break out. Five of them were killed in the attempt, seven were wounded, and twenty-five
were retaken, but forty- five escaped, and among them Fuzl Allee, one of the four assassins,
who, in April 1847, cut down the late minister, Ameen-od Dowla, in the midst of his followers,
in one of the principal streets of Lucknow, through which the road, leading from the city to
Cawnpore, now passes. One of the four, Tuffuzzul Hoseyn, was killed in attempting to escape
on the 8th August 1849, and one, Alee Mahomed, was killed in this last attempt. The third,
Fuzl Allee, with some of the most atrocious and desperate of his companions, is now with this
Ghoolam Huzrut, disturbing the peace of the country. The leader in this attempt was Ghoolam
Hyder Khan, who is still in jail at Lucknow.

On my remarking to the King's wakeel that these ruffians had all high-sounding names, he said,
"They are really all men of high lineage; and men of that class, who become ruffians, are always
sure to be of the worst description." "As horses of the best blood, when they do become vicious,
are the most incorrigible, I suppose?" "Nothing can be more true, sir," rejoined the wakeel.
An account of the attack made by the above-named ruffians on the minister, may be here given
as both interesting and instructive, or at least as illustrative of the state of society and
government in Oude.

At five in the morning of the 8th of April 1847, the minister, Ameen- od Dowlah, left his house
in a buggy to visit the King. Of his armed attendants he had only three or four with him. He
had not gone far when four armed assassins placed themselves in front of his buggy and ordered
him to stop. One of them, Tuffuzzul Hoseyn, seized the horse; by the bridle, and told the minister,
that he must give him the arrears of pay due before he could go on. The other three, Fuzl Allee,
Allee Mahomed, and Hyder Khan, came up and stood on the right side of the buggy. One of the
minister's servants, named Hollas, tried to prevent their coming near, but was fired upon by
Allee Mahomed. He missed him, but Fuzl Allee discharged his blunderbuss at him, and he fell;
but in falling, he wounded Hyder Khan slightly with his sword. Hyder Khan then threw away his
fire-arms and sprang into the buggy with his naked dagger in his right hand and the minister
in his left. The minister seized him round the waist, forced him back out of the buggy on the
left, and fell upon him. Tuffuzzul Hoseyn then quitted his hold of the horse and rushed to
his comrade's assistance, but the minister still holding Hyder Khan in his right hand, seized
Tuffuzzul Hoseyn with his left. Syud Aman Allee, another personal servant of the minister,
was cut down by Fuzl Allee, in attempting to aid his master, and a third personal servant,
Shah Meer, was severely wounded by Allee Mahomed, and stood at a distance of twenty paces,
calling for help. Fuzl Allee now made two cuts with his sword on the right shoulder and arm
of the minister, below the elbow, and he quitted his hold on the two assassins and fell. The
four assassins now grasped their victim, and told him that they would do him no farther harm
if no rescue were attempted. As they saw the rest of the minister's armed attendants and a
crowd approach, Fuzl Allee and Hyder Khan, with their blunderbusses loaded and cocked, stood
one at each end of an open space of about sixty yards, and threatened to shoot the first man
who should venture to approach nearer. The crowd and attendants of the minister were kept back,
and no one ventured to enter this space, in the centre of which the minister lay, grasped by
Tuffuzzul Hoseyn and Allee Mahomed, who held their naked daggers at his breast. The minister
called out to his attendants and the crowd to keep back. He was then allowed to rise and walk
to a small raised terrace on the side of the street, where he lay down on his back, being unable
any longer to sit or stand from the loss of blood. Tuffuzzul Hoseyn and Allee Mahomed knelt
over him, holding the points of their daggers at his breast, and swearing that they would plunge
them to his heart if he attempted to move, or any one presumed to enter the open space to rescue
him. Hollas and Syud Aman Allee lay bleeding at the spot where they fell. Hollas died that
day, and Syud Aman Allee a few days after, of lock-jaw.

As soon as the attack on the minister was made, information of it was sent off to the Resident,
Colonel Richmond, who wrote to request the Brigadier Commanding the Troops in Oude, to send
him, as soon as possible, a regiment of infantry with two guns, from the Cantonments, which
are three miles and a-half distant from the Residency, on the opposite side from the scene
of the attack, to prevent any tumult that the loose characters of the city might attempt to
raise on the occasion, and repaired himself to the spot attended by the Assistant, Captain
Bird, and a small guard of sipahees. They reached the open spot, in the centre of which the
minister lay, about a quarter of an hour after he fell. He found the street, in which the attack
took place, crowded with people up to the place where the two sentries, Fuzl Allee and Hyder
Khan, stood at each end of the open space, in the centre of which the minister lay, with the
daggers of the two other assassins pressing upon his breast. On reaching one end of the open
space, the Resident directed Captain Bird to advance to the spot where the minister lay. The
assassin who guarded that end at first threatened to shoot him, but no sooner recognized him
than he let him pass on unattended. He asked the two men, who knelt over the minister, what
they meant by this assault. They told him, that good men were no longer employed in the King's
service, and that they were, in consequence, without the means of subsistence; and had been
compelled to resort to this mode of obtaining them; that they required fifty thousand rupees
from the minister, with a written assurance from the British Resident, that they should be
escorted in safety across the Ganges into the British territory with this sum.

The Resident peremptorily refused to enter into any written agreement with them, and told them,
through the Assistant, that if they presumed to put the minister to death, or to offer him
any further violence, they should be all four immediately shot down and cut to pieces; but,
if they did him no further harm, their lives should, be spared; and, to prevent their being
killed as soon as they quitted their hold, that he would take them all with him to the Residency,
and neither imprison them himself, nor have them made over as prisoners to the Oude Government;
but that he declined being a party to any arrangement that the minister might wish to make
of paying money for his life.

They continued resolutely to threaten instant death to the minister should any one but the
Resident or his Assistant presume to enter the open space in which he lay. Many thousands of
reckless and desperate characters filled the street, ready to commence a tumult, for the plunder
of the city, the moment that the minister or the assassins should be killed, while the relations
and dependents of the minister, with loud cries, offered lacs of rupees to the assassins if
they spared his life, so as to encourage them to hold out. They at last collected and brought
to the spot, on three or four elephants, the fifty thousand rupees demanded by the assassins,
and offered them to his assailants apparently with his concurrence; and the four ruffians,
having assented to the terms offered by the Resident, permitted Doctor Login, the Residency
Surgeon, to approach the prostrate minister and dress his wounds. One of the assassins, however,
continued to kneel by his side with his naked dagger resting on his breast till he saw the
other three seated upon the elephants, on which the money was placed, with the understanding,
that the guard of sipahees, which the Resident had brought with him, should escort them to
the Residency, and that Captain Bird, the Assistant, should accompany them. The fourth man
then quitted his hold on the minister, who had become very faint, and climbed upon Captain
Bird's elephant and took seat behind him. Captain Bird, however, made him get off, and mount
another elephant with his companions. The crowd shouted shah bash, shah bash!--well done, well
done! and they attempted to scatter some of the money from the elephants among them, but were
prevented by Captain Bird, who dreaded the consequences in such a tumult. They were all four
taken to the Residency under the guard of sipahees, and accommodated in one of the lower rooms
of the office; and a guard was placed over the money with orders to keep back the crowd of
spectators, which was very great. Three of the four ruffians had been wounded by the minister's
attendants before they could secure his person, and their wounds were now dressed by Doctor Login.

It was now ten o'clock, and at twelve the Resident had an interview with the King, who had
become much alarmed, not only for the safety of the minister, but for that of the city, threatened
by the thousands of bad characters, anxious for an occasion of pillage; and he expressed an
anxious wish that the assassins should be made over to him for trial. But the Resident pleaded
the solemn promise which he had made, and his Majesty admitted the necessity of the promise
under the circumstances, and that of keeping it; but said that he would have the whole affair
carefully investigated. As soon as the Resident left him, he sent a company of sipahees with
fetters to the Residency to receive charge of the prisoners, but the Resident would not give
them up. The King then wrote a letter to the Resident with his own hand, requesting that the
prisoners might be surrendered to him. The Resident, in his reply to His Majesty's, letter,
told him, that he could not so far violate the promise he had given, but that he would send
them to answer any other charges that might be brought against them, in any open and impartial
Court that might be appointed to try them; and if they should be found guilty of other crimes,
His Majesty might order any sentence passed upon them, short of death, to be carried into execution.

Charges of many successful attempts of the same kind, and many atrocious murders perpetrated
by the ruffians, in distant districts of Oude, were preferred against them; and they were prevailed
upon to give up their arms, and to submit to a fair and open trial, on the other charges preferred
against them, on condition that they should neither be put to death nor in any way maimed,
or put in fetters, or subjected to ill-treatment before trial and conviction. The Resident
offered them the alternative of doing this or leaving the Residency, after he had read to them
the King's letter, and told them, that his promise extended only to saving their lives and
escorting them to the Residency; and, that he would not be answerable for their lives beyond
the court-yard of the Residency, if they refused the conditions now offered. They knew that
their lives would not be safe for a moment after they got beyond the court-yard, and submitted.
Their arms and the fifty thousand rupees were sent to the King. At four in the afternoon, the
four prisoners were made over to the King's wakeel, on a solemn promise given under the express
sanction of his Majesty, of safe conduct through the streets, of freedom from fetters, or any
kind of ill-treatment before conviction, and of fair and open trial.

But they had not gone two paces from the Residency court-yard, when they were set upon by the
very people sent by the King to take care of them on the way; the King's wakeel having got
into his palkee and gone on before them towards the palace. They were beaten with whips, sticks,
and the hilts of swords, till one of the four fell down insensible, and the other three were
reduced to a pitiable condition. The Resident took measures to protect them from further violence,
recalled the wakeel; and, after admonishing him for his dishonourable conduct, had the prisoners
taken unfettered to a convenient house near the prison. The wounded minister wrote to the King,
earnestly praying that the prisoners might not suffer any kind of ill-treatment before conviction,
after a fair and impartial trial. The Resident reported to Government all that had occurred,
and stated, that he should see that the promises made to the prisoners were fulfilled, that,
should they be convicted before the Court appointed to conduct the trial, of other crimes perpetrated
before this assault on the minister, they would be subject to such punishment as the Mahommedan
law prescribed for such crimes. Three of them, Tuffuzzul Hoseyn, Hyder Khan, and Fuzl Allee,
were convicted, on their own confessions, and the testimony of their own relations, of many
cold blooded murders, and successful attempts to extort money from respectable and wealthy
persons in different parts of Oude, similar to this on the minister, and all four were sentenced
to imprisonment for life. The Government of India had insisted on their not being executed
or mutilated. Fuzl Allee, as above stated, broke jail, and is still at large at his old trade,
and Hyder Khan is still in prison at Lucknow.

These ruffians appear to have been encouraged, in this assault upon the minister, for the purpose
of extorting money, by a similar but more successful attempt made in the year 1824, by a party
headed by a person named Syud Mahomed Eesa Meean, alias Eesa Meean.

This person came to Lucknow with a letter of recommendation from Captain Gough. He delivered
it in person to the Resident, but was never after seen or heard of by him till this affair
occurred. He became a kind of saint, or apostle, at Lucknow; and Fakeer Mahomed Khan Rusaldar,
who commanded a corps of Cavalry, and had much influence over the minister, Aga Meer, became
one of his disciples, and prevailed upon the minister to entertain him as a mosahib, or aide-de-camp.
He soon became a favourite with Aga Meer, and formed a liaison with a dancing-girl, named Beeba
Jan. His conduct towards her soon became too violent and overbearing, and she sought shelter
with the Khasmahal, or chief consort, of the minister, who promised her protection, and detained
her in her apartments. Eesa Meean appealed to the minister, and demanded her surrender. The
minister told him that she was mistress of her own actions, as she had never gone through the
ceremonies of permanent marriage, or nikkah, nor even those of a temporary one, motah; and
most be considered as altogether free to choose her own lovers or mode of life.

He then appealed to Moulavee Karamut Allee, the tutor of Aga Meer's children, but was told,
that he could not interfere, as the female was a mere acquaintance of his, and bound to him
by no legal ties whatever; and must, therefore, be considered as free to reside where and with
whom she chose. Eesa Meean then took his resolution, and prevailed upon some fifteen of the
loose and desperate characters who always swarm at Lucknow, to aid him in carrying it out.
On the 2nd of June 1824, Karamut Allee, the tutor, was bathing, and Aga Meer's two eldest sons,
Aga Allee, aged eleven, and Nizam-od Dowlah, aged six years were reading their lessons in the
school-room, under the deputy-tutor, Moulavee Ameen Allee. It was early in the morning, but
the minister had gone out to wait upon the King. Eesa Meean entered the school-room, and approached
the children with the usual courtesy and compliments, followed by six armed men, and one table
attendant, or khidmutgar.

The two boys were sitting beside each other, the eldest, Aga Allee, on the left, and the youngest,
Nizam-od Dowla, on the right. Eesa Meean sat down on the left side of the eldest, and congratulated
both on the rapid progress they were making in their studies. Three of his followers, while
he was doing this, placed themselves on the left of the eldest, and the other three on the
right of the youngest. On a concerted signal all drew forth and cocked their pistols, and placed
themselves at the only three doors that opened from the school-room, two at each, while at
a signal made by the khidmutgar, eight more men came in armed in the same manner. Two of them
with naked daggers in their right hands seized the two boys with their left, and threatened
them with instant death if they attempted to more or call for help. The other six threatened
to kill any one who should attempt to force his way into the apartment. The khidmutgar, in
the mean time, seized and brought into the room two large gharahs or pitchers of drinking water,
that stood outside, as the weather was very hot, and the party would require it They were afraid
that poison might be put into the water if left outside after they had commenced the assault.
Eesa Meean then declared, that he had been driven to this violent act by the detention of his
girl by the Khasmahal, and must have her instantly surrendered, or they would put the boys
to death. Hearing the noise from his bathing-room, their tutor, Karamut Allee, rushed into
the room with nothing on his person but his waist-band, and began to admonish the ruffians.
Seeing him unarmed, and respecting his peaceful character, they let him pass in and vociferate,
but paid no regard to what he said.

The alarm had spread through the house and town, and many of the chief officers of the Court
were permitted to enter the room unarmed. Roshun-od Dowlah, Sobhan Allee Khan, Fakeer Mahomed
Khan, Nuzee Allee Khan, (the Khasmahul's son-in-law,) and others of equal rank, all in loud
terms admonished the assailants, and demanded the surrender of the children, but all were alike
unheeded. The chief merchant of Lucknow, Sa Gobind Lal, came in; and thinking that all affairs
could and ought to be settled in a business-like way, told the chief officers to fix the sum
to be given, and he would at once pledge himself to the payment. All agreed to this, and Sobhan
Allee Khan, the Chief Secretary of the minister, set to work and drew up a long and eloquent
paper of conditions. On his beginning to read it, one of the ruffians, who had one eye, rushed
in, snatched it from his hand, tore it to pieces, and threw the fragments into his chief's,
Eesa Meean's, face, saying, "that this fellow would write them all out of their lives, as he
was writing the people of Oude every day out of their properties; that if they must die, it
should not be by pen and paper, but by swords and daggers in a fair fight; that all their lives
had been staked, and all should die or live together." He was overpowered by the others, and
other papers were drawn up by the ready writer and consummate knave Sobhan Allee, but the one-eyed
man contrived to get hold of all, one after the other, and tear them up.

The minister was with the King when he first heard of the affair, and he went off forthwith
to the Resident, Mr. Ricketts, to say, that his Majesty had in vain endeavoured to rescue the
boys through his principal civil officers, and had sent all his available troops, but in vain;
and now earnestly entreated the British Resident to interpose and save their lives. The Resident
consented to do so, on condition that any arrangement he might find it necessary to make should
be binding on his Majesty and the minister. Aga Meer returned to the King with this message,
and his Majesty agreed to this condition. The Resident then sent his head moonshie, Gholam
Hossein, to promise Eesa Meean, that the woman should be restored to him, and any grievance
he might have to complain of should be redressed, and his party all saved, if he gave up the
children. But he and his followers now demanded a large sum of money, and declared, that they
would murder the boys unless it was given and secured to them, with a pledge for personal security
to the whole party.

The minister, on hearing this, came to the Resident, and implored him to adopt some measures
to save the lives of the children. A particular triangle represented in my imagination, I Here
is a sensible representation; intellectual act of perception of the nature of a triangle considered
in general, here is a sensible idea concerning the order or geometrical knowledge mine an act
of understanding or the will, here is a pure idea and intuitive intelligence will, conceived in
general, here is a certain general idea, substance, here is a indefinite general idea (V. Cap.
XII and XIII).

[198.] What is meant by innate? The unborn, what the spirit has, not for work own, not by impressions
coming from outside, but for immediate gift of the Author of nature. The innate as opposed to what
is acquired, and ask if there are innate ideas, is to ask whether
before to receive impressions and to exercise any act, we already
have in our minds the ideas.

[199.] It can be argued that sensible representations are innate. Experience testified that no prints
of the bodies have no representations to them; once put those in action in the appropriate
way, we can not experience them. This is general to all the sensations, whether current and remembered.
Those who engage to defend sensitive representations exist in our soul, before all organic prints,
hold an opinion that can not support with facts and experience nor
a priori reasons.

[200.] It is noteworthy that the argument based on the inability of the body convey impressions
the spirit, proves nothing in favor of the opinion that fight. Even when the argument be substantiated,
not infer the necessity of innate ideas, since, with the system occasional causes would save the
physical isolation of body and spirit and at the same time one could
argue that the ideas did not preexist, but have been caused to the
presence and on the occasion of organic disease.

[201.] Ideas on sensible representations, seem to consist, not in understanding, but this acts
on those representations (V. Cap. XX). Call these ideas is innate
to counteract the experience, and to acknowledge the nature of them.

Eesa Meean then rose and said: "Money is not my object. I despise it. I regard nothing but
the preservation of my honour, and agree to what you propose; but I have several companions
here who require to be consulted: let me speak to them." He then went into the large room.
His companions all made objections of one kind or another, and what they all agreed to one
moment was rejected the next. They vociferated loudly, and disputed violently with each other,
and with all around them, and at times appeared desperate and determined to sacrifice the boys,
and sell their own lives as dearly as possible. Eesa Meean himself seemed to be the most violent
and boisterous of all, and had his hand frequently on the hilt of his sword when he disputed
with the King's officers, whom he abused in the grossest possible terms. They did more harm
than good by their want of temper and patience, but above all by their utter want of character,
since no one could place the slightest reliance on the word of any one of them in such a trying
moment. They seemed to have no control over their feelings, and to think that they could do
all that was required by harsh language and loud bawling.

Captain Lockett at last persuaded them to leave the whole affair in his hands; and had they
done so at first, he would have settled the matter, he thought, in half the time. They had
been discussing matters in this angry manner for four hours and a half, without making the
slightest impression on the ruffians; but when all became silent, Captain Lockett prevailed
on them to release the boys on the conditions agreed to between him and Eesa Meean, and recorded
on paper. In this paper it was declared--"That Syud Mahomed Eesa Khan, together with the woman,
Beeba Jan, shall be allowed to go where he liked, with security to his life and honour, and
with all the property and effects he might have, whether he got it from the King of Oude or
from his minister; and that no one, either in the Honourable Company's or in the King of Oude's
dominions, shall offer him any molestation; that no obstruction shall be thrown in his way
by the officers of the British Government in the countries of any of the Rajahs at whose courts
there may be a British Resident; and further, that no molestation shall be offered to him in
the British territories in consequence of the disturbance which took place at Bareilly in 1816.

"(Signed)    A. LOCKETT, Assistant Resident."

After this paper had been signed by Captain Lockett, the two boys were set at liberty, and
sent off in palanqeens to their mother under a guard. The minister had, in the morning, promised
to give the assailants twenty thousand rupees, and they arrived before the discussions closed,
and were placed on the floor of the school-room. The girl, Beeba Jan, was now brought into
the room, and made over to Eesa Meean. When first brought before him, she thought she was to
be sacrificed to save the lives of the boys, and was in a state of great agitation. She implored
Captain Lockett to save her life; but, to the great surprise of all present, Eesa Meean took
up one of the bags of money, containing one thousand rupees, and, with a smile, put it into
her arms, and told her that she was now at liberty to return to her home or go where she pleased.
The joy expressed by the girl and by all who witnessed this scene was very great; for they
had all considered him to be a mere ruffian, incapable of anything like a generous action.

It had been arranged that Eesa Meean, with all his party, should go with Captain Lockett to
the Residency; but when the time came, and the excitement had passed away in the apartment,
he began to be alarmed, and told Captain Lockett that he felt sure he should be murdered on
the road. He wanted to go with Captain Lockett on the same elephant, but to this Captain Lockett
would not consent, as it would compromise his dignity, to sit on the same elephant with so
atrocious a character. There was no palanqeen available for him, and he would not allow Captain
Lockett to enter his, declaring that if he did so, he, Eesa Meean, would be instantly cut down
by the King's people. Captain Lockett was, therefore, obliged to walk with him from the minister's
house at Dowlut Poora to the Residency, a distance of a mile, in the heat of the day, and the
hottest month in the year, followed by the King's troops, and an immense multitude from the
city. About four o'clock Captain Lockett reached the Residency, and made over Eesa Meean and
his sixteen followers to the Resident, who ratified the written engagement, and sent the party
to the cantonments, three miles distant from the city, to Brigadier-General Price, who commanded
the troops in Oude, to be taken care of for a few days till arrangements could be made for
their safe conduct to Cawnpore, within the British territory. Their arms were taken from them,
to be sent to the magistrate at Cawnpore, for delivery to them when they might be released.
On the morning of the 3rd the King came to the Resident to thank him for what he had done,
and express the sense he entertained of the judicious conduct of his Assistant during the whole
of this trying scene; and to request that he might be permitted to go to the palace to receive
some mark of distinction which his Majesty wished to confer upon him. Captain Lockett went
with the minister, and was received with marked distinction; and thirteen trays of shawls and
other articles were presented to him. Captain Lockett selected one pair, which he accepted,
and placed, as usual, in the Resident's Toshuk-khana.

When he signed the paper he remarked the omission of all mention of Eesa Meean's associates
in that document, but did not consider it to be his duty to point out the oversight, lest it
might increase the excitement, and prolong the angry discussions. In his report of the circumstances
to the Resident, however, he mentioned it to him, and told him that the omission clearly arose
from an oversight, and unless his associates received the same indulgence as the principal,
Eesa Meean himself, their exclusion from the benefits of the engagement might be attributed
to decoit or artifice on his part. The Resident concurred in this opinion, and in his report
of the following day to Government, he recommended that they should all be considered as included
in the engagement.

Government, in its reply of the 25th of June 1824, consents to this construction of the written
engagement, but notices a no less important oversight on the part of the Resident and his Assistant,
in the free pardon given to Eesa Meean, for the share he had taken in the Bareilly insurrection,
which had caused the loss of so many lives in April 1816. Government infers, that they could,
neither of them have been aware, that this ruffian was the original instigator and most active
leader in that formidable insurrection; that it was chiefly, if not entirely, owing to his
endeavours to inflame the popular phrenzy, and to collect partizans from the neighbouring towns,
that the efforts of the local authorities, to quell or avert the rising storm, failed wholly
of success; that he stood charged as a principal in the murder of Mr. Leycester's son, and
that, on these grounds, he was expressly excluded from the general amnesty, declared after
the successful suppression of the rebellion, and a reward of two thousand rupees offered for
his arrest; that this written pledge had involved Government in the dilemma of either cancelling
a public act of the British Resident, or pardoning and setting at large, within its territory,
a proclaimed outlaw, and notorious rebel and most dangerous incendiary; and that it felt bound
in duty to guard the public peace from the hazard of further interruption, through the violence
or intrigue of so desperate and atrocious an offender; and to annul that part of the engagement
which absolves Eesa Meean from his guilt in the Bareilly insurrection, since the Resident and
his Assistant went beyond their powers in pledging their Government to such a condition. Government
directed, that he and his associates should be safely escorted over the border into the British
territory, and that he should not be brought to trial before a Judicial Court, with a view
to his being capitally punished for his crimes at Bareilly, but be confined, as a state prisoner,
in the fortress of Allahabad. The Government, in strong but dignified terms, expresses its
surprise and displeasure at his having been placed in so confidential a position, and permitted
to bask in the sunshine of ministerial favour, when active search was being made for him all
over India; for the King and his minister must have been both aware of the part he had taken
in the Bareilly insurrection, since the King himself alludes to it in a letter submitted by
the Resident to Government on the 8th of June 1824.

The Resident and his Assistant, in letters dated 15th of July, declare that they were altogether
unacquainted with the part which Eesa Meean had taken in the Bareilly rebellion in 1816, the
Resident being at that time at the Cape of Good Hope, and his Assistant in England. Eesa Meean
was confined, as directed, in the fort of Allahabad; but soon afterwards released on the occasion
of the Governor-General's visit to that place. He returned again to Lucknow in the year 1828,
soon after Aga Meer had been removed from his office of minister. As soon as it was discovered
that he was in the city, he was seized and sent across the Ganges; and is said to have been
killed in Malwa or Goozerat, in a similar attempt upon some native chief or his minister.

The two boys are still living, the eldest, Aga Allee, or Ameen-od Dowla, at Lucknow, and Nizam-od
Dowla, the youngest, at Cawnpore; both drawing large hereditary pensions, under the guarantee
of the British Government. This is not the Ameen-od Dowla who was attacked in the streets,
as above described, in the year 1847.

About two years ago this Ghoolam Huzrut took by violence possession of the small estate of
Golha, now in the Sibhore purgunnah; and turned out the proprietor, Bhowannee Sing, a Rathore
Rajpoot, whose ancestors had held it for several centuries. The poor man was re- established
in it by the succeeding contractor, Girdhara Sing; but on his losing his contract, Ghoolam
Huzret, on the 23rd of September last, again attacked Bhowanne Sing at midnight, at the head
of a gang of ruffians; and after killing five of his relatives and servants, and burning down
his houses, turned him and his family out, and secured possession of the village, which he
still holds. The King's officers were too weak to protect the poor man, and have hitherto acquiesced
in the usurpation of the village. Ghoolam Huzrut has removed all the autumn crops to his own
village; and cut down and taken away sixty mango-trees planted by Bhowannee Sing's ancestors.
Miherban Sing, the son of the sufferer, is a sipahee in the 63rd Regiment Native Infantry,
and he presented a petition through the Resident in behalf of his father. Other petitions have
been since presented, and the Court has been strongly urged to afford redress. Ghoolam Huzrut
has two forts, to which he retires when pursued, one at Para, and one at Sarai, and a good
many powerful landholders always ready to support him against the government, on condition
of being supported by him when necessary.

On crossing the river Ghagra, I directed Captain Bunbury, (who commands a regiment in the King
of Oude's service with six guns, and was to have accompanied me, and left the main body of
his regiment with his guns under his second in command, Captain Hearsey, at Nawabgunge,) to
surprise and capture Ghoolam Huzrut, if possible, by a sudden march. He had left his fort of
Para, on my passing within a few miles of it, knowing that the minister had been with me, and
thinking that he might have requested my aid for the purpose. Captain Bunbury joined his main
body unperceived, made a forced march during the night, and reached the fort of Para at daybreak
in the morning, without giving alarm to any one on the road. In this surprise he was aided
by Khoda Buksh, of Dadra, a very respectable and excellent landholder, who had suffered from
Ghoolam Huzrut's depredations.

He had returned to his fort with all his family on my passing, and it contained but few soldiers,
with a vast number of women and children. He saw that it would be of no use to resist, and
surrendered his fort and person to Captain Bunbury, who sent him a prisoner to Lucknow, under
charge of two Companies, commanded by Captain Hearsey. He is under trial, but he has so many
influential friends about the Court, with whom he has shared his plunder, that his ultimate
punishment is doubtful. Captain Bunbury was praised for his skill and gallantry, and was honoured
with a title by the king.

December 3, 1849.--Kinalee, ten miles over a plain, highly cultivated and well studded with
groves, but we could see neither town, village, nor hamlet on the road. A poor Brahmin, Gunga
Sing, came along the road with me, to seek redress for injuries sustained. His grandfather
was in the service of our Government, and killed under Lord Lake, at the first siege of Bhurtpore
in 1804. With the little he left, the family had set up as agricultural capitalists in the
village of Poorwa Pundit, on the estate of Kulunder Buksh, of Bhitwal. Here they prospered.
The estate was, as a matter of favour to Kulunder Buksh, transferred from the jurisdiction
of the contractor to that of the Hozoor Tehseel.*  Kulunder Buksh either could not, or would
not, pay the Government demand; and he employed two of his relatives, Godree and Hoseyn Buksh,
to plunder in the estate and the neighbourhood, to reduce Government to his own terms. These
two persons, with two hundred armed men, attacked the village in the night; and, after plundering
the house of this Brahmin, Gunga Sing, they seized his wife, who was then pregnant, and made
her point out a hidden treasure of one hundred and seven gold mohurs, and two hundred and seventy-seven
rupees. She had been wounded in several places before she did this, and when she could point
out no more, one of the two brothers cut her down with his sword, and killed her. In all the
Brahmin lost two thousand seven hundred and fifty-five rupees' worth of property; and, on the
ground of his grandfather having been killed in the Honourable Company's service, has been
ever since urging the Resident to interpose with the Oude government in his behalf.

[* The term "Hozoor Tehseel" signifies the collections of the revenue made by the governor
himself whether of a district or a kingdom. The estates of all landholders who pay their land-revenues
direct to the governor, or to the deputy employed under him to receive such revenues and manage
such estates, are said to be in the "Hozoor Tehseel." The local authorities of the districts
on which such estates are situated have nothing whatever to do with them.]

The estate of Bhitwal has been retransferred to the jurisdiction of the Amil of Byswara, who
has restored it to Kulunder Buksh; and his two relatives, Godree and Hoseyn Buksh, are thriving
on the booty acquired, and are in high favour with the local authorities. I have requested
that measures may be adopted to punish them for the robbery and the cruel murder of the poor
woman; but have little hope that they will be so. No government in India is now more weak for
purposes of good than that of Oude.

This village of Kinalee is now in the estate of Ramnuggur Dhumeereea, held by Gorbuksh, a large
landholder, who has a strong fort, Bhitolee, at the point of the Delta, formed by the Chouka
and Ghagra rivers, which here unite. He has taken refuge with some four thousand armed followers
in this fort, under the apprehension of being made to pay the full amount of the Government
demand, and called to account for the rescue of some atrocious offenders from Captain Hearsey,
of the Frontier Police, by whom they had been secured. Get tested, apply this observation
to all measures of time, and they will see that the three factors are sufficient, but all three
are essential.

[115.] Hence the need of the time is still considered empirically, since it involves a metaphysical
and a mathematical idea, applied both to a fact. Metaphysical idea, the relationship of being
and nonbeing; mathematical idea number; fact, the sensible phenomenon, such as solar motion, the
sidereal etc, etc. Metaphysics and mathematics are responsible for the accuracy absolute fact
responsible for the observed experimental certainty, and as, moreover, this phenomenon is true, then
that, if necessary, dispense with the reality and be served only to the possibility that the
time is still an empirical question, can be subject to the exact
sciences.

[116.] In this theory there is no need to make time on a purely subjective condition, or give
an independent nature of things: the purely intellectual order is
reconciled with experience, and the man is in communication with the
real world, without getting in contradiction with their ideas.

CHAPTER XVII.

RELATIONS BETWEEN THE IDEA OF TIME AND THE PRINCIPLE OF CONTRADICTION. At first sight it seems
that link the ideas contained in this principle is such that it can not be no difficulty in
his explanation, for how that just raising questions on its true sense, we come in contradiction
with one of the fundamental truths that the whole edifice of our knowledge. Because if there
is any doubt about true sense of principle, is a sign that can be
understood in various ways, and then There is also doubt whether the
generality of the men as it should be understood, and therefore if
for them serves as a firm foundation in the building of knowledge.

This review, at first sight very serious, ceases to be if we think that the axioms obvious may be
considered in two ways: empirically or scientifically, or in other words, serve as the application,
or as they are subject to analytical examination. Under the first appearance, are equal certainty
and clarity for all men under the second can be subject to difficulties. Things equal to a
third are equal to each other, this principle empirically considered, is absolutely certain
and evident to all men, from the wisest to the most rugged, all compared to one third the amount
of equity which inequality or want to make sure, which is not nothing but an application of
the principle expressed. When asked the reason for this procedure, while not setting forth
the axiom in precise terms, they refer to it in different ways. "These two tables are equal because
we have measured, and both have four feet long. "Probably the generality of men who are not
accustomed to reflect on their knowledge, and therefore not easily separate the general from
the particular, would be correct to express the principle Universal and precise terms, saying "these
two tables are equal because they have a common measure, and things equal to a third are equal
to each other, "but it would in that of know the beginning certainly and clearly, and apply without
danger of mistake, to all actual or potential cases. This is what I call empirical knowledge
of the principles; knowledge that has all the perfection in the direct order, lacking only
the order reflection (V. Lib. I, chap.

III).

With this clarity, sufficient for all applications, not only common but also scientists, is very
difficult to reconcile the analysis of the principle, so in the above example is can analyze the meaning
of the word equal, which leads to the analysis of the meaning of another word quantity, and
these things can work out the real difficulties finding reflection, which, although not disturb
the human race in the possession of truth, so do not leave be difficulties. The geometry is
indeed a science, which leaves nothing to be desired his evidence and certainty, but who will
deny that the court called the idea of ​​metaphysics extension, give very serious difficulties?
The arithmetic is indeed a universal science, and yet the analysis of the ideas of quantity
and number, essential for it raises extremely abstruse issues in the field of metaphysics and
ideology. In general we can ensure that there is no branch of our knowledge, that can be exempt
from difficulties, if considered at its root, but those that arise
in the field of reflection, not damaged in any way to the certainty
of direct knowledge.

Infiérese from the above that there is no objection to the analysis of the principle of contradiction
offers difficulties, and that this is not hesitate feared that the building of our knowledge.
Besides the little matter to attend to these repairs will not if
they exist in reality; difficulty disappears not cover their eyes
to see.

Consider it not vain fears the true meaning of the principle of contradiction.

[118.] It seems that the principle does not exist, or has no meaning unless it assumes the idea
of time and on the other hand, no time is conceived, if not the principle presupposes contradiction. Will
there by any chance a vicious circle, and that nothing less than
the principle fundamental of all knowledge?

Behold the difficulty presentémosla clearer still unfolding these indications.

The principle of contradiction presupposes the idea of ​​time as the contradiction is not verifies
whether being and nonbeing do not refer to the same time. Clearly the latter condition is absolutely
indispensable, because there is no concurrency by removing any objection to a thing is and is
not. Not only is there in this no problem, but we're constantly experimenting in everything
around us.

Are continually being and not on things that happen in the non-existence to existence and non-existence
to existence.

Even though the principle of contradiction does not express the simultaneity, they would always
for understatement, for so nothing would move in this part by adopting
the formula Kant (V. Lib.

I, chap. XX). Whatever the terms used to enunciate the principle always turn out that the same
thing can not be and not be at the same moment, but can well-being and not being at different times.

Then
the idea of ​​time is necessary to make it a contradiction in some cases, and disappears in others
as containing concurrency, engenders contradiction, as contains sequence, takes away the contradiction:
for that being and nonbeing are impossible, if a duration is assumed
successively, whose various parts can be distributed things which
otherwise would be contradictory.

[119.] The idea of ​​time to turn presupposes the principle of contradiction, because if time
but not in things, that being and nonbeing, and understanding, the perception of this being and
nothing turns out that we can not perceive time without being seen and not be, and how are
you considered without succession ideas can not present itself without contradiction, is that when
we perceive time need perceived by the same principle contradiction. He said that mutual exclusion
involves the succession of things that happen: and the main exclusions
is the principle of contradiction, the perception of time, perceive
the succession, then we have seen and contradiction.

[120.] These observations might believe it is necessary to choose between a circle vicious, something
inadmissible to the foundation of all knowledge, and an explanation of time, independent of the
ideas of being and nonbeing. If concibiésemos time as a thing self-existent, as a kind of infinitely
long line, shape of all things, but distinct from all of them, like a vague sort of capacity which
could beings place thereafter, to the way we put in space co, then the idea of ​​time is not
explained by the principle of contradiction, and could only say this is complemented by that.
Indeed, to say, it is impossible that a thing is and is not at the same moment, but it may be and not
be at different times, it gets the contradiction or takes it away according to the being and
not being referred to the same point or at different points of the vague extension of that line call
duration infinite succession, in which we conceive mutable things distributed. This explanation
is convenient, but has the disadvantage of not can resist the philosophical examination, as demonstrated
in previous chapters, and so it must appeal to considerations of
another kind.

[121.] To eliminate these difficulties dutifully necessary to clarify the ideas. The expression,
vicious cycle, applies to this case inaccurate, and called attention to this particular because
once understood this inaccuracy difficulties disappear by themselves. In the explanation of things,
the circle is a defect, and deserves the name of cycle, when have to clarify which are not identical,
but when two ideas are identical in content if appear different because they offer different points
of view, it is impossible to explain one can not trip so to speak with each other, and stand
on this, it becomes of some So on that. The exam if done properly, should lead to knowledge of
the background things. If this fund is for identity, identity must be presented, and the more
visible as the screen is deeper. In this case there is a circle, but not vicious: two ideas one
explains the other, because they both are the same. As presented under two different aspects,
led them to believe they were two different things, but entering a analytical examination,
has dispensed with the diversity of things, it has penetrated the intimate reality of things,
and therefore has reached the point where they meet, or better tell
you where completely confused identity.

[122.] From this observation we will draw a criterion that will serve us in many cases: to explain
two objects we find driven alternately from one to another without we can avoid the circle, we
suspect that the two objects, seemingly different are not really,
and that our understanding is it a single object, perceived under
two different reasons.

[123.] This is true in this matter. In explaining the principle of contradiction, we find the idea
of ​​time, and to define the time we find the principle of contradiction,
or with the ideas of being and nonbeing.

There are circle, but inevitable, and therefore longer cycle. Clarify these ideas.

[124.] What does the principle of contradiction? Being excluded means not being; and conversely,
not being to being, means that these extremes are such that since the other one disappears, not only
in the order of our concepts, but also in reality. Calling B to any being, we have that the
principle of contradiction means which excludes the non-B B, and not B excludes B. Thought B,
disappears into the concept of the non-B; and thought the non-B, disappears into the concept B.
Since in reality B, disappears no B, and since in reality the non-B, disappears B. Behold the
true meaning of the principle of contradiction. While reflecting, you will notice that as soon
as possible, we have omitted the idea of ​​time as we have considered only the mutual exclusion
and non-B B all referring to a simulator, to an indivisible point of duration, which, not locking
succession, gives no idea of ​​time.

I said, as nearly as possible, because we thought through what B and not B, germinated already
in our mind the idea of ​​succession and therefore of time.

[125.] Thinking B and then not B, we find a contradiction, but not so that these Two things can
not be dead. The exclusion is conditional, that is, as the contradictory extremes are simultaneous,
or refer to a now indivisible, but the idea of ​​B, we discover an inner necessity of existence,
and therefore although know that while it is B can not be non-B, conceiving that B may well cease
to be, and become non-B In this case the idea of ​​contradiction
disappears, and is very well reconciled in our understanding of the
two ideas of B and not B, provided they are distributed in different
moments.

[126.] From this it follows that the perception of time implies the perception of things not required;
beings, when there may no longer exist, and when there are can come into existence. The difference
will be necessary to the contingent, is that in the former existence
absolutely exclude its non-existence, and the second excludes the
existence of non-existence only conditionally, ie, in the case of
simultaneity.

[127.] This is the reason why we need to put on the principle of contradiction the condition of time.
The objects we perceive are changeable, so that no any amendments thereof, or in its intimate
nature, contain nothing that ensures existence. When can leave be, and if it does not continually
as to their substance, takes place in their accidents. For this reason we can not claim absolute
contradiction, but conditional: the reluctance of being and not only
exists in the case of concurrency.

[128.] If only concibiésemos necessary beings, we could have no idea
of ​​time, the existence absolutely would exclude non-existence, and
therefore always serious contradiction absolute, never conditional.

[129.] This analysis is a consequence of significantly. The perception of next time we end up
in the perception of non-necessity of things, from the when we perceive not be necessary,
we see a being who can stop being, in which If we already thought of the estate or real time
or possible.

Here assaulted a reflection extremely serious: the idea of ​​time is the idea of ​​contingency
time consciousness is the consciousness of our weakness.

[130.] The idea of ​​time is so close in our spirit, that without
it we would form idea of ​​self.

The awareness of self identity is a link (V. Lib.

I, chap.

XXV) it is impossible to find without memory.

This includes by necessity the relationship of past, and therefore the idea of ​​time.

CHAPTER XVIII.

ABSTRACT.

We present in brief the doctrine of the previous chapters.

[131.] Time is a very difficult thing to explain, who denies such a clear problem have thought
very little about the merits of the question.

[132.] The movement is measured by time, but this does not define just dutifully call measure
of motion.

[133.] Unable to find a primitive measure of the movement: the order
is necessary to stop in one or the other, even when taken arbitrarily,
and refer to it.

This must be the most uniform as possible.

[134.] The similarity between the idea of ​​time and space, the suspicion
must be explained in a similar way.

[135.] No duration without something that lasts, then there is no separate duration of things.
If not had nothing, there would be lasting.

[136.] There is no succession if there are things that happen, then
the succession, although it alone can be formulated in the abstract,
can not be performed as an independent form of things.

[137.] The time involved before and after, and therefore succession. All things considered,
is the sequence itself, since in devising succession, as we conceive time.

[138.] The succession involves exclusion of some things together. This exclusion may be based
in essence the same, or arise from an external cause.

[139.] The time thus involves the idea of ​​exclusion of many things
among themselves, is the general idea the order of moves, or the relationship
between being and nonbeing.

[140.] If there were no moves would be no time.

[141.] Before the existence of the world had not spent any time. There was more lasting that
eternity.

[142.] Eternity is the very existence of the infinite, without any
real alteration or possible.

[143.] The absolute time is not independent of things, but is actually
in them.

Is the order of being and nonbeing.

[144.] The idea of ​​time is the perception of this order of being
and nonbeing.

[145.] Coexistence is the mere existence of various beings. In having no idea of ​​negation to be, if
conceived many beings, there perception of coexistence.

[146.] The time may be considered under three aspects: past, present and future. All other relationships
of time expressed in different ways in various languages, are combinations of those aspects.

[147.]
This is the only absolute time: he sees no relation to the past and
to what future, but the past and the future can not be conceived without
relation to the present.

[148.] The idea of ​​this came to the same idea of ​​being, or better say is confused with the
very idea of ​​existence, so this does not exist, not to be.

[149.] The idea of ​​time spent is the perception of not being or a being already destroyed,
relation to a being present, as well as the future is the perception
of a possible pending and determined a cause and relationship to a
being present.

[150.] The idea of ​​time is excited by the experience, but not be called a fact mere observation,
it is opposed to their intrinsic necessity which makes it capable
of being subjected to the exact sciences.

[151.] Much less can be
said that this idea will stick to the sensible order, because it embraces
general all kinds of changes, are sensitive or insensitive.

[152.]
As the idea of ​​time the perception of order between being and nonbeing;
considered this relationship in its more general, belongs to the purely
intellectual order. Their transition to experience, performed the
same way as that of other general concepts and indeterminate.

[153.]
Need to distinguish between the ideal time and the empirical pure,
pure is the relationship between being and not being considered in
their more general and more complete in its indeterminacy; the empirical
relationship is the same subject to a sensible measure.

[154.] To
measure this succession takes three things, which together form the
idea of ​​time empirical. 1. ª pure idea of ​​being and nonbeing,
or moving. 2. ª Application of this idea to a sensitive phenomena,
such as solar motion. 3. ª Idea number of determination the removal
of this phenomenon.

[155.] So why is conceived empirical time poses
a real need, subject science. Of the three elements that make up,
one is a metaphysical idea, the other a mathematical idea, and the
third is a fact of observation to which they apply these ideas. If
this fact was not real, it would at least possible, which would save
the need for calculation on the step.

[156.] There is an intimate
relationship between the idea of ​​time and the principle of contradiction.
This is because of that, and vice versa, so there is no vicious circle.
Consisting the principle of contradiction in the mutual exclusion
between being and non being, and being the idea perception time of
order between being and nonbeing, is that the test is coming into
a fund to identical, ie the comparison between the ideas of being
and nonbeing.

[157.] But the idea of ​​time will be impossible memory,
and therefore the unit consciousness.

CHAPTER XIX.

GLANCE AT THE
IDEAS OF SPACE AND TIME NUMBER.

[158.] We have reached the point
where I can point and determine with absolute precision, the necessary
elements that form the subject of natural sciences. But it is probable, that the number who suffer from this disease has
diminished merely with the rest of the population, and that the proportion which the goitered
bear to the ungoitered may be still the same. They told me that they had been plundered of
all their stock and moveable property by the terrible scourge, Rughber Sing, during his reign
of two years, and could not hope to recover from their present state of poverty for many more;
that their lands were scantily tilled, and the crops had so failed for many years, since this
miscreant's rule, that the district which used to supply Lucknow with grain was obliged to
draw grain from it, and even from Cawnpore. This is true, and grain has in consequence been
increasing in price ever since we left Lucknow. It is now here almost double the price that
it is at Lucknow, while it is usually twice as cheap here.

December 9, 1849.--Bahraetch, ten miles north-east. We encamped on a fine sward, on the left
bank of the Surjoo river, a beautiful clear stream. The cultivation very scanty, but the soil
good, with water everywhere, within a few feet of the surface. Groves and single trees less
numerous; and of villages and hamlets we saw none. Under good government, the whole country
might, in a few years, be made a beautiful garden. The river Surjoo is like a winding stream
in a park; and its banks might, everywhere, be cultivated to the water's edge. No ravines,
jungle, or steep embankments. It is lamentable to see so fine a country in so wretched a state.

The Turae forest begins a few miles to the north of Bahraetch, and some of the great baronial
landholders have their residence and strongholds within it. The Rajah of Toolseepoor is one
of them. He is a kind-hearted old man, and a good landlord and subject; but he has lately been
driven out by his young and reprobate son, at the instigation and encouragement of a Court
favourite. The Rajah had discharged an agent, employed by him at Court for advocating the cause
of his son while in rebellion against his father. The agent then made common cause with the
son, and secured the interest of two powerful men at Court, Balkrishen Dewan and Gholam Ruza,
the deputy minister, who has charge of the estates in the Hozoor Tehsel. The jurisdiction over
the estate had been transferred from the local authorities to the Hozoor Tehsel; and, by orders
from Court, the father's friends, the Bulrampoor and other Rajahs of the clan, were prevented
from continuing the aid they had afforded to support the father's authority. The father unwilling
to have the estate devastated by a contest with the band of ruffians whom his son had collected,
retired, and allowed him to take possession. The son seized upon all the property the father
had left, and now employs it in maintaining this band and rewarding the services of Court favourites.
The Nazim of the district is not permitted to interfere, to restore rights or preserve order
in the estate, nor would he, perhaps, do either, if so permitted, for he has been brought up
in a bad school, and is not a good man. The pretext at Court is, that the father is deranged;
but, though not wise, he is learned, and no man can be more sober than he is, or better disposed
towards his sovereign and tenants. That he is capable of managing his estate, is shown by the
excellent condition in which he left it.

Prethee Put, of Paska, is not worse than many of the tallookdars of Oude, who now disturb the
peace of the country; and I give a brief sketch of his history, as a specimen of the sufferings
inflicted on the people by the wild licence which such landholders enjoy under the weak, profligate,
and apathetic government of Oude.

Keerut Sing, the tallookdar of Paska, on the left bank of the Ghagra, between Fyzabad and Byram-ghaut,
was one of the Chehdwara landholders, and had five sons, the eldest Dirgpaul Sing, and the
second Prethee Put, the hero of this brief history. Before his death, Keerut Sing made over
the management of his estate to his eldest son and heir; but gave to his second son a portion
of land out of it, for his own subsistence and that of his family. The father and eldest son
continued to reside together in the fort of Dhunolee, situated on the right bank of the Ghagra,
opposite Paska. Prethee Put took up his residence in his portion of the estate at Bumhoree,
collected a gang of the greatest ruffians in the country, and commenced his trade, and that
of so many of his class, as an indiscriminate plunderer. Keerut Sing and his eldest son, Dirgpaul,
continued to pay the Government demand punctually, to obey the local authorities, and manage
the estate with prudence.

Prethee Put, in 1836, attacked and took a despatch of treasure, consisting of twenty-six thousand
rupees, on its way to Lucknow, from the Nazim of Bahraetch. In 1840 he attacked and took another
of eighty-five thousand rupees, on its way to Lucknow from the same place. With these sums,
and the booty which he acquired from the plunder of villages and travellers, he augmented his
gang, built a fort at Bumhoree, and extended his depredations. In January 1842, his father,
who had been long ill, died. The local authorities demanded five thousand rupees from the eldest
son, Dirgpaul Sing, on his accession. He promised to pay, and sent his eldest son, Dan Bahader
Sing, a lad of eighteen, as a hostage for the payment to the Nazim. Soon after, Prethee Pat
attacked the fort of Dhunolee, in which his elder brother resided with his family, killed fifty-six
persons, and made Dirgpaul, his wife, and three other sons prisoners. Dirgpaul's sister tried
to conceal her brother under some clothes; but, under a solemn oath from Prethee Put, that
no personal violence should be offered to him, he was permitted to take him. His wife and three
sons were sent off to be confined under the charge of Byjonauth Bhilwar, zumeendar of Kholee,
in the estate of Sarafraz Ahmud, one of his associates in crime, on the left bank of the Goomtee
river.

Three days after, finding that no kind of torture or intimidation could make his elder brother
sign a formal resignation of his right to the estate in his favour, he took him into the middle
of the river Ghagra, cut off his head with his own hands, and threw the body into the stream.
Deeming this violation of his pledge a dishonourable act his friend, Byjonauth, from whom he
had demanded the widow and her three sons, released them all, to seek protection elsewhere,
as he was not strong enough to resist Prethee Put himself. They found shelter with some friends
of the family in another district, and Wajid Allee Khan, the Nazim of Bahraetch, in the beginning
of November 1843, went with the best force he could muster, drove Prethee Pat out of Dhunolee
and Paska, and put Dan Bahader Sing, the eldest son of Dirgpaul, and rightful heir, into possession.
In the latter end of the same month, however, he was attacked by his uncle, Prethee Put, and
driven out with the loss of ten men. He again applied for aid to the Nazim; but, thinking it
more profitable to support the stronger party, he took a bribe of ten thousand rupees from
Prethee Put, and recognized him as the rightful heir of his murdered brother. Dan Bahader collected
a small party of fifteen men, and took possession of a small stronghold in the jungle of the
Shapoor estate, belonging to Murtonjee, another of the Chehdwara tallookdars, where he was
again attacked by his uncle in March 1844, and driven out with the loss of four out of his
fifteen men. Soon after Prethee Put attacked and took another despatch of treasure, on its
way to Lucknow from Bahraetch, consisting of eighteen thousand rupees. Soon after, in June,
the Nazim, Ehsan Allee, sent a force with Dan Bahader, and re-established him in possession
of the estate of Paska; but Ehsan Allee was soon after superseded in the contract by Rughbur
Sing, who adopted the cause of the strongest, and restored Prethee Put, who continued to hold
the estate for 1845.

In April 1847, Mahommed Hossein, one of the Tusseeldars under Rughbur Sing, seized and confined
Prethee Put, once more put Dan Bahader in possession of the estate, and sent his uncle to Rughbur
Sing. In November 1847, Incha Sing superseded his nephew, Rughbur Sing; and, thinking Prethee
Put's the more profitable cause to adopt, he turned out Dan Bahader, and restored Prethee Put
to the possession of the Paska estate, which he has held ever since. He has continued to pursue
his system of indiscriminate plunder and defiance of the Government authorities, and has seized
upon the estates of several of his weaker neighbours.

In 1848, he attacked and plundered the village of Sahooreea, belonging to Sarafraz Allee, Chowdheree
of Radowlee, and this year he has done the same to the village of Semree, belonging to Rajah
Bukhtawar Sing. He carried off fifty-two persons from this village of Semree, and confined
them for two months, flogging and burning them with red-hot ramrods, till they paid the ransom
of five thousand rupees required. He has this year plundered another village, belonging to
the same person, called Nowtee, and its dependent hamlet of Hurhurpoora. He has also this year
attacked, plundered, and burnt to the ground the villages of Tirkolee, in the Radowlee purgunnah,
and Aelee Pursolee, in Bahraetch. The attack on Tirkolee took place in September last, and
five of the inhabitants were killed; and in the attack on Aelee Pursolee, six of the zumeendars
were killed in defending themselves. In this attack he was joined by the gang under Murtonjee.
He also plundered and confined a merchant of Gowaris till he paid a ransom of seven hundred
rupees; and about twenty-five days ago he attacked and plundered two persons from Esanugur,
on their way to Ojodheea, on pilgrimage, and kept them confined and tortured till they paid
a ransom of five hundred rupees.

Prethee Put has, as before stated, in collusion with local authorities, and by violence, seized
upon a great portion of the lands of Hissampoor, and ruined and turned out the Syud proprietors,
by whose families they had been held for many generations. He is bound to pay twenty thousand
rupees a year; but has not, for many years, paid more than seven thousand.

Mahommed Hossein, the present Nazim of the Gonda Bahraetch districts, describes the capture
of Prethee Put by himself, as follows:-"In 1846, the purgunnahs of Gowaris and Hissampoor were
reduced to a state of great disorder by the depredations of Prethee Put, and the roads leading
through them were shut up. He had seized Syud Allee Asgar, the tallookdar of Aleenughur, in
the Hissampoor purgunnah, taken possession of his estate, and driven out, or utterly ruined,
all the landholders and cultivators. He tried, by all kinds of torture, to make Allee Asgar
sign, in his favour, a deed of sale; but his family found means to complain to the Durbar,
and Rughbur Sing, the Nazim, was ordered to seize him and rescue his prisoner. I was sent to
manage the two purgunnahs, seize the offender, and rescue Allee Asgar. When I approached the
fort of Bumhoree, where he kept his prisoner confined, Prethee Put put him in strong irons,
left him in that fort, and, with his followers, passed over the Ghagra, in boats, to his stronger
fort of Dhunolee, on the right bank. I took possession of Bumhoree without much resistance,
rescued the prisoner, and restored him to the possession of his estate, and put all the rest
of the lands held by Prethee Put under the management of Government officers. Two months after,
seeing my force much reduced by these arrangements, he came at the head of a band of seventeen
hundred men to attack me in the village of Dhooree Gunge. The place was not defended by any
wall, but we made the best of it, drove him back, and killed or wounded about fifty of his
men, with the loss on our side, in killed or wounded, of about twenty-three.

"I kept Prethee Put confined for two months, when Rughbur Sing sent for him, on pretence that
he wished to send him to Lucknow. He kept him till the end of the year, when he was superseded
in the contract by his uncle, Incha Sing, who released Prethee Put at the intercession of Maun
Sing, the brother of Rughbur Sing, who expected to make a good deal out of him." Prethee Put,
of Paska, was attacked on the morning of the 26th of March, 1850, in his fort of Dhunolee,
by a force under the command of Captains Weston, Thompson, Magness, and Orr; and, on their
approach, he vacated the fort, separated himself from his gang, and took shelter in the house
of a Brahmin. He was then traced by a party from Captain Magness's corps; and, as he refused
to surrender, he was cut down and killed. His clan, the Kulhunsies, refused to take the body
for interment. The head had been cut off to be sent to Lucknow as a trophy, but Captain Weston
opposed this, and it was replaced on the body, which was sewn up in a winding-sheet and taken
into the river Ghagra by some sipahees, as the best kind of interment for a Hindoo chief of
his rank. The persons employed in the ceremony were Hindoos, who knew nothing of Prethee Put's
history; but it was afterwards found that the place where the body was committed to the stream
was that on which he had killed his eldest brother, and thrown his body into the river from
his boat. This was a remarkable coincidence, and tended to impress upon the minds of the people
around a notion that his death was effected by divine interposition. All, except his followers,
were rejoiced at the death of so atrocious a character. Dan Bahader, the eldest son of the
brother he had murdered, being poor and unable to pay the usual fees and gratuities to the
minister and court favourites, was not, however, permitted to take possession of his patrimonial
estate, and he died in December, 1850, in poverty and despair. Dhunolee and Bhumoree have been
levelled with the ground.

December 9, 1849.--In the news-writer's report of the 3rd December, 1849, it is stated--"that
Ashfakos Sultan, Omrow Begum, one of the King's wives, reported to his Majesty, that a man
named Sadik Allee had come to Lucknow while the King was suffering from palpitations of the
heart, and, in the disguise of a Durveish, hired a house in Muftee Gunge, and taken up his
residence in it. He there gave himself out as one of the Kings of the Fairies (Amil-i-Jinnut);
and the fakeer, to whom his Majesty's confidential servants, the singers, had taken him to
be cured of his disease, was no other than this Sadik Allee. The King, on hearing this, sent
for Sadik Allee, who was seized and brought before him on the 2nd December. He confessed the
imposture, but pleaded that he had practised it merely to obtain some money, and that the singers
were associated with him in all that he did. The King soothed his apprehensions, and conferred
upon him a dress of honour, consisting of a doshala and roomul, and then made him over to the
custody of Ashfak-os Sultan. At night the King sent for the minister, and, summoning Sadik
Allee, bid him dress himself exactly as he was dressed on the night he visited him, and prepare
a room in the palace exactly in the same manner as he had prepared his own to receive his Majesty
on that night. He chose a small room in the palace, and under the ceiling he suspended a second
ceiling, so that no one could perceive how it was fixed on, and placed himself between the
two. When all was ready the King went to the apartment with the minister, accompanied by Ruzee-od
Dowlah, the head singer. When the door of the apartment was closed, they first heard a frightful
voice, without being able to perceive whence it came. Neither the minister nor the King could
perceive the slightest opening or fissure in the ceiling. They then came out and closed the
door, but immediately heard from within the peaceful salutation of 'salaam aleekom,' and the
man appeared within as King of the Fairies, and presented his Majesty with some jewels and
other offerings. All was here enacted precisely as it had been acted on the occasion of the
King's visit to Muftee Gunge. Turning an angry look upon Ruzee-od Dowlah, the King said, 'All
the evil that I have so often heard of you, men of Rampoor, I have now with my own eyes seen
realized;' and, turning to the minister, he said, 'How often have these men spoken evil of
you before me!' Ruzee-od Dowlah then said, 'If your Majesty thinks me guilty, I pray you to
punish me as may seem to you proper; but I entreat you not to make me over to the minister.'
The King, without deigning any reply, summoned Hajee Shureef, and told him to place mounted
sentries of his own corps of cavalry over the door of Saadut Allee Khan's mausoleum, in which
these singers resided, and infantry sentries in the apartments with them, with strict orders
that no one should be permitted to go out without, being first strictly searched. The sister
of Ruzee-od Dowla could nowhere be found, and was supposed to have made her escape."

The King had several interviews of this kind with his Majesty, the King of the Fairies, who
described the symptoms from which he suffered, and prescribed the remedies, which consisted
chiefly of rich offerings to the Fairies, who were to relieve him. He frequently received letters
from the Fairy King to the same effect, written in an imperious style, suited to the occasion.
The farce was carried on for several months, and the King at different times is supposed to
have given the Fairy King some two lacs of rupees, which he shared liberally with the singers.

I had heard of the affair of the Durveish from the minister, through his wakeel, and from Captain
Bird, the first Assistant, in a letter. I requested that he would ask for an audience, and
congratulate his Majesty on the discovery of the imposture, and offer any assistance that he
might require in the banishment of the impostors. He was received by the King in the afternoon
of the 6th. He expressed his regret that the King should have been put to so much trouble by
the bad conduct of those who had received from him all that a king could give-wealth, titles,
and intimate companionship; hinted at the advantage taken of this by Ruzee-od Dowlah, in his
criminal intercourse with one of his Sultanas, Surafraz Muhal; and earnestly prayed him to
put an end to the misery and disgrace which these men had brought and were still bringing on
himself, his house, and his country. The King promised to have Ruzee-od Dowlah, his sister,
and Kotub-od Dowlah, banished across the Ganges; but stated, that he could do nothing against
Sadik Allee, however richly he deserved punishment, since he had pledged his royal word to
him, on his disclosing all he knew about the imposition. The King asked captain Bird, whether
he thought that he had felt no sorrow at parting with Surafraz Muhal, with whom he had lived
so intimately for nine years; that he had, he said, cast her off as a duty, and did Captain
Bird think that he would spare the men who had so grossly deceived him, caused so much confusion
in his kingdom, and ill-feeling towards him, on the part of the British Government and its
representative? His Majesty added, "I cherished low-bred men, and they have given me the low-bred
man's reward, had I made friends of men of birth and character it would have been otherwise;"
and concluded by saying, that he could not touch the money he had given to these fellows, because
people would say that he had got rid of them merely to recover what he had bestowed upon them.*

[* When he afterwards confined and banished them in June and July 1850, he took back from them
all that they had retained; but they had sent to their families and friends, property to the
value of many lacs of rupees.]

The King, in the latter end of November, divorced Surafraz Muhal, and sent her across the Ganges,
to go on a pilgrimage to Mecca. She had long been cohabiting with the chief singer, Gholam
Ruza, and was known to be a very profligate woman. She is said to have given his Majesty to
understand that she would not consent to remain in the palace with him without the privilege
of choosing her own lovers, a privilege which she had freely enjoyed before she came into it,
and could not possibly forego.

Bahraetch is celebrated for the shrine of Syud Salar, a martyr, who is supposed to have been
killed here in the beginning of the eleventh century, when fighting against the Hindoos, under
the auspices of Mahmood Shah, of Ghuznee, his mother's brother. Strange to say, Hindoos as
well as Mahommedans make offerings to this shrine, and implore the favours of this military
ruffian, whose only recorded merit consists of having destroyed a great many Hindoos in a wanton
and unprovoked invasion of their territory. They say, that he did what he did against Hindoos
in the conscientious discharge of his duties, and could not have done it without God's permission--that
God must then have been angry with them for their transgressions, and used this man, and all
the other Mahommedan invaders of their country, as instruments of his vengeance, and means
to bring about his purposes: that is, the thinking portion of the Hindoos say this. The mass
think that the old man must still have a good deal of interest in heaven, which he may be induced
to exercise in their favour, by suitable offerings and personal applications to his shrine.

The minister reports to the Resident on the 9th, that the King had relented, and wished to
retain the singer, Ruzee-od Dowlah, and his sister, and Kotub Allee, at Lucknow, with orders
never to approach the presence. Captain Bird, in a letter, confirms this report.

December 11, 1849.--Left Bahraetch and came south-east to Imaleea, on the road to Gonda, over
a plain in the Pyagpoor estate, almost entirely waste. Few groves or single trees to be seen;
scarcely a field tilled or house occupied; all the work of the same atrocious governor, Rughbur
Sing. No oppressor ever wrote a more legible hand.

The brief history of the management of this district for the last forty-three years, is as
follows. The district consisted in 1807, of

                              Khalsa Lands       Present Khalsa Lands
     Bahraetch    .    .    .   2,50,000                 4,000
     Hissampoor   .    .    .   2,00,000                40,000
     Hurhurpoor   .    .    .   1,25,000                10,000
     Buhareegunge .    .    .   1,50,000                15,000

                                7,25,000                69,000

The contract was held by Balkidass Kanoongoe, for five years, from 1807 to 1811, when he died,
and was succeeded in the contract by his son, Amur Sing, who held it till 1816. In the end
of that year, or early in 1817, Amur Sing was seized, put into confinement, and murdered by
Hakeem Mehndee, who held the contract for 1817 and 1818. In the year 1816, Hakeem Mehndee,
who held the contract for the Mahomdee district, at four lacs of rupees a-year, and that for
Khyrabad at five, heard of the great wealth of Amur Sing, and the fine state to which he and
his father had brought the district by good management; and offered the Oude government one
lac of rupees a- year more than he paid for the contract for the ensuing year. Hakeem Mehndee
resided chiefly at the capital of Lucknow, on the pretence of indisposition, while his brother,
Hadee Allee Khan, managed the two districts for him. He had acquired a great reputation by
his judicious management of these two districts, and become a favourite with the King, by the
still more skilful management of a few male and female favourites about his Majesty's person.
The minister, Aga Meer, was jealous of his growing fame and favour, and persuaded the King
to accept the offer, in the hope that he would go himself to his new charge, in order to make
the most of it. As soon as he heard of his appointment to the charge of Bahraetch, Hakeem Mehndee
set out with the best body of troops he could collect, and sent on orders for Amur Sing to
come out and meet him. He declined to do so until he got the pledge of Hadee Allee Khan, the
Hakeem's brother, for his personal security. This mortified the Hakeem, and tended to confirm
him in the resolution to make away with Amur Sing, and appropriate his wealth. Both Hakeem
Mehndee and his brother are said to have sworn on their Koran that no violence whatever should
be offered to or restraint put upon him; and, relying on these oaths and pledges, Amur Sing
met them on their approach to Bahraetch.

After discussing affairs and adjusting accounts for some months at Bahraetch, the Hakeem, by
his courteous manners and praises of his excellent management, put Amur Sing off his guard.
When sitting with him one evening in his tents, around which he had placed a select body of
guards, he left him on the pretext of a sudden call, and Amur Sing was seized, bound, and confined.
Meer Hyder and Baboo Beg, Mogul troopers, were placed in command of the guards over him, with
orders to get him assassinated as soon as possible. Sentries were, at the same time, placed
over his family and wealth. At midnight he was soon after strangled by these two men and their
attendants. Baboo Beg was a very stout, powerful man; and he attempted to strangle him with
his own hands, while his companions held him down; but Amur Sing managed to scream out for
help, and, in attempting to close his mouth with his left hand, one of his fingers got between
Amur Sing's teeth, and he bit off the first joint, and kept it in his mouth. His companions
finished the work; and Baboo Beg went off to get his fingers dressed without telling any one
what had happened. In the morning Hakeem Mehndee gave out, that Amur Sing had poisoned himself,
made the body over to his family, and sent off a report of his death to the minister, expressing
his regret at Amur Sing's having put an end to his existence by poisoning, to avoid giving
an account of his stewardship. The property which Hakeem Mehndee seized and appropriated, is
said to have amounted, in all, to between fifteen and twenty lacs of rupees!

Amur Sing's family, in performing the funeral ceremonies, had to open his mouth, to put in
the usual small bit of gold, Ganges water, and leaf of the toolsee-tree; and, to their horror,
they there found the first joint of a man's finger. This confirmed all their suspicions, that
he had been murdered during the night, and they sent off the joint of the finger to the minister,
demanding vengeance on the murderer. Aga Meer was delighted at this proof of his rival's guilt,
and would have had him seized and tried for the murder forthwith, but Hakeem Mehndee gave two
lacs of rupees, out of the wealth he had acquired from the murder, to Rae Doulut Rae, Meer
Neeaz Hoseyn, Munshee Musaod, Sobhan Allee Khan, and others, in the minister's confidence;
and they persuaded him, that he had better wait for a season, till he could charge him with
the more serious offence of defalcations in the revenue, when he might crush him with the weight
of manifold transgressions.

They communicated what they had done to Hakeem Mehnde, who, by degrees, sent off all his disposable
wealth to Shabjehanpoor and Futtehghur, in British territory. In April 1818, the Governor-General
the Marquess of Hastings passed through the Khyrabad and Bahraetch districts, attended by Hakeem
Mehndee, on a sporting excursion, after the Mahratta war; and the satisfaction which he expressed
to the King with the Hakeem's conduct during that excursion, added greatly to the minister's
hatred and alarm. He persuaded his Majesty to demand from Hakeem Mehndee an increase of five
lacs of rupees upon nine lacs a- year, which he already paid for Mahomdee and Khyrabad; and
resolved to have him tried for the murder of Amur Sing, as soon as he could get him into his
power. Hakeem Mehndee knew all this from the friends he had made at Court, refused to keep
the contract at the increased rate, and, on pretence of settling his accounts, went first to
Seetapoor from Bahraetch, and thence over the border to Shahjehanpoor, with all his family,
and such of the property as he had not till then been able to send off. The family never recovered
any of the property he had taken from Amur Sing, nor was any one of the murderers ever punished,
or called to account for the crime.

On the departure of Hakeem Mehndee, Hadee Allee Khan (not the brother of Hakeem Mehndee, but
a member of the old official aristocracy of Oude) got the contract of the district of Bahraetch
with that of Gonda, which had been held in Jageer by and for the widow of Shoja-od Dowlah,
the mother of Asuf-od Dowlah, commonly known by the name of the Buhoo Begum, of Fyzabad, where
she resided. Hadee Allee Khan held the contract of these two districts for nine years, up to
1827. He was succeeded by Walaeut Allee Khan, who held the contract for only half of the year
1828, when he was superseded by Mehndoo Khan, who held it for two years and a half, to the
end of 1830, when Hadee Allee Khan again got the contract, and he held it till he died in 1833.
He was succeeded by his nephew, Imdad Allee Khan, who held the contract till 1835.

Rajah Dursun Sing superseded him in 1836, and was the next year superseded by the widow of
Hadee Allee, named "Wajee-on-Nissa Begum," who held the contract for one year and a half to
1838. For the remainder of 1838, the contract was held by Fida Allee Khan and Ram Row Pandee
jointly; and for 1839, by Sunker Sahae Partuk. For 1840, it was held by Sooraj-od Dowlah, and
for 1841 and up to September 1843, Rajah Dursun Sing held it again. For 1844 and 1845, Ehsan
Allee and Wajid Allee held it. For 1846 and 1847, Rughbur Sing, one of the three sons of Rajah
Dursun Sing, held it. For 1848, it was held by Incha Sing, brother of Dursun Sing; and for
1849, it has been held by Mahummud Hasun. The Gonda district consisted of the purgunnahs of
Gonda and Nawabgunge, and a number of tallooks, or baronial estates.

Under the paternal government of Balukram and his son, Amur Sing, hereditary canoongoes of
the district, life and property were secure, the assessment moderate, and the country and people
prosperous. It was a rule, strictly adhered to, under the reign of Saadut Allee Khan, from
1797 to 1814, never under any circumstances to permit the transfer of khalsa or allodial lands
(that is, lands held immediately under the Crown) to tallookdars or baronial proprietors, who
paid a quit-rent to Government, and managed their estates with their own fiscal officers, and
military and police establishments. Those who resided in or saw the district at that time,
describe it as a magnificent garden; and some few signs of that flourishing state are still
to be seen amidst its present general desolation.

The adjoining district of Gonda became no less flourishing under the fostering care of the
Buhoo Begum, of Fyzabad, who held it in Jageer till her death, which took place 18th December,
1815. Relying upon the pledge of the British Government, under the treaty of 1801, to protect
him against all foreign and domestic enemies, and to put down for him all attempts at insurrection
and rebellion by means of its own troops, without any call for further pecuniary aid, Saadut
Allee disbanded more than half his army, and reduced the cost, while he improved the efficiency
of the other half, to bring his expenditure within his income, now so much diminished by the
cession of the best half of his dominions to the British Government. He assessed, or altogether
resumed, all the rent-free lands in his reserved half of the territory; and made all the officers
of his two lavish and thoughtless predecessors,* disgorge a portion of the wealth which they
had accumulated by the abuse of their confidence; and, at the same time, laboured assiduously
to keep within bounds the powers and possessions of his landed aristocracy.

[* Asuf-od Dowlah and Wuzeer Allee.]

Hakeem Mehndee exacted from the landholders of Bahraetch two annas in the rupee, or one-eighth,
more than the rate they had hitherto paid; and his successor, Hadee Allee, exacted an increase
of two annas in the rupee, upon the Hakeem's rate. It was difficult to make the landholders
and cultivators pay this rate, and a good deal of their stock was sold off for arrears; and
much land fell out of cultivation in consequence. To facilitate the collection of this exorbitant
rate, and at the same time to reduce the cost of collection, he disregarded systematically
the salutary rule of Saadut Allee Khan, who had died in 1814, and been succeeded by his do-nothing
and see-nothing son, Ghazee-od Deen Hyder; and transferred the khalsa estates of all defaulters
to the neighbouring tallookdars, who pledged themselves to liquidate the balances due, and
pay the Government demand punctually in future. This arrangement enabled him to reduce his
fiscal, military, and police establishments a good deal for the time, and his tenure of office
was too insecure to admit of his bestowing much thought on the future.

As soon as these tallookdars got possession of khalsa villages, they plundered them of all
they could find of stock and other property; and, with all possible diligence, reduced to beggary
all the holders and cultivators who had any claim to a right of property in the lands, in order
to prevent their ever being again in a condition to urge such claims in the only way in which
they can be successfully urged in Oude--cut down all the trees planted by them or their ancestors,
and destroyed all the good houses they had built, that they might have no local ties to link
their affections to the soil. As the local officers of the Oude government became weak, by
the gradual withdrawal of British troops, from aiding in the collection of revenue and the
suppression of rebellion and disorder, and by the deterioration in the character of the Oude
troops raised to supply their places, the tallookdars became stronger and stronger. They withheld
more and more of the revenue due to Government, and expended the money in building forts and
strongholds, casting or purchasing cannon, and maintaining large armed bands of followers.
All that they withheld from the public treasury was laid out in providing the means for resisting
the officers of Government; and, in time, it became a point of honour to pay nothing to the
sovereign without first fighting with his officers.

Hadee Allee Khan's successors continued the system of transferring khalsa lands to tallookdars,
as the cheapest and most effectual mode of collecting the revenue for their brief period of
authority. The tallookdars, whose estates were augmented by such transfers, in the Gonda Bahraetch
district, are Ekona, Pyagpoor, Churda, Nanpoora, Gungwal, Bhinga, Bondee, Ruhooa, and the six
divisions of the Gooras, or Chehdwara estate. The hereditary possessions of the tallookdars,
and, indeed, all the lands in the permanent possession of which they feel secure, are commonly
very well cultivated; but those which they acquire by fraud, violence, or collusion, are not
so, till, by long suffering and "hope deferred," the old proprietors have been effectually
crushed or driven out of the country. The old proprietors of the lands so transferred to the
tallookdars of the Gonda Baraetch districts from time to time had, under a series of weak governors,
been so crushed or driven out before 1842, and their lands had, for the most part, been brought
under good tillage.

The King of Oude, in a letter, dated the 31st of August 1823, tells the Resident, "that the
villages and estates of the large refractory tallookdars are as flourishing and populous as
they can possibly be; and there are many estates among them which yield more than two and three
times the amount at which they have been assessed; and even if troops should be stationed there,
to prevent the cultivation of the land till the balances are liquidated, the tallookdars immediately
come forward to give battle; and, in spite of everything, cultivate the lands of their estates,
so that their profits from the land are even greater than those of the Government." This picture
is a very fair one, and as applicable to the state of Oude now as in 1823.

But if a weak man, by favour, fraud, or collusion, gets possession of a small estate, as he
often does, the consequences are more serious than where the strong man gets it. The ousted
proprietors fight "to the death" to recover possession; and the new man forms a gang of the
most atrocious ruffians he can collect, to defend his possession. He cannot afford to pay them,
and permits them to subsist on plunder. In the contest the estate itself and many around it
become waste, and the fellow who has usurped it, often--nolens-volens--becomes a systematic
leader of banditti; and converts the deserted villages into strongholds and dens of robbers.
I shall have occasion to describe many instances of this kind as I proceed in my Diary.

Dursung Sing was strong both in troops and Court favour, and he systematically plundered and
kept down the great landholders throughout the districts under his charge, but protected the
cultivators, and even the smaller land proprietors, whose estates could not be conveniently
added to his own. When the Court found the barons in any district grow refractory, under weak
governors, they gave the contract of it to Dursun Sing, as the only officer who could plunder
and reduce them to order. During the short time that he held the districts of Gonda and Bahraetch
in 1836, he did little mischief. He merely ascertained the character and substance of the great
landholders, exacted from the weaker all that they could pay, and "bided his time." When he
resumed the charge in 1842, the greater landholders had become strong and substantial; and
he was commanded by the Durbar to coerce and make them pay all the arrears of revenue due,
or pretended to be due, by them.

Nothing loth, he proceeded to seize and plunder them all, one after the other, and put their
estates under the management of his own officers. The young Rajah of Bulrampoor had gone into
the Goruckpoor district, to visit his friend, the Rajah of Basee, Mahpaul Sing, when Dursun
Sing marched suddenly to his capital at the head of a large force. The garrison of the small
stronghold was taken by surprise; and, in the absence of their chief, soon induced to surrender,
on a promise of leave to depart with all their property. They passed over into a small island
in the river, which flows close by; and as soon as Dursun Sing saw them collected together
in that small space, he opened his guns and musketry upon them, and killed between one and
two hundred. The rest fled, and he took possession of all their property, amounting to about
two hundred thousand rupees. The Rajah was reduced to great distress; but his personal friend,
Matabur Sing, the minister of Nepaul, aided him with loans of money; and gave him a garden
to reside in, about five hundred yards from the village of Maharaj Gunge, in the Nepaul territory,
fifty-four miles from Bulrampoor, where Dursun Sing remained encamped with his large force.

The Rajah had filled this garden with small huts for the accommodation of his family and followers
during the season of the rains, and surrounded it with a deep ditch, knowing the unscrupulous
and enterprising character of his enemy. In September 1843, Dursun Sing, having had the position
and all the road leading to it well reconnoitred, marched one evening, at the head of a compact
body of his own followers, and reached the Rajah's position at daybreak the next morning. The
garden was taken by a rush; but the Rajah made his escape with the loss of thirty men killed
and wounded. Dursun Sing's party took all the property the Rajah and his followers left behind
them in their flight, and plundered the small village of Maharaj Gunge; but in their retreat
they were sorely pressed by a sturdy landholder of the neighbourhood, who had become attached
to his young sporting companion, the Rajah, and whose feeling of patriotism had been grievously
outraged by this impudent invasion of his sovereign's territory; and they had five sipahees
and one trooper killed. The Bulrampoor Rajah had been plundered in the same treacherous manner
in 1839, by the Nazim, Sunkersahae and Ghalib Jung, his deputy or collector. He had invited
them to a feast, and they brought an armed force and surrounded and plundered his house and
capital. He escaped with his mother into British territory; and tells me, that he was a lad
at the time, and had great difficulty in making his mother fly with him, and leave all her
wardrobe behind her.

The Court of Nepaul complained of this aggression on their territory, and demanded reparation.
The Governor-General Lord Ellenborough called upon the Oude government, in dignified terms,
to make prompt and ample atonement to that of Nepaul. "Promptness," said his Lordship, "in
repairing an injury, however unintentionally committed is as conducive to the honour of a sovereign,
as promptness in demanding reparation where an injury has been sustained." The Nepaul Court
required, that Dursun Sing should be seized and sent to Nepaul, to make an apology in person
to the sovereign of that state; should be deprived of all his offices, with an assurance, on
the part of Oude, that he should never be again employed in any office under that government;
and, that the amount of injury sustained by the subjects of Nepaul should be settled by arbitrators
sent to the place on the part of both States, and paid by the Oude government. The Governor-
General did not insist upon Oude's complying with the first of these requirements; but Dursun
Sing was dismissed from all employments, arbitrators were sent to the place, and the Oude government
paid the nine hundred and fourteen rupees, which they decided to be due to the subjects of Nepaul.

Dursun Sing at first fled in alarm into the British territory, as the Nepaul government assembled
a large force on the border, and appeared to threaten Oude with invasion; while the Governor-General
held in readiness a large British force to oppose them; and he knew not what the Oude government,
in its alarm, might do to the servant who had wantonly involved it in so serious a scrape.
His brother, Bukhtawar Sing, the old courtier, knew that they had enemies, or interested persons
at Court, who would take advantage of the occasion to exasperate the King, and persuade him
to plunder them of all they had, and confiscate their estates, unless Dursun Sing appeared
and pacified the King by his submission, and aided him in a judicious distribution of the ready
money at their command; and he prevailed upon him to hasten to Court, and throw himself at
his Majesty's feet.

He came, acknowledged that he had been precipitate in his over-zeal for his Majesty's service;
but pleaded, in excuse, that the young Rajah of Bulrampore had been guilty of great contumacy,
and owed a large balance to the Exchequer, which he had been peremptorily commanded to recover;
and declared himself ready to suffer any punishment, and make any reparation or atonement that
his master, the King, might deem proper. The British and Nepaul governments had expressed themselves
satisfied; but other parties had become deeply interested in the dispute. The King, with many
good qualities, was a very parsimonious man, who prided himself upon adding something every
month to his reserved treasury; and he thought, that advantage should be taken of the occasion,
to get a large sum out of so wealthy a family. Three of his wives, Hoseynee Khanum, Mosahil
Khanum, and Sakeena Khanum, had at the time great influence over his Majesty, and they wished
to take advantage of the occasion, not only to screw out of the family a large sum for the
King and themselves, but to confiscate the estates, and distribute them among their male relations.
The minister, Menowur-od Dowlah, the nephew and heir of Hakeem Mehndee, who has been and will
be often mentioned in this Diary, thought that, after paying a large sum to gratify his Majesty's
ruling passion, and enable him to make handsome presents to the three favourites, Dursun Sing
ought to be released and restored to office, for he was the only man then in Oude capable of
controlling the refractory and turbulent territorial barons; and if he were crushed altogether
for subduing one of them, the rest would all become unmanageable, and pay no revenue whatever
to the Exchequer. He, therefore, recommended the King to take from the two brothers the sum
of twenty-five lacs of rupees, leave them the estates, and restore Dursun Sing to all his charges,
as soon as it could be done without any risk of giving umbrage to the British Government.

The King thought the minister's advice judicious, and consented; but the ladies called him
a fool, and told him, that the brothers had more than that sum in stores of seed-grain alone,
and ought to be made to pay at least fifty lacs, while the brothers pleaded poverty, and declared
that they could only pay nineteen. The minister urged the King, to take even this sum, give
two lacs to the three females, and send seventeen to the reserved treasury; and called upon
the Chancellor of the Exchequer to give in his accounts of the actual balance due by the two
brothers, on their several contracts, for the last twenty-five years. He, being on good terms
with the minister, and anxious to meet his wishes, found a balance of only one lac and thirty-two
thousand due by Dursun Sing, and one of only fifteen lacs due by his brother, Bukhtawar Sing,
in whose name the contracts had always been taken up to 1842. The King, sorely pressed by the
females, resolved to banish Dursun Sing, and confiscate all his large estates; but the British
Resident interposed, and urged, that Dursun Sing should be leniently dealt with, since he had
made all the reparation and atonement required. The King told him, that Dursun Sing was a notorious
and terrible tyrant, and had fearfully oppressed his poor subjects, and robbed them by fraud,
violence, and collusion, of lands yielding a rent-roll of many lacs of rupees a-year; and,
that unless he were punished severely for all these numerous atrocities, his other servants
would follow his example, and his poor subjects be everywhere ruined!

The Resident admitted the truth of all these charges; but urged, in reply, that the Oude government
had, in spite of all these atrocities, without any admonition, continued to employ him with
unlimited power in the charge of many of its finest districts, for twenty-five or thirty years;
and, that it would now be hard to banish him, and confiscate all his fine estates, when his
Majesty had so lately offered, not only to leave them all untouched, but to restore him to
all his charges, on the payment of a fine of twenty-five lacs. The King was perplexed in his
desire to please the Resident, meet the wishes of his three ladies, and add a good round sum
to his reserved treasury; and at last closed all discussions by making Dursun Sing pay the
one lac and thirty-two thousand rupees, found to be due by him, and sending him into banishment;
holding Bukhtawar Sing responsible for the fifteen lacs due by him, and seizing upon his estates,
and putting them under the management of Hoseyn Allee, the father of Hoseynee Khanum, the most
influential of the three favourites, till the whole should be paid. She satisfied herself that
she should be able to make the banishment of the man and the confiscation of the estate perpetual;
and, before he set out, she secured the transfer of the strong fort of Shahgunge, with all
its artillery and military stores, from Dursun Sing's to the King's troops. Dursun Sing went
into banishment on the 17th of March 1844; but before he set out he addressed a remonstrance
to the British Resident, stating--"that he had paid all that had been found to be due by him
to the Exchequer, and made every atonement required for the offence charged against him; but
had, nevertheless, been ordered into banishment--had all his charges taken from him, and his
lands, houses, gardens, &c., worth fifty lacs, taken from him, and made over to strangers and
Court favourites."

Hoseyn Allee had promised to pay to the Exchequer one lac of rupees a-year for these estates
more than Dursun Sing had paid. He had paid annually for the Mehdona estates two lacs and eight
thousand two hundred and seventy-six; and for the Asrewa estates, in the same district of Sultanpoor,
one lac thirty-one thousand and eighty-nine- total, three lacs and thirty-nine thousand three
hundred and sixty- five; and they probably yielded to him an annual rent of nearly double that
sum, or at least five lacs of rupees. Hoseyn Allee, however, found it impossible to fulfil
his pledges. The landholders and cultivators would not be persuaded that the sovereign of Oude
could long dispense with the services of such a man as Dursun Sing, or bring him back without
restoring to him his landed possessions; or that he would, when he returned, give them credit
for any payments which they might presume to make to any other master during his absence. They,
therefore, refused to pay any rent for the past season, and threatened to abandon their lands
before the tillage for the next season should commence, if any attempt were made to coerce
them. All the great revenue contractors and other governors of districts declared their inability
to coerce the territorial barons into paying anything, since they had lost the advantage of
the prestige of his great name; and the minister found that he must either resign his office
or prevail upon his sovereign to recall him. The King, finding that he must either draw upon
his reserved treasury or leave all his establishments unpaid under such a falling off in the
revenue, yielded to his minister's earnest recommendation, and in May 1844, consented to recall
Dursun Sing from our district of Goruckpoor, in which he had resided during his banishment.

On the 10th of that month he was taken by the minister to pay his respects to his Majesty,
who, on the 30th, conferred upon him additional honours and titles, and appointed him Inspector-general
of all his dominions, with orders "to make a settlement of the land revenue at an increased
rate; to cut down all the jungles, and bring all the waste lands into tillage; to seize all
refractory barons, destroy all their forts, and seize and send into store all the cannon mounted
upon them; to put down all disturbances, protect all high roads, punish all refractory and
evil-minded persons; to enforce the payment of all just demands of his sovereign upon landholders
of all degrees and denominations; to invite back all who had been driven off by oppression,
and re-establish them on their estates, or punish them if they refused to return; to ascertain
the value of all estates transferred from the jurisdiction of the local authorities to the
'Hozoor Tehsel,' without due inquiry; and report, for the consideration of his Majesty and
his minister, any nankar or rent- free lands, assigned, of late years, by Amils and other governors
of districts; to enforce the payment of all recoverable balances, due on account of past years;
to muster the troops, and report, through the commander-in-chief, all officers and soldiers
borne on the muster- rolls, and paid from the treasury, but in reality dead, absent without
leave, or unfit for further service;" in short, to reform all abuses, and make the government
of the country what the King and his minister thought it ought to be. Dursun Sing assured them
that he would do his best to effect all the objects they had in view; and, after recovering
possession of his estates, and conciliating, by suitable gratuities, all the reigning favourites
at Court, he went to work heartily at his Herculean task after his wonted way. But he, soon
after, became ill, and retired to his residence at Fyzabad, where he died on the 20th of August,
1844, leaving his elder brother, Bukhtawar Sing--my Quartermaster-general--at Court; and his
three sons, Ramadeen, Rughbur Sing, and Mann Sing, to fight among themselves for his landed
possessions and immense accumulated wealth.

The minister was a man of good intentions; and, having inherited an immense fortune from his
uncle, Hakeem Mehndee, he cared little about money; but he was an indolent man, and indulged
much in opiates, and his object was to reform the administration at the least possible cost
of time and trouble to himself. He had, he thought, found the man who could efficiently supervise
and control the administration in all its branches; and he invested him with plenary powers
to do so. Of the duty, on his part and that of his master; efficiently to supervise and control
the exercise of these plenary powers on the part of the man of their choice, in order to prevent
their being abused to the injury of the state and the people; or of the necessity of taking
from Court favourites the nomination of officers to the charge of all districts and all fiscal
and judicial Courts, and to the command of all corps and establishments, in order to render
them efficient and honest, and prevent justice from being perverted, and the revenues of the
state from being absorbed on their way to the treasury, they took no heed. Court favourites
retained their powers, and the King and his minister relied entirely, as heretofore, upon the
reports of the news-writers, who attend officially upon all officers in charge of districts,
fiscal and judicial Courts, corps and establishments of all kinds, for the facts of all cases
on which they might have to pass orders; and remained as ignorant as their predecessors of
the real state of the administration and the real sufferings of the people, if not of the real
losses to the Exchequer. When he contracts for it he pays a certain sum to the public treasury,
over and above what he pays to the influential officers and Court favourites in gratuities.
When he holds it in amanee, he pays only gratuities, and the public treasury gets nothing.
His payments amount to about the same in either case. Many, whose avowed salary is from four
to ten rupees a-month, receive each, from the persons to whom they are accredited, more than
five hundred, three-fourths of which they must send for distribution among Court favourites,
or they could not retain their places a week, nor could their President retain his. Some of
those who derive part of their incomes from this source are "persons behind the throne, who
are greater than the throne itself." The mother of the heir-apparent gets twelve thousand rupees
a-year from it.

But their exactions are not confined to government officers of all grades and denominations;
they are extended to contractors of all kinds and denominations, to him who contracts for the
supply of the public cattle with grain, as well as to him who contracts for the revenue and
undivided government of whole provinces; and, indeed, to every person who has anything to do
under, or anything to apprehend from, government and its officers and favourites; and, in such
a country, who has not? Of the practical working of the system, many illustrations will be
found in this Diary.

The Akbar, or Intelligence Department, had been farmed out for some years, at the rate of between
one and two lacs of rupees a-year, when, at the recommendation of the Resident, the King expressed
his willingness to abolish the farm, and intrust the superintendence to men of character and
ability, to be paid by Government. This resolution was communicated to Government by the Resident
on the 24th of April, 1839; and on the 6th of May the Resident was instructed to communicate
to his Majesty the satisfaction which the Governor- General derived on hearing that he had
consented to abolish this farm, which had produced so large a revenue to the state. Iten, if I err on the number, Mr. Merlin, for he
knows everything, has to be careful to count and tell me that I'm missing or that I have plenty.

"All
the leftovers will not be notified," said Merlin, "for coming to
the full number, then suddenly be disenchanted lady Dulcinea, and
come to find, as grateful to good Sancho, and give thanks, and even
reward him for the good work.

So there's nothing to be scruple leftovers or failures, or heaven forbid I should cheat anyone,
but be on a hair of the head.

- Turn then, the hand of God! "Said Sancho. I agree to my bad luck, say I I accept the penance
with targeted conditions.

Just Sancho uttered these last words, when he returned to play the
music of oboes and turned to fire muskets infinite, and Don Quixote
hung on Sancho's neck, kissing him on the forehead and cheeks.

The duchess and the duke and all present showed signs of having received any great joy, and
the car began to walk, and, pass, the beautiful Dulcinea bowed to the dukes and bowed deeply
to Sancho.

And in this, came over to walk the morning, happy and smiling, the
flowers of the fields it stood out and stood, and liquid crystal rills,
whispering through white and brown pebbles, were to pay tribute to
the river before them.

Happy land, clear skies, clean air, light, quiet, each alone and together, giving apparent signals
that the day that came treading on the skirts Aurora, was to be calm and clear. And Dukes
happy hunting and have achieved its intention so discreet and happy returned to their castle,
prosupuesto second in their taunts, which they had not I really should give it more taste.

Chapter XXXVI. Which tells the strange and undreamt adventure of the owner Distressed Trifaldi alias
Countess, with a letter which Sancho Panza wrote to his wife Teresa Panza

Duke had a steward very casual burlesque and wit, which made the figure of Merlin and settled
the whole apparatus of the late adventure, and he composed the verses
to a page hiciese Dulcinea.

Finally, with the intervention of their lords, he ordered one of the funniest and strange trick
you can imagine.

The duchess asked Sancho if another day had begun the task of penance
that had to the disenchantment of Dulcinea.

He said yes, and that very night he had taken five whipping. The duchess asked him what he had
given. Responded that hand.

"That," said the duchess, "is more than slapping stripes. I have to myself that the wise Merlin
will not be satisfied with so much tenderness, must be that good Sancho to use a discipline
of thorns, or the cannelloni, which are felt for the letter with blood enters, and not be given
freedom so cheap so great a lady as Dulcinea is at so little cost, and Sancho warns that charities
that are warm and loose are without merit and are worth nothing.

To which Sancho:

"Give me your ladyship should have discipline or branch, that I give to him and not me hurts
too much, because I know your grace that, although I am rustic, my
flesh more cotton than rush, and will not be good that I outbreeding
for the benefit of others.

-Be in good time, "said the duchess,"
tomorrow I will give you a discipline that comes very the fair and
fits with the tenderness of your flesh, as if they were his own sisters.

To which Sancho said:

"Know your highness, lady of my soul, that
I have written a letter to my wife Teresa Panza, giving an account
of everything that has happened to me after I left her, here I have
in the breast, they do not need more than put the overwritten; would
like your discretion read it, because I think that goes under the
governor, say, the way it should write to the governors.

- And who
noticed?

Asked the Duchess.

- Who had to notice but me, a sinner of me? "Said Sancho.

- What escribístesla you?

"Said the duchess.

"Not to think," said Sancho, "because I can not read or write, since
I know sign.

"Let us see," said the duchess, that surely it that you may show the
quality and sufficiency of your wit.

Sancho took out an open letter of the breast, and took her by the Duchess, was that it ran
thus:

Letter to Teresa Panza Sancho Panza, his wife

If you gave me good
spanking, well sir I would, if I have my good governance, good spanking
I find it hard. This will not understand you, my Teresa, for now you'll
know it again. Know, Teresa, I have determined to walk in the car,
which makes the case, because every other walking is crawling. Wife
of a governor you are, see if you gnaw Zanchetta nobody! The Rajah would not agree
to pay the seven thousand, but went off to request some capitalists to furnish securities for
the punctual payment of the rent.

The agent sent off secretly to Rughbur Sing to say, that unless he came at the head of his
forces he saw no chance of getting the revenues from the Rajah or his tenants, who were all
assembled and might be secured if he could contrive to surprise them. Rughbur Sing came with
a large force at night, surrounded his agent's camp, where the tenants and the Rajah's officers
were all assembled, and seized them. He then sent out parties of soldiers of from one hundred
to two hundred each, to plunder all the towns and villages on the estate, and seize all the
respectable residents they could find. They plundered the town of Bondee, and pulled down all
the houses of the Rajah, and those of his relatives and dependents; and, after plundering all
the other towns and villages in the neighbourhood, they brought in one thousand captives of
both sexes and all ages, who were subjected to all manner of torture till they paid the ransom
demanded, or gave written pledges to pay. Five thousand head of cattle were, at the same time,
brought in and distributed as booty.

The Rajah made his escape, but his agents were put to the same tortures as his tenants. Rughbur
Sing, among other things, commanded them to sign a declaration, to the effect that his predecessor
and enemy, Wajid Allee Khan, had received from them the sum of thirty thousand rupees more
than he had credited to his government, but this they all refused to do. Rughbur Sing remained
at Bondee for six weeks, superintending personally all these atrocities; and then went off,
leaving, as his agent, Kurum Hoseyn. He continued the tortures upon the tenants and officers
of the Rajah, and the captives collected in his camp. He rubbed the beards of the men with
moist gunpowder; and, as soon as it became dry in the sun, he set fire to it. Other tortures,
too cruel and indecent to be named, were inflicted upon four servants of the Rajah, Kunjun
Sing, Bustee Ram, Admadnt Pandee, and Bhugwant Rae, and upon others, who were likely to be
able to borrow or beg anything for their ransom.

Finding that the tenants did not return, and that the estate was likely to be altogether deserted,
unless the Rajah returned, Kurum Hoseyn was instructed by Rughbur Sing to invite him back on
any terms. The poor Rajah, having nothing in the jungles to which he had fled to subsist upon,
ventured back on the solemn pledge of personal security given by Pudum Sing, a respectable
capitalist, whom the collector had induced, by solemn oaths on the holy Koran, to become a
mediator; and, as a token of reconciliation and future friendship, the Rajah and collector
changed turbans. They remained together for five months on the best possible terms, and the
Rajah's tenants returned to their homes and fields. All having been thus lulled into security,
Rughbur Sing suddenly sent another agent, Maharaj Sing, to supersede Kurum Hoseyn, and seize
the Rajah and his confidential manager, Benee Ram Sookul. They, however, went off to Balalpoor,
forty miles distant from Bondee, and kept aloof from the new collector, till he prevailed upon
all the officers, commanding corps and detachments under him, to enter into solemn written
pledges of personal security. The Rajah had been long suffering from ague and fever, and had
become very feeble in mind and body. He remained at Balalpoor; but, under the assurance of
these pledges from military officers of rank and influence, Benee Ram and other confidential
officers of the Rajah came to his camp, and entered upon the adjustment of their accounts.

When he found them sufficiently off their guard, Maharaj Sing, while sitting one evening with
Benee Ram, who was a stout, powerful man, asked him to show him the handsome dagger which he
always wore in his waistband. He did so, and as soon as he got it in his hand, the collector
gave the concerted signal to Roshun Allee, one of the officers present, and his armed attendants,
to seize him. As he rose to leave the tent he was cut down from behind by Mattadeen, khasburdar;
and the rest fell upon him and cut him to pieces in presence of the greater part of the officers
who had given the solemn pledges for his personal security. Not one of them interposed to save
him. Doulut Rae, another confidential servant of the Rajah, however, effected his escape, and
ran to the Rajah, who prepared to defend himself at Balalpoor, where Maharaj Sing tried, in
vain, to persuade his troops' to attack him. For two months the towns and villages were deserted,
but the crops were on the ground, and guarded by the Passee bowmen, who are usually hired for
the purpose.

Beharee Lal, the principal agent of Rughbur Sing in these districts, now wrote a letter of
condolence to the Rajah, on the death of his faithful servant, Benee Ram--told him that he
had dismissed from all employ the villain Maharaj Sing, and appointed to his place Kurum Hoseyn,
who would make all reparation and redress all wrongs. This letter he sent by a very plausible
man, Omed Rae, the collector of the Rahooa estate. Kurum Hoseyn resumed charge of his office,
and went unattended to the Rajah, with whom he remained some days feasting, and swearing on
the Koran, that all had been without his connivance or knowledge, and that he had come back
with a full determination to see justice done to his friend, the Rajah, and his landholders
and cultivators in everything. Having thus soothed the poor old Rajahs apprehensions, he prevailed
on him to go back with him to Bondee, where he behaved for some time with so much seeming frankness
and cordiality, and swore so solemnly on the Koran to respect the persons of all men who should
come to him on business, that the Rajah's tenants and agents lost all their fears, and again
came freely to his camp. The Rajah now invited all his tenants as before, to enter into engagements
to pay their rents to officers appointed by the collector as jumogdars; and the people had
hopes of being permitted to gather their harvests in peace. Kurum Hoseyn now suggested to Beharee
Lal, to come suddenly with the largest force he could collect, and seize the many respectable
men who had assembled- at his invitation.

He made a forced march daring the night, appeared suddenly at Bondee with a large force, and
seized all who were there assembled, save the Rajah and his family, who escaped to the jungles.
Detachments of from one hundred to two hundred were sent out as before, to plunder the country,
and seize all from whom anything could be extorted. All the towns and villages on the estate
were plundered of everything that could be found, and fifteen hundred men, and about five hundred
women and children, were brought in prisoners, with no less than eighty thousand animals of
all kinds. There were twenty-five thousand head of cattle; and horses, mares, sheep, goats,
ponies, &c., made up the rest. All with the men, women, and children were driven off, pell-
mell, a distance of twenty miles to Busuntpoor, in the Hurhurpoor district, where Beharee Lal's
headquarter had been fixed. For three days heavy rain continued to fall. Pregnant women were
beaten on by the troops with bludgeons and the butt-ends of muskets and matchlocks. Many of
them gave premature birth to children and died on the road; and many children were trodden
to death by the animals on the road, which was crowded for more than ten miles.

Rughbur Sing and his agents, Beharee Lal, Kurum Hoseyn, Maharaj Sing, Prag Sing, and others,
selected several thousand of the finest cattle, and sent them to their homes; and the rest
were left to the officers and soldiers of the force to be disposed of; and, for all this enormous
number of animals, worth at least one hundred thousand rupees, the small sum of one hundred
and thirty rupees was credited in the Nazim's accounts to the Rajah's estate. At Busuntpoor
the force was divided into two parties, for the purpose of torturing the surviving prisoners
till they consented to sign bonds, for the payment of such sums as might be demanded from them.
Beharee Lal presided over the first party, in which they were tortured from day- break till
noon. They were tied up and flogged, had red-hot ramrods thrust into their flesh, their tongues
were pulled out with hot pincers and pierced through; and, when all would not do, they were
taken to Kurum Hoseyn, who presided at the other party, to be tortured again till the evening.
He sat with a savage delight, to witness this brutal scene and invent new kinds of torture.
No less than seventy men, besides women and children, perished at Busuntpoor from torture and
starvation; and their bodies were left to rot in the mud, and their friends were afraid to
approach them. Bustee's body was stolen at night by his son, and Guyadut's was sold to his
family by the soldiers.

Among the persons of respectability who died under the tortures, several are named below.*
Buldee Sing, the husband of the Rajah's sister, took poison and died; and Ramdeen, a Brahmin
of great respectability, stabbed himself to death, to avoid further torture and dishonour.
For two months did these atrocities continue at Busuntpoor; and during that time the prisoners
got no food from the servants of Government. All that they got was sent to them by their friends,
or by the charitable peasantry of the country around; and when sweetmeats were sent to them
as food, which the most scrupulous could eat from any hand, the soldiers often snatched them
from them and ate them themselves, or took them to their officers. The women and children were
all stripped of their clothes, and many died from cold and want of sustenance. It was during
the months of September and October that these atrocities were perpetrated. The heavy rain
had inundated the country, and the poor prisoners were obliged to lie naked and unsheltered
on the damp ground.

[* 1. Byjonauth, the Rajah's accountant.
   2. Gijraj Sing, Rajpoot.
   3. Sheopersaud.
   4. Rampersaud.
   5. Jhow Lal.
   6. Guyadut.
   7. Duyram.
   8. Budaree Chobee.
   9. Mungul Sing, Rajpoot.
  10. Seodeen Sing, ditto.
  11. Akber Sing.
  12. Bustee, a farmer.]

Apreel Sing, a respectable Jagheerdar of Bondee, was tortured till he consented to sell his
two daughters, and pay the money; and a great many respectable females, who were taken from
Bondee to Busuntpoor, have never been heard of since. Whether they perished or were sold their
friends have never been able to discover. The sipahees and other persons, employed to torture,
got money from their victims or their friends, who ventured to approach, or from the pitying
peasantry around; and all laughed and joked at the screams of the sufferers. Several times,
during the two months, Rughbur Sing paid off heavy arrears, due to his personal servants, by
drafts on his agents for prisoners, to be placed at the disposal of the payee, ten and twenty
at a time. It is worthy of remark, that an old Subadar of one of our regiments of Native Infantry,
who was then at home in furlough, happened to pass Busuntpoor with his family, on his way to
Guya, on a pilgrimage. He and his family had saved what was to them a large sum, to be spent
in offerings, for the safe passage of his deceased relatives through purgatory. On witnessing
the sufferings of the poor prisoners at Busuntpoor, he and his family offered all they had
for a certain number of women and children, who were made over to them. He took them to their
homes, and returned to his own, saying, that he hoped God would forgive them for the sake of
the relief which they had afforded to sufferers.

In the latter end of October, Beharee Lal took off all the force that could be spared, to attack
the Rajah of Bhinga, and plunder his estate in the same manner; and Kurum Hoseyn took another
to plunder Koelee, Murdunpoor, Budrolee, and some other villages of the Bondee estate, which
had suffered least in the last attack. He collected two thousand plough-bullocks, and sold
them for little to Nuzur Allee and Sufder Allee, who commanded detachments under him. He soon
after made an attack upon Sookha and other villages, in the vicinity of Busuntpoor, and collected
between twenty and thirty thousand head of cattle; but, on his way back, he was attacked by
a party of twenty brave men (under a landholder named Nabee Buksh, whom he wished to seize),
and driven back to his camp at Busuntpoor, with the loss of all his booty. He attempted no
more enterprises after this check. The tortures ceased, and ten days after he ran off, on hearing
that Rughbur Sing had been deprived of his charge by orders from Lucknow. At this time one
hundred and fifty prisoners remained at Busuntpoor, and they were released by Incha Sing, the
successor and uncle of Rughbur Sing.

The Akhbar Naveeses, so far from admonishing the perpetrators of these atrocities, were some
of them among the most active promoters of them. Jorakhun, the news-writer at Bondee, got one
anna for every prisoner brought in; and from two to three rupees for every prisoner released.
He got every day subsistence for ten men from Kurum Hoseyn. All the news-writers in the neighbourhood
got a share of the booty in bullocks, cows, and other animals. Two chuprassies are said to
have come from Government, and remained at Busuntpoor for nearly the whole two months, while
these tortures were being inflicted, without making any report of them. When the order for
dismissing Rughbur Sing came from the Durbar, Maharaj Sing went off, saying, that he would
soon smother all complaints, in the usual way, at Lucknow.

In September 1847, Rughbur Sing's agents, with a considerable force, encamped at Parbatee-tolah,
in the Gonda district, and made a sudden attack upon the fine town of Khurgoopoor. After plundering
the town, the troops seized forty of the most respectable merchants and shopkeepers of the
place, and made them over to Rughbur Sing's agents, at the rate agreed upon, of so much a head,
as the perquisites of the soldiers; and these agents confined and tortured them till they each
paid the ransom demanded, and rated according to their supposed means. The troops did the same
by Bisumberpoor, Bellehree Pundit, Pyaree, Peepree, and many other towns and villages in the
same district of Gonda. A trooper and his son, who tried to save the honour of their family,
by defending the entrance to their house, were cut down and killed at Khurgapoor; and in Bisumberpoor
one of the soldiers, with his sword, cut off the arm of a respectable old woman, in order the
more easily to get her gold bracelets. The poor woman died a few hours afterwards. The only
relative of the poor old woman who could have assisted her was seized, with forty other respectable
persons, and taken off to the camp at Parbatee-tola, where they were all tortured till they
paid the ransom demanded, and a gratuity, in addition, to the soldiers who had seized them.
One of the persons died under the tortures inflicted upon him.

In the Gungwal district similar atrocities were committed by Rughbur Sing's agents and their
soldiers. These agents were Gouree Shunkur and Seorutun Sing. The district formed the estate
of Rajah Sreeput Sing, who resided with his family in the fort of Gungwal. The former Nazim,
Suraj-od Dowlah, had attacked this fort on some frivolous pretence; and, having taken it by
surprise, sacked the place and plundered the Rajah and his family of all they had. The Rajah
died soon after of mortification, at the dishonour he and his family had suffered, and was
succeeded by his son, Seetul Persaud Sing, the present Rajah, who was now plundered again,
and driven an exile into the Nepaul hills. The estate was now taken possession of by the agents,
Goureeshunker and Seorutun Sing. Seorutun Sing seized a Brahmin who was travelling with his
wife and brother, and, on the pretence that he must be a relation of the fugitive Rajah, had
him murdered, and his head struck off on the spot. The wife took the head of her murdered husband
in her arms, wrapped it up in cloth, and, attended by his brother, walked with it a distance
of fifty miles to Ajoodheea, where Rughbur Sing was then engaged in religious ceremonies. The
poor woman placed the head before him, and demanded justice on her husband's murderers. He
coolly ordered the head to be thrown into the river, and the woman and her brother-in-law to
be driven from his presence. Many other respectable persons were seized and tortured on similar
pretext of being related to, or having served or assisted, the fugitive Rajah. Moistened gunpowder
was smeared thickly over the beards of the men, and when dry set fire to; and any friend or
relatives who presumed to show signs of pity was seized and tortured, till he or she paid a
ransom. All the people in the country around, who had moveable property of any kind, were plundered
by these two atrocious agents, and tortured till they paid all that they could beg and borrow.
Many respectable families were dishonoured in the persons of wives, sisters, or daughters,
and almost all the towns and villages around became deserted.

In Rajah Nirput Sing's estate of Pyagpoor, the same atrocities were committed. Rajah Rughbur
Sing seized upon this estate as soon as he entered upon his charge in 1846, and put it under
the management of his own agents; and, after extorting from the tenants more than was justly
due, according to engagement, he attacked the Rajah's house by surprise, and plundered it of
property to the value of fifteen thousand rupees. The Rajah, however, contrived to make his
escape with his family. He had nothing with him to subsist upon, and in 1847 he was invited
back on solemn pledges of personal security; and, from great distress, was induced again to
undertake the management of his own estate, at an exorbitant rate of assessment.

In spite of this engagement, Goureeshunker, when the tenants had become lulled into security
by the hope of remaining under their own chief, suddenly, with his troops, seized upon all
he could catch, plundered their houses, and tortured them till they paid all that they could
prevail upon their relatives and friends to lend them. Eighteen hundred of their plough-bullocks
were seized and sold by him, together with many of their wives and daughters. While under torture,
Seetaram, a respectable Brahmin, of Kandookoeea, put an end to his existence, to avoid further
sufferings and dishonour. Sucheet, another respectable Brahmin, of Pagaree, did the same by
opening a vein in his thigh. A cloth steeped in oil was bound round the hands of those who
appeared able, but unwilling, to pay ransoms, and set fire to, so as to burn like a torch.
In these tortures, Lala Beharee Lal, Rughbur Sing's deputy, was the chief agent. "I found,"
says Captain Orr, "the estate of Pyagpoor in a desolate condition; village after village presenting
nothing but bare walls--the finest arable lands lying waste, and no sign of cultivation was
anywhere to be seen. Even the present Nazim, Mahommed Hussan, after conciliating and inviting
in the Rajah on further solemn assurances of personal security, seized him and all his family,
and kept them confined in prison for several months, till they paid him an exorbitant ransom.
The poorer classes told me, that it was impossible for them to plough their fields, since all
their plough-bullocks had been seized and sold by the Nazim's agents. Great numbers in this
and the adjoining estates have subsisted entirely upon wild fruits, and some species of aquatic
plants, since they were ruined by these atrocities."

This picture is not at all overdrawn. In passing through the estate, and communing with the
few wretched people who remain, I find all that Captain Orr stated in his report to be strictly
correct.

In the Hurhurpoor district similar atrocities were committed by Rughbur Sing and his agents.
He confided the management to his agent, Goureeshunker. In 1846 he made his settlement of the
land revenue, at an exorbitant rate, with the tallookdar, Chinghy Sing; and, in the following
year, he extorted from him an increase to this rate of twenty-five thousand rupees. He was,
in consequence, obliged to fly; but he was soon invited back on the usual solemn assurances
for his personal security, and induced to take on himself the management of the estate. But
he was no sooner settled in his house than he was again attacked at night and plundered. One
of his attendants was killed, and another wounded; and all the respectable tenants and servants
who had ventured to assemble around him on his return were seized and tortured till they paid
ransoms. No less than two thousand and five hundred bullocks from this estate were seized and
sold, or starved to death. A great many women were seized and tortured till they paid ransoms
like the men; and many of them have never since been seen or heard of. Some perished in confinement
of hunger and cold, having been stripped of their clothes, and exposed at night to the open
air on the damp ground, while others threw themselves into wells and destroyed themselves after
their release, rather than return to their families after the exposure and dishonour they had
suffered.

In the Bahraetch district, the same atrocities were practised by Rughbur Sing and his agents.
Here also Goureeshunker was the chief agent employed, but the few people who remained were
so terrified, that Captain Orr could get but little detailed information of particular cases.
The present Nazim had been one of Rughbur Sing's agents in all these atrocities, and the people
apprehended that he was in office merely as his "locum tenens;" and that Rughbur Sing would
soon purchase his restoration to power, as he boasted that he should. The estate of the Rajah
of Bumunee Paer was plundered in the same manner; and Rughbur Sing's agents seized, drove off,
and sold two thousand bullocks, and cut down and sold or destroyed five hundred and five mhowa-trees,
which had, for generations, formed the strongest local ties of the cultivators, and their best
dependence in seasons of drought.

In the Churda estate, in the Tarae forest, the same sufferings were inflicted on the people
by the same agents, Goureeshunker and Beharee Lal. They seized Mudar Buksh, the manager, and
made him over to Moonshee Kurum Hoseyn, who had him beaten to death. The estate of the Rajah
of Bhinga was treated in the same way. Beharee Lal attacked the town with a large force, plundered
all the houses in it, and all the people of their clothes and ornaments. They seized all the
plough- bullocks and other cattle, and had them driven off and sold. The women were all seized
and driven off in crowds to the camp of Rughbur Sing at Parbatee-tolah. Many of them who were
far gone in pregnancy perished on the road, from fatigue and harsh treatment The estate of
the Rajah of Ruhooa was treated in the same manner; and the Rajah, to avoid torture and disgrace,
fled with his family to the jungles. In July 1846, being in great distress, he was induced
to come back on the most solemn assurances from Rughbur Sing of personal security for himself,
family, and attendants. He left the Rajah his nankar lands for his subsistence, pledging himself
to exact no rents or revenues from them; but put the estate under the management of his own
agents, Lala Omed Rae and others. He at the same time pledged himself not to exact from any
of the poor Rajah's tenants higher rates than those stipulated for in the engagements then
made. But he immediately after saddled the Rajah with the payment of five hundred armed men,
on the pretence that they were necessary to protect him, and aid him in the management of these
nankar lands. In May 1847, when the harvests had been gathered, and he had exacted from the
tenants and cultivators the rates stipulated, Goureeshunker was put into the management. He
seized all the tenants and cultivators by a sudden and simultaneous attack upon their several
villages, and extorted from them a payment of fifty thousand rupees more. Not satisfied with
this, Goureeshunker seized the Rajah's chief manager, Mungul Pershad, tied him up to a tree,
and had him beaten to death. Many of the Rajah's tenants and servants were beaten to death
in the same manner; and no less than forty villages were attacked and plundered. A good many
respectable females were seized and compelled to make up the ransoms of their husbands and
fathers who were under torture. Many of the females who had been seized perished from the cruel
treatment and from want of food. Two thousand head of cattle, chiefly plough- bullocks, were
seized and sold from this estate.

I have passed through all the districts here named, save two, Churda and Bhinga, and I can
say, that everything I saw and heard tended to confirm the truth of what has here been told.
Rughbur Sing and the agents employed by him were, by all I saw, considered more as terrible
demons who delighted in blood and murder than as men endowed with any feelings of sympathy
for their fellow-creatures; and the government, which employed such men in the management of
districts with uncontrolled power, seemed to be utterly detested and abhorred.

It will naturally be asked, whether the circumstances described were ever reported to the Oude
Government or to the British Resident; and whether they did anything to punish the guilty and
afford redress and relief to the sufferers. The following are the reports which were made to
the Oude Durbar by the news-writers, employed in the several districts, and communicated to
the Resident and his Assistant, by the Residency news-writer, in his daily reports, which are
read out to them every morning.

July 10, 1847.--Report from Bondee states, that Rajaram, Rughbur Sing's collector of Mirzapoor
and other villages in that estate, had attacked and plundered Mirzapoor, and carried off sixty
head of cattle.

August 12, 1847.--Report from Bondee states, that the estates of Bondee and Tiperha, which
yielded one hundred and fifty thousand rupees a-year, had become so desolated by the oppression
of Beharee Lal and Kurum Hoseyn, the agents of Rughbur Sing, that they could not possibly yield
anything for the ensuing year; that Kurum Hoseyn had seized all the cattle and other property
of the peasantry, sold them and appropriated the money to his own use, and had so beaten the
landholders and cultivators, that many of them had died. Order by the Durbar, that these two
agents be deterred from such acts of oppression, fined five thousand rupees, and made to release
the remaining prisoners, and restore the property taken. Nothing whatever was done!

August 14, 1847.--Report from Bondee states, that although the landholders and cultivators
of this estate had paid all that was due, according to engagements, Beharee Lal and Kurum Hoseyn
were having them flogged and tortured every day to extort more; selling off all their stock
and other property, and selecting all the good bullocks and cows and sending them to their
own houses. Order by the Durbar, that the minister punish the oppressors, and cause their property
to be given back to the oppressed. The minister ordered his deputy, Ramchurn, to see this done.
He did nothing whatever!

September 6, 1847.--Report from Gonda states, that all the lands from Bondee and Pyagpoor had
been left waste from the oppression of Rughbur Sing. Order by the Durbar, that the minister
hasten to get the lands tilled, as the season was passing away. Nothing whatever was done!

September 24, 1847.--Report from the same place states, that Rughbur Sing had seized no less
than eighteen thousand bullocks, from the villages of the Bondee estate, collected them at
Neemapoor, and ordered his agents to get them all sold off as fast as possible; and that the
cultivators could till none of the lands in consequence. Order by the Durbar, that the minister
put a stop to all this oppression. Nothing whatever was done!

September 24, 1847.--Report from the same place states, that Kurum Hoseyn had seized Ahlad
Sing, the malgoozar of Hurkapoor in Bondee, and had red-hot ramrods thrust into his flesh,
on account of a balance due, and then had him put upon an ass and paraded through the streets.
Order by the Durbar, that the minister see to this. Nothing whatever was done!

August 2, 1847.--Report from Gonda states, that the troops under Beharee Lal were robbing all
the females of the country of their ornaments; and that Beharee Lal neither did nor said anything
to prevent them. Order by the Durbar, that Rughbur Sing be directed to restrain his soldiers
and restore the ornaments. Nothing whatever was done!

September 6, 1847--Report from the same place states, that Luchman Naraen, malgoozar of Bhurduree
in Gonda, had paid all the rents due, according to his engagements; that Beharee Lal had, nevertheless,
sent a force of three hundred men, who attacked his house, plundered it of all that it contained,
and took off five thousand seven hundred and thirty-one maunds of stored grain. Order by the
Durbar, that the minister punish and restrain the oppressors, and cause all the property to
be restored. Nothing whatever was done in the matter!

October 2, 1847.--Report from Gonda states, that Jafir Allee and Hemraj Sing, Rughbur Sing's
agents, had, with a body of sixteen hundred troops, attacked the town of Khurgapoor in Gonda,
plundered it, and attacked and plundered five villages in the vicinity, and seized Sudasook
and thirty other merchants and shopkeepers of Khurgapoor, Chungul Sing, the farmer of that
place, Kaleechurn, a writer, and Benee, the agent of the Gonda Rajah, and no less than one
hundred landholders and cultivators. Order by the Durbar: Let the minister seize all the offenders,
and release and satisfy all the sufferers. Nothing whatever was done in the matter.

October 5, 1847.--Report from Gonda states, that Rughbur Sing's troops had seized and brought
off from Gonda to Nawabgunge, two hundred men and women, and shut up the road where they were
confined, that no one might pass near them--that three or four of the women were pregnant,
and near their confinement, and suffered much from harsh treatment and want of food. Order
by the Durbar: Let the minister grant redress, and send a suzawal to see that the sufferers
are released. A suzawal was sent, it appears, but he remained a quiet spectator of the atrocities,
having received something for doing so.

September 1, 1847.--Report from Hissampoor states, that Byjonauth Sing, agent of Rughbur Sing,
in Hissampoor, had seized all the plough-bullocks and cows he could find, sent the best to
his own home, and made the rest over to Wazeer Allee, Canongoe, to be sold. Order by the Durbar,
that Rughbur Sing be directed to restore all that has been taken, and collect the revenue with
more moderation. Nothing whatever was done.

September 11, 1847.--Report from Bahraetch states, that the estate of Aleenugger in Hissampoor,
which yielded eighteen thousand rupees a-year, had become so deserted from the oppressions
of Rughbur Sing, that it could no longer yield anything. Order by the Durbar, that Rughbar
Sing be directed to restore the tillage, or hold himself responsible for the King's revenue!

July 28, 1847.--Report from Gonda states, that Goureeshunker, the collector of Gungwal and
Pyagpoor, had, by order of Beharee Lal, attacked the village of Ruhooa, and seized and carried
off sixty-four cultivators, and confined them in his camp. No order whatever was passed by
the Durbar.

September 7, 1847.--From Nawabgunge in Gonda reports, that Beharee Lal's soldiers were then
engaged in sacking that town, and carrying off the property. Order by the Durbar. Let the minister
see that the property be restored and wrongs redressed. Nothing whatever was done.

September 18, 1847.--Report from Bahraetch states, that Cheyn Sing, the tallookdar of Bahmanee
Paer, had fled into the British territory, but returned to his fort; that Beharee Lal heard
of his return and sent two thousand men to seize him; that the tallookdar had only sixty men,
but held out for three hours, killed ten of the King's soldiers, and then evacuated the fort
and fled; that Beharee Lal's soldiers had collected two thousand bullocks from the estate,
and brought them all off to his camp. Order by the Durbar, that the minister give stringent
orders in this case. Nothing whatever was done.

October 2, 1847.--Report from Seerora states, that Mahommed Hussan (the present Nazim), one
of Rughbur Sing's collectors, with one thousand horse and foot and one gun, had come to the
hamlet of Sondun Lal, and the village of Seerora, attacked and plundered these places, and
seized and taken off one hundred men and women, and two hundred bullocks, killed two hundred
Rajpoots in a fight, and then gone back to his camp at Bahoreegunge. Order by the Durbar, that
the minister seize and send the oppressors to Lucknow, and restore the property to its proper
owners. The minister did nothing of the kind; and soon after made this oppressor the governor
of these districts.

September 20, 1847.--Report from Radowlee states, that armed men belonging to Kurum Hoseyn,
escorting one thousand selected bullocks, sent by Rughbar Sing, had come to Radowlee, on their
way to his fort of Shahgunge. Order by the Durbar: Let the minister see to this affair. Nothing
was done.

On the 28th September 1847 an order was addressed by the Durbar to Rughbur Sing, that his agent,
Kurum Hoseyn, appeared to have attacked the house of Seodeen, though he had paid all that was
due by him to the State, according to his engagements, and plundered it of property to the
value of eighteen thousand rupees, and seized and confined all his relations--that he must
cause all the property to be restored, and obtain acquittances from the sufferers. Rughbur
Sing took no notice whatever of this order.

On the 2nd of October 1847, the Resident, Colonel Richmond, wrote to the King, acquainting
him, that he had heard, that Rughbur Sing had seized and sold all the ploughs and bullocks
in the Bahraetch district, and, seized and sold also five hundred men, women, and children
of the landholders and cultivators; that he regrets all this and prays that his Majesty will
cause inquiries to be made; and, should the charges prove true, cause the articles taken, or
their value, to be restored, and the men, women, and children to be released. On the 25th of
October 1847, the Resident again addressed the King, stating, that he had heard, that, on the
2nd of October, Jafir Allee and Maharaj Sing, agents of Rughbur Sing, with eleven hundred soldiers,
had attacked and plundered the town of Khurgapoor and five villages in its neighbourhood, and
seized and taken off Ramdeen Sudasook, and thirty merchants, shopkeepers and other respectable
persons, also Junglee, the farmer of that town, Kaleechurn Mutsudee, Dabey Pershad, the Rajah's
manager, and one hundred landholders and cultivators; and praying that orders be given for
inquiry and redress. Nothing whatever was done; but on the 30th of October, the King replied
to these letters, and to one written to him by the Resident on the 31st of August 1847, transmitting
a list of unanswered letters. His Majesty stated, that he had sent orders to Rughbur Sing and
to his brother Maun Sing, in all the cases referred to by the Resident; but that they were
contumacious servants, as he had before described them to the Resident to be; and had taken
no notice whatever of his orders!

August 20, 1846.--Report from Bahraetch states, that Goureeshunkur, the agent of Rughbur Sing,
in Bahraetch, had taken four persons from among the many whom he had in confinement on account
of balances, had them suspended to trees, and cruelly flogged, and then had their hands wrapped
up in thick cloth, steeped in oil, and set fire to till they burned like torches; and that
he sat listening to their screams and cries for mercy with indifference. Order by the King:
Let the minister, Ameen-od Dowlah, be furnished with a copy of this report, and let him send
out three troopers, as suzawuls, to bring in Goureeshunkur and the four men whose hands had
been burnt, and let him employ Mekhlis Hoseyn, to inquire into the affair, and report the result.
Nothing was done.

On the 29th of August, the Resident, Mr. Davidson, addressed a letter to the King stating,
that he had before represented the cruelties which Rughbur Sing was inflicting upon the people
of his district, but had heard of no redress having been afforded in any case; that he had
received another report on the same subject, and now forwards it to show what atrocities his
agent, Goureeshunkur, was committing in Bahraetch; that in no other country could the servants
of the sovereign commit such cruel outrages upon his subjects; that he had been wrapping up
the bodies of the King's subjects in oilcloths, and setting, fire to them as to torches; that
he could not do all this without the knowledge and sanction of his master, Rughbur Sing; and
the Resident prays, that he may be punished, and that his punishment may be intimated to him,
the Resident. Nothing was ever done, nor was any answer given to this letter, till it was,
on the 30th of August 1847, acknowledged with the many others contained in the list sent to
the King, in his letter of the 31st August 1847, by the then Resident, Colonel Richmond. The triangle Triangle is
a way, his idea is a modification of the general idea, and nobody will say that the idea of
​​a rectangle does not add anything to the triangle, and are the same thing. The same is checked
against the idea of ​​being, as amended.

[44.] We have already seen (Lib. IV, cap. XXI) the indeterminate ideas alone do not lead us
themselves to positive knowledge, and certainly none better deserves the name, the of being. If
our understanding is limited to, the perception would be no more
than a concept vague, incapable of any combination.

[45.] The same denial, as we shall see below, is known to us, could
not be, if anything admitiésemos that understanding is conceived only
in body, in which case, we lack the indispensable condition of all
knowledge: the principle of contradiction.

[46.] These reasons are enough to leave no doubt what I intended to
express: but as This point has intimate relations with the most momentous
of logic and metaphysics, I explain more at length in the next chapter.

CHAPTER

VII.

ALL SCIENCE IS FOUNDED ON THE EXISTENCE Postulate.

[47.] I said that the idea of ​​being is not the only perceived, but is a necessary any perception.
But I do not mean with this, but we can not perceive the existing in action, but there comes at
least, as a condition of any perceived. Let me explain. When we see just one object, say anything
about him, is presented always true. Our idea we express something, and out of reality there is
nothing. Even the perception of the essential relations of things, involves the condition if they
exist.

So when I say that in the same circle or in equal circles, equal arcs are subtended for equal
strings, implicitly assume the condition, "if there is a circle."

[48.] As this way of explaining the knowledge of the essential relations of things, may seem
strange, I will present the point of view more clearly than I can. When I affirm or deny an
essential relationship of two things, do you affirm or deny of my ideas or of things? Clear
is that things and not my ideas. If I say "the ellipse is a curve" I mean not my idea, but
the object of my idea. We know that our ideas are not ellipses, which in our heads do not
exist, and that when we think for example, Earth's orbit, the orbit
of the Earth is not in us.

What are we talking then? Nó the idea, but its object, not what is in us, but what is outside
us.

[49.] Not mean that we will see it: we mean is this: when I say circumference is longer than
the diameter does not mean that they see, but is well. Both disto to talk about my idea, which
affirm the same thing be true, but I do not see it, although I did
not exist.

Only talk about the idea, when we doubt his correspondence with the object: it's not about reality
but the appearance, and in such cases language is in itself an admirable accuracy: do not say
it, but I think.

[50.] Our claims and denials, therefore relate to the objects.

Now I argue thus: so that there is a pure nothing so that nothing, nothing can affirm or deny,
because has no property, no relationship of any kind, is a pure negation
of everything, then nothing can affirm or deny, nothing to combine,
compare anything, feel anything but under the condition of existence.

I mean under the condition, because we know the properties, relations, many things not exist,
but in all that we conceive them, always enter the condition, if any.

[51.] It follows that our science lies always in a postulate, and
employees in a the word mathematics to show that this condition requiring
all science, not par excellence disdain which are called exact.

Most of their shows start with a postulate. "Drop a line etc. etc. "" If we assume a right angle
at B etc. etc. "" Take a number A greater than B and so on. etc. "Behold it as the mathematician
himself, to the full extent of their shows, is always the condition of existence.

[52.] This existence is necessary to assume, otherwise you can not explain anything. What have
not seen some metaphysical, reaches common sense. Let's try, see how would speak a mathematician
who had never thought of metaphysics. Assume that the speaker I have to show that in a right
triangle the square of the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the squares of the legs, and
to exercise their intellect, or better, without realizing that we
explain what happens in their mind with respect to the perception
of object, we make several questions, seemingly silly, but in fact
are only scrutinizing.

For clarity I'll put it in dialogue form, and assuming no waxed and
that the demonstration is given in memory.

Proof. Download a perpendicular from the right angle to the hypotenuse.

Where?

Is

clear: in the triangle of which we speak.

But sir, if there is such a triangle .....

Then what is it?

Already seen, this is a right triangle, and the case is that there
are none.

There is not, but it can be.

If we had the blackboard or paper, and ruler, we would from later.

Ie V. we would talk about the triangle ...

Yes sir.

I get it, but then I would, but now they will have it.

Congratulations, but if we had, could not get off the perpendicular?

Yes sir.

Well, I do not mean anything.

But V. and he said he came down .........

It is clear that if there
is no triangle, you can not lose, but then there is no vertex angle
edge, or hypotenuse, or anything, but when I say get off the perpendicular,
always assume the triangle.

And it is clear that this triangle can be constructed, the assumption
is not explicit; understood it.

I understand this, but then go down the perpendicular to that triangle
solo, and V. I speaks as if it came down at all.

The triangle is constructed for an example, and what we did with him,
it is clear that we could do it all.

With everyone?

Yes sir, "they can not conceive V. that in any right triangle can download a perpendicular the
right angle to the hypotenuse?

I represent here in this: but as this is in my head, there are triangles, then I represent
some with sides of thousands of rods, and I have nothing big head .....

But this is not what is V. in his head, but the triangles themselves
....

But as these triangles do not exist, nothing I can say about
them .....

But at least do the can there be?

Who could doubt it?

Well, if any, large or small, in one position or another, in one part
or another, Is not it true that you could drop a perpendicular from
the apex of the right angle to the hypotenuse?

Is clear.

But I do not mean something else but in any right triangle whatever was can download this perpendicular.

But
it is understood that V. not talking about those who are not ..... Is not it?

I speak for all of which are and which are not.

Already seen that the perpendicular it can not be disposed of in a
triangle that does not exist.

What is not there is nothing. But what may exist there, and I see clearly that if there will verify
what I say. So I can talk, and talk about all of the existing and not existing, without exception.

The reader will judge whether to bother the poor mathematical difficulties
of the importunate crafty making the rough, we did not respond as
anyone would respond not was prevented by any metaphysical idea, and
it is clear that these responses would accept as reasonable, as satisfactory
as the only ones that can occur in this case, all mathematicians around
the world.

Well, in these answers and explanations is what we have said, all science based a postulate: all
reason to demonstrate even the most essential properties and relationships
of things, part of the assumption of its existence.

CHAPTER VIII.

THE BASIS OF THE POSSIBILITY PURA AND THE STATUS OF STOCK.

[53.] I said that the basis of pure possibility of things, and their properties and relationships,
was the essence of God, that is the reason of all (v. L. IV from Ch. XXIII to XXVII), and at
first sight it might seem that science is enough to that foundation, and does not need to rely
on the condition of the existence of things.

For if the essences are represented in God, is in the divine essence in order of science and therefore
is not conclusive the argument based on that from nothing, not can
say anything.

Assuming the same figure, the science does not deal with a pure nothing but a very real thing,
and therefore has an object to the very positive view, even when dispensing with the reality of the
thing considered.

Let's see how we can dispel this difficulty.

[54.] Necessary relations of things, regardless of its existence, must have reason enough: this
can only be found in need. Then the condition of existence, presupposes the representation of
the essence of being contingent, being necessary, then the condition "if" you can not, unless
the foundation is assumed of possibility.

[55.] This observation shows that there are two questions here: 1. Nd what is the basis for the
inner possibility of things? 2. ª Granted the possibility, what is the condition as the wrapping
is affirmed or denied of the object possible? The foundation of the possibility God: the condition
is the existence of the goods concerned.

Both are necessary for there to be science: if there is no basis for the possibility intrinsic,
could not put the condition of existence, and if admitted the possibility do not add the condition,
the science does not arise.

[56.] To understand more about this matter should be noted, that in affirming or denying the
represented relationships loved God, do not try what these beings
are in God but what would be in themselves, if they exist.

God, are the same God, because all what is in God, is identified
with God, if only because we consider things as are in it, would not
target those things, but to God.

It is true that God is the foundation, or is the sufficient reason,
the truths of geometry, but geometry does not deal with these as they
are in God, but as performed or possible to perform.

In God there are no lines or dimensions of any kind, then there is the object of geometry itself.
Geometrical truths have in him a target value, or representation, and not subjective, otherwise
it would be necessary to say that God is extensive.

[57.] Behold, as expressed in that place that is not opposed to what is stated here: and God
putting on the foundation of every possibility, does not exclude
the scientific need the condition of existence.

[58.] To make this point beyond doubt, I shall present the issue from another angle, stating that
when God called finite truths, also sees in them the condition: "If they exist." God knows
the truth of this proposition: "The triangles of equal base and height are equal in area. "This
is true in the eyes of infinite intelligence and the ours, if that were not, the proposition would
not be true in itself: we would in error.

Now, in God, to be most simple, no real figures, even if the intellectual perception of them. Then
the knowledge of God in regard to things finite, refers to the possible existence of them, and therefore
involves the condition: "If they exist."

God's knowledge does not refer to the purely ideal representation, but to their reality, actual
or possible: when God knows the truth about finite beings, not the only known representation
of the same as in himself is, but what they would, if any.

[59.] Any object can be considered real or computer, or in the ideal. The ideal is its representation
in an understanding, which only has any value, as it relates to actual or potential reality.
Only in this way has the idea objectively, for without this would a purely subjective which could
not confirm nor deny anything, except the purely subjective. The idea we have of the triangle helps
us to meet and combine, as has a real object or possible, what we affirm or deny it, we refer
to their object: if disappears, the idea becomes a purely subjective,
which can not applied without contradiction, the properties of a triangle.

CHAPTER
IX.

IDEA OF THE DENIAL.

[60.] It is said that the intellect can
not conceive of nothingness, and this is true, in the sense that not
conceive of nothing as something, which would be contradictory, but
does not follow from this that in any way we conceive of nothing.
Not being is nothingness, and yet not conceive. This perception is
necessary to us, without it you perceive the contradiction, and therefore
we would fail the fundamental principle of our knowledge, "it is impossible
that a thing is and not be at the same time. "

[61.] Will say that
the conception of anything, not to be, is not conceived but did not
conceive, but this is false, because it is not conceivable that a
thing is, and not conceiving. The first involves a negative view,
which can be expressed by a negative proposition, and the second is
the simple absence of the act of perception that has nothing to do
with the thing: first is objective, the second is subjective. When
sleep does not perceive things, but this perception is not not equivalent
to perceive that are not. A stone can be seen to say no other stone;
but not received by the other stone.

[62.] La perception of nothingness
is a positive act, and you can not say it's the same perception of
being, which was contradictory: it would follow that if being able
to perceive, perceive its negation, not to be, and vice versa, which
is absurd.

[63.] When we see not being, it is true that we perceive
in relation to being, and not understanding conceivably not be receiving
the absolute, without any idea of ​​being, but does not prove that
the two ideas are not different, and contradictory.

[64.] While it
is noted, the idea of ​​negation, but to enter the fundamental principles
of our understanding, "it is impossible that a thing is and is not,
at the same time, '" any thing, or is, or is not, "is necessary also
to almost all our perceptions. Not conceive different beings, not
conceive that one is not the other, and we can not form an opinion
negative, but under him in the denial. Where is that just as there
idea of ​​being absolute and relative, there is also non-being, and
can say: "The sun is" "diameters of a circle are equal, "can also
say:" The Phoenix is ​​not "
He found the King in a small inner room lying on a cot covered with a ruzae or quilt.

There were closed doors on the side of the room where the cot stood, and Captain Bird perceived
that persons were behind listening to the conversation. On the minister advancing to meet him
at the door. Captain Bird declined taking his proffered hand, and in a loud voice declared--"that
he believed that he was mixed up with the fiddlers, and was afraid of their being removed,
or he would have carried his Majesty's order for their dismissal into effect." He then advanced
to the King, shook him by the hand, apologized for intruding upon him after his excuse of illness,
and stated--"that his own character was at stake, and he had been obliged to take this step
to save it, and requested that the minister might be told to retire during the conversation,
as he had already shown his partiality for the characters whom his Majesty had stigmatized
as low, intriguing, and untrustworthy--as ruiners of his good name and his kingdom, and the
cause of ill-feeling between the British Government and himself. The King expressed a wish
that the minister might remain, that he might have an opportunity to listen to what Captain
Bird had to state, as it appeared to be against him. Captain Bird replied, that he had no complaint
to make against the minister; that his object in coming was, to claim the fulfilment of the
promise which his Majesty had so solemnly made to him, to dismiss Gholam Ruza and his sister,
and Kotub Allee, and send them across the Ganges; that he was induced to demand this audience
by the minister's visit of the preceding evening, to ask him to excuse his Majesty's fulfilling
the promise which he had made; and by the written report given to him that morning by the news-writer,
stating, that his Majesty had changed his mind, and pardoned the parties."

The King declared that he had never given Captain Bird any such promise. Captain Bird then
repeated to his Majesty the conversation which had taken place on that occasion. The King seemed
to be staggered; but the minister came to his aid, and said--"that his Majesty had ascertained
from Sadik Allee himself, that Gholam Ruza was not an accomplice in that affair." Captain Bird
replied--"that the King had told him, that the deception had been so fully proved, that they
were speechless; and that his Majesty had spit in their faces." The King said "not in Gholam
Ruza's. His sister and Kotub Allee are alone guilty." Captain Bird urged, that all were alike
guilty, and he besought the King to fulfil his promise, saying,--"that his, Captain Bird's,
name was at stake; that if the parties were not removed, the whole city would say, that the
King had bribed him, and bought off his promise." The King replied, "This is all nonsense;
do you wish me to swear that Gholam Ruza is innocent, and that I never gave the promise you
mention?" and, calling the minister, he placed his right hand on his head, and said,--"I swear,
as if this was my son's head, and by God, that I believe Gholam Ruza to be entirely innocent;
and that I never promised to turn him out, or to send him across the Ganges." Captain Bird
then heard a movement of feet in the next room behind the closed doors. He was horrified; but
returning to the charge, said, "Your Majesty has, at any rate, acknowledged the guilt of Gholam
Ruza's sister, and that of Khotub Allee; pray fulfil your promise on the guilty." The King
said--"When absent from my sight, they are as far off as across one hundred rivers. I know
they are intriguers, and shall keep my eyes upon them." Captain Bird said --"I have reported
the circumstances of the case thus far to the Resident. Your Majesty has made me a participator
in the breaking of your word. I have told Colonel Sleeman you would turn these men out." The
King said--"This case has reference only to my house--it has no connection with the Government;
but if you wish to use force, take me also by the beard, and pull me from my throne!" Captain
Bird said--"I pray your Majesty to recollect how often, when force might have been used, under
your own sign-manual and seal, on these fiddlers interfering in State affairs, the Resident
has hesitated to put your written permission for their removal into force; and now who can
be your friend, or save you from any danger, which may hereafter threaten your life or your
well-being? I must, of course, report all to the Resident." The minister now said--"Yes, report
to the Resident that the King has changed his mind, broken his word, and will not fulfil his
promise; and ask for permission to employ direct force for the removal of these men: see if
he will give permission." Captain Bird replied, "that any orders he received from the Resident
would certainly be carried, into effect; but if his Majesty's own acknowledgment of the deceitfulness
of these men, and their intriguing rascality were not sufficient to induce him to remove them--if
the King set so little value on his promise--a promise now known to the whole city, and which
he must in self-defence now speak openly of, he foresaw the speedy downfall of the kingdom.
Who, he asked, will subject themselves to be deceived in an endeavour to prop it up by the
removal of those who were living on its heart's blood, or be made liars by reporting promises
never to be fulfilled?" Thus ended this interview.

The next day Sadik Allee had a dress of honour conferred upon him, and an increase of one hundred
rupees a-month made to his salary; and Gholam Ruza, and his relative the fiddler, Anees-od
Dowla, were seated behind his Majesty in his carriage-and-four, and paraded through the city,
as in full possession of his favour. After the King had alighted from the carriage at the palace,
the coachman drove the two singers to their apartments in the Mukbura, seated as before in
the khuwas, or hind seat. [On the 25th of May 1850, the King caused the chief singer, Gholam
Ruza, his father, Nathoo, his sister, and her husband, Dummun Khan, Gholam Hyder Khan, Kotub
Allee, his brother, Sahib Allee, and the females of his family, in all fourteen persons, to
be seized and confined in prison. On the 2nd of June, all but Gholam Ruza and Dummun Khan were
transported across the Ganges into British territory; and, on the 23rd of July, these two men
were transported in the same manner. The immediate cause of the King's anger was the discovery
that his divorced and banished wife, Surafrazmahal, had actually come back, and remained concealed
for seven days and seven nights in the palace, in the apartments of the chief singer, Gholam
Ruza. They were all made to disgorge the Company's notes and jewels found upon them, but the
King visited Gholam Ruza the day before his departure, and treated him with great kindness,
and seemed very sorry to part with him.]

On the 10th, I had written to Captain Bird to mention the distinction which he appeared to
have overlooked in his zeal to get the fiddlers removed. The offence with which these persons
stood charged in this case was a personal affront to the King, or an affront to his understanding,
and not any interference with the administration of the Government; and the first Assistant
was requested by the Resident to wait upon his Majesty, merely with a view to encourage him
in his laudable resolution to banish them, and to offer his aid in doing so should his Majesty
manifest any wish to have it; and not to demand their punishment on the part of the British
Government. In the one case, if the King promised to punish the offenders and relented and
forgave them, we could only regret his weakness; but in the other, if he promised to punish
them and failed to do so, we should consider it due to the character of our Government to insist
upon the fulfilment of his promise. On the evening of the 11th I got the above report of his
interview with the King from Captain Bird; and, on the 12th, I wrote to tell him, that I considered
him to have acted very indiscreetly; that he had brought this vexation and mortification upon
himself by his overweening confidence in his personal influence over the King; that he ought
to have waited for instructions from me, or at least for a reply from me to his letter, regarding
the former interview at Court; that I could not now give him the support he required, as I
could neither demand that his requisitions should be complied with, nor tell the King that
I approved of them that he had been authorized by me to act on his own discretion in any case
of great emergency, but this could not be considered of such a character, for no evil or inconvenience
was to be apprehended from a day or two's delay, since the question really was, whether his
Majesty should have a dozen fiddlers or only ten.

In the beginning of September 1850, the King became enamoured of one of his mother's waiting-maids,
and demanded her in marriage. See was his mother's favourite bedfellow, and she would not part
with her. The King became angry, and to soothe him his mother told him that it was purely out
of regard for him and his children that she refused to part with this young woman; that she
had a "sampun," or the coiled figure of a snake in the hair on the back of her neck. No man,
will purchase a horse with such a mark, or believe that any family can be safe in which a horse
or mare with such a mark is kept. His mother told him, that if he cohabited with a woman having
such a mark, he and all his children must perish. The King said that he might probably have,
among his many wives, some with marks of this kind; and that this might account for his frequent
attacks of palpitation of the heart. "No doubt," said the old Queen Dowager; "we have long
thought so; but your Majesty gets into such a towering passion when we venture to speak of
your wives, that we have been afraid to give expression to our thoughts and fears." "Perhaps,"
said the King, "I may owe to this the death, lately, of my poor son, the heir- apparent." "We
have long thought so," replied his mother. The chief eunuch, Busheer, was forthwith ordered
to inspect the back of the necks of all save that of the chief consort, the mother of the late
and present heir-apparent. He reported that he had found the fatal mark upon the necks of no
less than eight of the King's wives, Nishat-mahal, Koorshed-mahal, Sooleeman-mahal, Huzrut-mahal,
Dara Begum, Buree Begum, Chotee Begum, and Huzrut Begum. The chief priest was summoned, and
the divorce, from the whole eight, pronounced forthwith; and the ladies were ordered to depart
with all that they had saved while in the palace. Some of their friends suggested to his Majesty,
that Mahommedans were but unskilful judges in such matters, and that a Court of Brahmins should
be assembled, as they had whole volumes devoted exclusively to this science. The most learned
were accordingly collected, and they declared that though there were marks resembling in some
degree the sampun, it was of no importance; and the evil it threatened might be averted by
singeing the head of the snake with a hot iron. The ladies were very indignant, and six of
them insisted upon leaving the palace, in virtue of the divorce. Two only consented to remain,
the Buree Begum and Chota Begum.

December 14, 1849.--Came on twelve miles to Gonda. The country well studded with groves and
fine single trees; the soil naturally fertile, and water near the surface. Cultivation good
about Gonda, and about some of the villages along the road it is not bad; but there is nowhere
any sugar-cane to be seen beyond a small garden patch. The country is so wretchedly stocked
with cattle that little manure is available for tillage.

The Bulrampore Rajah, a lively, sensible, and active young man, joined me this morning, and
rode along by the side of my elephant, with the capitalist, Ramdut Pandee, the Nazim, Mahommed
Hussan, and old Bukhtawar Sing, the brother of the late Dursun Sing, whom I have often mentioned
in this Diary. Rajah Bukhtawar Sing is the King's Mohtamin, or Quartermaster-General of the
Resident's' camp. The Rajah of Toolseepore also, who has been ousted by his son from his estate,
joined me last night; but he was not well enough to ride with me. Dogs, hawks, and panthers
attend for sport, but they afford little or no amusement. I have ordered all these hunting
animals to return to Lucknow.

Although the personal character of the Toolseepoor Rajah is not respected, that of his son
is much worse; and the Bulrampoor Rajah and other large landholders in the neighbourhood would
unite and restore him to the possession of his estate, but the Nazim is held responsible for
their not moving in the matter, in order that the influential persons about the Court may have
the plucking of it at their leisure. The better to insure this, two companies of one of the
King's regiments have been lately sent out with two guns, to see that the son is not molested
in the possession. The father was restored to his estate in 1850, and the son fled again to
the Goruckpoor district. He became reconciled to his father some months after, through the
mediation of the magistrate, Mr. Chester, and returned to Toolseepoor. The father and son,
however, distrusted each other too much to live long together on amicable terms, and the son
has gone off again to Goruckpoor.

The Toolseepoor estate extends along from east to west for about one hundred miles, in a belt
of from nine to twelve miles wide, upon the southern border of that part of the Oude Tarae
forest which we took from Nepaul in 1815, and made over to the Oude Government by the treaty
of the 11th May 1816, in lieu of the one crore of rupees which our Government borrowed from
Oude for the conduct of that war. The rent-roll of Toolseepoor is now from two to three lacs
of rupees a- year; but it pays to the Oude Government a revenue of only one lac and five thousand,
over and above gratuities to influential officers. The estate comprises that of Bankee, which
was held by a Rajah Kunsa. Dan Bahader, the father of the present Rajah of Toolseepoor, attacked
him one night in 1832, put him and some two hundred and fifty of his followers and family to
death, and absorbed the estate. Mahngoo, the brother of Kunsa, escaped and sought redress from
the Oude Durbar; but he had no money and could get no redress; and, in despair, he went off
to seek employment in Nepaul, and died soon after. Dan Bahader, enriched by the pillage of
Bankee, came to Lucknow, and purchased permission to incorporate Bankee with his old estate
of Toolseepoor.

Khyreeghur and Kunchunpoor, on the western border of that forest, were made over by us to Oude
at the same time, as part of the cession. They had been ceded to our Government by the treaty
of 1801, at an estimated value of two hundred and ten thousand, but, up to 1816, they had never
yielded to us fifty thousand rupees a-year. They had, however, formerly yielded from two to
three lacs of rupees a- year to the Oude Government, and under good management may do so again;
but, at present, Oude draws from them a revenue of only sixteen thousand, and that with difficulty.
The rent-roll, however, exceeds two hundred thousand, and may, in a few years, amount to double
that sum, as population and tillage are rapidly extending.

The holders of Khyreegur and Kunchunpoor are always in a state of resistance against the Oude
Government, and cannot be coerced into the payment of more than their sixteen thousand rupees
a-year; and hundreds of lives have been sacrificed in the collection of this sum. The climate
is so bad that no people from the open country can venture into it for more than four months
in the year--from the beginning of December to the end of March. The Oude Government occasionally
sends in a body of troops to enforce the payment of an increased demand during these four months.
The landholders and cultivators retire before them, and they are sure to be driven out by the
pestilence, with great loss of life, in a few months; and the landholders refuse to pay anything
for some years after, on the ground that all their harvests were destroyed by the troops. The
rest of the Tarae lands ceded had little of tillage or population at that time, and no government
could be less calculated than that of Oude to make the most of its capabilities. It had, therefore,
in a fiscal point of view, but a poor equivalent for its crore of rupees; but it gained a great
political advantage in confining the Nepaulese to the hills on its border. Before this arrangement
took place there used to be frequent disputes, and occasionally serious collisions between
the local authorities about boundaries, which were apt to excite the angry feelings of the
sovereigns of both States, and to render the interposition of the paramount power indispensable.

It was at Bhinga, on the left bank of the Rabtee River, in the Gonda district, and eight miles
north-east from Bulrampoor, that Mr. George Ravenscroft, of the Bengal Civil Service, was murdered
on the night of the 6th May, 1823. He had been the collector of the land revenue of the Cawnpore
district for many years; but, having taken from the treasury a very large sum of money, and
spent it in lavish hospitality and unsuccessful speculations, he absconded with his wife and
child, and found an asylum with the Rajah of Bhinga, on the border of the Oude Tarae, where
he intended to establish himself as an indigo planter. Strict search was being made for him
throughout India by the British Government, and his residence at Bhinga was concealed from
the Oude Government by the local authorities. The Rajah made over to him a portion of land
for tillage, and a suitable place in a mango grove, about a mile from his fort, to build a
house upon. He built one after the Hindoostanee fashion, with bamboos and grass from the adjoining
jungle. It consisted of a sitting-room, bed- room, and bathing-room, all in a line, and forming
one side of a quadrangle, and facing inside, with only one small door on the outside, opening
into the bathing-room. The other three sides of the quadrangle consisted of stables, servants'
houses, and out-offices, all facing inside, and without any entrances on the outside, save
on the front side, facing the dwelling-house, where there was a large entrance.

                  PLAN OF MR. RAVENSCROFT'S HOUSE.

             |                  |             |       |
             |                  |              Bathing|
             |  Sitting Room.   |  Bed Room.    Room. |
             |   |   ||
             |     |                          |       |
             |     |                          |       |
             |                                     |
             |                |   |                   |
             |     |          |   |           |       |
             ||          ||           ||
             |     |           Cot            |       |
             |     |                          |       |
             |  O                                 S   |
             |  u                                 t   |
             |  t  |                          |   a   |
             |     |                          |   b   |
             |O|                          |l|
             |  f  |                          |   e   |
             |  f  |                          |   s   |
             |  i  |                          |       |
             |  c                                     |
             |  e                                     |
             |  s  |                          |       |
             |     |                          |       |
             ||                          ||
             |     |                          |       |
             |                                        |
             |     |        Entrance          |       |
             |     |          |       |
             |                |    |                  |
             |                |    |                  |
             ||    ||

The Rajah, Seo Sing, was a worthy old man. He had four sons, Surubjeet Sing, the eldest, Omrow
Sing, Kaleepurkas Sing, and Jypurkas Sing. The eldest was then married, and about the age of
twenty-five; the other three were still boys. The old man left the management of the estate
to the eldest son, a morose person, who led a secluded life, and was never seen out of the
female apartments, save twice a-year, on the festival of the hooley and the anniversary of
his marriage. Mr. Ravenscroft had never seen or held any communion with him, save through his
father, brothers, or servants; but he was in the habit of daily seeing and conversing with
the father and his other sons on the most friendly terms. The eldest son became alarmed when
he saw Mr. Ravenscroft begin to plant indigo, and prepare to construct vats for the manufacture;
and apprehended that he would go on encroaching till he took the whole estate from him, unless
he was made away with. He therefore hired a gang of Bhuduk dacoits from the neighbouring forest
of the Oude Tarae to put him to death, after he had been four months at Bhinga. During this
time Mrs. Ravenscroft had gone on one occasion to Cawnpoor, and on another to Secrora, on business.

Bhinga lies fifty miles north-east from Secrora, where the 20th Regiment of Native Infantry,
under the command of Colonel Patton, was then cantoned. On the 6th of May 1823, Ensign Platt,
of that corps, had come out to see him. In the evening, the old Rajah and his second and third
sons came to visit Mr. Ravenscroft as usual, and they sat conversing with the family on the
most friendly terms till nine o'clock, when they took leave, and Mrs. Ravenscroft, with her
child and two female attendants, retired to the sleeping-room in the house. Ensign Platt went
to his small sleeping-tent outside the quadrangle, under a mango-tree. This tent was just large
enough to admit his small cot, and a few block-tin travelling-boxes, which he piled away inside,
to the right and left of his bed. Mr. Ravenscroft slept on a cot in the open air, in the quadrangle,
a few paces from the door leading to Mrs. Ravenscroft's sleeping-apartment. He that night left
his arms in the sitting-room, and Ensign Platt had none with him. Mr. Ravenscroft was the handsomest
and most athletic European gentleman then in India, and one of the most expert in the use of
the sword and shield.

His servants had been accustomed to stand sentry, by turns, at the entrance of the quadrangle,
and it was his groom Munsa's turn to take the first watch that night. He was to have been relieved
by the chowkeedar, Bhowaneedeen; but, in the middle of his watch, he roused the chowkeedar,
and told him that he had been taken suddenly ill, and must go to his house for relief. The
chowkeedar told him that he might go at once, and he would get up and take his place immediately;
but he lay down and soon fell asleep again.

About eleven o'clock the whole quadrangle was filled by a gang of about sixty dacoits, who
set their torches in a blaze, and began to attack Mr. Ravenscroft with their spears. He sprang
up, and called loudly for his sword and shield, but there was no one to bring them. He received
several spears through his body as he made for the door of Mrs. Ravenscroft's apartment, calling
out to her in English to fly and save herself and child, and defending himself as well as he
could with his naked arms. Mosahib, a servant who slept by his cot, got to Mrs. Ravenscroft's
room and assisted her to escape, with her child and two female attendants, through the bathing-room
to the outside. A party had been placed to stab Ensign Platt with their long spears through
the sides of his small tent; but they passed through and through the block-tin boxes, and roused
without hurting him. He rushed out and attempted to defend himself by seizing the spears of
his assailants; but he received several of them through his arms. He made for the entrance
to the quadrangle, and there, by the blaze of the torches, saw Mr. Ravenscroft still endeavouring
to defend himself, but covered with blood, which was streaming from his wounds and mouth.

On seeing Ensign Platt at the entrance, he staggered towards him, but the dacoits made a rush
at Ensign Platt with their spears at the same time. He saved himself by springing over a thick
and thorny hedge on one side of the quadrangle, and ran round behind to the small door leading
into the bathing-room, which he reached in time to assist Mrs. Ravenscroft to escape, as the
dacoits were forcing their way through the screen into her bed-room from the sitting-room.
As soon as he saw her under the shade of the trees, beyond the blaze of the torches, he left
her and her child, and the two female attendants, to the care of Mosahib, and went round to
the entrance in search of her husband. He had got to a tree, outside the entrance, into which
Deena, Ensign Platt's servant, had climbed to save himself as soon as he saw his master attacked,
and was leaning against it; but, on seeing Ensign Platt, he again staggered towards him, saying
faintly bus, bus--enough, enough. These were the last words he was heard to utter, and must
have referred to the escape of his wife and child, of which he had become conscious. By this
time the gang had made off with the little booty they found. On attacking Mr. Ravenscroft at
first, some of them were heard to say, "You have run from Cawnpoor to come and seize upon the
estate of Bhinga, but we will settle you." Mrs. Ravenscroft, her infant, and female attendants,
remained concealed under the shade of the trees, and her husband was now taken to her with
eighteen spear wounds through his body. The Rajah and his two young sons soon after made their
appearance, and in the evening the survivors were all taken by the old man to a spacious building,
close outside the fort, where they received every possible attention; but the eldest son never
made his appearance. Out of the twenty-nine men who composed the party when the attack commenced,
seven had been killed and eighteen wounded. Mr. Ravenscroft died during the night of the 7th,
after great suffering. He retained his consciousness till near the last; but the blood continued
to flow from his mouth, and he could articulate nothing. On the morning of the 8th, he was
buried in the grove, and Ensign Platt read the funeral service over his grave. Mrs. Ravenscroft
and her child were taken to Colonel Patton, at Secrora, and soon after sent by him to Lucknow.

On the 10th, he reported the circumstances of this murder to the Resident, Mr. Ricketts; and
sent him the narratives of Mosahib and Deena; and his report, with translations of these narratives,
was submitted by the Resident to Government on the 12th of that month. But in these narratives
no mention whatever was made of a British officer having been present at the murder and the
burial of Mr. Ravenscroft. This suppression arose, no doubt, from the apprehension that Government
might be displeased to find that the military authorities at Secrora had become aware of Mr.
Ravenscroft's residence at Bhinga without reporting the circumstance to Government; and still
more so to find, that he had been there visited by a British officer, when search was being
made for him throughout India. With all this, among many others reasons
that it happened, "said the housekeeper;

"Really, sir, that if your grace does not assert the foot flat and is staying at home and allowed
to walk through the mountains and through valleys like a soul in pain, looking for those who
say which are called adventures, whom I call misfortunes, I have
to complain to me and cry aloud God and the king, to remedy it.

To which Don Quixote

"Mistress, what God will respond to your complaints I do not know, or what has to answer His Majesty
either, and just know that if I were king, I avoid answering to so
many memorials irrelevant as each day gives you, that one of the greatest
works that kings have, among many others, is being forced to listen
to all and answer them all, and thus would not I give him my things
to regret.

To which the lady said:

"Tell us, sir, in the court of His Majesty, are there no knights?

"Yes," replied Don Quixote, "and many, and that there is reason to trim greatness of princes and
display of real majesty.

"Well, would not your worship," she said one of the walk stayed serve their king and Lord, estándose
in court?

"Look, friend," said Don Quixote, "all knights can not be courtiers, nor all the courtiers can not
be knights: all must have in the world, and although we are all knights, there is much difference
from one another, for the court, without leaving their rooms or the thresholds of the court,
strolling around the world, looking a map, without Costa Blanca, or suffer heat or cold, hunger
or thirst, but we, the true knights, sun, cold, air, inclement sky, night and day, on foot
and horseback, we measured the whole earth with our own feet and not only we know the painted
enemies, but in its very being, and all costs and at all times the we undertake, without looking
at trifles, or the laws of the challenges, if present, or is not more short spear, or sword, if
he brings on himself relics, or some covert deception, if it has leave and make slices in the
sun or not, with other ceremonies Deste sort, which are used in particular challenges from person to
person, you do not know and I do. And you must know, moreover, that the true knight-errant, though he
may see ten giants with heads not only play, but clouds pass, and that each will serve two very
great tower legs, and arms tree-like thick and powerful ships, and each eye like a great millstone,
and more burning a glass furnace will not have to chase in any way; them with a gallant and was
fearless heart attack and fall upon, and, if possible, vanquish and destroy in a little while,
but they should come armed with shells of a certain fish that say that are harder than if
they were diamonds instead of swords and knives sharp favorable answer of Damascus steel, or
clubs also Ferrara with steel tips, as I have seen more twice.

All this I say, love me, because you see the difference there gentlemen to others, and would have
no reason not deemed prince over the second, or, rather, the first kind of knights errant, who, as
stated in their stories, such has been between them has been the health not only of a kingdom,
but many.

- Ah, sir! By this time, "said the niece, warn your worship that says it all of knights-errant
is fable and falsehood, and their stories, and not the burn, deserved that each one will you
take a sambenito, or any sign that was infamously known for by spender of public decency.

"For the God who sustains me," said Don Quixote, that if you were not my niece right as a child
of my own sister, who had to make such a punishment on you, for blasphemy you said, it sounded
all over the world. How it is possible that a girl is barely able twelve sticks lace wiggle
dare to censor language and stories of knights walking? What say Mr. Amadis if you hear that?
But surely he will forgive you, because it was the most gentle and
courteous knight of his time, and others, great protector of the maids,
but, as you might have heard that you do not go well dello, not everyone
is polite not well regarded, some are villains and ill. Not all men
are called are all around: some are gold, others of alchemy, and all
seem gentlemen, but not everyone can be the touch stone of truth.

But in its reply, dated the 31st July, Government very justly remarks, that all the unnecessary
trouble which had attended this investigation, as well as the very painful step of having the
body disinterred, which the Resident found himself compelled to adopt in obedience to its orders,
arose from a want of those obvious precautions in the first instance which ought to have suggested
themselves to Colonel Patton. Had he made the requisite inquiries at Secrora, he must have
learnt that an English officer belonging to his own regiment, who had been present at the interment,
had been wounded when Mr. Ravenscroft was murdered, and, for a time, rendered unfit for duty.
The facts since deposed to on oath by Ensign Platt might have been elicited, and his testimony,
if necessary, might have been confirmed by the evidence of the widow of the deceased; and had
such conclusive evidence been submitted to Government in the first instance, the doubts excited
by the extraordinary circumstances of the whole affair would never have existed. When ordered
on the inquiry to Bhinga, had Ensign Platt at once declared at Secrora that he could there
afford all the information required as to the fact of the murder and interment of the body,
the necessity of further inquiry on the spot would have been obviated. He had apparently been
deterred from doing this by the apprehension of compromising both himself and his commanding
officer. Colonel Patton had no knowledge of Mr. Ravenscroft being at Bhinga, though he had
heard a rumour of his being somewhere in the Oude territory; and, in his application for a
few days' leave, Ensign Platt made no mention of him or of his intention to visit him. This
is stated in a subsequent letter from Colonel Patton to the Resident, dated 27th of August 1823.

The opinion that the Rajah had nothing whatever to do with the murder, and that the gang was
secretly hired for the purpose by his eldest son, Surubjeet, has been confirmed by time, and
is now universal among the people of these parts. He died soon after of dropsy, and the people
believe that the disease was caused by the crime. He left an only son, Krishun Dutt Sing. The
Rajah, Seo Sing, survived his eldest son some years; and, on his death, he was succeeded by
Krishun Dutt Sing, who now leads precisely the same secluded life that his father led, and
leaves the management of the Bhinga estate entirely to his only surviving uncle, Kaleepurkas
Sing, the youngest of the two boys who visited Mr. Ravenscroft on the evening of the murder.
The other three sons of the old Rajah are dead. The actual perpetrators of the murder were
never punished or discovered. Mrs. Ravenscroft afterwards became united in marriage to the
Resident at the time, Mr. Mordaunt Ricketts, and still lives. Her child, a boy, was drowned
at the Lucknow Residency some time after his mother's marriage with the Resident. He had been
shut up by his mother in a bathing-room for some fault; and, looking into a bathing- tub at
his image in the water, he lost his balance, fell in, and was drowned. When the servants went
to let him out they found him quite dead. On the way this morning, we passed Koorassa, which
is said once to have been the capital of a formidable Rajah, the head of the Kulhuns tribe
of Rajpoots. The villages which we see along the road seem better, and better peopled and provided
with cattle. The soil not naturally very fertile, but yields fine returns under good culture,
manure, and irrigation. Water everywhere very near the surface. The place is called after the
then Nawab Wuzeer, Asuf-od Dowlah, who built a country-seat here with all appurtenances of
mosque, courts, dwelling-houses, &c., on the verge of a fine lake, formed in the old bed of
the Ghagra river, with tillage and verdure extending down to the water's edge. The garden-
wall, which surrounds a large space of ground, well provided with fruit and ornamental trees,
is built of burnt bricks, and still entire. The late minister, Ameen-od Dowlah, persuaded his
master, Amjad Allee Shah, to give this garden and the lands around, with which it had been
endowed, to his moonshee, Baker Allee Khan, who now resides at Fyzabad, and subsists upon the
rents which he derives from them, and which are said to be about twelve hundred rupees a-year.

The Bulrampoor Rajah, Ramdut Pandee, the banker, and Rajah Bukhtawar Sing, rode with me this
morning. The Rajah of Bulrampoor is an intelligent and pleasing young man. He was a child when
Mr. Ravenscroft was killed, but said he had heard, that the Bhinga chief had suffered for the
share which he had had in the murder; his body swelled, and he died within a month or two.
"If men's bodies swelled for murder, my friend," I said, "we should have no end of swelled
bodies in Oude, and among the rest, that of Prethee Put's, of Paska." "Their bodies all swell,
sooner, or later," said old Bukhtawar Sing, "when they commit such atrocious crimes, and Prethee
Puts will begin to swell when he finds that you are inquiring into his." "I am afraid, my friends,
that the propensity to commit them has become inveterate. One man hears that another has obtained
lands or wealth by the murder of his father or brother, and does not rest till he has attempted
to get the same by the murder of his, for he sees no man punished for such crimes." "It is
not all nor many of our clan" (Rajpoots), said the Rajah of Bulrampoor, "that can or will do
this: we never unite our sons or daughters in marriage with the family of one who is so stained
with crimes. Prethee Put and all who do as he has done, must seek an union with families of
inferior caste." "No," replied the Rajah; "it is an odd name for a beast that feeds on nothing
but the flesh of deer, cattle, and men." "It is, I suppose, Rajah Sahib," I remarked, "because
he feeds upon the deer, which are the greatest enemies of their young crops."

The Rajahs of Toolseepoor and Bulrampoor, and all the merchants and respectable landholders
in these parts assure me, that all the large colonies of Bhuduks, or gang robbers by hereditary
profession, who had, for so many generations, up to A.D. 1840, been located in the Oude Terae
forest, have entirely disappeared under the operation of the "Special Police," of the Thuggee
and Dacoitee Department, aided and supported by the Oude Government; and that not one family
of them can now be found anywhere in Oude. They have not been driven out as formerly, to return
as soon as the temporary pressure ceased, but hunted down and punished, or made to blend with
the rest of society in service or at honest labour.

December 16, 1849.--Nawabgunge, eight miles, over a plain of the same good soil, but not much
better cultivated. The people tell me, that garden tillage is now almost unknown in these districts;
first, because kachies or gardeners (here called moraes) having been robbed, ruined, and driven
into exile by Rughbur Sing, cannot be induced to return to and reside in places, where they
would have so little chance of reaping the fruits of their labour; and, secondly, because there
are no people left who can afford to purchase their garden produce. They tell me also, that
the best classes of ordinary cultivators, the Koormies and Lodhees, have been almost all driven
out of the district from the same cause. The facts are manifest-- there are no gardeners, and
but few Koormies and Lodhees left; and there is, in consequence, little good tillage of any
kind, and still less of garden cultivation.

The Rajah of Bulrampoor and Ramdut Pandee, the banker, rode with me, and related the popular
tradition regarding the head of the Kulhuns family of Rajpoots, Achul Sing, who, about a century
and a quarter ago, reigned over the district intervening between Gonda and Wuzeer Gunge, and
resided at his capital of Koorassa. The Rajah had a dispute with one of his landholders, whom
he could not get into his power. He requested Rutun Pandee, the banker, to mediate a reconciliation,
and invite the landholder to an amicable adjustment of accounts, on a pledge of personal security.
The banker consented, but made the Rajah swear by the River Sarjoo, which flowed near the town,
that he should be received with courtesy, and escorted back safely. The landholder relied on
the banker's pledge and came; but the Rajah no sooner got him into his power, than he caused
him to be put to death. The banker could not consent to live under the dishonour of a violated
pledge; and, abstaining from food, died in twenty-one days, invoking the vengeance of the River
Sarjoo, on the head of the perfidious Prince. In his last hours the banker was visited by one
of the Rajah's wives, who was then pregnant, and implored him to desist from his purpose in
mercy to the child in her womb; but she was told by the dying man, that he could not consent
to survive the dishonour brought upon him by her perjured husband; and that she had better
quit the place and save herself and child, since the incensed river Sarjoo would certainly
not spare any one who remained with the Rajah. She did so. The banker died, and his death was
followed by a sudden rise of the river and tempest. The town was submerged, and the Rajah with
all who remained with him perished. The ruins of the old town are said to be occasionally still
visible, though at a great depth under the water in the old bed of the Sarjoo, which forms
a fine lake, near the present village of Koorassa, midway between Gonda and Wuzeer Gunge.

The pregnant wife fled, and gave birth to a son, whose descendant is now the head of the Kulhuns
Rajpoots, and the Rajah of Bahmanee Paer, a district on the eastern border of Oude towards
Goruckpoor. But, it is a remarkable fact, that the male descendants have been all blind from
their birth, or, at least, the reigning portion of them, and the present Rajah is said to have
two blind sons. This is popularly considered to be one of the effects of the Rajah's violated
pledge to the banker. A handmaid of the Rajah, Achul Sing, is said to have fled at the same
time, and given birth to a son, from whom are descended the Kulhuns tallookdars of the Chehdwara,
or Gowaris district, already noticed. The descendants of Rutun Pandee are said still to hold
rent-free lands, under Achul Sing's descendant, in Bahmanee Paer; and the Pandee is worshipped
throughout the districts as a saint or martyr. He has a shrine in every village, at which offerings
are made on all occasions of marriage, and blessings invoked for the bride and bridegroom,
from the spirit of one who set so much value on his plighted faith while on earth. The two
branches of the Kulhuns family above mentioned, propitiate the spirit of the deceased Pandee
by offerings; but there is a branch of the same family at Mohlee, in the Goruckpoor district,
who do not. Though Hindoos, they adopt some Mussulman customs, and make offerings to the old
Mussulman saint, at Bahraetch, in order to counteract the influence of the Pandee's spirit.

Such popular traditions, arising from singular coincidences of circumstances, have often a
salutary effect on society, and seem to be created by its wants and wishes; but rivers have,
of late years, become so much less prompt in the vindication of their honour, that little reliance
is placed, upon the oaths taken in their names by the Prince, his officers or his landowners
in Oude.

Nawabgunge, Munkapoor, and Bahmanee transferred to the British Government, with the other lands,
under the treaty of 1801; and retransferred to Oude, by the treaty of the 11th of May 1816,
in exchange for Handeea, alias Kewae, a slip of land extending along the left bank of the Ganges,
between Allahabad and Benares.

                           Rent Roll.    Kankur.   Govt. demand

Nawabgunge, Wuzeergunge,.}   l,08,000     32,000       76,000
   Mahadewa .  .  .  .  .}

Munkapoor   .  .  .  .  .      40,000     12,000       28,000 Bahmanee Paer  .  .  .  .   
12,000      3,000        9,000

The landholders and cultivators complain sadly of the change of sovereigns; and the tillage
and population have greatly diminished under the Oude Government since 1816, but more especially,
since the monster, Rughbur Sing got the government. Here Ramdut Pandee, the Rajah of Bulrampoor,
and the Nazim of the district, have taken leave of me, this being my last stage in their district.
Ramdut Pandee holds two estates in this district, for which he pays an annual revenue to Government
of 1,66,744 13 3.* He holds, at the same time, a small estate in our district of Goruckpoor,
where he resides and keeps his family, till he obtains solemn written pledges, confirmed on
oath, for their security, not only from the local authority of the day, but from all the commandants
of corps and establishments, comprising the military force employed under him. These pledges
include all his clients, who may have occasion to visit or travel with him, as the Rajah of
Bulrampoor is now doing. These pledges require to be renewed on every change in the local authorities
and in the military officers employed under them. He is one of the most substantial and respectable
of the agricultural capitalists of Oude, and the highest of his rank and class in this district.
He every year stands security for the punctual payment of the revenues due, according to existing
engagements, by the principal landholders of the district, to the extent of from six to eight
lacs of rupees; and for this he gets a certain per centage, varying with the character and
capability of the landholders. The first thing he said was:

- Who is the lord governor here?

-
Who will it be, "replied the secretary, but he who is sitting in the
chair?

-Humíllome therefore their presence, "said the farmer.

And on his knees, he asked to kiss his hand.

Sancho refused, and ordered that up and say what he wanted. The farmer did so, and then said:

"I,
sir, am a farmer, a native of Miguel Turra, a village two leagues
from Ciudad Real.

- Another Tirteafuera!

"Said Sancho. Say, brother, you know what I mean is that I know Miguel
Turra, and is not far from my village.

"It is, therefore, the case, sir," continued the farmer, "I, by the mercies of God, I'm married
in peace and make the Holy Roman Catholic Church, I have two children students the younger
is studying to become bachelor, and the highest degree, I am a widower, for my wife died, or, rather,
I was killed by a bad doctor, who purged while pregnant, and if God is served came to light
delivery, and was a boy, I shall put to study for doctor, because not envy his brothers the bachelor
and the licentiate.

"So," said Sancho, "if your wife had not died, or had died, you agora
fuérades not a widower.

"No, sir, in any way," said the farmer.

- Medrado we are! "Said Sancho. Go ahead, brother, it's time to sleep than to negotiate.

"Well then," said the farmer, "that my son has to be a bachelor, he himself fell in love people
of a young girl named Clara Perlerina, daughter of Andrew Perlerino, very rich farmer; Perlerines
and this name will not come from ancestry or descent, but because all Deste lineage are paralytics,
and for a better name Perlerines call them, though, if you say the
truth the damsel is like an Oriental pearl, and look on the right
side, like a flower of the field, the left was not so much because
he lacks one eye, which she lost to smallpox; and although the holes
on the face are many and great, say those who want it better than
those are no holes, but the graves where they buried the souls of
her lovers.
No person is permitted to take arms into the Nazim's tent; nor does any landholder or merchant
of Oude enter his tent without the pledges for personal security above mentioned. Ramdut Pandee
and the Rajah entered with only a few personal servants, leaving all their other attendants
outside the outer curtain. This curtain surrounded the tent at a distance of only a few yards
from it, and the tent was pitched in the centre. They were received with all due ceremony,
and in the same friendly manner as usual. The Rajah had no business to talk about, while the
Nazim and banker had; and, after a short conversation, he took leave to return to his tents
and break his fast, which he had kept that day for some religious purpose. He left in the tent
the Nazim, his deputy, Jafir Allee, and his nephew and son-in-law, Allee Hoseyn, sitting together
on the carpet, on the right, all armed, and Ramdut sitting unarmed, on the left, with a Brahmin
lad, Jowahir, standing at the door, with the banker's paundan and a handkerchief. Kurunjoo,
a second person, with the banker's shoes, and a third attendant of his standing outside the
tent door.

