A very pleasant adventure happened at this review to Count Tesse, colonel of dragoons.  Two
days previously M. de Lauzun, in the course of chit- chat, asked him how he intended to dress
at the review; and persuaded him that, it being the custom, he must appear at the head of his
troops in a grey hat, or that he would assuredly displease the King.  Tesse, grateful for this
information, and ashamed of his ignorance, thanked M. de Lauzun, and sent off for a hat in
all haste to Paris.  The King, as M. de Lauzun well knew, had an aversion to grey, and nobody
had worn it for several years.  When, therefore, on the day of the review he saw Tesse in a
hat of that colour, with a black feather, and a huge cockade dangling and flaunting above,
he called to him, and asked him why he wore it.  Tesse replied that it was the privilege of
the colonel-general to wear that day a grey hat.  "A grey hat," replied the King; "where the
devil did you learn that?"

"From M. de, Lauzun, Sire, for whom you created the charge," said Tesse, all embarrassment.
On the instant, the good Lauzun vanished, bursting with laughter, and the King assured Tesse
that M. de Lauzun had merely been joking with him.  I never saw a man so confounded as Tesse
at this. He remained with downcast eyes, looking at his hat, with a sadness and confusion that
rendered the scene perfect.  He was obliged to treat the matter as a joke, but was for a long
time much tormented about it, and much ashamed of it.

Nearly every day the Princes dined with Marechal de Boufflers, whose splendour and abundance
knew no end.  Everybody who visited him, even the humblest, was served with liberality and
attention. The
blazing fire of both loving souls entered the atom, he gave brightness and smoothness, and as there
are beautiful and noble in the world, came to reflect it in enchanted mirror that purifies and it
sublimates everything. The holy desires of love for him and her, have merged into one; and, without
entirely rid of both souls, had in the mysterious Union be unique and substantial yours and
something as a vague, undecided and own conscience. Separated lovers  I return in spite of myself to the Marechal's liberality; because, who
ever saw it, cannot forget, or ever cease to be in a state of astonishment and admiration at
its abundance and sumptuousness, or at the order, never deranged for a moment at a single point,
that prevailed.

The King wished to show the Court all the manoeuvres of war; the siege of Compiegne was therefore
undertaken, according to due form, with lines, trenches, batteries, mines, &c.  On Saturday,
the 13th of September, the assault took place.  To witness it, the King, Madame de Maintenon,
all the ladies of the Court, and a number of gentlemen, stationed themselves upon an old rampart,
from which the plain and all the disposition of the troops could be seen.  I was in the half
circle very close to the King. It was the most beautiful sight that can be imagined, to see
all that army, and the prodigious number of spectators on horse and foot, and that game of
attack and defence so cleverly conducted.

But a spectacle of another sort, that I could paint forty years hence as well as to-day, so
strongly did it strike me, was that which from the summit of this rampart the King gave to
all his army, and to the innumerable crowd of spectators of all kinds in the plain below. 
Madame de Maintenon faced the plain and the troops in her sedan-chair-alone, between its three
windows drawn up-her porters having retired to a distance.  On the left pole in front sat Madame
la Duchesse de Bourgogne; and on the same side in a semicircle, standing, were Madame la Duchesse,
Madame la Princesse de Conti, and all the ladies, and behind them again, many men.  At the
right window was the King, standing, and a little in the rear, a semicircle of the most distinguished
men of the Court.  The King was nearly always uncovered; and every now and then stooped to
speak to Madame de Maintenon, and explain to her what she saw, and the reason of each movement.
Each time that he did so she was obliging enough to open the window four or five inches, but
never half way; for I noticed particularly, and I admit that I was more attentive to this spectacle
than to that of the troops.  Sometimes she opened of her own accord to ask some question of
him, but generally it was he who, without waiting for her, stooped down to instruct her of
what was passing; and sometimes, if she did not notice him, he tapped at the glass to make
her open it. Athanasius Preacher, preacher as eloquent as severe. The horror of the storm
which continued and grew, the tremendous sentence with the father lashed the vices and describing
the eternal punishment that God imposes righteous and perhaps also a devotee box Luca Giordano,
which at the church seemed representing Mary Magdalene at the feet of Christ, all pricked by this beautiful
art to the sinner, penetrating his heart like sharp arrows of fire, which was filled with attrition
and even contrition, he felt that the Almighty called her to himself
as was miraculously converted.

María
Antonia Fernández returned to tread the boards, made from that point
withdrawal and exemplary life, and the bitterness of their repentance
late, harsh mortifications with which she was punished and the shame
and profound regret that the memory of his sins caused, ended suddenly
with the health of your body, giving instead the salvation of souls.

All this is perfectly historical notoriety then in Madrid, and now remembered on time by Mr. Cota.
What I will refer to as the appendix is ​​usually ignored.

III Any mortal sin is abhorrent, but when sin does not pollute any
subject innocent and pure and will not depart from the path of virtue,
her malice is much lower than when extended their pernicious influence
on human creatures, and when it infects everything and corrupts.

Maria Antonia Fernandez, but repentant and tearful, had the consolation
of having no sin ever in this second sense. Who had fallen into their
networks and it had been with sinners, deviants were well in advance,
so that it no virtue in not withered flower, or imitating the devil
stole angels to heaven to take them with you.

A María Antonia pricked the conscience, but of their own destruction, not having tried the others.
Only once she was so conducive to commit double and ugly crime, but became frustrated and was
in attempted due to the strength of a subject and above all, thanks to divine mercy. The Gee
recalled with horror that case. The Duke of Campoverde, who call it to hide its true title,
protected and housed in their home to a nephew so famous as a poor
man named D. Jacinto de la Mota, handsome young man in Florida age
of twenty years, elegant, discreet and friendly in the extreme.

And the most unique and rare that he had was his spiritual and immaculately clean. No outrageous few ladies
had the impudence to laugh and mock surly about your condition, named
the new Hippolytus and perhaps feeling the itch to mimic Fedra with
better success and fortune.

The Duke, and some jolly old freethinker, and two friends, very seasoned
and well versed in light and gallant adventures of continuous mortified
D. Jacinto, ridiculing his honest modesty and weaving patterns and
looking for dangerous times in which every point you lose.

In order for such wicked conspirators sought the help of the powerful
Wow. There was a dinner, attended D. Jacinto, ignoring what was going
to be in it, and he sat beside the sultry actress, beautiful as ever
that night, with light and almost transparent robes, and adorned
his arms and throat bare and yeast with rich and splendid bracelets
necklace Pearl.

Happen here long, so licentious that no tittle of this writing, about the hellish arts that The
Boy, the three industries for libertines, his self-excited, eager for victory, and also enamored of the
gallantry and innocence of chaste boy overwhelmed and struggled to
pay all his talent.

Don Jacinto was firmer than a rock almost eclipsed the memory of the patriarch Jacob's favorite son, all with
such dignity and so without fuss or affectation, that laughter and chacota,
the uncle and his two friends began to show, trocar was soon in awe
and respect

.


The King left the camp on Monday the 22d of September, much pleased with the troops.  He gave,
in parting, six hundred francs to each cavalry captain, and three hundred francs to each captain
of infantry.  He gave as much to the majors of all the regiments, and distributed some favours
to his household.  To Marechal de Boufflers he presented one hundred thousand francs.  All
these gifts together amounted to something: but separately were as mere drops of water.  There
was not a single regiment that was not ruined, officers and men, for several years.  As for
Marechal de Boufflers, I leave it to be imagined what a hundred thousand francs were to him
whose magnificence astounded all Europe, described as it was by foreigners who were witnesses
of it, and who day after day could scarcely believe their own eyes.

CHAPTER XIV

Here I will relate an adventure, which shows that, however wise and enlightened a man may be,
he is never infallible.  M. de La Trappe had selected from amongst his brethren one who was
to be his successor.  The name of this monk was D. Francois Gervaise.  He had been in the monastery
for some years, had lived regularly during that time, and had gained the confidence of M. de
La Trappe.  As soon, however, as he received this appointment, his manners began to change.
He acted as though he were already master, brought disorder and ill-feeling into the monastery,
and sorely grieved M. de La Trapp; who, however, looked upon this affliction as the work of
Heaven, and meekly resigned him self to it.  At last, Francois Gervaise was by the merest chance
detected openly, under circumstances which blasted his character for ever.  His companion in
guilt was brought before M. de La Trappe, to leave no doubt upon the matter.  D. Francois Gervaise,
utterly prostrated, resigned his office, and left La Trappe. Yet, even after this, he had the
hardihood to show himself in the world, and to try and work himself into the favour of Pere
la Chaise.  A discovery that was made, effectually stopped short his hopes in this direction.
A letter of his was found, written to a nun with whom he had been intimate, whom he loved,
and by whom he was passionately loved.  It was a tissue of filthiness and stark indecency,
enough to make the most abandoned tremble.  The pleasures, the regrets, the desires, the hopes
of this precious pair, were all expressed in the boldest language, and with the utmost licence.
I believe that so many abominations are not uttered in several days, even in the worst places.
For this offence Gervaise might have been confined in a dungeon all his life, but he was allowed
to go at large.  He wandered from monastery to monastery for five or six years, and always
caused so much disorder wherever he stopped, that at last the superiors thought it best to
let him live as he liked in a curacy of his brother's.  He never ceased troubling La Trappe,
to which he wished to return; so that at last I obtained a 'lettre de cachet', which prohibited
him from approaching within thirty leagues of the abbey, and within twenty of Paris.  It was
I who made known to him that his abominations had been discovered.  He was in no way disturbed,
declared he was glad to be free, and assured me with the hypocrisy which never left him, that
in his solitude he was going to occupy himself in studying the Holy Scriptures.

Bonnceil, introducer of the ambassadors, being dead, Breteuil obtained his post.  Breteuil
was not without intellect, but aped courtly manners, called himself Baron de Breteuil, and
was much tormented and laughed at by his friends.  One day, dining at the house of Madame de
Pontchartrain, and, speaking very authoritatively, Madame de Pontchartrain disputed with him,
and, to test his knowledge, offered to make a bet that he did not know who wrote the Lord's
Prayer.  He defended himself as well as he was able, and succeeded in leaving the table without
being called upon to decide the point.  Caumartin, who saw his embarrassment, ran to him, and
kindly whispered in his ear that Moses was the author of the Lord's Prayer.  Thus strengthened,
Breteuil returned to the attack, brought, while taking coffee, the conversation back again
to the bet; and, after reproaching Madame de Pontchartrain for supposing him ignorant upon
such a point, and declaring he was ashamed of being obliged to say such a trivial thing, pronounced
emphatically that it was Moses who had written the Lord's Prayer.  The burst of laughter that,
of course, followed this, overwhelmed him with confusion.  Poor Breteuil was for a long time
at loggerheads with his friend, and the Lord's Prayer became a standing reproach to him.

He had a friend, the Marquis de Gesvres, who, upon some points, was not much better informed.
Talking one day in the cabinet of the King, and admiring in the tone of a connoisseur some
fine paintings of the Crucifixion by the first masters, he remarked that they were all by one hand.

He was laughed at, and the different painters were named, as recognized by their style.

"Not at all," said the Marquis, "the painter is called INRI; do you not see his name upon all
the pictures?"  What followed after such gross stupidity and ignorance may be imagined.

At the end of this year the King resolved to undertake three grand projects, which ought to
have been carried out long before: the chapel of Versailles, the Church of the Invalides, and
the altar of Notre-Dame de Paris.  This last was a vow of Louis XIII., made when, he no longer
was able to accomplish it, and which he had left to his successor, who had been more than fifty
years without thinking of it.

On the 6th of January, upon the reception of the ambassadors at the house of the Duchesse de
Bourogogne, an adventure happened which I will here relate.  M. de Lorraine belonged to a family
which had been noted for its pretensions, and for the disputes of precedency in which it engaged.
He was as prone to this absurdity as the rest, and on this occasion incited the Princesse d'Harcourt,
one of his relations, to act in a manner that scandalised all the Court.  Entering the room
in which the ambassadors were to be received and where a large number of ladies were already
collected, she glided behind the Duchesse de Rohan, and told her to pass to the left.  The
Duchesse de Rohan, much surprised, replied that she was very well placed already.  Whereupon,
the Princesse d'Harcourt, who was tall and strong, made no further ado, but with her two arms
seized the Duchesse de Rohan, turned her round, and sat down in her place.  All the ladies
were strangely scandalised at this, but none dared say a word, not even Madame de Lude, lady
in waiting on the Duchesse de Bourgogne, who, for her part also, felt the insolence of the
act, but dared not speak, being so young.  As for the Duchesse de Rohan, feeling that opposition
must lead to fisticuffs, she curtseyed to the Duchess, and quietly retired to another place.
A few minutes after this, Madame de Saint- Simon, who was then with child, feeling herself
unwell, and tired of standing, seated herself upon the first cushion she could find.  It so
happened, that in the position she thus occupied, she had taken precedence of Madame d'Armagnac
by two degrees.  Madame d'Armagnac,, perceiving it, spoke to her upon the subject.  Madame
de Saint-Simon, who had only placed herself there for a moment, did not reply, but went elsewhere.

As soon as I learnt of the first adventure, I thought it important that such an insult should
not be borne, and I went and conferred with M. de la Rochefoucauld upon the subject, at the
same time that Marechal de Boufflers spoke of it to M. de Noailles.  I called upon other of
my friends, and the opinion was that the Duc de Rohan should complain to the King on the morrow
of the treatment his wife had received.

In the evening while I was at the King's supper, I was sent for by Madame de Saint-Simon, who
informed me that the Lorraines, afraid of the complaints that would probably be addressed to
the King upon what had taken place between the Princesse d'Harcourt and the Duchesse de Rohan,
had availed themselves of what happened between Madame de Saint-Simon and Madame d'Armagnac,
in order to be the first to complain, so that one might balance the other.  Here was a specimen
of the artifice of these gentlemen, which much enraged me.  On the instant I determined to
lose no time in speaking to the King; and that very evening I related what had occurred, in
so far as Madame de Saint-Simon was concerned, but made no allusion to M. de Rohan's affair,
thinking it best to leave that to be settled by itself on the morrow.  The King replied to
me very graciously, and I retired, after assuring him that all I had said was true from beginning
to end.

The next day the Duc de Rohan made his complaint.  The King, who had already been fully informed
of the matter, received him well, praised the respect and moderation of Madame de Rohan, declared
Madame d'Harcourt to have been very impertinent, and said some very hard words upon the Lorraines.

I found afterwards, that Madame de Maintenon, who much favoured Madame d'Harcourt, had all
the trouble in the world to persuade the King not to exclude her from the next journey to Marly.
She received a severe reprimand from the King, a good scolding from Madame de Maintenon, and
was compelled publicly to ask pardon of the Duchesse de Rohan.  This she did; but with a crawling
baseness equal to her previous audacity.  Such was the end of this strange history.

There appeared at this time a book entitled "Probleme," but without name of author, and directed
against M. de Paris, declaring that he had uttered sentiments favourable to the Jansenists
being at Chalons, and unfavourable being at Paris.  The book came from the Jesuits, who could
not pardon M. de Paris for having become archbishop without their assistance.  It was condemned
and burnt by decree of the Parliament, and the Jesuits had to swallow all the shame of it.
The author was soon after discovered.  He was named Boileau; not the friend of Bontems, who
so often preached before the King, and still less the celebrated poet and author of the 'Flagellants',
but a doctor of much wit and learning whom M. de Paris had taken into his favour and treated
like a brother.  Who would have believed that "Probleme" could spring from such a man?  M.
de Paris was much hurt; but instead of imprisoning Boileau for the rest of his days, as he
might have done, he acted the part of a great bishop, and gave him a good canonical of Saint
Honore, which became vacant a few days afterwards.  Boileau, who was quite without means, completed
his dishonour by accepting it.

The honest people of the Court regretted a cynic who died at this time, I mean the Chevalier
de Coislin.  He was a most extraordinary man, very splenetic, and very difficult to deal with.
He rarely left Versailles, and never went to see the king.  I have seen him get out of the
way not to meet him.  He lived with Cardinal Coislin, his brother.  If anybody displeased him,
he would go and sulk in his own room; and if, whilst at table, any one came whom he did not
like, he would throw away his plate, go off to sulk, or to finish his dinner all alone.  One
circumstance will paint him completely.  Being on a journey once with his brothers, the Duc
de Coislin and the Cardinal de Coislin, the party rested for the night at the house of a vivacious
and very pretty bourgeoise.  The Duc de Coislin was an exceedingly polite man, and bestowed
amiable compliments and civilities upon their hostess, much to the disgust of the Chevalier.
At parting, the Duke renewed the politeness he had displayed so abundantly the previous evening,
and delayed the others by his long-winded flatteries.  When, at last, they left the house,
and were two or three leagues away from it, the Chevalier de Coislin said, that, in spite of
all this politeness, he had reason to believe that their pretty hostess would not long be pleased
with the Duke.  The Duke, disturbed, asked his reason for thinking so.  "Do you wish to learn
it?" said the Chevalier; "well, then, you must know that, disgusted by your compliments, I
went up into the bedroom in which you slept, and made a filthy mess on the floor, which the
landlady will no doubt attribute to you, despite all your fine speeches."

At this there was loud laughter, but the Duke was in fury, and wished to return in order to
clear up his character.  Although it rained hard, they had all the pains in the world to hinder
him, and still more to bring about a reconciliation.  Nothing was more pleasant than to hear
the brothers relate this adventure each in his own way.

Two cruel effects of gambling were noticed at this time.  Reineville, a lieutenant of the body-guard,
a general officer distinguished in war, very well treated by the King, and much esteemed by
the captain of the Guards, suddenly disappeared, and could not be found anywhere, although
the utmost care was taken to search for him.   He loved gaming.  He had lost what he could
not pay.  He was a man of honour, and could not sustain his misfortune.  Twelve or fifteen
years afterwards he was recognised among the Bavarian troops, in which he was serving in order
to gain his bread and to live unknown.  The other case was still worse. Permillac, a man of
much intelligence and talent, had lost more than he possessed, and blew his brains out one
morning in bed.  He was much liked throughout the army; had taken a friendship for me, and
I for him. Everybody pitied him, and I much regretted him.

Nearly at the same time we lost the celebrated Racine, so known by his beautiful plays.  No
one possessed a greater talent or a more agreeable mien.  There was nothing of the poet in
his manners: he had the air of a well-bred and modest man, and at last that of a good man.
He had friends, the most illustrious, at the Court as well as among men of letters.  I leave
it to the latter to speak of him in a better way than I can.  He wrote, for the amusement of
the King and Madame de Maintenon, and to exercise the young ladies of Saint Cyr, two dramatic
masterpieces, Esther and Athalie.  They were very difficult to write, because there could be
no love in them, and because they are sacred tragedies, in which, from respect to the Holy
Scriptures, it was necessary rigidly to keep to the historical truth.  They were several times
played at Saint Cyr before a select Court.  Racine was charged with the history of the King,
conjointly with Despreaux, his friend.  This employment, the pieces I have just spoken of,
and his friends, gained for Racine some special favours: It sometimes happened that the King
had no ministers with him, as on Fridays, and, above all, when the bad weather of winter rendered
the sittings very long; then he would send for Racine to amuse him and Madame de Maintenon.
Unfortunately the poet was oftentimes very absent. It happened one evening that, talking with
Racine upon the theatre, the King asked why comedy was so much out of fashion.  Racine gave
several reasons, and concluded by naming the principal,--namely, that for want of new pieces
the comedians gave old ones, and, amongst others, those of Scarron, which were worth nothing,
and which found no favour with anybody.  At this the poor widow blushed, not for the reputation
of the cripple attacked, but at hearing his name uttered in presence of his successor!  The
King was also embarrassed, and the unhappy Racine, by the silence which followed, felt what
a slip he had made.  He remained the most confounded of the three, without daring to raise
his eyes or to open his mouth.  This silence did not terminate for several moments, so heavy
and profound was the surprise.  The end was that the King sent away Racine, saying he was going
to work.  The poet never afterwards recovered his position.  Neither the King nor Madame de
Maintenon ever spoke to him again, or even looked at him; and he conceived so much sorrow at
this, that he fell into a languor, and died two years afterwards.  At his death, Valincourt
was chosen to work in his place with Despreaux upon the history of the King.

The King, who had just paid the heavy gaming and tradesmen's debts of Madame la Duchesse, paid
also those of Monseigneur, which amounted to fifty thousand francs, undertook the payment of
the buildings at Meudon, and, in lieu of fifteen hundred pistoles a month which he had allowed
Monseigneur, gave him fifty thousand crowns.  M. de la Rochefoucauld, always necessitous and
pitiful in the midst of riches, a prey to his servants, obtained an increase of forty-two thousand
francs a-year upon the salary he received as Grand Veneur, although it was but a short time
since the King had paid his debts.  The King gave also, but in secret, twenty thousand francs
a-year to M. de Chartres, who had spent so much in journeys and building that he feared he
should be unable to pay his debts.  He had asked for an abbey; but as he had already one, the
King did not like to give him another, lest it should be thought too much.

M. de Vendome began at last to think about his health, which his debauches had thrown into
a very bad state.  He took public leave of the King and of all the Court before going away,
to put himself in the hands of the doctors.  It was the first and only example of such impudence.
From this time he lost ground.  The King said, at parting, that he hoped he would come back
in such a state that people might kiss him without danger!  His going in triumph, where another
would have gone in shame and secrecy, was startling and disgusting.  He was nearly three months
under the most skilful treatment-and returned to the Court with half his nose, his teeth out,
and a physiognomy entirely changed, almost idiotic.  The King was so much struck by this change,
that he recommended the courtiers not to appear to notice it, for fear of afflicting M. de
Vendome.  That was taking much interest in him assuredly.  As, moreover, he had departed in
triumph upon this medical expedition, so he returned triumphant by the reception of the King,
which was imitated by all the Court.  He remained only a few days, and then, his mirror telling
sad tales, went away to Anet, to see if nose and teeth would come back to him with his hair.

A strange adventure, which happened at this time, terrified everybody, and gave rise to many
surmises.  Savary was found assassinated in his house at Paris he kept only a valet and a maid-servant,
and they were discovered murdered at the same time, quite dressed, like their master, and in
different parts of the house.  It appeared by writings found there, that the crime was one
of revenge: it was supposed to have been committed in broad daylight.  Savary was a citizen
of Paris, very rich, without occupation, and lived like an epicurean.  He had some friends
of the highest rank, and gave parties, of all kinds of pleasure, at his house, politics sometimes
being discussed.  The cause of this assassination was never known; but so much of it was found
out, that no one dared to search for more.  Few doubted but that the deed had been done by
a very ugly little man, but of a blood so highly respected, that all forms were dispensed with,
in the fear lest it should be brought home to him; and, after the first excitement, everybody
ceased to speak of this tragic history.

On the night between the 3rd and 4th of June, a daring robbery was effected at the grand stables
of Versailles.  All the horse-cloths and trappings, worth at least fifty thousand crowns, were
carried off, and so cleverly and with such speed, although the night was short, that no traces
of them could ever afterwards be found.  This theft reminds me of another which took place
a little before the commencement of these memoirs.  The grand apartment at Versailles, that
is to say, from the gallery to the tribune, was hung with crimson velvet, trimmed and fringed
with gold.  One fine morning the fringe and trimmings were all found to have been cut away.
This appeared extraordinary in a place so frequented all day, so well closed at night, and
so well guarded at all times. Bontems, the King's valet, was in despair, and did his utmost
to discover the thieves, but without success.

Five or six days afterwards, I was at the King's supper, with nobody but Daqum, chief physician,
between the King and me, and nobody at all between one and the table.  Suddenly I perceived
a large black form in the air, but before I could tell what it was, it fell upon the end of
the King's table just before the cover which had been laid for Monseigneur and Madame.  By
the noise it made in falling, and the weight of the thing itself, it seemed as though the table
must be broken.  The plates jumped up, but none were upset, and the thing, as luck would have
it, did not fall upon any of them, but simply upon the cloth.  The King moved his head half
round, and without being moved in any way said, "I think that is my fringe!"

It was indeed a bundle, larger than a flat-brimmed priest's hat, about two feet in height,
and shaped like a pyramid.  It had come from behind me, from towards the middle door of the
two ante-chambers, and a piece of fringe getting loose in the air, had fallen upon the King's
wig, from which it was removed by Livry, a gentleman-in-waiting.  Livry also opened the bundle,
and saw that it did indeed contain the fringes all twisted up, and everybody saw likewise.
A murmur was heard.  Livry wishing to take away the bundle found a paper attached to it.  He
took the paper and left the bundle.  The King stretched out his hand and said, "Let us see."
Livry, and with reason, would not give up the paper, but stepped back, read it, and then passed
it to Daquin, in whose hands I read it.  The writing, counterfeited and long like that of a
woman, was in these words:--" Take back your fringes, Bontems; they are not worth the trouble
of keeping--my compliments to the King."

The paper was rolled up, not folded: the King wished to take it from Daquin, who, after much
hesitation, allowed him to read it, but did not let it out of his hands.  "Well, that is very
insolent!" said the King, but in quite a placid unmoved tone--as it were, an historical tone.
Afterwards he ordered the bundle to be taken away.  Livry found it so heavy that he could scarcely
lift it from the table, and gave it to an attendant who presented himself.  The King spoke
no more of this matter, nobody else dared to do so; and the supper finished as though nothing
had happened.

Besides the excess of insolence and impudence of this act, it was so perilous as to be scarcely
understood.  How could any one, without being seconded by accomplices, throw a bundle of this
weight and volume in the midst of a crowd such as was always present at the supper of the King,
so dense that it could with difficulty be passed through?  How, in spite of a circle of accomplices,
could a movement of the arms necessary for such a throw escape all eyes?  The Duc de Gesvres
was in waiting.  Neither he nor anybody else thought of closing the doors until the King had
left the table.  It may be guessed whether the guilty parties remained until then, having had
more than three-quarters of an hour to escape, and every issue being free.  Only one person
was discovered, who was not known, but he proved to be a very honest man, and was dismissed
after a short detention.  Nothing has since been discovered respecting this theft or its bold
restitution.

CHAPTER XV

On the 12th August, Madame de Saint-Simon was happily delivered of a second son, who bore the
name of Marquis de Ruffec.  A singular event which happened soon after, made all the world marvel.

There arrived at Versailles a farrier, from the little town of Salon, in Provence, who asked
to see the King in private.  In spite of the rebuffs he met with, he persisted in his request,
so that at last it got to the ears of the King.  The King sent word that he was not accustomed
to grant such audiences to whoever liked to ask for them. Reading them, we can not but exclaim almost with envy. Come, come, fun did
not stop our grandparents moderated!

And what is for me the greatest merit that have the books that I
am speaking, is very suggestive.  Upon this the King allowed him to have an interview with
one of his secretaries, Barbezieux.  But Barbezieux was not a minister of state, and to the
great surprise of everybody, the farrier, who had only just arrived from the country, and who
had never before left it or his trade, replied, that not being a minister of state he would
not speak with him.  Upon this he was allowed to see Pomponne, and converse with him; and this
is the story he told:

He said, that returning home late one evening he found himself surrounded by a great light,
close against a tree and near Salon.  A woman clad in white--but altogether in a royal manner,
and beautiful, fair, and very dazzling--called him by his name, commanded him to listen to
her, and spake to him more than half-an-hour. I have not talked to you.

Juana is upset and distressed about the fact that D.Jacinto has not
been seen at the house of the patient nor had they sent even one servant
to inquire about the patient.

Finally, La Caramba learned some unexpected news. She
said that in case he could not see the King he was to speak with a minister of state, telling
him certain things, but reserving certain others for the King alone.  She told him, moreover,
to set out at once, assuring him he would be punished with death if he neglected to acquit
himself of his commission.  The farrier promised to obey her in everything, and the queen then
disappeared.  He found himself in darkness near the tree.  He lay down and passed the night
there, scarcely knowing whether he was awake or asleep.  In the morning he went home, persuaded
that what he had seen was a mere delusion and folly, and said nothing about it to a living soul.

Two days afterwards he was passing by the same place when the same vision appeared to him,
and he was addressed in the same terms.  Fresh threats of punishment were uttered if he did
not comply, and he was ordered to go at once to the Intendant of the province, who would assuredly
furnish him with money, after saying what he had seen.  This time the farrier was convinced
there was no delusion in the matter; but, halting between his fears and doubts, knew not what
to do, told no one what had passed, and was in great perplexity.  He remained thus eight days,
and at last had resolved not to make the journey; when, passing by the same spot, he saw and
heard the same vision, which bestowed upon him so many dreadful menaces that he no longer thought
of anything but setting out immediately.  In two days from that time he presented himself,
at Aix, to the Intendant of the province, who, without a moment's hesitation, urged him to
pursue his journey, and gave him sufficient money to travel by a public conveyance.  Nothing
more of the story was ever known.

The farrier had three interviews with M. de Pomponne, each of two hours' length.  M. de Pomponne
rendered, in private, an account of these to the King, who desired him to speak more fully
upon the point in a council composed of the Ducs de Beauvilliers, Pontchartrain, Torcy, and
Pomponne himself; Monseigneur to be excluded.  This council sat very long, perhaps because
other things were spoken of. He came off a very luxurious car and was accompanied by his machioness wife who was very well
dressed however ugly.

Maria Antonia involuntarily closed her eyes to avoid seeing them; in order not be seen she covered
face with her cloak and moved towards the wall in more shaded area of
the temple.

However Maria Antonia returned to the Capuchin Church. She didn't want
to see D. Jacinto in the company of the Marchionness. She wanted
to see him alone and speak to him. She delayed in realizing her wish,
but her wish was finally fulfilled.  At this the King stopped, and, turning round, a thing
he scarcely ever did in walking, replied, "If that be so, I am not noble, for I have discoursed
with him long, he has spoken to me with much good sense, and I assure you he is far from being
mad."

These last words were pronounced with a sustained gravity which greatly surprised those near,
and which in the midst of deep silence opened all eyes and ears.  After the second interview
the King felt persuaded that one circumstance had been related to him by the farrier, which
he alone knew, and which had happened more than twenty years before.  It was that he had seen
a phantom in the forest of Saint Germains.  Of this phantom he had never breathed a syllable
to anybody.

The King on several other occasions spoke favourably of the farrier; moreover, he paid all
the expenses the man had been put to, gave him a gratuity, sent him back free, and wrote to
the Intendant of the province to take particular care of him, and never to let him want for
anything all his life.

The most surprising thing of all this is, that none of the ministers could be induced to speak
a word upon the occurrence.  Their most intimate friends continually questioned them, but without
being able to draw forth a syllable.  The ministers either affected to laugh at the matter
or answered evasively.  This was the case whenever I questioned M. de Beauvilliers or M. de
Pontchartrain, and I knew from their most intimate friends that nothing more could ever be
obtained from M. de Pomponne or M. de Torcy.  As for the farrier himself, he was equally reserved.
He was a simple, honest, and modest man, about fifty years of age.  Whenever addressed upon
this subject, he cut short all discourse by saying, "I am not allowed to speak," and nothing
more could be extracted from him.  When he returned to his home he conducted himself just as
before, gave himself no airs, and never boasted of the interview he had had with the King and
his ministers.  He went back to his trade, and worked at it as usual.

