During the Easter holidays of 1864 Garibaldi came to England. My uncle, Frank Vizetelly, was
the chief war-artist of that period, the predecessor, in fact, of the late Melton Prior. He
knew Garibaldi well, having first met him during the war of 1859, and having subsequently accompanied
him during his campaign through Sicily and then on to Naples--afterwards, moreover, staying
with him at Caprera. And so my uncle carried me and his son, my cousin Albert, to Stafford
House (where he had the entree), and the grave-looking Liberator patted us on the head, called
us his children, and at Frank Vizetelly's request gave us photographs of himself. I then little
imagined that I should next see him in France, at the close of the war with Germany, during
a part of which my brother Edward acted as one of his orderly officers.

My father, being at the head of a prominent London newspaper, often received tickets for one
and another theatre. Thus, during my winter holidays, I saw many of the old pantomimes at Drury
Lane and elsewhere. I also well remember Sothern's "Lord Dundreary," and a play called "The
Duke's Motto," which was based on Paul Feval's novel, "Le Bossu." I frequently witnessed the
entertainments given by the German Reeds, Corney Grain, and Woodin, the clever quick-change
artist. I likewise remember Leotard the acrobat at the Alhambra, and sundry performances at
the old Pantheon, where I heard such popular songs as "The Captain with the Whiskers" and "The
Charming Young Widow I met in the Train." Nigger ditties were often the "rage" during my boyhood,
and some of them, like "Dixie-land" and "So Early in the Morning," still linger in my memory. In
short, the omission by Meres proves no more than that he either did not think of the play, or did
not think it necessary to mention it.

  To the second assumption,
   I answer that the date
   of the first Hamlet is
   "not proven:" it may have been an early play.

From the play of Hamlet, in its earlier form, is the name Baptiste, where it is used in conjunction
with Albertus, taken; the scene mentioned is Guiana; and there is nothing to lead one to suppose
that the name is used as an Italian name at all. Both the date of Hamlet, therefore, and--whichever
way decided--the conclusion drawn from the supposed mistake, I regard
as open questions.

  There is yet another circumstance
     which Mr. Collier thinks may strengthen
   his conclusion with regard
     to the date of this play.
   
   Helter, skelter, melter, pelter,
     We're the lads for mirth and spree!"

For "cockalorum," be it noted, we frequently substituted the name of some particularly obnoxious
master.

To return to the interesting sights of my boyhood, I have some recollection of the Exhibition
of 1862, but can recall more vividly a visit to the Crystal Palace towards the end of the following
year, when I there saw the strange house-like oar of the "Giant" balloon in which Nadar, the
photographer and aeronaut, had lately made, with his wife and others, a memorable and disastrous
aerial voyage. Readers of Jules Verne will remember that Nadar figures conspicuously in his
"Journey to the Moon." Quite a party of us went to the Palace to see the "Giant's" car, and
Nadar, standing over six feet high, with a great tangled mane of frizzy flaxen hair, a ruddy
moustache, and a red shirt a la Garibaldi, took us inside it and showed us all the accommodation
it contained for eating, sleeping and photographic purposes. I could not follow what he said,
for I then knew only a few French words, and I certainly had no idea that I should one day
ascend into the air with him in a car of a very different type, that of the captive balloon
which, for purposes of military observation, he installed on the Place Saint Pierre at Montmartre,
during the German siege of Paris.

A time came when my father disposed of his interest in the Illustrated Times and repaired to
Paris to take up the position of Continental representative of the Illustrated London News.
My brother Edward, at that time a student at the Ecole des Beaux Arts, then became his assistant,
and a little later I was taken across the Channel with my brother Arthur to join the rest of
the family. We lived, first, at Auteuil, and then at Passy, where I was placed in a day-school
called the Institution Nouissel, where lads were prepared for admission to the State or municipal
colleges. There had been some attempt to teach me French at Eastbourne, but it had met with
little success, partly, I think, because I was prejudiced against the French generally, regarding
them as a mere race of frog-eaters whom we had deservedly whacked at Waterloo. Eventually my
prejudices were in a measure overcome by what I heard from our drill-master, a retired non-commissioned
officer, who had served in the Crimea, and who told us some rousing anecdotes about the gallantry
of "our allies" at the Alma and elsewhere. In the result, the old sergeant's converse gave
me "furiously to think" that there might be some good in the French after all.

At Nouissel's I acquired some knowledge of the language rapidly enough, and I was afterwards
placed in the charge of a tutor, a clever scamp named Brossard, who prepared me for the Lycee
Bonaparte (now Condorcet), where I eventually became a pupil, Brossard still continuing to
coach me with a view to my passing various examinations, and ultimately securing the usual
baccalaureat, without which nobody could then be anything at all in France. In the same way
he coached Evelyn Jerrold, son of Blanchard and grandson of Douglas Jerrold, both of whom were
on terms of close friendship with the Vizetellys. But while Brossard was a clever man, he was
also an unprincipled one, and although I was afterwards indebted to him for an introduction
to old General Changarnier, to whom he was related, it would doubtless have been all the better
if he had not introduced me to some other people with whom he was connected. He lived for a
while with a woman who was not his wife, and deserted her for a girl of eighteen, whom he also
abandoned, in order to devote himself to a creature in fleshings who rode a bare-backed steed
at the Cirque de l'Imperatrice. When I was first introduced to her "behind the scenes," she
was bestriding a chair, and smoking a pink cigarette, and she addressed me as mon petit. Briefly,
the moral atmosphere of Brossard's life was not such as befitted him to be a mentor of youth.

Let me now go back a little. At the time of the great Paris Exhibition of 1867 I was in my
fourteenth year. The city was then crowded with royalties, many of whom I saw on one or another
occasion. I was in the Bois de Boulogne with my father when, after a great review, a shot was
fired at the carriage in which Napoleon III and his guest, Alexander II of Russia, were seated
side by side. I saw equerry Raimbeaux gallop forward to screen the two monarchs, and I saw
the culprit seized by a sergeant of our Royal Engineers, attached to the British section of
the Exhibition. Both sovereigns stood up in the carriage to show that they were uninjured,
and it was afterwards reported that the Emperor Napoleon said to the Emperor Alexander: "If
that shot was fired by an Italian it was meant for me; if by a Pole, it was meant for your
Majesty." Whether those words were really spoken, or were afterwards invented, as such things
often are, by some clever journalist, I cannot say; but the man proved to be a Pole named Berezowski,
who was subsequently sentenced to transportation for life.

It was in connection with this attempt on the Czar that I did my first little bit of journalistic
work. By my father's directions, I took a few notes and made a hasty little sketch of the surroundings.
This and my explanations enabled M. Jules Pelcoq, an artist of Belgian birth, whom my father
largely employed on behalf of the Illustrated London News, to make a drawing which appeared
on the first page of that journal's next issue. I do not think that any other paper in the
world was able to supply a pictorial representation of Berezowski's attempt.

I have said enough, I think, to show that I was a precocious lad, perhaps, indeed, a great
deal too precocious. However, I worked very hard in those days. My hours at Bonaparte were
from ten to twelve and from two to four. I had also to prepare home-lessons for the Lycee,
take special lessons from Brossard, and again lessons in German from a tutor named With. Then,
too, my brother Edward ceasing to act as my father's assistant in order to devote himself to
journalism on his own account, I had to take over a part of his duties. One of my cousins,
Montague Vizetelly (son of my uncle James, who was the head of our family), came from England,
however, to assist my father in the more serious work, such as I, by reason of my youth, could
not yet perform. My spare time was spent largely in taking instructions to artists or fetching
drawings from them. Wild House, Drury Lane.--Mr. Cunningham says, "Why so called, I am not aware."
Wild is a corruption of Weld. It was the town mansion of the family of the Welds, of Lutworth
Castle.
Compton Street, Soho.--Built in the reign of Charles the First by
Sir Francis Compton. Occasionally a sketch was posted to England, but more frequently I
had to despatch some drawing on wood by rail. Though I have never been anything but an amateurish
draughtsman myself, I certainly developed a critical faculty, and acquired a knowledge of different
artistic methods, during my intercourse with so many of the dessinateurs of the last years
of the Second Empire.

By-and-by more serious duties were allotted to me. The "Paris Fashions" design then appearing
every month in the Illustrated London News was for a time prepared according to certain dresses
which Worth and other famous costumiers made for empresses, queens, princesses, great ladies,
and theatrical celebrities; and, accompanying Pelcoq or Janet when they went to sketch those
gowns (nowadays one would simply obtain photographs), I took down from la premiere, or sometimes
from Worth himself, full particulars respecting materials and styles, in order that the descriptive
letterpress, which was to accompany the illustration, might be correct.

