"And the Union workhouses?"[252-3] demanded Scrooge. "Are they still in operation?"

"They are. Still," returned the gentleman, "I wish I could say they were not."

"The Treadmill[252-4] and the Poor Law are in full vigour, then?" said Scrooge.

"Both very busy, Sir."

"Oh! I was afraid, from what you said at first, that something had occurred to stop them in
their useful course," said Scrooge. "I'm very glad to hear it."

"Under the impression that they scarcely furnish Christian cheer of mind or body to the multitude,"
returned the gentleman, "a few of us are endeavoring to raise a fund to buy the poor some meat
and drink, and means of warmth. We choose this time, because it is a time, of all others, when
want is keenly felt, and abundance rejoices. What shall I put you down for?"

"Nothing!" Scrooge replied.

"You wish to be anonymous?"

"I wish to be left alone," said Scrooge. "Since you ask me what I wish, gentlemen, that is
my answer. I don't make merry myself at Christmas, and I can't afford to make idle people merry.
I help to support the establishments I have mentioned: they cost enough: and those who are
badly off must go there."

"Many can't go there; and many would rather die."

"If they would rather die," said Scrooge, "they had better do it, and decrease the surplus
population. Besides--excuse me--I don't know that."

"But you might know it," observed the gentleman.

"It's not my business," Scrooge returned. "It's enough for a man to understand his own business,
and not to interfere with other people's. Mine occupies me constantly. Good afternoon, gentlemen!"

Seeing clearly that it would be useless to pursue their point, the gentlemen withdrew. Scrooge
resumed his labours with an improved opinion of himself, and in more facetious temper than
was usual with him.

Meanwhile the fog and darkness thickened so, that the people ran about with flaring links,[253-5]
proffering their services to go before horses in carriages, and conduct them on their way.
The ancient tower of a church, whose gruff old bell was always peeping slily down at Scrooge
out of a gothic window in the wall, became invisible, and struck the hours and quarters in
the clouds, with tremulous vibrations afterwards as if its teeth were chattering in its frozen
head up there. The cold became intense. In the main street at the corner of the court, some
labourers were repairing the gas-pipes, and had lighted a great fire in a brazier, round which
a party of ragged men and boys were gathered: warming their hands and winking their eyes before
the blaze in rapture. The water-plug being left in solitude, its overflowings sullenly congealed,
and turned to misanthropic ice. The brightness of the shop where holly sprigs and berries crackled
in the lamp heat of the windows, made pale faces ruddy as they passed. Poulterers' and grocers'
trades became a splendid joke: a glorious pageant, with which it was next to impossible to
believe that such dull principles as bargain and sale had anything to do. The Lord Mayor, in
the stronghold of the mighty Mansion House, gave orders to his fifty cooks and butlers to keep
Christmas as a Lord Mayor's household should; and even the little tailor, whom he had fined
five shillings on the previous Monday for being drunk and bloodthirsty in the streets, stirred
up to-morrow's pudding in his garret, while his lean wife and the baby sallied out to buy the beef.

Foggier yet, and colder! Piercing, searching, biting cold. If the good Saint Dunstan[254-6]
had but nipped the Evil Spirit's nose with a touch of such weather as that, instead of using
his familiar weapons, then indeed he would have roared to lusty purpose. The owner of one scant
young nose, gnawed and mumbled by the hungry cold as bones are gnawed by dogs, stooped down
at Scrooge's keyhole to regale him with a Christmas carol: but at the first sound of

    "God bless you, merry gentlemen!
    May nothing you dismay!"[254-7]

Scrooge seized the ruler with such energy of action, that the singer fled in terror, leaving
the keyhole to the fog and even more congenial frost.

At length the hour of shutting up the counting-house arrived. With an ill-will Scrooge dismounted
from his stool, and tacitly admitted the fact to the expectant clerk in the Tank, who instantly
snuffed his candle out, and put on his hat.

"You'll want all day to-morrow, I suppose?" said Scrooge.

"If quite convenient, Sir."

"It's not convenient," said Scrooge, "and it's not fair. If I was to stop half-a-crown for
it, you'd think yourself ill-used, I'll be bound?" 

A partial exception to the rule is found in the common Myrtle Warbler.

Although in winter these birds range south to Panama, many remain
as far north as New Jersey, Kansas, and the Ohio Valley.

This does not mean that insects are found in these regions in sufficient
numbers to supply the larder of the Myrtle Warblers, but it does mean
that they find acceptable substitutes for their usual food.

Oddly enough, what they depend on is not animal matter in any form, but consists of berries which
contain some of the essential food properties of fatty meats. One of the most popular with them
is the common bayberry.

Among the sand dunes of the extensive "Banks" along the North Carolina coast there grows in great
profusion a small bushy tree known as the yaupon. {90} The young leaves of this when dried
and steeped make a very acceptable drink, and during the hungry days
of the Civil War when the Federal blockade became effective the people
of the region used this as a substitute for tea and coffee.

The yaupon produces in great abundance a berry that is so highly esteemed by the Myrtle Warblers
that they pass the winter in these regions in numbers almost incredible.

When the Food Supply Fails.--It is hard to realize the extent of the havoc wrought among birds
by cold, snowy weather. Early in the year 1895 a long, severe cold spell, accompanied by snow and
sleet, almost exterminated the Bluebird in the eastern United States. The bodies of no less
than twenty-four of these birds were found in the cavity of one tree. It looked as if they had
crowded together with the hope of keeping warm. It was not the cold alone which had destroyed the
birds: a famine had preceded the cold snap, and the birds, weakened by hunger, were ill prepared
to withstand its rigours. Now, it
is a fact, that there was nothing at all particular about the knocker on the door, except that
it was very large. It is also a fact, that Scrooge had seen it, night and morning, during his
whole residence in that place; also that Scrooge had as little of what is called fancy about
him as any man in the City of London, even including--which is a bold word--the corporation,
aldermen, and livery. Let it also be borne in mind that Scrooge had not bestowed one thought
on Marley, since his last mention of his seven-years' dead partner that afternoon. And then
let any man explain to me, if he can, how it happened that Scrooge, having his key in the lock
of the door, saw in the knocker, without its undergoing any intermediate process of change,
not a knocker, but Marley's face.

Marley's face. It was not in impenetrable shadow as the other objects in the yard were, but
had a dismal light about it, like a bad lobster in a dark cellar. It was not angry or ferocious,
but looked at Scrooge as Marley used to look: with ghostly spectacles turned up on its ghostly
forehead. The hair was curiously stirred, as if by breath or hot air; and, though the eyes
were wide open, they were perfectly motionless. That, and its livid colour, made it horrible;
but its horror seemed to be in spite of the face and beyond its control, rather than a part
of its own expression.

As Scrooge looked fixedly at this phenomenon, it was a knocker again.

To say that he was not startled, or that his blood was not conscious of a terrible sensation
to which it had been a stranger from infancy, would be untrue. But he put his hand upon the
key he had relinquished, turned it sturdily, walked in, and lighted his candle.

He did pause, with a moment's irresolution, before he shut the door; and he did look cautiously
behind it first, as if he half expected to be terrified with the sight of Marley's pigtail
sticking out into the hall. But there was nothing on the back of the door, except the screws
and nuts that held the knocker on; so he said "Pooh, pooh!" and closed it with a bang.

The sound resounded through the house like thunder. Every room above, and every cask in the
wine-merchant's cellars below, appeared to have a separate peal of echoes of its own. Scrooge
was not a man to be frightened by echoes. He fastened the door, and walked across the hall,
and up the stairs, slowly too, trimming his candle as he went.

You may talk vaguely about driving a coach-and-six up a good old flight of stairs, or through
a bad young Act of Parliament; but I mean to say you might have got a hearse up that staircase,
and taken it broadwise, with the splinter-bar[258-8] towards the wall, and the door towards
the balustrades: and done it easy. There was plenty of width for that, and room to spare; which
is perhaps the reason why Scrooge thought he saw a locomotive hearse going on before him in
the gloom. Half-a-dozen gas-lamps out of the street wouldn't have lighted the entry too well,
so you may suppose that it was pretty dark with Scrooge's dip.

Up Scrooge went, not caring a button for that: darkness is cheap, and Scrooge liked it. But
before he shut his heavy door, he walked through his rooms to see that all was right. He had
just enough recollection of the face to desire to do that.

Sitting-room, bedroom, lumber-room. All as they should be. Nobody under the table, nobody under
the sofa; a small fire in the grate; spoon and basin ready; and the little saucepan of gruel
(Scrooge had a cold in his head) upon the hob. Nobody under the bed; nobody in the closet;
nobody in his dressing-gown, which was hanging up in a suspicious attitude against the wall.
Lumber-room as usual. Old fire-guard, old shoes, two fish-baskets, washing-stand on three legs,
and a poker.

Quite satisfied, he closed his door, and locked himself in; double-locked himself in, which
was not his custom. Thus secured against surprise, he took off his cravat; put on his dressing-gown
and slippers, and his nightcap; and sat down before the fire to take his gruel.

It was a very low fire indeed; nothing on such a bitter night. He was obliged to sit close
to it, and brood over it, before he could extract the least sensation of warmth from such a
handful of fuel. The fireplace was an old one, built by some Dutch merchant long ago, and paved
all round with quaint Dutch tiles, designed to illustrate the Scriptures. There were Cains
and Abels, Pharaoh's daughters, Queens of Sheba, angelic messengers descending through the
air on clouds like feather-beds, Abrahams, Belshazzars, Apostles putting off to sea in butter-boats,
hundreds of figures, to attract his thoughts; and yet that face of Marley, seven years dead,
came like the ancient Prophet's rod, and swallowed up the whole. If each smooth tile had been
a blank at first, with power to shape some picture on its surface, from the disjointed fragments
of his thoughts, there would have been a copy of old Marley's head on every one.

"Humbug!" said Scrooge; and walked across the room.

After several turns, he sat down again. As he threw his head back in the chair, his glance
happened to rest upon a bell, a disused bell, that hung in the room, and communicated for some
purpose now forgotten with a chamber in the highest story of the building. It was with great
astonishment, and with a strange, inexplicable dread, that as he looked, he saw this bell begin
to swing. It swung so softly in the outset that it scarcely made a sound; but soon it rang
out loudly, and so did every bell in the house. This might have lasted half a minute, or a
minute, but it seemed an hour. The bells ceased as they had begun, together. They were succeeded
by a clanking noise, deep down below; as if some person were dragging a heavy chain over the
casks in the wine-merchant's cellar. Scrooge then remembered to have heard that ghosts in haunted
houses were described as dragging chains.

The cellar-door flew open with a booming sound, and then he heard the noise much louder, on
the floors below; then coming up the stairs; then coming straight towards his door.

"It's humbug still!" said Scrooge. "I won't believe it."

His colour changed though, when, without a pause, it came on through the heavy door, and passed
into the room before his eyes. Upon its coming in, the flame leaped up, as though it cried
"I know him! Marley's Ghost!" and fell again.

The same face: the very same. Marley in his pigtail, usual waistcoat, tights and boots; the
tassels on the latter bristling, like his pigtail, and his coat-skirts, and the hair upon his
head. The chain he drew was clasped about his middle. It was long, and wound about him like
a tail; and it was made (for Scrooge observed it closely) of cash-boxes, keys, padlocks, ledgers,
deeds, and heavy purses wrought in steel. His body was transparent; so that Scrooge, observing
him, and looking through his waistcoat, could see the two buttons on his coat behind.

Scrooge had often heard it said that Marley had no bowels[261-9], but he had never believed
it until now.

No, nor did he believe it even now. Though he looked the phantom through and through, and saw
it standing before him; though he felt the chilling influence of its death-cold eyes; and marked
the very texture of the folded kerchief bound about its head and chin, which wrapper he had
not observed before: he was still incredulous, and fought against his senses.

"How now!" said Scrooge, caustic and cold as ever. "What do you want with me?"

"Much!"--Marley's voice, no doubt about it.

"Who are you?"

"Ask me who I was."

"Who were you then?" said Scrooge, raising his voice. "You're particular--for a shade." He
was going to say "to a shade," but substituted this, as more appropriate.

"In life I was your partner, Jacob Marley."

"Can you--can you sit down?" asked Scrooge, looking doubtfully at him.

"I can."

"Do it then."

Scrooge asked the question, because he didn't know whether a ghost so transparent might find
himself in a condition to take a chair; and felt that in the event of its being impossible,
it might involve the necessity of an embarrassing explanation. But the Ghost sat down on the
opposite side of the fireplace, as if he were quite used to it.

"You don't believe in me," observed the Ghost.

"I don't," said Scrooge.

"What evidence would you have of my reality beyond that of your senses?"

"I don't know," said Scrooge.

"Why do you doubt your senses?"

"Because," said Scrooge, "a little thing affects them. A slight disorder of the stomach makes
them cheats. You may be an undigested bit of beef, a blot of mustard, a crumb of cheese, a
fragment of an underdone potato. There's more of gravy than of grave about you, whatever you are!"

Scrooge was not much in the habit of cracking jokes, nor did he feel, in his heart, by any
means waggish then. The truth is, that he tried to be smart, as a means of distracting his
own attention, and keeping down his terror; for the spectre's voice disturbed the very marrow
in his bones.

To sit staring at those fixed, glazed eyes in silence for a moment, would play, Scrooge felt,
the very deuce with him. There was something very awful, too, in the spectre's being provided
with an infernal atmosphere of its own. Scrooge could not feel it himself, but this was clearly
the case; for though the Ghost sat perfectly motionless, its hair, and skirts, and tassels,
were still agitated as by the hot vapour from an oven.

"You see this toothpick?" said Scrooge, returning quickly to the charge, for the reason just
assigned; and wishing, though it were only for a second, to divert the vision's stony gaze
from himself.

"I do," replied the Ghost.

"You are not looking at it," said Scrooge.

"But I see it," said the Ghost, "notwithstanding."

"Well!" returned Scrooge. "I have but to swallow this, and be for the rest of my days persecuted
by a legion of goblins, all of my own creation. Humbug, I tell you--humbug!"

At this the spirit raised a frightful cry, and shook its chain with such a dismal and appalling
noise, that Scrooge held on tight to his chair, to save himself from falling in a swoon. But
how much greater was his horror, when, the phantom taking off the bandage round its head, as
if it were too warm to wear indoors, its lower jaw dropped down upon its breast!

Scrooge fell upon his knees, and clasped his hands before his face.

"Mercy!" he said. "Dreadful apparition, why do you trouble me?"

"Man of the worldly mind!" replied the Ghost, "do you believe in me or not?"

"I do," said Scrooge. "I must. But why do spirits walk the earth, and why do they come to me?"

"It is required of every man," the Ghost returned, "that the spirit within him should walk
abroad among his fellow-men, and travel far and wide; and if that spirit goes not forth in
life, it is condemned to do so after death. It is doomed to wander through the world--oh, woe
is me!--and witness what it cannot share, but might have shared on earth, and turned to happiness!"

Again the spectre raised a cry, and shook its chain, and wrung its shadowy hands.

"You are fettered," said Scrooge, trembling. "Tell me why?"

"I wear the chain I forged in life," replied the Ghost. "I made it link by link, and yard by
yard; I girded it on of my own free will, and of my own free will I bore it. Is its pattern
strange to you?"

Scrooge trembled more and more.

"Or would you know," pursued the Ghost, "the weight and length of the strong coil you bear
yourself? It was full as heavy and as long as this, seven Christmas Eves ago. You have laboured
on it, since. It is a ponderous chain!"

Scrooge glanced about him on the floor, in the expectation of finding himself surrounded by
some fifty or sixty fathoms of iron cable: but he could see nothing.

"Jacob," he said, imploringly. "Old Jacob Marley, tell me more. Speak comfort to me, Jacob."

"I have none to give," the Ghost replied. "It comes from other regions, Ebenezer Scrooge, and
is conveyed by other ministers, to other kinds of men. Nor can I tell you what I would. A very
little more, is all permitted to me. I cannot rest, I cannot stay, I cannot linger anywhere.
My spirit never walked beyond our counting-house--mark me!--in life my spirit never roved beyond
the narrow limits of our money-changing hole and weary journeys lie before me!"

It was a habit with Scrooge, whenever he became thoughtful, to put his hands in his breeches
pockets. Pondering on what the Ghost had said, he did so now, but without lifting his eyes,
or getting off his knees. "You must have been very slow about it, Jacob," Scrooge observed,
in a business-like manner, though with humility and deference.

"Slow!" the Ghost repeated.

"Seven years dead," mused Scrooge. "And travelling all the time!"

"The whole time," said the Ghost. "No rest, no peace. Incessant torture of remorse."

"You travel fast?" said Scrooge.

"On the wings of the wind," replied the Ghost.

"You might have got over a great quantity of ground in seven years," said Scrooge.

The Ghost, on hearing this, set up another cry, and clanked its chain so hideously in the dead
silence of the night, that the Ward would have been justified in indicting it for a nuisance.

"Oh! captive, bound, and double-ironed," cried the phantom, "not to know, that ages of incessant
labour, by immortal creatures, for this earth must pass into eternity before the good of which
it is susceptible is all developed. Not to know that any Christian spirit working kindly in
its little sphere, whatever it may be, will find its mortal life too short for its vast means
of usefulness. Not to know that no space of regret can make amends for one life's opportunity
misused! Yet such was I! Oh! such was I!"

"But you were always a good man of business, Jacob," faltered Scrooge, who now began to apply
this to himself.

"Business!" cried the Ghost, wringing its hands again. "Mankind was my business. The common
welfare was my business; charity, mercy, forbearance, and benevolence, were, all, my business.
The dealings of my trade were but a drop of water in the comprehensive ocean of my business!"

It held up its chain at arm's length, as if that were the cause of all its unavailing grief,
and flung it heavily upon the ground again.

"At this time of the rolling year," the spectre said, "I suffer most. Why did I walk through
crowds of fellow-beings with my eyes turned down, and never raise them to that blessed Star
which led the Wise Men to a poor abode! Were there no poor homes to which its light would have
conducted me?"

Scrooge was very much dismayed to hear the spectre going on at this rate, and began to quake
exceedingly.

"Hear me!" cried the Ghost. "My time is nearly gone."

"I will," said Scrooge. "But don't be hard upon me! Don't be flowery, Jacob! Pray!"

"How it is that I appear before you in a shape that you can see, I may not tell. I have sat
invisible beside you many and many a day."

It was not an agreeable idea. Scrooge shivered, and wiped the perspiration from his brow.

"That is no light part of my penance," pursued the Ghost. "I am here to-night to warn you,
that you have yet a chance and hope of escaping my fate. A chance and hope of my procuring,
Ebenezer."

"You were always a good friend to me," said Scrooge. "Thank'ee!"

"You will be haunted," resumed the Ghost, "by Three Spirits."

Scrooge's countenance fell almost as low as the Ghost's had done.

"Is that the chance and hope you mentioned, Jacob," he demanded, in a faltering voice.

"It is."

"I--I think I'd rather not," said Scrooge.

"Without their visits," said the Ghost, "you cannot hope to shun the path I tread. Expect the
first to-morrow, when the bell tolls one."

"Couldn't I take 'em all at once, and have it over, Jacob?" hinted Scrooge.

"Expect the second on the next night at the same hour. The third upon the next night when the
last stroke of twelve has ceased to vibrate. Look to see me no more; and look that, for your
own sake, you remember what has passed between us!"

When it had said these words, the spectre took its wrapper from the table, and bound it round
its head, as before. Scrooge knew this, by the smart sound its teeth made, when the jaws were
brought together by the bandage. He ventured to raise his eyes again, and found his supernatural
visitor confronting him in an erect attitude, with its chain wound over and about its arm.

The apparition walked backward from him; and at every step it took, the window raised itself
a little, so that when the spectre reached it, it was wide open. It beckoned Scrooge to approach,
which he did. When they were within two paces of each other, Marley's Ghost held up its hand,
warning him to come no nearer. Scrooge stopped.

Not so much in obedience, as in surprise and fear: for on the raising of the hand, he became
sensible of confused noises in the air; incoherent sounds of lamentation and regret; wailings
inexpressibly sorrowful and self-accusatory. The spectre, after listening for a moment, joined
in the mournful dirge; and floated out upon the bleak, dark night.

Scrooge followed to the window: desperate in his curiosity. He looked out.

The air was filled with phantoms, wandering hither and thither in restless haste, and moaning
as they went. Every one of them wore chains like Marley's Ghost; some few (they might be guilty
governments) were linked together; none were free. Many had been personally known to Scrooge
in their lives. He had been quite familiar with one old ghost, in a white waistcoat, with a
monstrous iron safe attached to his ankle, who cried piteously at being unable to assist a
wretched woman with an infant, whom it saw below upon a door-step. The misery with them all
was, clearly, that they sought to interfere, for good, in human matters, and had lost the power
for ever.

Whether these creatures faded into mist, or mist enshrouded them, he could not tell. But they
and their spirit voices faded together; and the night became as it had been when he walked home.

Scrooge closed the window, and examined the door by which the Ghost had entered. It was double-locked,
as he had locked it with his own hands, and the bolts were undisturbed. He tried to say "Humbug!"
but stopped at the first syllable. And being, from the emotion he had undergone, or the fatigues
of the day, or his glimpse of the Invisible World, or the dull conversation of the Ghost, or
the lateness of the hour, much in need of repose; went straight to bed, without undressing,
and fell asleep upon the instant.

STAVE TWO

The First of the Three Spirits

When Scrooge awoke, it was so dark, that looking out of bed, he could scarcely distinguish
the transparent window from the opaque walls of his chamber. He was endeavoring to pierce the
darkness with his ferret eyes, when the chimes of a neighboring church struck the four quarters.
So he listened for the hour.

To his great astonishment the heavy bell went on from six to seven, and from seven to eight,
and regularly up to twelve; then stopped. Twelve! It was past two when he went to bed. The
clock was wrong. An icicle must have got into the works. Twelve!

He touched the spring of his repeater, to correct this most preposterous clock. Its rapid little
pulse beat twelve; and stopped.

"Why, it isn't possible," said Scrooge, "that I can have slept through a whole day and far
into another night. It isn't possible that anything has happened to the sun, and this is twelve
at noon!"

The big idea being an alarming one, he scrambled out of bed, and groped his way to the window.
He was obliged to rub the frost off with the sleeve of his dressing-gown before he could see
anything; and could see very little then. All he could make out was, that it was still very
foggy and extremely cold, and that there was no noise of people running to and fro, and making
a great stir, as there unquestionably would have been if night had beaten off bright day, and
taken possession of the world. This was a great relief, because "three days after sight of
this First of Exchange pay to Mr. Ebenezer Scrooge or his order," and so forth, would have
become a mere United States' security if there were no days to count by.

Scrooge went to bed again, and thought, and thought, and thought it over and over and over,
and could make nothing of it. The more he thought, the more perplexed he was; and the more
he endeavoured not to think, the more he thought. Marley's Ghost bothered him exceedingly.
Every time he resolved within himself, after mature inquiry, that it was all a dream, his mind
flew back again, like a strong spring released, to its first position, and presented the same
problem to be worked all through, "Was it a dream or not?"

Scrooge lay in this state until the chimes had gone three quarters more, when he remembered,
on a sudden, that the Ghost had warned him of a visitation when the bell tolled one. He resolved
to lie awake until the hour was passed; and, considering that he could no more go to sleep
than go to Heaven, this was perhaps the wisest resolution in his power.

The quarter was so long, that he was more than once convinced he must have sunk into a doze
unconsciously, and missed the clock. At length it broke upon his listening ear.

"Ding, dong!"

"A quarter past," said Scrooge, counting.

"Ding, dong!"

"Half-past!" said Scrooge.

"Ding, dong!"

"A quarter to it," said Scrooge.

"Ding, dong!"

"The hour itself," said Scrooge, triumphantly, "and nothing else!"

He spoke before the hour bell sounded, which it now did with a deep, dull, hollow, melancholy
One. Light flashed up in the room upon the instant, and the curtains of his bed were drawn.

The curtains of his bed were drawn aside, I tell you, by a hand. Not the curtains at his feet,
nor the curtains at his back, but those to which his face was addressed. The curtains of his
bed were drawn aside; and Scrooge, starting up into a half-recumbent attitude, found himself
face to face with the unearthly visitor who drew them: as close to it as I am now to you, and
I am standing in the spirit at your elbow.

It was a strange figure--like a child: yet not so like a child as like an old man, viewed through
some supernatural medium, which gave him the appearance of having receded from the view, and
being diminished to a child's proportions. Its hair, which hung about its neck and down its
back, was white as if with age; and yet the face had not a wrinkle in it, and the tenderest
bloom was on the skin. The arms were very long and muscular; the hands the same, as if its
hold were of uncommon strength. Its legs and feet, most delicately formed, were, like those
upper members, bare. It wore a tunic of the purest white; and round its waist was bound a lustrous
belt, the sheen of which was beautiful. It held a branch of fresh green holly in its hand;
and, in singular contradiction of that wintry emblem, had its dress trimmed with summer flowers.
But the strangest thing about it was, that from the crown of its head there sprang a bright
clear jet of light, by which all this was visible; and which was doubtless the occasion of
its using, in its duller moments, a great extinguisher for a cap, which it now held under its arm.

Even this, though, when Scrooge looked at it with increasing steadiness, was not its strangest
quality. For as its belt sparkled and glittered now in one part and now in another, and what
was light one instant, at another time was dark, so the figure itself fluctuated in its distinctness:
being now a thing with one arm, now with one leg, now with twenty legs, now a pair of legs
without a head, now a head without a body: of which dissolving parts, no outline would be visible
in the dense gloom wherein they melted away. And in the very wonder of this, it would be itself
again; distinct and clear as ever.

"Are you the Spirit, Sir, whose coming was foretold to me?" asked Scrooge.

"I am!"

The voice was soft and gentle. When some sheltered spot in the ground, quite to her liking,
has been found she deposits the eggs and goes her way.

Little companies of female Phalaropes may be seen at this time of
the year frequenting the ponds and sloughs they inhabit.

The dutiful and well-trained males are all at home, where they are
responsible for the entire task of caring for, and incubating, the
eggs.

Length of Mated Life.--The length of time which birds remain mated is a question often asked but
seldom answered satisfactorily. The truth of the {48} matter is that
not much is known about the subject.

Apparently a great many birds return to the same yard and even to the same tree to build their
nest year after year.


"Your welfare!" said the Ghost.

Scrooge expressed himself much obliged, but could not help thinking that a night of unbroken
rest would have been more conducive to that end. The spirit must have heard him thinking, for
it said immediately: "Your reclamation, then. Take heed!"

It put out its strong hand as it spoke, and clasped him gently by the arm.

"Rise! and walk with me!"

It would have been in vain for Scrooge to plead that the weather and the hour were not adapted
to pedestrian purposes; that bed was warm, and the thermometer a long way below freezing; that
he was clad but lightly in his slippers, dressing-gown, and nightcap; and that he had a cold
upon him at that time. The grasp, though gentle as a woman's hand, was not to be resisted.
He rose: but finding that the Spirit made towards the window, clasped its robe in supplication.

"I am a mortal," Scrooge remonstrated, "and liable to fall."

"Bear but a touch of my hand there," said the Spirit, laying it upon his heart, "and you shall
be upheld in more than this!"

As the words were spoken, they passed through the wall, and stood upon an open country road,
with fields on either hand. The city had entirely vanished. Not a vestige of it was to be seen.
The darkness and the mist had vanished with it, for it was a clear, cold, winter day, with
snow upon the ground.

"Good Heaven!" said Scrooge, clasping his hands together, as he looked about him. "I was bred
in this place. I was a boy here!"

The Spirit gazed upon him mildly. Its gentle touch, though it had been light and instantaneous,
appeared still present to the old man's sense of feeling. He was conscious of a thousand odors
floating in the air, each one connected with a thousand thoughts, and hopes, and joys, and
cares long, long forgotten!

"Your lip is trembling," said the Ghost. "And what is that upon your cheek?"

Scrooge muttered, with an unusual catching in his voice, that it was a pimple; and begged the
Ghost to lead him where he would.

"You recollect the way?" inquired the Spirit.

"Remember it!" cried Scrooge with fervor--"I could walk it blindfold."

"Strange to have forgotten it for so many years!" observed the Ghost. "Let us go on."

They walked along the road; Scrooge recognizing every gate, and post, and tree; until a little
market-town appeared in the distance, with its bridge, its church, and winding river. Some
shaggy ponies now were seen trotting towards them with boys upon their backs, who called to
other boys in country gigs and carts, driven by farmers. All these boys were in great spirits,
and shouted to each other, until the broad fields were so full of merry music, that the crisp
air laughed to hear it.

"These are but shadows of the things that have been," said the Ghost. "They have no consciousness
of us."

The jocund travellers came on; and as they came, Scrooge knew and named them every one. Why
was he rejoiced beyond all bounds to see them! Why did his cold eye glisten, and his heart
leap up as they went past! Why was he filled with gladness when he heard them give each other
Merry Christmas, as they parted at cross-roads and bye-ways, for their several homes! What
was merry Christmas to Scrooge? Out upon merry Christmas! What good had it ever done to him?

"The school is not quite deserted," said the Ghost. "A solitary child, neglected by his friends,
is left there still."

Scrooge said he knew it. And he sobbed.

